
What can be done to redress the horrible mistreatment of people held in 
offshore detention? CanPeter Dutton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton> or any of his 
servants or agents be dragged into court and punished? Can’t international law 
come to the rescue of tortured asylum seekers and refugees? Are other civil or 
criminal remedies and responses available?

Big questions with interesting possibilities but much as many would like to 
see a punitive response dished out to those who implement this abuse, the 
pathway is relatively untrod and uncertain.

Australia is a party to the Rome statute that established the international 
criminal court, which can prosecute crimes against humanity – and that includes 
“inhumane acts ... intentionally causing great suffering or serious injury to 
body or to mental or physical health”. The first trials for crimes against 
humanity took place at Nuremberg after the second world war.

Some years ago the federal MP Andrew Wilkie wrote to the ICC prosecutor in The 
Hague 
<https://theconversation.com/will-the-international-criminal-court-prosecute-australia-for-crimes-against-humanity-33363>
 requesting an investigation and prosecution of the then prime minister, Tony 
Abbott, and 19 of his cabinet ministers in relation to the mistreatment of 
asylum seekers.

Not much more was heard about this submission other than outrage from Andrew 
Nikolic, now an ex-MP, who said the accusations were “vague and embarrassing”, 
and the then immigration minister, Scott Morrision, who said he would keep on 
doing what he was doing and would not be intimidated.

As a condition to becoming a party to Rome statute and agreeing to the 
jurisdiction of the ICC, Australia introduced to thecommonwealth criminal code 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/cca1995115/sch1.html> 
provisions relating to crimes against humanity, providing for a penalty of 
imprisonment of 25 years (see: 268.12 and 268.13). This adds a frisson of 
excitement to the prospect of getting some really nasty types charged up and in 
court.

The provision in the code mirrors the relevant part of the statute of Rome 
<http://legal.un.org/icc/statute/99_corr/cstatute.htm>, so our domestic law 
provides for such a crime with elements, such as: infliction of severe physical 
or mental pain or suffering which are not incidental to lawful sanctions; and 
the conduct is committed knowingly as part of a systemic attack on civilians. 
There are also provisions dealing with “imprisonment or other severe 
deprivation of liberty”.

Domestically, the commonwealth director of public prosecutions would be the 
prosecutor but only if the attorney general agreed and any offences would have 
to be prosecuted in the name of the AG. On the face of it there is plenty of 
evidence of conduct that fits the ingredients prescribed in the criminal code.

Nauru inquiry should look at whether abuse reports were investigated – Labor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/14/nauru-inquiry-should-look-at-whether-abuse-reports-were-investigated-labor>
But can you see the attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, going completely 
off-piste and prosecuting Peter Dutton, a man who displays such a lack of human 
empathy?

Because the relevant bit of the Rome statute is part of Australian domestic 
law, the ICC itself has stronger and more plausible arguments should it be 
inspired to look into what’s going on down here.

It’s hard to imagine Malcolm Turnbull, Dutton and other ministers in the same 
Hague dock as Congolese warlords who conscript child soldiers. Yet, it is quite 
plausible that the ICC could mount a preliminary examination into Australia’s 
shocking treatment of offshore detainees who sought our protection under the 
Refugee convention.

The ICC is undertaking the same process in relation to the Iraq war 
<https://www.icc-cpi.int/Pages/item.aspx?name=160704-otp-stat> and in doing so 
will consider the findings of theChilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>. After a preliminary 
examination the next step would be an investigation and if all the dots lines 
up, a prosecution.
Even a preliminary examination by the ICC would be a major embarrassment for 
Australia which, so far, has been beyond embarrassment in the ruthless 
implementation of “border protection”. It would flag internationally a pariah 
status for a country that wantonly abuses human rights, particularly asthere 
are policy options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/there-are-policy-alternatives-to-locking-up-refugees-in-pacific-gulags>
 far more humane than the one preferred by successive governments.

Comparisons have been made with mistreatment of detainees at Abu Ghraib 
<http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/11/comparing-nauru-to-guantanamo-bay-is-ridiculous-says-australian-immigration-minister>
, whereUS military personnel have been tried and convicted 
<http://www.salon.com/2006/03/14/prosecutions_convictions/> by courts martial. 
Dutton dismissed as“ridiculous” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/11/comparing-nauru-to-guantanamo-bay-is-ridiculous-says-australian-immigration-minister>
 other comparisons with Nauru and Guantánamo Bay. The barrister and refugee 
advocate Julian Burnside QC told Guardian Australia that Dutton is right, but 
not in the way he imagines.

“Guantánamo Bay holds people who are thought to be dangerous terrorists, 
whereasNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> holds people who have 
been assessed as refugees, people fleeing terrorism, people who are not thought 
to be a risk to anyone at all.”

Dutton also said the mistreatment was out of Australian hands and was a 
problem for Nauru. He may not have caught up with thefindings of the high court 
in February this year 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2016/hca-1-2016-02-03.pdf>
, in the M68 case, where even though, by a majority, the judges found that 
detaining people on Nauru was not unlawful, nonethelessAustralia’s involvement 
in the regional “processing” centre was found to be “indisputable” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/04/the-high-court-despite-the-law-at-its-disposal-has-let-them-get-away-with-it>
. You might think that would put an end to the fiction that it has nothing to 
do with us.

There’s another aspect to the high court’s Nauru decision that puts the 
government on notice. The offshore regime is only lawful if it is 
“proportionate” to the requirement of processing refugees and not a system of 
permanent detention. The fact that there has been precious little resettlement 
puts the commonwealth on shaky ground. The longer refugees are held, the more 
unlawful the Nauru regional processing centre becomes.

There have also been calls by the Australian Lawyers Alliance to have Comcare 
prosecute relevant offenders under the Work Health and Safety Act 
<https://www.lawyersalliance.com.au/news/comcare-must-prosecute-for-nauru-abuses>
. The alliance says the act applies to Australian activities on Nauru and makes 
liable people who are responsible in a workplace for the health and safety of 
others. An offence is committed where those with a duty to protect the health 
and safety of people in their care fail to do so, thereby exposing “an 
individual to a risk of death or serious injury or illness”.

Liability also arises for breaches of a civil duty of care and a couple of 
high-profile class actions have been launched on behalf of detainees.

Maurice Blackburn has a case under way 
<https://www.mauriceblackburn.com.au/current-class-actions/people-detained-on-christmas-island/>
 in relation to Christmas Island “for people who sought asylum and were injured 
or pregnant while in detention and suffered physical or psychological injury or 
the exacerbation of an injury due to the failure of the commonwealth to provide 
adequate medical care”.

Slater & Gordon is also running a class action in Victoria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/05/want-to-know-about-immigration-detention-then-sue-for-negligence>
 on behalf of people detained on Manus Island. The defendants are the 
commonwealth, Transfield (now Broadspectrum and part of the Spanish Ferrovial 
group) and the former contractor G4S. The claim relates to the provision of 
substandard food, water, shelter and medical care.

Civil actions are slow, arduous and expensive. The remedy is in damages which 
is not much of a sanction to large global corporations or the commonwealth. 
History shows that, if the evidence looks like it might be too embarrassing for 
the defendants, they settle and the unsightly conduct stays buried.

Australia fails the same lesson every time. The Nauru files show how secrecy 
hides abuse | Kristina Keneally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/10/australia-fails-the-same-lesson-every-time-the-nauru-files-show-how-secrecy-hides-abuse>
There’s certainly no shortage of legal advice since the Nauru files were 
published by the Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/nauru-files>
. TheLaw Council of Australia is calling 
<http://www.lawcouncil.asn.au/lawcouncil/images/1653_--_Independent_oversight_of_immigration_detention_and_border_protection_laws_needed_following_Nauru_leaks.pdf>
, again, for the appointment of an independent inspector of immigration 
detention and an independent monitor of migration laws.

The Human Rights Law Centre and others have issued advice 
<http://hrlc.org.au/royal-commission-has-nauru-jurisdiction-legal-advice-says/> 
that an investigation of the abusive conditions in which children are detailed 
in Nauru is within the jurisdiction of the royal commission into institutional 
responses to child sexual abuses.

The royal commission earlier rejected an invitation to pick up that hot 
potato, but now the HRLC, Acoss and the Australian Council for International 
Development insist it should, andhere’s the legal advice they proffered 
<https://acfid.asn.au/sites/site.acfid/files/Legal%20Advice%20to%20Royal%20Commission%20Into%20Institutional%20Responses%20to%20Child%20Sex%20Abuse.pdf>
.

There are a range of possibilities for legal redress but, much as you might 
believe it would be a just outcome, don’t expect anytime soon to see Australian 
government ministers doing 25 years porridge for crimes against humanity.
 