
In 2000, Patrick Coleman, a law and politics student at James Cook University, 
was protesting by distributing leaflets in Townsville, accusing the police of 
corruption.

Among other things, the pamphlets invited the police to “kiss my arse you 
slimy lying bastards”. He also publicly insulted Constable Brendan Power, who 
had asked for one of the fliers.

Coleman was convicted of using insulting words under the Vagrants, Gaming and 
Other Offences Act and, ultimately, when his appeal got to the High Court, one 
of the main issues was whether the act burdened the implied freedom of 
communication about government or political matters and whether it also served 
a legitimate end compatible with representative government.

Four out of seven of the judges said it did burden the implied freedom and was 
not compatible with a legitimate end, so Coleman’s convictions under the act 
were set aside.

Six years before Coleman was protesting in Townsville, Laurence Levy was out 
and about near Lake Buloke in Victoria during the duck hunting season. He 
wanted to hold up dead ducks for the television cameras as part of his protest 
about the slaughter of wildlife.

The issue for the high court in his case was whether the wildlife game hunting 
season regulations and the Conservational Forests and Lands Act got in the way 
of Levy’s right to protest. The court said the protection of protesters’ safety 
was a legitimate aim of the legislation and so Levy’s implied freedom of 
political communication was not impermissibly burdened.

Bob Brown arrested while protesting against logging in Tasmania
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/25/bob-brown-arrested-while-protesting-against-logging-in-tasmania>
Here we are nearly 20 years later with the New South Wales parliament passing 
amendments 
<http://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/prod/parlment/nswbills.nsf/0/A3F6ECF3F449E614CA257F700015556D>
 to existing laws that will give the police wide new powers to stop protests, 
and not just protests about coal seam gas exploration and extraction.

It’s not surprising that the government has bundled into its amendments 
provisions about the protection of people’s safety. This is an attempt to make 
the legislation constitutionally bulletproof because safety was what the High 
Court latched on to in sinking Levy’s argument that the regulations got in the 
way of his free speech.

In a nutshell, three pieces of NSW legislation have been amended.

A new offence has been created under the Inclosed Lands Protection Act – 
attempting or intending to interfere with a business, or undertaking, or doing 
anything that gives rise to a serious risk to a person’s safety. There’s a new 
maximum penalty of $5,500, up from $550.

There are existing laws that deal with trespass, unlawful assembly and 
criminal damage, but the new measures take us into “attempts and intentions” to 
interfere with a business undertaking.

There is also an amendment to the Crimes Act, extending the definition of a 
mine to any place where gas or petroleum is extracted or areas of exploration 
for minerals or gas.

While the new laws have been sold as clearing the path for unhindered coal 
seam gas extraction, the related amendments are not confined to mine protests.
For instance, the changes to the Law Enforcement (Powers and Responsibilities) 
Act allow for the confiscation by police, without warrant, of “anything” that 
is intended to be used to lock or secure someone to equipment. Maybe that’s a 
piece or rope, wire, masking tape or some strong shoelaces.

As the NSW Bar Association says in its submission opposing these amendments 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/26922006/1458278217507/NSWBar_protests_submission.pdf?token=0OSrr%2B7fOSPOugNUNsoG%2F%2F729wE%3D>
:
“The criminal law should not operate by reference to vague descriptions of 
physical items that fall within the ambit of a provision only by the existence 
of someone’s intention to use them in the future for a purpose, particularly 
when that purpose and the likely use of the items are each themselves 
assessments based on broad and uncertain criteria.”

Knitting Nannas charged in NSW coal-seam gas protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/18/knitting-nannas-charged-in-nsw-coal-seam-gas-protest>
The amendments also sweep away previous restraints on police power in giving 
“directions” in relation to genuine demonstrations or protests, a procession or 
organised assembly. Now the police will be able to give directions where there 
may be a serious risk to personal safety or where the assembly is obstructing 
traffic.

As the barristers’ submission says: “The bill sets the threshold too low for 
the activation of police powers ...”

The direction about obstructing traffic can be given to any person, whether or 
not that person is actually obstructing the traffic.

Once again, there is a concern that this sort of legislation is incompatible 
with the implied constitutional right to free speech on political or government 
policy issues. No doubt it will head to the high court, just as Levy and 
Coleman did.

The former Greens leader Bob Brown has initiated High Court proceedings 
<http://www.bobbrown.org.au/releases> claiming that the Tasmanian Workplace 
(Protection from Protesters) Act 2014 impermissibly burdens the implied freedom 
of political communication. The legislation criminalises all protest activity 
on business premises where it hinders business activities.

Protest is sweepingly defined as an activity that is for the “purpose of 
promoting awareness of or support for an opinion, or belief in respect of a 
political, environmental, social, cultural or economic issue”.

Brown was arrested and charged at a logging site 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-25/bob-brown-arrested-at-tasmanian-logging-coupe/7112220>
 under the legislation in January.

Western Australia is contemplating draconian measures, although at this stage 
its proposed legislation has not been passed. It seeks to create two new 
offences. Anyone who intentionally physically prevents a lawful activity that 
is being or about to be carried out faces up to two years jail or a fine of 
$24,000. Here, there is no requirement relating to the level of seriousness of 
the offence and the burden of proof is reversed.

The second new offence is that a person may not make, adopt, or knowingly 
possess “a thing” for the purpose of using it to prevent lawful activity.

Labor asks for audit of all infrastructure spending after East West Link 
findings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jan/06/labor-asks-for-audit-of-all-infrastructure-spending-after-east-west-link-findings>
This is beyond Orwellian and three US special rapporteurs have urged the WA 
government 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=15002&LangID=E>
 not to press for the passage of this legislation, saying it is contrary to 
international law.

Victoria and Queensland have also recently expanded police powers that deal 
with protesters, in Victoria’s case prompted by the East-West Link picketers 
and in Queensland ahead of the G20 meeting in late 2014.

The common law has long held that citizens have a right to assemble and 
protest peacefully. Of course, without a bill of rights the common law can be 
overturned by legislation. Nor do we have an explicit right to assembly, 
because it is only relevant in circumstances where the implied freedom of 
political communication arises and as we have seen that varies, depending on 
whether you are handing out insulting leaflets or protesting against duck 
hunting.

Brown’s case looks as though it has many of the ingredients that could pave 
the way for a constitutionally protected right to protest.

 