
The Senate legal and constitutional affairs reference committee is meeting 
with a pressing question before it: did theattorney general, George Brandis, 
mislead parliament when he claimed the changes to the functions of the 
solicitor general 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/Parliamentary_Business/Committees/Senate/Legal_and_Constitutional_Affairs/SolicitorGeneralOpinion>
 in providing independent legal advice to government agencies and ministers 
came about through a process of consultation.

It’s an important question and in an attempt to find the answer an FOI request 
was made to both the attorney general and the solicitor general, Justin Gleeson 
SC.
Gleeson provided enough documents to make the case that indeed parliament was 
misled by Brandis’s claim that he had consulted with the second law officer 
about radical changes to his powers and functions.

Bank inquiry: some ANZ customers not told about banned advisers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/05/bank-inquiry-some-anz-customers-not-told-about-banned-advisers>
There are two instruments at play here and what Brandis has done is to elide 
both in order to claim Gleeson was in the loop about the legislation changes to 
his role as an independent legal adviser to the commonwealth.

Indeed, there had been a series of consultations and a meeting between the 
attorney general and the solictor general on 30 November, 2015, concerning a 
document calledGuidance Note 11 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27254468/1474361719390/Guidance_Note11_revised.pdf?token=1n95pvAAtyjPhGiRzObY8Ij766g%3D>
, which deals with briefing the solicitor general. As its name suggests, it is 
a guidance document, and does not have binding force.

The note said that advice from the solicitor general to agencies, ministers 
and departments would all be referred through the attorney general. However, 
the solicitor general also has a stand-alone function of providing advice in 
relation to litigation in which the commonwealth is involved.

On 4 May this year, Brandis wrote to Gleeson enclosing a final copy of the 
revised Guidance Note 11, “which has been prepared having regard,inter alia, to 
your suggestions”.

Then out of the blue, Brandis added 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27254464/1474361441737/FOI_Brandis_Legal_Services_SG_Opinions.pdf?token=OgE2vdfW7KRCCngc16Y5VkJCX4g%3D>
:

I have also issued an amendment to the Legal Services Directions 2005. The 
amendment will insert a new paragraph 10B and will take the form of the 
enclosed document.

Both the revised Guidance Note and the amended Legal Services Directions take 
effect immediately.

Gleeson notes that the version of the note published by the attorney general 
is “in a materially different form to the form of that document immediately 
prior to 4 May 2016”.

Maybe Gleeson is suggesting that he is surprised by these material 
differences, to the Guidance Note, despite the prior consultations.

While the documents seen under FOI variously refer to discussions about the 
note there was no prior documented consultations about changes to the Legal 
Services Directions.

The difference is that the Legal Services Directions have legislative force 
and they seek to cut off an important “loophole” – the solicitor general’s 
independent function in providing advice in respect of litigation involving the 
commonwealth and its agencies.

In his reasons relating to the release of the documents under FOI, Gleeson 
points out 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/10/05/FOI_SG_reasons_revised_Redacted.pdf> 
that the briefing direction issued by Brandis, “is the first time the process 
for briefing the solicitor general has been placed on a legislative basis”.

“The direction binds the solicitor general as well as others. The direction is 
in a materially different form to the procedures in Guidance Note 11 as it was 
prior to May 4, 2016.”



So what did George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis> tell the Senate? He 
tabled an unequivocal statement that he had consulted the solicitor general in 
relation to the Legal Services Direction:

Section 55ZF of the Judiciary Act 1903 empowers the attorney general to issue 
directions, which are to apply generally to Commonwealth legal work, or are to 
apply to Commonwealth legal work being performed, or to be performed, in 
relation to a particular matter. As the Direction relates to the process for 
referring a question of law to the solicitor general, the attorney general has 
consulted the solicitor general.

On 16 July a spokesperson for the attorney general told the Australian 
Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/george-brandis-challenged-by-justin-gleeson-20160616-gpktum?>
:

The attorney general consulted the solicitor general about the procedure for 
briefing and taking advice from the solicitor general in person at a meeting on 
November 30, 2015 and also asked him to provide feedback in writing. That 
feedback was provided and considered.

Of course, the 30 November meeting was about the Guidance Note, not about the 
Legal Services Directions.

Just over a week later Brandis appeared on the ABC’s Insiders where he claimed 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/transcripts/Pages/2016/ThirdQuarter/24-July-2016-Interview-with-Fran-Kelly-Insiders.aspx>
 the changes were to “regularise” arrangements so that all government agencies 
and departments were aware of the powers of the solicitor general under the Law 
Officers Act.

Again he claimed that this was discussed with the solicitor general at the 30 
November meeting. For Brandis to paint this as regularising “the practice 
across government to ensure it was in conformity with section 12(b) of theLaw 
Officers Act 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/loa1964127/s12.html> is also 
misleading.

George Brandis has a history of meddling with independent agencies. He's at it 
again | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/george-brandis-has-a-history-of-meddling-with-independent-agencies-hes-at-it-again>
Guidance Note 11, before Brandis’ amendments, described how ministers, 
departments and agencies could obtain the solicitor general’s advice consistent 
with s.12(b).

The documents released under FOI suggest the meeting on 30 November 2015 had 
nothing to do with agencies not being aware of s.12(b), as Brandis told 
Insiders. Rather it was about how to ensure that when the solicitor general 
advises on the validity of draft legislation, he is also told about any further 
amendments and given an opportunity to revise his advice.

The attorney general, the attorney general’s department and the Australian 
government solicitor all opposed disclosure of the documents subject to the FOI 
request.

The Senate committee has to plough through a lot of fog. The documents at our 
disposal contradict claims by the political law officer of the commonwealth 
that the legislative change to the functions and powers of the independent law 
officer arose from a process of consultation.
 