
Australia’s attorney general, George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, has a disturbing 
tendency to meddle with the independence of agencies within his portfolio of 
responsibilities.

We’ve seen this with the Australian Human Rights Commission, the Australia 
Council when he was arts minister, to some extent with the Law Reform 
Commission and now with the functions of the second law officer of the 
commonwealth, the solicitor general.

Justin Gleeson SC, a highly qualified lawyer and advocate, was appointed 
solicitor general by Labor attorney general Mark Dreyfus in February 2013. His 
job involves arguing the commonwealth’s important cases in the high court and 
in international courts (eg the Japanese whaling case before the international 
court of justice) and giving top-level legal advice to ministers and government 
agencies.

Australian election 2016: Reports Turnbull facing pressure to put Abbott in 
defence ministry – politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/16/australian-election-2016-coalition-ramps-up-campaign-on-border-protection-politics-live>
It is vitally important that the solicitor general gives advice that is 
independent <http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/loa1964127/> and 
legally sustainable and not merely suitable to the political interests of the 
party in power.

In practical terms, the solicitor general brings intellectual heft at the apex 
of the government’s internal legal apparatus, particularly in circumstances 
where the attorney general is more a politician than a lawyer.

Last month, just before the election was called, George Brandis issued a legal 
services direction under the Judiciary Act to say that no government official 
or minister, not even the prime minister, can seek the advice of the solicitor 
general without first having the written, signed, approval of the attorney 
general.

While Gleeson was always accountable to Brandis and technically the attorney 
general could formally control issues upon which the solicitor general advised, 
this new directive substantially changes the balance between the first and 
second law officers of the commonwealth.

Ministers and heads of agencies are no longer free to go directly to the 
solicitor general for advice. The attorney general now decides at the threshold 
who can seek legal opinions from the government’s top independent statutory 
lawyer. Associate Professor Gabrielle Appleby from the University of NSW law 
school has studied the office of the solicitor general and written extensively 
on it, most recently in a new book, The Role of the Solicitor General: 
Negotiating Law, Politics and the Public Interest.

She says this directive from Brandis 
<http://insidestory.org.au/a-fragile-relationship>, “is an assertion of control 
by the attorney general over the solicitor general for no immediately 
perceptible reason”.

One perceptible reason might be that the attorney general wants to restrict 
access to the solicitor general while at the same time farming out more advice 
work to the private bar where politically agreeable opinions are readily on 
offer. If this is so, it undermines the functions of the solicitor general and 
is an affront to the rule of law.

Apart from that, Appleby says there could be a chilling effect on ministers 
wanting the solicitor general’s advice if they have to get Brandis approval and 
signature to do so. It certainly takes the solicitor general’s “accountability” 
to a whole new level. Observers of the internal workings of the attorney 
general and solicitor general dynamic say there have been some disturbing 
disagreements, which have led to the directive that undermines Gleeson’s 
independent functions.

It is understood there was dissent about the legal advice that the attorney 
general sent to the governor general over proroguing parliament for two days so 
that the government could clear the notice paper and attempt to control the 
Senate’s agenda. It is understood that opinion was briefed by Brandis to a 
private barrister in Sydney.

Another matter that caused disagreement concerned legislation by Western 
Australia for a government agency to take control of the assets of the Bell 
Group (in liquidation). The companies in the group have been the subject of 
long running litigation in which the Australian Taxation Office claims a 
substantial amount in unpaid taxes.

Normally the commonwealth would have supported the ATO’s litigation, instead 
the government in Canberra seemed to prefer the method adopted by the WA 
government of taking charge of the group’s assets and distributing them on a 
non-judicial basis.

In the end, the high court last month found 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2016/hca-21-2016-05-16.pdf>
 the Western Australian Bell Act to be invalid, but in the meantime there had 
been strong differences of opinion about the best legal position to adopt.

Brandis’s office offered a strange justification for the legal service 
directive, claiming there was “uncertainty in government about the procedure 
for briefing the solicitor general” and the new arrangement seeks to “clarify 
the procedure for briefing and taking advice from the SG”.

Since the directive now makes access to the solicitor general less certain, it 
can only be assumed that the real purpose of the change is to enable Brandis to 
more tightly circumscribe who can seek advise and to what ends.

The attorney general is not without form in these matters. He has persistently 
sought to refocus the Human Rights Commission so that it is dedicated to 
protecting individual liberties, such as free speech, rather than enforcing the 
Racial Discrimination Act.

HRC president Gillian Triggs got into hot water with Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/feb/09/gillian-triggs-report-children-in-detention-centres>
 over her report into children held in immigration detention – the AG insisting 
that this was not an investigation that should have been done during the period 
of the Abbott government which, apparently, has shown nothing but kindness to 
these imprisoned youngsters.

Brandis sought to sideline Triggs 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-03-02/brandis-censured-by-senate-after-criticism-of-gillian-triggs/6274294>
 as president of the HRC by offering her an alternate posting and as a result 
he was censured by the Senate as being unfit to hold the office of attorney 
general.

After giving the Australian Law Reform Commission an ideologically loaded and 
unwieldyinvestigation into encroachment into rights and freedoms 
<https://www.alrc.gov.au/publications/freedoms-alrc129> by commonwealth law, he 
then refused to give this top-rated research body any additional work for 
nearly two years.

Ultimately he came up with an ALRC reference on how to safeguard and protect 
old people from misuse or abuse by “formal and informal” carers, supporters and 
others, an exercise that doubles up on various other inquiries into much the 
same topic: a 2014 ALRC report on equality, capacity and disability in 
commonwealth laws, a Senate committee document on abuse and neglect against the 
disabled, and a House of Representatives study on old people and the law.

We’ve also seen the attorney general politicise the courts at welcome and 
farewell ceremonies for judges of the federal circuit court. At the farewell 
ceremony for Judge Stuart Roberts in Launceston, held a few weeks into the 
election campaign, Brandis used the occasion to lavish praise on the local MP, 
Andrew Nikolic (Liberal, Bass).

When Judge Anne Demack was appointed to sit in the Rockhampton federal circuit 
court, at the bar table alongside Brandis at her welcome ceremony was the local 
National party MP, Michelle Laundy, who is not a lawyer and would be regarded 
professionally as not having a “right of appearance”.

The government says there's no need for a federal corruption body. They would 
| John Madigan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/the-government-says-theres-no-need-for-a-federal-corruption-body-they-would>
Not only did Laundy make a speech in which she mispronounced the judge’s name 
and the name of the bar’s representative but then held a press conference 
outside the court with Brandis. It was noted by the lawyers in attendance that 
Laundy holds the seat of Capricornia by a slim margin.

Just days before the government went into caretaker mode, the attorney general 
announced76 appointments to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal, 
<https://www.attorneygeneral.gov.au/Mediareleases/Pages/2016/SecondQuarter/6-May-2016-Appointments-to-the-Administrative-Appeals-Tribunal.aspx>
 among who were party functionaries, ideologues or political backroom 
operatives:

 * Dennis Dragovic, who sought Liberal preselection for Goldstein;

 * Judith Troeth, a former Liberal senator and Brandis’s factional ally;

 * Saxon Rice, former Queensland Liberal MP;

 * Michael Manetta, a Liberal candidate for the South Australian parliament;

 * Adrienne Milbank, who has called for the UN refugee convention to be 
ditched; and

 * Anne Brandon-Baker, Scott Morrison’s chief of staff. 
The office of attorney general is unique in the parliamentary system because 
it entails both political and legal functions. The mark of a good attorney 
general is to keep those functions rigorously separate and to protect the 
independence of the legal agencies and courts that are part of his or her 
responsibility.

On that score, the current attorney is not travelling well.
 