
Last week news broke that a Victorian supreme court judge had expressed his 
“profound disappointment” and a feeling of being “disrespected” because 
barristers had turned up in his court wearing wigs.

It wasn’t so long ago that judges would have been disappointed and 
disrespected if members of the bar hadn’t appeared in wigs.

Transcript of Justice Kevin Bell venting at the briefs who were overdressed 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27049205/1464578618617/Wigs_Bell_Victoria.pdf?token=R9uAUxhZM8ElS8T1sK566xIEy3w%3D>
 did the rounds, not just in Melbourne, but throughout the legal profession in 
Australia and even into far flung sister common law countries like the UK and 
Canada.

Apparently, Chief Justice Marilyn Warren had told the judges of the court’s 
common law division not to wig-up, as of May 1. Somehow, this was also a signal 
for barristers to dewig, but some didn’t get the hint.

Senior EU lawyer backs workplace ban on Muslim headscarves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/31/senior-eu-lawyer-backs-workplace-ban-on-muslim-headscarves>
In response to Justice Bell’s conniption there was a suitable amount of 
grovelling from the bar table as the briefs tore off their disrespectful 
horsehair. The issue was only clarified later by a “notice to the profession” 
on 26 May, “not to wear wigs in any common law division proceeding”.

There’s been so much confusion about the wearing of wigs that it it is easy to 
fall foul of protocol.

In the county court of Victoria, for instances, each judge specifies their own 
wig and gown protocols, which means counsel have to keep a handy pocket-sized 
ready-reckoner as to the appropriate clobber. Close study ofthe form 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/26745717/1450666767003/Wig_preferences_County_Court.pdf?token=VQLqya8ZMV8ZPkX%2FtOeN9Ym%2Baqw%3D>
 shows that 19% of county court judges don’t want wigs for either civil or 
criminal cases while 6% require those appearing to be wigged for crime and 
civil. The rest are somewhere in between.

For instance, Judge Saccardo says it’s entirely a matter for senior counsel 
whether wigs will be worn at all, while Judge Hinchey wants counsel to confer 
with her associate whether to wig-up for civil cases.

The high court says counsel should wear whatever is customarily worn in the 
court of appeal in the state supreme court in which they ordinarily ply their 
trade.

The federal court has banned full-bottomed wigs for any occasion, an 
instruction attorney general George Brandis must have overlooked when he 
breezed into a shocked court for a special sitting, sporting his long 
ceremonial headwear flapping around his ears.

The NSW supreme court has published a chart of its court attire policy 
<http://www.nswbar.asn.au/docs/webdocs/sc_attire10.pdf> and in common law cases 
it’s wigs or no-wigs depending on whether the appearance is for a trial or for 
a pre-trial application.

The NSW dust diseases tribunal requires wigs for all matters except directions 
hearings. In every jurisdiction throughout Australia there are different rules 
and directions so it’s little wonder even professional robe and wig wearers 
lose track.

Former Victorian attorney general Rob Hulls was a vehement opponent of wigs, 
saying the courts should scrap them altogether, but leaving open the option for 
barristers to wear them in the privacy of their homes or when mowing the nature 
strip at weekends.

One of the previous leaders of the Law Institute of Victoria, Bill O’Shea, 
also wanted to see them go, but his main concern was on health grounds: “You 
can catch all sorts of things from wigs.”

David Pannick QC, now Lord Pannick, writing in The Times said that not only 
the wig, but the rest of the barristers’ dress code, “is positively damaging to 
the health of the legal system”.

The debate continues to inspire great passion. Queensland bar president 
Christopher Hughes says that when the family court did away with ceremonial 
attire judges began to look “fallible” andsome were shot, even bombed 
<http://www.couriermail.com.au/business/quensland-legal-eagles-refuse-to-have-their-wigs-clipped/news-story/77bf353918a852163988f27cdfe09629>
. The solicitors’ branch, on the other hand, are officially opposed to any 
horsehair.

The wig craze got up steam in the 17th century when Charles II returned to 
England from France, bringing with him the fashion of the periwig from the 
court of Louis XIV. In those times just about everyone was wigged, so you 
couldn’t tell the barristers from your average louche citizen. In an attempt 
not to move with the times, members of the bar firmly believed fashion began 
and ended in 1663.

The defamation case that is bad news for journalism and the protection of 
sources | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/the-defamation-case-that-is-bad-news-for-journalism-and-the-protection-of-sources>
Various elaborate conceits were invented to preserve the barristerial wig, one 
favourite being that it unified the appearance of counsel so that a particular 
good-looking brief would not have a jury advantage over a plain looking 
opponent.

Surely, one way of bringing about overdue reform would be to widen the 
privilege and insist that other professionals and craftspeople be wigged: 
general practitioners, specialists and and surgeons, auditors, newspaper 
editors, even pastry cooks. There would be no better way of seeing barristers 
and judges dump their wigs, than if the pretension spread to other sectors of 
fee-earning activity.

A level of delightful absurdity was observed when one of the state supreme 
court judges, who was widely believed to wear a toupee, was seen on the ABC 
program Rough Justice placing a full-bottomed wig over his already extravagant 
hairpiece. For some people, there can never be too many wigs.
 