
The Netflix series Orange is the New Black presented a stark interpretation of 
what can happen when a corporation takes over the running of a state prison.

The first thing is that costs across the board are slashed. Profit becomes the 
main management driver at the Litchfield Penitentiary for women. The quality of 
the food is reduced, inexperienced “correctional officers” are hired while 
unionised ones are let go, recreational and educational services are scaled 
back, and security becomes woefully slack. The place soon falls apart and the 
prisoners escape through a hole in the fence for a glorious romp in the lake.

That’s the small screen’s version of what can happen when corporations look 
after prisoners. Clearly, it hasn’t deterred the NSW government from 
introducing competitive bids from private operators in managing the state’s 
correctional institutions.

The operation of the state-run prisons in due course will become “contestable” 
with private corporations bidding against Corrective Services NSW for the right 
to manage the lives of around 12,000 inmates.

Prison privatisation should be a national scandal | Chris Poyner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/08/prison-privatisation-g4s-wolds>
The NSW minister for corrections, David Elliott, spelt out the policy 
<http://www.justice.nsw.gov.au/Pages/media-news/media-releases/2016/Prison-reform-to-improve-community-safety.aspx>
 last week. At the same time Gary Sturgess, a public policy wonk, published an 
articletrumpeting the process 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/this-is-not-a-race-to-the-bottom-20160320-gnmj4p.html>
 by which the John Morony Correctional Complex at Windsor is now the first 
facility open to a competitive public-private management tender.

Sturgess is a former executive director of a London based institute sponsored 
by the global corrections corporationSerco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/sercogroup>. He is now chairman of the 
board advising the government on prison “contestability”.

The minister said that management targets are to be introduced into the 
system, focusing on measurements to improve the number of hours prisoners spend 
outside their cells and their participation in rehabilitation activities. 
“Benchmarked” budgets also will be required so comparisons between prisons can 
be more easily made.

State run Corrective Services NSW is putting in a bid alongside private prison 
operators in the hope that it can continue to run the John Morony Centre. About 
six of the main North American and British private prison operators turned up 
at a briefing for the tender process, including Serco and the Florida based GEO 
Group.

At least Corrective Services is permitted to bid, which is something of a 
breakthrough for a government whose natural inclination would be just to throw 
the whole lot to the private sector.

The management-speak term for this process is “market testing” and it is being 
promoted as a way of driving change throughout the corrections system, which in 
NSW comprises 35 prisons and over 8,200 sentenced prisoners and another 3,600 
on remand.

If state prisons consistently fail to meet performance targets and benchmarked 
budgets they will be market tested. That is, put out to tender.

The introduction of more private operators into NSW prison management is now 
underway. Already there are at least seven privately operated prisons in 
Australia with two in NSW, Junee and Parklea Correctional Centres, both run by 
the GEO Group.

In the US there have been allegations 
<http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/GEO_Group> that some of GEO’s facilities 
are unsanitary and provide sub-standard care. In one case where the parents of 
a man murdered at the Rio Grande facility in Texas successfully sued the 
company for $US47.5 million, there was an allegation that the defendant had 
destroyed evidence. There have been allegations against the company of 
unsanitary conditions and sub-standard care in its US prison system.

The NSW government is selling its policy as a “major reform program” with the 
aim of lifting standards and reducing reoffending by five percent within three 
years.


Sturgess in his recent article on prison contestability pointed to a 
Queensland audit that found the two contract prisons in that state cost about 
20 percent less to operate than comparable public prisons.

He thinks the numbers will be much the same in NSW, even though no similar 
studies have been carried out. The central argument is that privately run 
prisons give “better value for money”.

The minister is thinking along the same line. “Market testing will give the 
government a realistic idea of how better outcomes will be achieved and how 
much it should cost to run a successful prison in NSW.”

Alarmingly, the minister went on to say that this reform, “will help deliver a 
prison system that accommodates more inmates”.

In order to have any chance of winning competitive tenders, Corrective 
Services NSW will have to scratch around for cost savings and “efficiencies” in 
a climate wherealready there has been an 18 percent increase 
<http://www.bocsar.nsw.gov.au/Pages/bocsar_media_releases/2016/mr-why-is-the-NSW-prison-population-still-growing.aspx>
 in the NSW prison population from June 2011 to September 2015.

The new agenda is largely driven by costs. According to one view 
<https://theconversation.com/prisons-policy-is-turning-australia-into-the-second-nation-of-captives-38842>
, Australia is “inefficient” in locking up prisoners, with the cost per 
prisoner, per year, at $A80,000, compared to a comparable cost in the US of 
$A30,000.

However, the evidence is patchy. A study by the Arizona Department of 
Corrections found thatprivate per prisoner costs could be up 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/05/19/us/19prisons.html?pagewanted=1&ref=us&_r=1> 
to $US1,600 a year more than for prisoners in state run institutions.

Another study in 2007 <http://ucjc.utah.edu/wp-content/uploads/861.pdf> by the 
University of Utah concluded that cost savings from privatising prisons cannot 
be guaranteed and in any case appeared to be minimal.

Research from Mississippi showed that private prisons increase the average 
length <http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2523238> of a 
prisoner’s sentences by between four to seven percent. The same work claimed 
that privately run prisons resulted in no reduction in reoffending, something 
that flies in the face of the NSW minister’s policy ambition.

There was also the notorious 2008 “kids-for-cash” scandal in Pennsylvania 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/pennsylvania-seeks-close-books-kids-cash-scandal-n408666>
 where two county court judges were pocketing money from the builder of two 
private, for profit, youth detention centres. The bribes were made to ensure 
juveniles got decent, lengthy sentences.

Here the profit motive conflicted with doing justice and that is a factor that 
plays out more broadly in the context of incarceration-for-profit. There’s a 
strong public policy argument that says imposing punishment on offenders is an 
essential government function. To contract it out creates conflicts and 
inconsistencies with the way the state is supposed to be responsible for 
upholding criminal justice.

Of course, we shouldn’t forget that all of Australia’s immigration prisons are 
privately run. There might already be enough evidence there to make useful 
comparisons on meeting performance targets.

Sanders' war on private prisons should make Australia feel the Bern | Antony 
Loewenstein
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/14/sanders-war-on-private-prisons-should-make-australia-feel-the-bern>
Gary Sturgess also wrote an interesting discussion paper 
<http://www.serco-ap.com.au/media/78951/bound_for_botany_bay.pdf> for the Serco 
Institute on the private arrangements under which convicts were transported to 
the Australian colonies.

The quality of the work of these service providers varied enormously, with 40% 
of the convicts on the second fleet either dying at sea or shortly after 
landing at Port Jackson, riddled with lice and infection. This compared with a 
death rate of three percent on the first fleet.

Governor Phillip remarked that the second fleet was a “scene of misery ... but 
it would be want of duty not to say that it was occasioned by the contractors 
having crowded too many on board these ships, and from their being too much 
confined during the passage”.

Sturgess argues that the important thing is not who delivers the service, but 
the design of the contract – the evaluation criteria, the performance regime 
and the manner in which it is managed.

It’s a hopeful argument, and while prisoners no doubt think that anything 
might be a better alternative to what they have now, you don’t hear them 
singing about the joys of life at the existing penal institutions that are run 
for profit.
 