
Sunday marks the end of the 30-year statutory embargo on the release of what 
could prove a treasure trove of documents dealing with the alleged misbehaviour 
of the former high court justice Lionel Murphy.

These are what are known as the Class A documents that were collected by the 
parliamentary commission of inquiry that was established in May 1986 to examine 
14 allegations against the high court judge.

The commission of inquiry was wound up before it could report on the 
allegations because in July 1986, Murphy was diagnosed with terminal cancer and 
given only a short time to live.


In August that year, the Labor government introduced the Parliamentary 
Commission of Inquiry (Repeal) Bill, to which assent was given 
<https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2004C00995> on 25 September 1986. 

Lionel Murphy drama confirmed but much detail remains under wraps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jan/01/lionel-murphy-drama-ended-with-a-whimper-rather-than-a-bang>
Section 6 says that for 30 years after the commencement of the repeal act, no 
one other than a presiding officer of the parliament (the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives and the president of the Senate) is entitled to access the 
documents.

From Sunday, the Class A documents can be released “with the written authority 
of the presiding officers”.

The Class B documents deal with the interpretation of section 72 of the 
constitution, dealing with theremoval of judges on the ground of “proved 
misbehaviour 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/coaca430/s72.html>”.


It is the misconduct documents that are expected to open a treasure trove of 
historical interest. Murphy was the reformist attorney general of the Whitlam 
government and was appointed to the high court in 1975 to replace Sir Douglas 
Menzies.

Justice Roslyn Atkinson of the Queensland supreme court broadly set out the 
history of the Murphy affairin a speech to a law dinner in 2008 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/cgi-bin/sinodisp/au/journals/QldJSchol/2008/51.html?stem=0&synonyms=0&query=%22cth%20consol_act%20pcoia1986456%22>
.

In November 1983, The National Times broke a story that federal and NSW police 
had commenced a crime intelligence operation against a Sydney solicitor in 
which they bugged the solicitor’s phone.

The National Times claimed that the conversations showed the solicitor and 
others were involved in fixing judicial proceedings and providing prostitutes 
to a senior judge.

In February 1984, The Age published a front page story with the headline: 
“Secret tapes of judge, lawyer”, with the sub-heading “Sydney solicitor’s phone 
was tapped”.

The article said that an unnamed judge was taped talking to the solicitor 
about judicial appointments, politicians and other matters. There was also a 
conversation between the solicitor and the Sydney crime figure Abe Saffron, in 
which the judge was described as “the trump”. The provision of “girls” to the 
judge was also discussed.

In March 1984, Don Lane, a minister in the Bjelke Petersen government said in 
the Queensland parliament that the judge involved in the illegally taped 
conversations was Justice Lionel Murphy of the high court. The solicitor was 
Morgan Ryan.


Later the chief magistrate of NSW Clarrie Briese and the district court judge 
Paul Flannery alleged that Murphy had improperly attempted to influence them in 
relation to charges faced by Ryan.

These allegations were investigated by two Senate committees, which split on 
party lines, although a majority on the second committee found that Murphy’s 
conduct might have amounted to “proved misbehaviour”.

In January 1985, the Commonwealth director of public prosecutions charged 
Murphy with two attempts of perverting the course of justice in relation to the 
criminal proceedings against Ryan, who was facing a retrial on an alleged 
conspiracy to obtain permanent resident status for 22 Koreans with the use of 
forged documents.

This was the first time criminal charges had been laid against a high court 
judge, and in April 1985 Murphy was committed for trial. The prosecutor was Ian 
Callinan QC, himself later to be appointed to the high court, with Tom Hughes 
QC acting on behalf of Murphy.

 Murphy was acquitted on the count relating to Flannery but convicted on the 
Briese charge.

The facts before the court were that Murphy had told the chief magistrate he 
was concerned about the conspiracy case against Ryan. Briese later told the 
High Court judge that he had inquired the magistrate hearing the Ryan case and 
it was likely that the accused would be committed for trial. Murphy replied: 
“The little fellow will be shattered.”

Later there was a telephone conversation in which Murphy told Briese he had 
spoken to the NSW attorney general who was in support of legislation to make 
magistrates independent, rather than employees of the government. According to 
Briese, the judge then said to him, “And now what about my little mate?”

Various questions of law about the charges and the trial went to the high 
court and some were sent back to the NSW court of criminal appeal, which 
quashed Murphy’s conviction and sentence of 18 months’ imprisonment and ordered 
a retrial.

Murphy was retried before Justice David Hunt and a jury in April 1986. Again 
he did not give sworn evidence but made a statement from the well of the court. 
On 28 April 1986, he was acquitted of the charge of attempting to pervert the 
course of justice in relation to Clarrie Briese.

However, the matter did not rest there. The Stewart Royal Commission reported 
that the police tapes, the transcripts of which had been published by The Age, 
were genuine. There was a second confidential volume of the report by Justice 
Donald Stewart that allegedly contained more allegations against Murphy.

In response to the judicial-political tempest that was adversely distracting 
the Hawke government, the cabinet agreed to create the parliamentary commission 
of inquiry, comprising three former judges, Sir George Lush, Sir Richard 
Blackburn and Andrew Wells QC.

Murphy made an unsuccessful application to the high court seeking an 
injunction to stop the commission sitting on the ground that the legislation 
was invalid.

In July 1986, Murphy knew he was terminally ill. He returned to the high court 
to sit, a move that was supported by the government,which moved to end the work 
of the parliamentary commission, against opposition protests 
<http://parlinfo.aph.gov.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;adv=yes;db=CHAMBER;id=chamber%2Fhansardr%2F1986-08-20%2F0002;orderBy=_fragment_number,doc_date-rev;page=2;query=Dataset%3Ahansardr,hansardr80%20Decade%3A%221980s%22%20Year%3A%221986%22;rec=4;resCount=Default>
.

In August 1986, Murphy released a media statement that said that in his view, 
“purported allegations ... are either untrue or do not constitute misbehaviour”.


The presiding officers have authorised the clerks of the Senate and the House 
of Representatives to access, after September 25, the commission’s records.

The office of Senator Stephen Parry, president of the Senate, told Guardian 
Australia: “As there is a considerable volume of material that could be of a 
sensitive nature, the task of reviewing, advising and determining appropriate 
arrangements for access to the records will take some time. The presiding 
officers will make known their decision on wider access to records of the 
commission in due course.”
 