
José Mourinho <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jose-mourinho> will not 
move for a centre-back despite Marcos Rojo’s injury potentially leaving only 
Phil Jones and Chris Smalling available going into Tuesday’s EFL semi-final 
against Hull City and Sunday’s league meeting with Liverpool.

Rojo suffered a muscle strain in Saturday’s 4-0 FA Cup third-round win over 
Reading 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
 and had to be replaced after 19 minutes. As Eric Bailly is away with Ivory 
Coast onAfrica Cup of Nations duty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/04/premier-league-winners-losers-2017-africa-cup-of-nations>
, the manager may be down to only two central defenders.

No Premier League players in Fifpro 2016 team of the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/global-players-poll-fifa-awards-snubs-premier-league>
Mourinho is yet to discover how serious Rojo’s problem is and after the 
victory over Reading was careful not to put a timescale on how long the 
Argentinian may be out. “People like to say: ‘First degree, x days out, second 
degree x days out.’ Let’s wait to see,” he said.

Yet Rojo’s injury has not changed Mourinho’s strategy, though any further 
setback may force him to rethink.

José Fonte, a long-term target, could then be an option as the 33-year-old has 
told Southampton he wants to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/05/southampton-jose-fonte-submits-transfer-request>
. His club-mate Virgil van Dijk has also impressed this term and Benfica’s
Swedish centre-half Victor Lindelof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/28/manchester-united-benfica-victor-lindelof-defence-improves>
, whom United hope to land in the summer, is a further player of interest.

Bailly, whose Ivory Coast side beat Sweden in a friendly on Sunday, is keen to 
play with Lindelof. “We have many good central defenders – Chris Smalling, 
Marcos Rojo and Phil Jones – but I hope I get to play with Lindelof,” hetold 
fotbollskanalen 
<http://www.fotbollskanalen.se/exklusivt/united-stjarnan-valkomnar-lindelof-hoppas-fa-spela-tillsammans-/>
.

Mourinho has said his team will play Hull with “all the power” they have for 
the first leg in an attempt to establish an advantage. United host Marco 
Silva’s team in the midst of a fine run of form, an eighth consecutive victory 
and 14th match unbeaten. United are sixth in the Premier League, 26 points 
better off than Hull.

Transfer window January 2017: every deal in England, Spain, Germany, France 
and Italy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/transfer-window-january-2017-all-the-latest-moves-and-news-interactive>
Yet Mourinho is intent that United take Hull, whose manager  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/06/marco-silva-hull-city-planning-miracle>
 is a friend, seriously. “The second leg is away so if we can do something in 
the first leg to give us an advantage, we will try that,” he said. “Hull may 
look at the semi-final as a big occasion. Maybe for them they have a more 
important game three days later in Premier League. Liverpool is a big match for 
us [on Sunday] but we want to be in the final.”

Mourinho has won the competition three times with Chelsea and he wants United 
to also try and claim the EFL Cup. “For big clubs, a competition is a 
competition. I was never good at choosing competitions. You get a very busy 
fixture list but you are in these competitions to try and win. I won it twice 
in Cardiff but at Wembley the meaning is better. Why not try? We are going to 
try.

“Hull have a new manager, an intelligent guy who will organise his team. It is 
not easy to come to the Premier League when you are a foreign coach. I spoke to 
him on Friday. He knows it is difficult because they are bottom of the league 
but it is a big opportunity for him.

“He is a good young coach. He went to Greece. Nobody knows he was champion 
there. Now he comes to the big one. It is a big opportunity. I hope he loses 
three matches [against United] and wins all the rest. His formation was 
[always] good.”

Silva managed Estoril from 2011-14 and then Sporting and Olympiakos for a 
season apiece. “He started from below, he was not given a top job immediately, 
and did well in a small job. He goes to Sporting. He won the cup and finished 
second, goes to Greece and is champion,” Mourinho added. “He is very stable. In 
spite of him being so young he is experienced. He is mature. I would love him 
to do well. But it is hard to jump from the bottom of the league.”

Mourinho will field a changed side on Tuesday. “Against Hull I will play with 
fresh players. It is easy to know our team: Zlatan [Ibrahimovic], [Paul] Pogba, 
[Antonio] Valencia, [Ander] Herrera. To win it we have to win three matches. 
Hull and [in the final] Liverpool or Southampton. The fact we are winning 
matches is good. We are not going to throw away an opportunity [to continue].”
 