
The attorney general, Senator George Brandis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/george-brandis>, did not fare well 
in Monday evening’s much anticipated debate with his Labor party opponent, Mark 
Dreyfus.

The attorney was variously accused of “lying to the parliament” and “a 
disaster for the rule of law”, whose term of office has been marked by “attacks 
on independent office holders”. For good measure, Dreyfus added that Brandis 
had “failed Australia” and was “delusional” if he thought the attorney 
general’s portfolio attracted “little controversy”.

The accusation about lying goes to the heart of the attorney’s claim that he 
had “consulted” 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/labor-calls-on-brandis-to-resign-over-clash-with-solicitorgeneral-20160617-gplsdl>
 with solicitor general Justin Gleeson on adirective that would preclude 
ministers seeking legal opinions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/george-brandis-has-a-history-of-meddling-with-independent-agencies-hes-at-it-again>
 from the SG without Brandis’ prior written approval.

Australian election 2016: new poll has Labor at 51% and Coalition at 49% – 
politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/jun/21/australian-election-2016-turnbull-shorten-coalition-greens-labor-politics-live>
However, Gleeson wrote to Brandis’ office on 11 May denying he was consulted 
over the attorney’s self-imposed veto of his independent advisory functions. 
Indeed, it has emerged that in implementing this change to the briefing policy, 
Brandis and his office were at pains to instruct the bureaucracy to keep the 
solicitor general out of the loop.

Dreyfus said this was another instance where Brandis had attacked the 
independent functions of agencies within his portfolio – including the Human 
Rights Commission, the Australia Council, and simultaneously starving the Law 
Reform Commission of important references while plying it with ideological ones.

Brandis reminded us that after the election the attorney general will be 
“front and centre” on two big issues – same sex marriage and Indigenous 
constitutional recognition.

Clearly, Dreyfus doesn’t think his opposite number is the right person to 
manage these important legal and political issues. The Labor party is opposed 
to the marriage plebiscite and if elected to government would shortly introduce 
legislation to amend the Marriage Act.

Brandis said it was possible to have gay both marriage and religious freedom 
(which translates into some churches maintaining bigoted responses to legal 
equality for same sex couples). It is “not a zero sum game”, he added. Dreyfus 
said that under Labor’s proposed legislation, “no minister of religion will be 
forced to marry anybody they don’t want to marry”.

The attorney cast the plebiscite as an opportunity for everyone to have 
“ownership” of the issue, and for conservative voices “the right to have their 
say”. The purpose of the conservative voices in the Coalition in deciding to 
have a plebiscite was somewhat different – to delay the issue, let some of the 
nastiest voices out of the closet and, maybe, sink the whole thing in a massive 
smear campaign.

Constitutional recognition for Indigenous Australians garners bipartisan 
political support, although at this stage we haven’t actually seen the proposed 
constitutional question.Mark Dreyfus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/mark-dreyfus> picked up what his 
leader Bill Shorten said on the ABC’s Q&A, adding that a “treaty is a live 
debate in the Aboriginal community – it cannot be sidestepped”, and is not 
inconsistent with an amendment to the constitution.

The hoary perennial of section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act was not 
far from the surface. Chris Merritt, a journalist with The Australian, wanted 
to know Brandis’ and Dreyfus’ views about a current case in which two 
non-Aboriginal Queensland University of Technologystudents are being sued under 
the Racial Discrimination Act for allegedly racist comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/01/students-accused-of-racist-posts-say-human-rights-commission-guilty-of-discrimination>
 posted on Facebook and whether the legislation needs to be changed.

Dreyfus was surprised that the legal editor of a newspaper would expect an 
answer about an issue currently before the courts. He would not comment on the 
case, nor would Brandis. As far as section 18C is concerned, the shadow 
attorney general said it “sets a standard against racial discrimination in this 
country” and attacks on it have been “shameful”.

The attorney general said he was “disappointed” in the debate about 18C but it 
was off the table now and that remains the government’s position.

Senator Brandis also stuck to his guns about the “proper” role of community 
legal centres – they should not be funded to do advocacy work. His thesis is 
that the money should go to frontline legal services, ignoring the reality that 
acting for the disadvantaged is not entirely focused on court proceedings, but 
entails frequent representations to government agencies and ministers.

Dreyfus said that to make funding conditional on ideological undertakings by 
community legal centres is “foolish”.

Which took us in the treacherous terrain of commonwealth legal aid funding. 
Brandis invariably presents a rolled-up figure of $1.6bn for the Coalition’s 
contribution to the legal assistance sector.

It is a figure that is spread thinly over five years and covers a lot of 
activity, including all the community legal centres, all legal aid commissions, 
all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander legal services and all family 
violence prevention and legal services – all around the nation.

From the $1.6bn, community legal centres receive around 11%, or $174m over 
five years. Their funding will fall from $42.2m to $30.1m in 2017-18, a cut of 
30%. The Federation of Community Legal Centres has prepared afact check on 
Senator Brandis’ funding claims 
<https://communitylawblog.wordpress.com/2016/06/02/fact-checking-attorney-general-brandis-on-community-legal-centre-funding/>
.

An interesting comparison is that the commonwealth over the same period will 
spend $3.5bn on its own legal services.

The contest about funding involves plenty of smoke and mirrors. Additional 
commitments have come from both sides for community legal centres and for 
domestic violence prevention and case work. The increased funds to some extent 
offset earlier cuts by the Coalition, but none will be sufficient to counter 
the cuts that start in 2017-2018.

Both Liberal and Labor have announced more money to address Indigenous 
domestic violence, but that is money that was already foreshadowed in the 2016 
budget or, in Labor’s case, it comes out of its $47.4m domestic violence 
package. Labor has a plan to reduce the prospect of fine defaulters ending up 
in prison and the Greens, even though not part of this debate, are talking 
money for justice reinvestment – ie address the underlying social and economic 
issues that produce criminality.

Interestingly, two senior judges have entered the fray with calls for the 
courts to receive at least $6m so they can handle domestic violence cases at 
the “coal face”. Both the chief justice of the family court, Diana Bryant, and 
the chief judge of the federal circuit court, John Pascoe, have put their names 
to a statement emphasising the criticalneed for family law courts to have the 
resources 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27114170/1466416793607/Election16_Federal_Courts_family_violence_funding.pdf?token=dTLJPkcE35xCcc0OmdynZM3d3xw%3D>
 to handle the domestic violence caseload.

George Brandis has a history of meddling with independent agencies. He's at it 
again | Richard Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/george-brandis-has-a-history-of-meddling-with-independent-agencies-hes-at-it-again>
Brandis was not entirely comforting when he said: “I wish there was more money 
for legal aid. I really do.”

As to judicial appointments, the attorney general assured us political 
considerations do not enter the selection equation. Maybe a non-ideological 
approach doesn’t figure too largely with appointments to the administrative 
appeals tribunal, particularly when you consider some of those selected just 
before the election was called:

 * Dennis Dragovic, who sought Liberal preselection for Goldstein; 
 * Judith Troeth, a former Liberal senator and Brandis’ factional ally; 
 * Saxon Rice, former Queensland Liberal MP; 
 * Michael Manetta, a Liberal candidate for the South Australian parliament; 
 * Adrienne Milbank, who has called for the UN refugee convention to be 
ditched; and 
 * Anne Brandon-Baker, Scott Morrison’s chief of staff. 

However, the attorney was a little surprised to hear one of his new judges at 
a recent swearing-in ceremony declare how much her family admired Josip Broz 
Tito, the former strongman of Yugoslavia.

Brandis is convinced that most of his time in office has been “largely 
uncontroversial ... with only boutique controversies that excite academic 
common rooms”.
 