
The lengths and depths to which governments will go to flog off precious 
public silverware knows no bounds. The extraordinary sale of the country’s 
largest land titles registry is the latest piece of critical infrastructure to 
be thrown open to private control.

The New South Wales parliament has just passed the land and property 
information NSW (authorised transaction) bill 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/bills/DBAssets/bills/BillText/3330/b2016-079-d15-House.pdf>
 and the process of selecting new operators for the registry is now under way. 
The last vote needed to get it across the line came from Christian Democratic 
MLC Reverend Fred Nile.

The Land and Property Information <http://www.lpi.nsw.gov.au/land_titles> 
unit, which runs the registry, already had been carved off from the Finance, 
Services and Innovation departmental “cluster”, and for months the place has 
had the slide rule run over it by KPMG and Boston Consulting, with instructions 
from the NSW government to plump the registry for sale.

Selling Asic's corporate registry 'highly detrimental' to economy, warn data 
brokers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/28/selling-asics-corporate-registry-highly-detrimental-to-economy-warn-data-brokers>
The land registry is crucial for the security of property ownership. It 
guarantees the title to everyone’s land, looks after the integrity of land data 
across the state, supports the mapping and valuation arms of the Land and 
Property Information service and returns an annual profit to the government of 
around $50m. However, it is expected that the sale price could be $700m-plus, 
which would consist of a one-off payment and an agreed return to Treasury 
subject to contract which would run for 35 years.

The plan is contagious because South Australia, in its 2016-17 budget, 
announced it would invite private operators to run its land titles registry. 
Privately operated registries of public information is bound to catch on in 
other cash-hungry jurisdictions, as we’ve also seen with the commonwealth 
puttingAsic’s company database into contention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/18/selling-off-asics-trove-of-company-data-would-hinder-tax-enforcement>
.

The state land registry is crucial to the protection of peoples’ most precious 
possession. Its sale to a private operator has not been on the public radar, 
which is odd because what is at stake is the high level of title security that 
is currently guaranteed.

The new operator is likely to be a consortium, comprising a bank, an insurance 
company, a foreign sovereign fund and an international superannuation fund. 
Certainly these institutions themselves would own and invest in significant 
amounts of real property. For large land investors to be operating the titles 
registry could be seen as an inherent conflict.

Title insurance is rarely purchased in NSW because the integrity of the system 
of registration is sound and there’s almost negligible land fraud. At present 
it is believed there would be no more than five claims a year against the 
Torrens Assurance Fund.

Margaret Hole, a former president of the NSW Law Society, says there has been 
no independent assessment of the sale. Her concern is that once it is private 
hands title insurance will be necessary, as is the case in the United States.

Title insurance on the purchase of a $1.4m property is currently about $990. 
Last year 213,000 land transfers were lodged in NSW, which means that 
conservatively $210m in insurance premiums can be raised by the operators 
holding the concession.

Over the 35-year term of the arrangement, that would be $744bn from land title 
insurance, which until now has been quite unnecessary. Already, insurance 
companies have been knocking on the registry’s door trying to get their paw 
into the lolly jar.

Here’s Margaret’s Hole’s submission 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27265162/1474969508743/Land_Titles_M.Hole.pdf?token=ocUk2KPkimDOBz2miQpgvH9G6UE%3D>
 outlining the issues at stake, and questioning the lack of public debate on 
the sale. Theunion movement, too, has been out on the battlements 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27265161/1474969507397/Land_Titles_union_protest.pdf?token=wrlI1v0GR6dylwypG3UUb08qSMQ%3D>
 opposing the sale.

Current NSW Law Society president Gary Ulman says that the justification for 
the privatisation of public assets usually lies in the need for a large scale 
injection of capital into an industry, or to address underperformance by a 
government utility – and that neither rationale applies in this case.

“This raises important issues around adequate protection of sensitive data, 
the continued implementation of best practice anti-fraud measures, and the 
potential loss of expertise of LPI personnel,” he said.

Needless to say, state treasurer Gladys Berejiklian paints a rosy picture, 
<http://www.treasury.nsw.gov.au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0006/129678/LPI_transaction_legislation_introduced.pdf>
 saying the legislation “provides a range of legislative and regulatory 
safeguards to protect the integrity of the property titling system while also 
protecting staff”.

At the moment redundancies are not available and LPI employees will have to 
take up positions with the private operator if a position is available. After 
four years they can be terminated.

Berejiklian says that the government will retain “full ownership of all land 
title data and the data must be stored in Australia” and price rises will be 
confined to CPI increases.

The legislation also provides for “step-in” powers and a new regulator will 
monitor the operator’s performance. She thinks that the private sector is best 
placed to invest in new technology, “which will have major benefits for 
consumers”.

These assurances carefully miss the point. The operation of the register, not 
the ownership of the data, is the key to the large potential profits from title 
insurance.

And it’s one thing for the registry to invest in new technology for electronic 
lodgement, and entirely something else for users to invest in the technology 
that gets them through the gate.

The British government has run several consultations on its proposal to change 
the ownership of its land registry. In November last year the chancellor of the 
exchequer played with the idea of privatising the registry but that was 
abandoned once it was revealed that all the potential bidders were linked to 
tax havens.

Face the facts: competition and profit don't work in health, education or 
prisons | John Quiggin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/face-the-facts-competition-and-profit-dont-work-in-health-education-or-prisons>
There was a further consultation between March and May 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/land-registry-faces-privatisation>
 and to date the government has not announced whether there will be a next step.

Those brilliant economic managers, Tony Abbott and his treasurer Joe Hockey, 
provided an alluring incentive to NSW and other states to become parties to 
what is known as the “asset recycling initiative”.

NSW premier, Mike Baird, signed onto this scheme in March 2015, whereby the 
commonwealth pledges to pay states and territories 15% in addition to the funds 
raised from selling public assets.

The proviso is that the liberated funds are to be spent on infrastructure 
projects. Meanwhile, theTurnbull government is pressing ahead with privatising 
Asic’s company database 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/25/privatising-asics-data-will-hinder-scrutiny-of-corporate-wrongdoing>
.

GetUp has been running a campaign against it with a video from independent 
investigative business reporter Michael West explaining why the company 
database should be retained as a public resource.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6pYGf70w3K8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6pYGf70w3K8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6pYGf70w3K8&media=>
 GetUp video: The Worst Sell-Off You Never Heard Of 
As was the case in Britain with the bidders for the land title registry, West 
suggests that the Asic company database could fall into the hands of tax 
dodgers, which could potentially comprise the ability of investigators and 
reporters to search the data and make company linkages.

These transactions are proceeding in the face of warnings issued by Rod Sims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/27/acccs-rod-sims-says-privatisations-severely-damaging-economy>
, chairman of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission. In July he 
said that the privatisation of public monopolies should cease because 
governments are mishandling them.

I’ve been a very strong advocate of privatisation for probably 30 years. I 
believe it enhances economic efficiency [but] I’m now almost at the point of 
opposing privatisation because it’s been done to boost proceeds, it’s been done 
to boost asset sales, and I think it’s severely damaging our economy.

Sims said the problem is the hefty price increases that accompany the 
privatisation of these assets. “Let’s call it out.”

“If we want support for privatisation then we’ve got to do them in ways that 
deliver what’s expected to be delivered, which is lower prices for consumers, 
not higher.”
 