
Operation Spicer it certainly was. Spicier and spicier by the page. The report 
<http://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/docman/investigations/reports-1/4865-investigation-into-nsw-liberal-party-electoral-funding-for-the-2011-state-election-campaign-and-other-matters-operation-spicer/file>
 on how NSW Liberals tapped into prohibited donations from property developers 
and then by various means misappropriated the money, washed the money, hid the 
money and subverted the law, is material we have been waiting to read ever 
since the public hearings were completed two years ago.

Since then there have been legal challenges, the high court reinterpretation 
of the meaning of “corruption” 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2015/hca-14-2015-04-15.pdf>
 in the Icac Act and changes to the legislation, accompanied by a barrage of 
frequently misinformed criticism in the Murdoch press.

That would have derailed a less gutsy organisation, but Icac did the job that 
has been crying out to be done. On the back of these findings, any half decent 
government would restore the funding that has been cut from Icac and strengthen 
its powers.

Icac recommends criminal charges against Joe Tripodi and Chris Hartcher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/icac-recommends-criminal-charges-against-joe-tripodi-and-chris-hartcher>
A spate of former Liberal politicians, whose names won’t mean anything to 
anyone because they were never more than party hacks,were found to have 
intended to evade election funding and disclosure laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/30/icac-recommends-criminal-charges-against-joe-tripodi-and-chris-hartcher>
. Some of those also sought to scratch their way around caps that the law 
imposed on donations.

The report also pinged for the same offences a sprinkling of people from the 
brown paper bag school of property development.

Among standout names was the one state MP who stayed in parliament, moving 
from the frontbench to the crossbench after Icac started sniffing into his 
affairs – former copper and police minister, Mike Gallacher.

Over the past few years he has stoutly denounced Icac and protested his 
innocence. Legal affairs reporter Chris Merritt in Tuesday’s Australian gave 
him a friendly leg-up by fearlessly predicting it was expected the report would 
exonerate him, “which will increase pressure on Premier Mike Baird to restore 
Mr Gallacher’s standing within the Liberal Party”.

In fact, the report found Gallagher had given unreliable evidence and “acted 
with the intention of evading laws” relating to the disclosure of political 
donations and the ban on donations from property developers.

According to Sydney Morning Herald state political editor, Sean Nicholls, the 
premier said the former minister won’t be welcome back into the parliamentary 
Liberal party.
Sean Nicholls (@SeanNic) 
Mike Baird says it's clear Mike Gallacher has done the wrong thing and he 
won't be welcome back into the parliamentary Liberal party#ICAC 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ICAC?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/SeanNic/status/770475131516903424> August 30, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SeanNic/status/770475131516903424> 
Another former prominent Coalition frontbencher, from the hard right, Chris 
Hartcher, is in even murkier water. Icac says that the DPP should consider 
whether Hartcher should be prosecuted “for the offence of larceny”, for 
allegedly trousering money that should have gone into the party coffers.

The maximum penalty for larceny is five years imprisonment. Hartcher was so 
inflamed by Icac’s temerity to question his god-given right to raise money from 
wherever he saw fit, that he took a miserable complaint to the NSW Bar 
Association about Spicer counsel assisting Geoffrey Watson SC.

Watson had given an interview to the Financial Review 
<http://www.afr.com/it-pro/icac-barristers-tough-tactics-20140724-janqi?login_token=1c5GRcPPlB-rmeevvSr58jVECg2SUMWam_Vu-V0HlMYwHT7aQsGehrapJ9grjNMFH4BG8kvBoHfs2jFzIT5cqQ&expiry=1472688880&single_use_token=_lKuOi3wt1T_ncRfdC9oe5cCHxXq42VXk-liHVoUH49XlX6OrSVn0n93RQdzrVCfQfZjb6wQgt3KreCiQBzDDA>
, where he said: “I have done all these cases involving the Labor Party, the 
Police Associations ... boy, they are hard. But I have never known anybody to 
kick and scratch more than the bloody Liberal Party.”

You might not believe it, but that offended some weird barristers’ rule and 
resulted in Watson’s censure by the disciplinarians at the NSW bar. The 
decision was then leaked to the faithful ciphers in the Murdoch press.

Other familiar names also suffer adverse findings in the report. There’s Nick 
Di Girolamo, a Liberal party fundraiser, associate of the Obeids and former CEO 
of Australian Water Holdings.

Icac said that Di Girolamo acted with the intention of subverting the law by 
attempting to disguise the purpose of a payment of $183,000 to a “sham company” 
whose purpose was to fund a member of Hartcher’s campaign staff.

Prior to the release of the Spicer Icac findings, Di Girolamo thought his 
reputation had been damaged by the Sydney Morning Herald and he brought 
defamation proceedings against Fairfax Media and some of its journalists over 
reports about Australian Water Holdings.

Earlier this year, Fairfax’s barrister, Tom Blackburn SC alleged in the court 
case that Di Girolamo lied about a sham transaction, whereby money from the 
Obeids was treated as a loan to Di Girolamo.

Blackburn alleged that the loan enabled Di Girolamo to appear on the share 
register of Australian Water Holdings in order to conceal the involvement of 
the Obeid family.

In short order, Di Girolamo withdrew his action with the newspaper telling the 
court it did not intend to say that Di Girolamo was corrupt or had engaged in 
any corrupt activity in respect of Australian Water Holdings. Di Girolamo’s 
lawyers never responded to the allegations put by Blackburn.

Case over without the court awarding any damages. About a month before the 
defamation trial commenced,Chris Merritt wrote 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/business/legal-affairs/smh-risks-12m-damages-bill-in-nick-di-girolamo-defamation-suit/news-story/9b20157fa2eaaae274f7ad95c8facc81?login=1>
 a lip-smacking beat-up in The Australian straight out of Di Girolamo’s 
playbook:

Fairfax Media and some of its star reporters are set to become embroiled in a 
spectacular defamation case in which the publisher is facing a damages claim of 
up to $12 million ... The case ... will subject The Sydney Morning Herald to 
intense scrutiny over its coverage of some of the most significant matters 
associated by the NSWIndependent Commission Against Corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/independent-commission-against-corruption>
.

Faced with such a massive claim, court documents indicate Fairfax has adopted 
a high risk-strategy in which it will attempt to prove the truth of its 
coverage.

The report on Australian Water Holdings, Operation Credo, is also waiting to 
come out of the closet, but isdelayed because of criminal proceedings 
<https://www.icac.nsw.gov.au/investigations/current-investigations/investigationdetail/203>
 against various Obeids.

The findings about breaches of the election funding laws are statute barred 
because there is a three year limitation period for those offences.

We should not forget former Labor minister and Obeid crony, Joe Tripodi, 
against whom a finding of serious corrupt conduct was made in relation to 
slipping a confidential Treasury report to Nathan Tinkler’s company, Buildev – 
for the personal benefit of the then MP. Icac says Tripodi should be prosecuted 
for misconduct in public office.

Much of the tireless sprays of inexactitude from the anti-Icac brigade are 
sourced from disgruntled citizens who had been found to have conducted 
themselves corruptly, but subsequently acquitted of criminal charges at trial.

Icac, the Car Crash: A Drama in Four Acts, starring Margaret Cunneen | Richard 
Ackland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/22/icac-the-car-crash-a-drama-in-four-acts-starring-margaret-cunneen>
To complain that this represents a gross denial of justice misunderstands the 
nature and function of Icac. Sydney barrister Bruce McClintock SC hasprepared 
two reports 
<https://www.parliament.nsw.gov.au/committees/DBAssets/InquirySubmission/Body/55589/Submission%2018%20-%20Bruce%20McClintock%20SC.pdf>
 for the government on the operations of Icac and he points out that the 
commission is a fact-finding, investigative body, making determinations on the 
balance of probabilities and on material that is not admissible in criminal 
proceedings.

Consequently, it is quite possible that there will be different results at the 
commission and in a court.

As McClintock says, an acquittal by a court, “does not mean that the person in 
question did not engage in corrupt conduct still less that the person is 
‘innocent’.”

Still the campaign rolls on. Coalition members of Icac’s parliamentary 
oversight committee are markedly hostile to commissioner Megan Latham and 
resentful of the commission.

The Icac inspector, David Levine, wants corruption investigations to be 
conducted in secret 
<http://www.oiicac.nsw.gov.au/assets/oiicac/reports/other-reports/Report-to-Premier-Inspectors-Review-of-the-ICAC.pdf>
 and that there be a “protocol of exoneration” for those who have been found 
not guilty in the courts.

In a submission to the parliamentary committee, McClintock said these 
recommendations defeat the purpose of exposing corruption, while exonerating 
people whose conduct was found to be corrupt reveals “a misunderstanding of 
ICAC’s role, its purpose, the Act itself and, indeed, of our criminal justice 
system”.
 