
Attorney general George Brandis says he wants the marriage equality plebiscite 
to be compulsory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/24/marriage-equality-george-brandis-to-ask-cabinet-to-decide-plebiscite-wording>
, which is all very well as far as it goes, but it does not go far enough.

He has also said that “the only way 
<http://www.theage.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/samesex-marriage-george-brandis-says-plebiscite-is-only-way-20160724-gqchqf.html>
” marriage equality can be dealt with in the life of the next parliament is 
through a plebiscite – something we know to be incorrect.

We’re flying blind here because Australia has never had a compulsory 
plebiscite. Unlike elections or referenda it is not mandatory to attend a 
polling station to cast a non-binding vote in a plebiscite.

The previous three plebiscites 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPost/2011/June/A_quick_guide_to_plebiscites_in_Australia>
 were not compulsory. There were two during the period of the Great War in 
1916-1917. One on conscription for military service, which was defeated, and 
another for sending more troops overseas, also defeated. Both were voluntary, 
because compulsory voting hadn’t dawned in Australia until 1924.

The marriage equality plebiscite is a time bomb for Turnbull. We need a 
conscience vote | Mark Dreyfus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/the-marriage-equality-plebiscite-is-a-time-bomb-for-turnbull-we-need-a-conscience-vote>
The 1977 plebiscite on the national song was interesting because, even though 
it wasn’t compulsory, it was held at the same time as a referendum relating to 
four changes to the constitution. So while people were compulsorily attending 
polling booths voting on referendum questions, they were also voting 
voluntarily on their preferences for a national song – out of which ultimately 
emerged the national dirge, Advance Australia Fair.

In 1977 voters in the Northern Territory and the ACT were not allowed to vote 
in referenda andthey were not fined 
<http://blogs.abc.net.au/antonygreen/2015/08/plebiscite-or-referendum-whats-the-difference.html>
 for failing to turn up for the plebiscite question.

The issue that has moved legal minds is the element of compulsion in the 
enabling legislation for the same-sex marriage plebiscite. Is it within the 
constitutional power of the federal parliament to pass a law that criminalises 
failure to vote in a plebiscite, the outcome of which doesn’t bind the 
parliament?

The marriage power is safely there in the constitution and indeed the high 
court has said thatthe parliament has power 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/coaca430/s51.html> with 
respect to same sex marriage, simply by amending the Marriage Act. Thecourt 
said as much 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2013/hca55-2013-12-12.pdf>
 when in 2013 it unanimously upheld the case against the validity of the ACT 
Marriage Equality (Same Sex) Act.

Which begs the question, if the parliament has the power, why not use it? 

The answer, of course, lies in the Abbott government pandering to religious 
opponents of marriage equality, which is a backdoor way to circumvent the 
secular rule of law entrenched in the constitution.

Can it be safely said that compulsory voting in a non-binding plebiscite is 
incidental to the Commonwealth’s marriage power? At best it is a law with 
respect to a law with respect to marriage. Does that make it too far removed 
from the head of power in the constitution?

It’s here that constitutional minds cannot be absolutely certain and the 
discussion extends to lawyers in the ranks of the government’s administration. 
Some are clear that the Commonwealth is on safe grounds if it legislates to 
criminalise non-attendance at the plebiscite.

Others voice doubts, and doubts open up the likelihood of a high court 
challenge to the enabling legislation. Someone may well run this question up 
the high court flagpole and see which judges salute.

It’s just one more messy and unnecessary element in a messy, unnecessary and 
expensive plebiscite.

It was a federal judge who first – privately in conversation – seeded the 
thought that a compulsory plebiscite was far from a constitutional certainty.

He can’t be named, otherwise his job on the bench would be over, but his view 
was that to criminalise non-voters was too remote from the constitutional 
powers available to the parliament on this issue.

Others are not entirely convinced, although they won’t rule anything out. 
For instance, Professor Andrew Lynch, a constitutional law expert at the 
University of New South Wales told Guardian Australia:


“It is certainly arguable that making voting in the plebiscite compulsory 
would be within power, but then quite plausibly it may be open to challenge ... 
Why engage in a special plebiscite process which, despite its democratic 
attractions, may be constitutionally uncertain and potentially invalid?”

Again the contentious issue is one of remoteness from the head of power or 
what is incidental to parliament’s power. Professor Lynch again:


“If you take the view that the legislation establishing the plebiscite is not 
in and of itself a law with respect to marriage, but a process whereby the 
people are merely asked their opinion on a question about marriage, then it may 
be that the plebiscite itself already relies quite a bit on incidental power 
rather than the main grant. In which case, the compulsory voting aspect may be 
said to be at a further remove again.”

Anne Twomey, professor of constitutional law at the University of Sydney, 
thinks it’s open to argument.

“I’d be doubtful that the high court would strike down a law providing for 
compulsory voting in a plebiscite, but there would at least be an argument 
about it that could be made in the high court.”

She added that the “incidental power” is a grey area, so “one can’t say 
anything with confidence ... The only thing I can think of that might impede 
[the legislation] is if the high court took the view that the incidental power 
cannot be used in a ‘coercive’ way and therefore no penalty can apply.”

The high court in 1988 struck down 
<http://eresources.hcourt.gov.au/showbyHandle/1/230095> parts of legislation 
that relied on the incidental legislative power to criminalise the use of 
certain words and phrases associated with the bicentennial celebrations.

Marriage Alliance faces showdown over anti-same-sex marriage spam emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/28/marriage-alliance-faces-showdown-over-anti-same-sex-marriage-spam-emails>
What does Lyle Shelton of the Australian Christian Lobby think of this 
constitutional chink? Interestingly, he is not interested in exploiting it. “We 
support a compulsory vote,” he told Guardian Australia.

The ACL wouldn’t open it up as a constitutional issue, but would look at it if 
others did. “It does seem like a spoiling tactic,” he added.

Marriage equality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/same-sex-marriage-australia> campaigners 
cite the Crosby Textor research that puts public support in favour at 72%. The 
expectation is that figure will come down in the privacy of the ballot box, the 
theory being that when asked by a pollster a question that seeks information 
about a person’s belief in equality or human rights, the response will be 
positive.

Privately, in a polling booth, people can let fly with their prejudices, 
unimpeded. If voting was not compulsory the equation would beeven more different
 
<http://www.australianmarriageequality.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/08/AME-Fact-Sheet-Plebiscite.pdf>
, because only “highly motivated votes would end up casting a ballot”.

Nothing should be taken for granted - not the vote on same sex marriage, and 
not even the legislation which purports to give us that vote.
 