
If the Beirut child snatch story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/16/channel-nine-60-minutes-sally-faulkner-tara-brown-child-recovery-lebanon>
 had come off we could expect to see an episode of 60 Minutes with all its 
distinctive elements: sonorous voiceover, nerve-tingling music, tear-stained 
interview, dramatic street scenes and cloying journalistic satisfaction that a 
wrong had been righted and justice done.

All the traditional elements of entertainment infused with “current affairs”. 

Instead, we are left with a pile of unanswered questions from a TV network 
looking shabbier than usual. Who authorised the Beirut story, who signed off on 
the payments to facilitate it, was legal advice provided, and will the results 
of an inquiry conducted by Nine Network insiders be made public?

Nine Network paid $69,000 to man hired to abduct children in Beirut, documents 
show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/nine-network-paid-69000-to-man-hired-to-abduct-children-in-beirut-documents-show>
No response to those questions has emerged from Nine’s spinners. Instead, we 
are gracelessly flicked a non-statement and told: “This note to Nine staff from 
[chief executive] Hugh Marks is all that we are saying.”

There’s another important question: why did Nine seek to fudge the truth about 
payments to the abduction recovery “expert” Adam Whittington and his company? 
The network has been content to let the public and the relevant authorities 
believe that the abduction recovery was being driven by Faulkner. Now it’s 
evident thatNine’s fingerprints are all over bank transfers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/21/nine-network-paid-69000-to-man-hired-to-abduct-children-in-beirut-documents-show>
 to IPCA Ltd, a corporate entity associated with Whittington, and that the 
network is involved in orchestrating the botched rescue mission.

The extent to which there has been a failure of journalistic ethics by Nine 
could conceivably be analysed at journalism schools around the country for 
decades to come. Letting the co-conspirators swing in the breeze while Nine’s 
precious cargo of talent pays its way out of trouble deserves an entire chapter.

Marks’s note does contain this extraordinary line: 

... at no stage did anyone from Nine or 60 Minutes intend to act in any way 
that made them susceptible to charges that they had breached the law or to 
become part of the story that is Sally’s story.

In other words, to Marks’s way of thinking, an intention to engage with 
British “recovery” lads to snatch children off the street of a foreign country 
miraculously would not leave any of the perpetrators open to criminal charges, 
if caught.

He’s having a big lend of us. For now the stuff-up is to be buried in an 
internal inquiry headed by 60 Minutes founding executive producer Gerald Stone 
along with David Hurley, a former executive producer of the tabloid news 
program A Current Affair, and Nine’s general counsel Rachel Landers.

Stone and Hurley have been at the cutting edge of chequebook journalism. It’s 
surprising former 60 Minutes presenter Ray Martin wasn’t included on the panel, 
what with his experience as a get-away driver for an earlier Channel Nine child 
snatch in Spain. Maybe, that was too far a stretch even for Nine because last 
weekMartin told ABC radio 
<http://www.abc.net.au/mediawatch/transcripts/s4445590.htm> that the 60 Minutes 
crew has been “ethical and I think they have done the right thing”.

Whatever Hugh Marks wants us to think, this exercise was an extra-judicial 
stunt.

The ABC has outsourced its inquiries into programs that came in for a bit of 
grief. Q&A, following thenon-problem of Zaky Mallah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/26/the-qa-scandal-is-very-very-serious-we-know-because-weve-been-told-so>
, was investigated by Martin and former SBS managing director Shaun Brown. It 
would have been refreshingly smart of Nine to give this inquiry to a team at 
arm’s length and to make the findings public – after all, public resources in 
the form of foreign affairs and consular help were expended for reporter Tara 
Brown, her producer, cameraman and sound recorder.

Whatever Hugh Marks wants us to think, this exercise was an extra-judicial 
stunt. Maybe it is understandable on the part of the mother, Sally Faulkner, 
who believed she had few other avenues by which to gain access to her two young 
children, taken toLebanon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/lebanon> nearly a 
year ago by their father.

The Hague Convention on the civil aspects of international child abduction 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hague_Convention_on_the_Civil_Aspects_of_International_Child_Abduction>
 doesn’t work in this case, because while Australia is a party to the 
convention, Lebanon is not.

The convention seeks to protect the status quo, in other words the arrangement 
that existed before a child was improperly removed is the one that should 
persist under international law. That would mean that Faulkner’s children most 
likely would be subject to the original orders of the Australian courts in 
relation to custody and access.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2F60-minutes-crew-arrive-home-in-sydney-after-being-released-from-jail-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=60%20Minutes%20crew%20arrive%20home%20in%20Sydney%20after%20being%20released%20from%20jail%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2F60-minutes-crew-arrive-home-in-sydney-after-being-released-from-jail-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=60%20Minutes%20crew%20arrive%20home%20in%20Sydney%20after%20being%20released%20from%20jail%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2F60-minutes-crew-arrive-home-in-sydney-after-being-released-from-jail-video&media=>
However, there is a bilateral agreement between Lebanon and Australia 
<https://www.ag.gov.au/FamiliesAndMarriage/Families/InternationalFamilyLaw/Documents/AustraliaLebanonAgreement-informationforparents.pdf>
 dealing with the welfare of children who are the victim of cross-border 
parental disputes. It simply sets up a governmental framework to “encourage 
dialogue between parents and assist in finding an amicable resolution ...”.

The department of the attorney general admits that “the process can be very 
slow and frustrating, it may take many months, or even years, to resolve the 
matter [and] the outcome may not be what the applicant was originally seeking”.

In these circumstances, it’s little wonder Sally Faulkner became a Nine 
Network victim.

Then we have the byzantine arrangements under Lebanese law, which draws its 
inspiration from French civil law and to our way of thinking in the common law 
world is puzzling, if not downright disturbing.

Here, the father of the children, Ali al-Amin brought his own personal 
criminal charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/sally-faulkner-and-ali-al-amin-reach-deal-before-beirut-court-hearing>
, filed at the local police station. These included armed abduction, threats 
and physical harm. At the same time the state is bringing similar or parallel 
criminal charges of its own.

Australian mother and TV crew released in Lebanon kidnap case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/20/sally-faulkner-and-ali-al-amin-reach-deal-before-beirut-court-hearing>
According to Ghassan Moghabghab, Faulkner’s Beirut lawyer, with whom Guardian 
Australia spoke on Thursday by phone, the Lebanese attorney general has sent 
criminal charges to the prosecutors’ office and they are likely then to go to 
the Chamber of Accusations.

The private charges would have had to be withdrawn by the father if the state 
had not brought its own charges. In this instance, because the attorney general 
and the public prosecutors are now involved it was open to do a deal with the 
private prosecutor, involving money, and lots of it, along with undertakings 
about child custody.

Here is a legal system in which money can make part of the problem go away. It 
is also overlaid with religious courts, whose jurisdiction in some instances 
overrides state law.

The TV crew and Faulkner have been whisked back to the common law world on 
bail, unlikely ever to see inside the Chamber of Accusations. At this point the 
child recovery “experts” are still doing porridge or, in this instance, falafel.

 