
Conservative voices, once again, are plotting to save us from the yoke that is 
oppressing our freedoms. “18C” is the magic password for entry into a dark 
campaign in search of a cause without a meaning.

Section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18c.html> is 
here to stay, so you wonder why this clutch of Senate crossbenchers, 
interplanetary Liberals and associated claqueurs in the Murdoch press continue 
to bang their heads against the wall in an exercise of stupefying pointlessness.

The removal of the provision that makes actionable those expressions that 
offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate on the basis of someone’s race, colour, 
national or ethnic origin has become a talisman, as important as climate 
denialism, opposition to marriage equality, and the virtues of negative gearing.

Malcolm Turnbull wants to diagnose rightwing populism? He should look to his 
own party | Jason Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/18/turnbull-wants-to-diagnose-rightwing-populism-he-should-look-to-his-own-party>
It would be intriguing to know just what free speech has been bottled up, 
desperate for escape. What is it, precisely, that people are constrained from 
saying? Most of the words and artworks about which complaints are made (“angry 
white male”, newspaper cartoons, etc.) are defensible under the same law that 
its opponents wish to tear down.

Maybe, if we turn to Maxine Beneba Clarke and her book The Hate Race we can 
get an idea of the sort of speech that is bursting to be free. Here she is 
wheeling her five month-old baby along the street in Melbourne’s East 
Bentleigh, when a white ute draws alongside, from whichpours the following free 
speech 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/life/weekend-australian-magazine/go-back-to-where-you-came-from/news-story/3ff4497c0c29f3141d0bba700c0ea30b>
:

Go on, fuck off. You make me sick, you fucken black slut. Go drown your kid. 
You should go drown your fucken kid. Fuck off will you.

There was more of the same: “Fuck off blackie. Why don’t you just piss off? 
Bitch. Go the fuck back to where you came from, back to your own fucken 
country, nigger.”

Inexplicably, Beneba Clarke chose to take offence at this burst of free 
expression when, according to libertarian senator David Leyonhjelm, none was 
given.He told the ABC’s Insiders program on 7 August 
<http://www.abc.net.au/insiders/content/2016/s4514490.htm>: 

Free speech is free speech. There’s no qualification to it ... If you want to 
take offence, that’s your choice. You have the choice of choosing another 
feeling. Offence is always taken, not given.

Fortunately, John Howard is on hand to remind us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jul/07/pauline-hanson-should-not-be-a-scorned-species-john-howard-says>
, “We are not a racist country and I wish people would stop reaching for that 
adjective whenever they want to ... isolate somebody who they do not agree 
with.”

What has happened is that section 18C has been repackaged and now is being 
sold as having a general clamp on free speech, whereas its actual design was to 
curtail speech that specifically threatens the delicate fabric of a 
multi-cultural society – speech that goes to the heart of someone’s racial or 
ethnic identity.

Senator-elect Malcolm Roberts, for instance, equates racist hate speech with 
being called “short ... fat ... a Queenslander ... a cane toad”.

Maybe that’s understandable coming from someone who thinks that section 18C of 
the Racial Discrimination Actwas introduced by Julia Gillard to “nobble” Andrew 
Bolt <http://www.abc.net.au/insiders/content/2016/s4514490.htm>, and has to be 
repealed because it is inhibiting “honest” discussion about tax and banking.

In fact, section 18C was introduced by the Keating government in 1995, well 
before Gillard was in parliament and even before Andrew Bolt was a celebrity 
journalist.

The historical context is that the denial of human rights, pogroms, the 
Holocaust and wave after wave of mistreatment were never specifically directed 
at the fat, bald or stupid.

There is also evidence that the anti-18C brigade have only a phoney attachment 
to the notion of free speech. Here are a few examples of some limited defence 
of free speech:

David Leyonhjelm

Leyonhjelm defended the right of Wicked Campers to drive around with slogans 
like, “A wife: an attachment you screw on the bed to get the housework done”. 
The senator said: “You need to be a particularly wowserish type of person to 
not find them funny.”

However, his unqualified support for free speech struck a hurdle when the 
Chaser team pulled up outside his home with a van daubed with the slogan: “The 
best thing about oral sex fromDavid Leyonhjelm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/david-leyonhjelm> – 5 minutes of silence.”

Maybe he didn’t get the joke, telling the Chaser team, with his trademark 
charm,to “fuck off” and threatening to call the police.  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/jun/30/the-chaser-pranks-david-leyonhjelm-by-making-him-his-own-wicked-camper-video>

Women’s rights activist Melinda Tankard Reist tweeted a picture of one the 
van’s slogan, adding “@DavidLeyonhjelm thinks this is funny #dontvoteforhim”.

In a breakthrough moment for free speech Leyonhjelm replied 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-06-30/leyonhjelm-tells-women's-rights-activist-'stfu'-on-twitter/7557830>
: “If you are unable to understand the concept of free speech, you ought to 
STFU [shut the fuck up].”

And this from the man who says there should be “no qualifications” to free 
speech.

Chris Back 

Chris Back is a Liberal senator from Western Australia who supports the repeal 
of section 18C.The IPA has listed him  
<http://freedomwatch.ipa.org.au/2015/10/the-senators-who-support-changes-to-section-18c/>
as one of its free speech heroes. However, he’s not so keen on free speech when 
it comes to the public’s right to know about cruelty to animals, particularly 
in the live cattle and sheep export trade.

His private member’s “ag-gag” bill 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2014-07-15/chris-back-animal-welfare-bill/5598938> 
sought to restrict citizens’ rights to publish footage of animals being abused, 
requiring this distressing material to be handed to the authorities without 
delay. In other words, a restriction on the sort of revelations broadcast by 
Four Corners.

George Brandis 

The attorney general, George Brandis, was one of the leading proponents of the 
repeal of 18C and drafted amending legislation so that we would have more room 
to express our inner bigot. He has since toed the government line and says an 
amendment is “not on the table”. Yet while he was pushing this odd free speech 
barrow people may have found it “passing strange”, to use one of the attorney 
general’s favourite expressions, to know he had wanted a book critical of his 
hero, Sir Robert Menzies,removed from a school library 
<http://www.theage.com.au/news/National/Row-over-tyrant-Menzies-library-book/2006/10/24/1161455704923.html%3CBR%3E>
 and he wrote apaper calling for defamation remedies 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/24027522/1386475644660/Brandis_free_speech_injunctions.pdf?token=h222ORYJI7XqCo2ybZXzugzlFZ8%3D>
 to include injunctions against media publications.

One Nation 

Pauline Hanson’s One Nation party also sees 18C standing in the way of free 
speech for ordinary Australians. However, Pauline Hanson successfully applied 
to the Queensland courts toban the broadcast of a satirical song called 
“Backdoor Man” <http://www.smh.com.au/articles/2003/09/04/1062548963055.html>, 
revealing that in her mind freedom of expression is a selective commodity.

A book published in her name, Pauline Hanson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/pauline-hanson> – The Truth, made a 
number of ludicrous claims, including that Aboriginal women ate their babies. 
When a racial vilification case was brought against the book, it was defended 
under the RDA exemption for publishers acting reasonably and in good faith.

18C won’t stop mature debate on race. But small mindedness and arrogance might 
| Dean Sherr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/15/18c-wont-stop-mature-debate-on-race-but-small-mindedness-and-arrogance-might>
Bob Day

Senator Bob Day is in the front line of attacks on 18C yet Family First, his 
political party, is wedded to some pretty repressive views about freedom of 
expression. When the Labor government’s internet filtering project was under 
discussion in 2008,Family First wanted X-rated and refused classification 
material banned 
<http://www.smh.com.au/news/national/family-first-demands-wider-internet-filters/2008/10/27/1224955948624.html>
 for everyone – including adults.

James Paterson

James Paterson, a Liberal senator from Victoria, is also selective about what 
information should be in the public domain. When a big-wig at the Institute for 
Public Affairs, he refused to discuss with this reporter the institute’s 
staffing arrangements. He even said that “no comment” was “off the record”. 
Free speech is all very well as long as you’re not free speaking about the 
IPA’s internal affairs.

Ultimately, reform and strengthening of the section 18D exemptions might have 
been a more constructive way to approach the issue, rather than sloppy, lazy 
and unhinged assaults on the race hate provision itself.

Serious improvements to free speech are well overdue. While the fraudulent war 
on 18C has been under way there has been no focus on the real inhibitors to 
freedom of speech: defamation law, disclosure penalties under the Border Force 
Act, the ever-increasing flow of suppression and take-down orders issued by the 
courts, penalties for protesting, the lamentable state of FOI and whistleblower 
protections, even criminal sedition laws.

All of those restrictions are nothing compared to the freedom to be able to 
scream “ape” at an Aboriginal football player.
 