
Surely it cannot be the right moment to dilute race hate laws when Trumpism is 
on a global march, with its direct appeal to racism and xenophobia.

In the Financial Times a week ago the paper’s chief United States columnist 
Edward Luce wrote about “The age of vitriol” and observed thatdemocracy’s sense 
of restraint seems to have vanished 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c0052e1e-a14b-11e6-86d5-4e36b35c3550>. 

“The glue of mutual respect that is so vital to any free society came unstuck.”

Anne Applebaum, a Warsaw-based columnist with the Washington Post, spoke of 
the spread of the “Populist International” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/global-opinions/trump-is-a-threat-to-the-west-as-we-know-it-even-if-he-loses/2016/11/04/a8dc9100-a2cc-11e6-a44d-cc2898cfab06_story.html>
, not only with Trump in the US, but in European countries and with Ukip in the 
UK.

The debate about 18C doesn't have to be a left-right slanging match | Gay 
Alcorn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/the-debate-about-18c-doesnt-have-to-be-a-left-right-slanging-match>
While the language may differ from place to place, the common thread of this 
movement is the expulsion of immigrants, a return to white dominance and the 
reversal of women’s or minorities’ rights.

Yet regressive voices in Australian politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/australian-politics> and media see 
this as the occasion to water down our race discrimination laws, if not junk 
them entirely.

The timing could not be more exquisite. In fact, section 18C, the most 
discussed provision 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18c.html> in the 
entire assembly of consolidated commonwealth law, actually should be 
strengthened and, along with it, theget-out-of jail defence 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18d.html> in 18D.

It might be thought that if people were really interested in freedom of speech 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/nsw/consol_act/da200599/s31.html> then why 
aren’t they mightily upset with section 31 of the “uniform” Defamation Act 
which deals with the defence of honest opinion and is so bound in 
technicalities and abstractions that it rarely, if ever, works for people 
wanting to defend an opinion in court.

There’s never a squeak about section 31 from the self-appointed protectors of 
free speech. Nor is anything said about the barrowloads of other laws that 
inhibit citizens from protesting, that undermine the principle of open courts 
and open justice, that prevent access to government information, and hide the 
truth about the welfare of people jailed in offshore detention centres.

It is utterly delusional to suggest that speech will be “freerer” in Australia 
once 18C has been sliced and diced. The tirade about 18C is a massive piece of 
fakery, a culture war conceit. The proponents of change are not really 
interested in the wider horizons of free speech, other than loosening 
inhibitions on bigotry and racial nastiness.

Nor is the attorney general, George Brandis, much of a free speech man. He has 
confined the inquiry by a parliamentary committee 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/27324348/1478574449503/Freedom_of_Speech_TOR.pdf?token=vTTxMdjc8SSpcWWnOqbD9rdFg3k%3D>
 to the Racial Discrimination Act and the Australian Human Rights Commission 
Act, as though they alone are responsible for blots on our freedoms. The bigger 
problems with free speech are nowhere to be found in his terms of reference.

This is no surprise when you remember the way in 2013 Brandis extolled the 
champions of free speech 
<http://podcast.thesydneyinstitute.com.au/podcasts/2013/THE_SYDNEY_INSTITUTE_07_MAY_2013_GEORGE_BRANDIS.mp3>
 in Australia: “Who defends freedom of speech in Australia today? Is it really 
to be left to a few conservative commentators like Andrew Bolt and Janet 
Albrechtsen; a couple of thinktanks like the Sydney Institute and the IPA and 
the Liberal party?”

The unifying feature of the 18C free speech brigade is that they don’t 
actually believe in human rights at all – certainly not in aformalised regime  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/22/australias-weird-record-on-human-rights-tribal-ideology-and-the-cultural-divide>
of a Human Rights Act or Charter of Rights. That is out of the question – 
again, for idealogical reasons.

Beyond 18C: six barriers to freedom of speech in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/beyond-18c-six-barriers-to-freedom-of-speech-in-australia>
To demand to be unshackled from 18C while opposing a regime of contestable 
human rights shows how lopsided, bizarre and dishonest this issue has become. 
It doesn’t get much more dotty than senatorDavid Leyonhjelm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/david-leyonhjelm> saying he will support the 
government’s industrial relations legislation if it repeals the prohibitions on 
race speech.

Let’s keep to the two things Brandis has sent to the parliamentary committee: 
the RDA and the AHRC Act.

The shred-18C lobby has the curious belief that the relevant provisions can be 
sliced into separate parts: offend, insult, humiliate and intimidate. The idea 
is that if you get rid of the first two on the list then humiliate and 
intimidate might be barely tolerable.

Even the Human Rights Commission president, Gillian Triggs, has fallen for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/08/gillian-triggs-says-replacing-insult-and-offend-could-strengthen-18c>
, saying she is open to the idea of replacing “offend and insult” with “vilify”.

On the other hand the judges, in the rare number of 18C cases that ever get to 
court, do not look at offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate as separate 
components to be applied individually to the circumstances of the alleged 
offence. The words are applied collectively, as a omnibus concept.

This is evident in Eatock v Bolt <https://jade.io/article/253894> when Justice 
Bromberg used the word “offend” as “shorthand” for offend, insult, humiliate or 
intimidate.

Professor David Rolph from Sydney law school points out the removal of “offend 
and insult” from the law “may not have a substantial impact 
<https://www.australianbookreview.com.au/abr-online/current-issue/186-october-2016-no-385/3590-the-debate-over-18c-by-david-rolph>
 on those who have been found liable for contravening 18C” – including Andrew 
Bolt in the Eatock case.

Triggs has also said she wants the Human Rights Commission to be able to knock 
out worthless complaints much earlier in the process: “We would welcome an 
attempt to moderate our statute that would make it a little easier for the 
commission to say these matters are coming to us and we don’t think they’ve got 
any legs at all. We’ve long argued for this.”

This is puzzling, because she has long had that very authority 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ahrca1986373/s46ph.html>. 
The Australian Human Rights Commission Act gives the president the power to 
terminate a complaint on a wide range of grounds, including that the alleged 
discrimination is not unlawful or that the complaint is trivial, vexatious, 
misconceived or lacking in substance.

There exists plenty of precedent to enable decisions to be made relatively 
quickly as to the whether discrimination is lawful or not. Of course, if people 
who allege discrimination are unhappy about having their complaints terminated 
by the president,they can still go to the federal court or the federal circuit 
court 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/ahrca1986373/s46po.html> – 
but by then the matter is out of the hands of the commission.

It’s not that the Human Rights Commission requires more power – the law as it 
stands just needs to be appropriately applied. To have said what she did, it 
might be assumed that Triggs had been poleaxed by too much bullying from the 
media and politicians.

Section 18C explainer: what is it, and why do some politicians want it changed?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/02/section-18c-explainer-what-is-it-and-why-do-some-politicians-want-it-changed>
What does need close attention is section 18D of the Racial Discrimination Act 
– the defence to what otherwise would be offences under 18C. The context here 
are performances, exhibitions or artistic works or discussion and debate for 
academic, artistic or scientific purposes.

For the media the defence extends to fair and accurate reporting of any matter 
of public interest 
<http://www.austlii.edu.au/au/legis/cth/consol_act/rda1975202/s18d.html> or “a 
fair comment on any event or matter of public interest ... ”

Professor Rolph points out there are problems with 18D, not least of which is 
that it imports the ineffective fair comment element from defamation law, 
thereby creating difficulties for media defendants in 18C cases.

If only these swivel-eyed campaigners would recognise that it is 18D that 
needs fixing, not 18C, then the mental health of the entire nation would be a 
lot better.
 