
Peter Dutton <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/peter-dutton> is a 
desperate man, clinging to the wreckage of a failed policy.

The best he could come up with after the supreme court of Papua New Guinea’s 
intervention in our migration policy is that asylum seekers and refugees on 
Manus Island should be shifted to Nauru – another dysfunctional, client state 
holding a desperate cargo of humanity for which Australia is responsible.

Both the Coalition and Labor are obdurately stuck with barbaric offshore 
detention policies, as though sensible, humane and politically viable 
alternatives are beyond them.

Labor MPs reportedly call for Manus Island men to be brought to Australia – 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/apr/28/manus-island-detainees-are-australias-responsibility-png-says-live>
Stopping the boats has been a politically successful outcome and the 
electorate seems unlikely to tolerate a return to waves of asylum seekers 
washing up on our shores. However, increasingly,voters are not happy with what 
they see going on at Manus Island and Nauru 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-02-17/lewis-babies-of-asylum-seekers-have-stirred-our-conscience/7175138>
, which is why the government goes to such extraordinary and comical lengths to 
shroud these operations in secrecy.

Why alternative policies are not tried, let alone suggested, is a profound 
mystery. Much could be done to assistIndonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/indonesia>, a country with more than 13,000 
registered refugees and asylum seekers waiting for years to be resettled.

Indonesia has been the source of Australia’s boat people, so a management plan 
would assist our neighbour and assist us, because if properly executed it would 
remove the incentive for people to get on boats.

Instead, Australia caps its refugee intake from Indonesia at 450 a year and a 
former immigration minister,Scott Morrison, turned off the tap completely 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp1415/RefugeeResettlement#_Toc410727193>
 for those registered in Indonesia after 1 July 2014.

There was a note of desperation from the Indonesian foreign affairs minister, 
Retno Maraud <http:// 
http://www.smh.com.au/world/indonesian-foreign-minister-hopes-countries-will-assist-to-resettle-refugees-20160319-gnmajq.html>
, when she was interviewed just before last month’s Bali round of regional 
ministers on how to manage the movement of the human tide.

The foreign affairs minister, Julie Bishop, was banging the usual drum about 
taking a strong stance against “the criminal networks that engage in people 
smuggling and human trafficking”. Labor’s immigration spokesman, Richard 
Marles, echoes the same line. Frankly, it’s this lazy thinking that has got us 
into the current parlous policy position.

For instance, if Australia were to offer 5,000 places a year from Indonesian 
camps and a similar number from Malaysia and Thailand together, there would be 
an incentive to come legitimately to Australia rather than get on boats and 
engage with “criminal networks”.

That would be one way to take down the people smuggling trade. Indonesia also 
would be more amenable to Australia turning back those on boats who seek to 
bypass the program, if we were actively assisting to reduce the pressure in 
their camps.

The reason people risk their lives at sea is because there is no alternative, 
they have no hope. If we gave them hope with a properly structured resettlement 
scheme there would be no need for a primitive stop-the-boats policy that is 
predicated on capturing asylum seekers, detaining them (in PNG’s case 
illegally) and, in order to deter others, treating them wickedly and ruining 
their lives.

At the moment we recruit our refugees from camps as far away from Indonesia as 
possible while at the same time limiting the intake from our nearest big 
neighbour to 3% of our annual refugee and humanitarian resettlements.

It doesn’t make sense. You would think by now policymakers would know that 
anything is better than running latter-day gulags in crumbling nooks of the 
Pacific.

We need to cooperate with countries in this region more urgently than we do 
with Sudan, Afghanistan, South America, Turkey, and Lebanon and that would mean 
realigning our refugee intake much more to Indonesia and Malaysia.

There’s an argument that the refugees in the Middle East countries are 
directly the responsibility of the old imperial powers in Europe. We have 
pressing doorstep issues of our own.

But back to Papua New Guinea and the supreme court decision 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/26992663/1461659795757/PNG_Manus.pdf?token=t4uErJ8mL8C83G1D1YUJhPlwgpA%3D>
. The way the case was run by the government gave every indication that there 
wasn’t much sleep lost over the prospect of it going down in flames.

Instead of an announcement that the government would seek again to amend the 
constitution to accommodate the thinking of the supreme court, as would have 
been perfectly possible,there was an prompt release from the prime minister, 
Peter O’Neill 
<http://static1.1.sqspcdn.com/static/f/556710/26996342/1461748916723/PNG_PM_Manus_RPC.pdf?token=t4uErJ8mL8C83G1D1YUJhPlwgpA%3D>
, that he “welcomed” the court’s decision and “will immediately ask the 
Australian government to make alternative arrangements for asylum seekers 
currently held at the regional processing centre”.

What was fascinating to find in the supreme court’s reasons is the extent to 
which the PNG constitution is bound with human rights protections and freedoms 
– completely missing from the Australian constitution, whose framers though the 
common law was protection enough for the unruly citizenry.

Manus Island detainees' compensation claims to be heard in court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/28/manus-island-detainees-compensation-claims-to-be-heard-in-court>
The PNG court found that not only was the imprisonment of people forcibly 
taken to Manus Island unconstitutional, but the constitutional amendment 
scrambled together in an effort to protect the memorandum of understanding with 
Australia was itself unconstitutional.

Two of the supreme court judges wrote the court’s findings: justices Ambeng 
Kandakasi and Terry Higgins, the former chief justice of the ACT supreme court.

Higgins, in his reasons, reminded us that while mandatory detention in these 
circumstances in PNG is illegal, it is not in Australia.Our high court has said 
<http://www.hcourt.gov.au/assets/publications/judgment-summaries/2014/hca-34-2014-09-11.pdf>
 that mandatory detention is lawful, the only proviso being that the exercise 
of the detention power must be reasonably necessary and incidental to other 
powers in the Migration Act, such as deportation, issuing of visas, and 
consideration of applications, etc.

Dutton doesn’t have the “impediment” of human rights obligations around his 
neck. It was PNG’s obligations to protect the human rights of those 
involuntarily detained that, not for the first time, has rendered our political 
leadership on this issue so hapless.
 