
Wayne Rooney said becoming Manchester United’s joint record goalscorer, on 249 
goals, with Sir Bobby Charlton was a “proud moment” after his seventh-minute 
strike against Reading set the FA Cup holders on the way to aresounding 4-0 
victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
.

Wayne Rooney equals record as Manchester United ease past Reading
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
The finish at Old Trafford that drew him level with Charlton came when he beat 
Reading’s Ali al-Habsi with his right knee. “It’s a proud moment, especially to 
do so at such a massive club likeManchester United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/manchester-united>,” Rooney said. “I’m 
hugely honoured to be able to play for this football club, and to be up there 
in terms of goals with Sir Bobby is a really proud moment for me. Hopefully 
I’ll be there out on my own soon, but I’ll enjoy today because it’s a real 
honour.

“I’m enjoying my football and I’m thankful to score again. It’s a huge part of 
my life this football club and I’m really honoured to be up there alongside Sir 
Bobby. Of course you want to break records in front of your home fans.
Wayne Rooney 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-07T12:11:33/embed.html>
“We’ve got two home games coming up [this week] so, hopefully, I can get the 
next one in one of those games. I’m delighted for today though and, more 
importantly, the result. There were a lot of changes and the lads have come in 
and shown they’re ready if needed.”

United next play on Tuesday night, against Hull City in the EFL Cup semi-final 
first leg, but it is not certain whether Rooney will get the chance to reach 
250 as United’s manager, José Mourinho, intends to make sweeping changes to his 
starting XI.

Manchester United v Reading: FA Cup third round – live!
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/live/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-v-reading-fa-cup-third-round-live>
Liverpool are next Sunday’s opponents and, as a proud Evertonian, Rooney would 
relish breaking the record against United’s and his boyhood club’s fiercest 
rivals.

Mourinho said: “I think the best day will arrive, this is not the best day for 
him, the best day will arrive, it’s just a question of when.

“It’s amazing because everybody knows who Sir Bobby is and what he means for 
the history of the club and the history of English football, and for Wayne to 
score the same number of goals for Manchester United is fantastic. But, again, 
the best day will arrive. The best day is the day he scores the next goal and 
becomes the top scorer in the history of Man United, and that’s an amazing 
thing.”
Manchester United 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-07T12:51:14/embed.html> 