
The question for Wayne Rooney now is how many more can be added to the 
joint-record 249th goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-goalscoring-record-bobby-charlton>
 he scored for Manchester United against Reading on Saturday.

Rooney’s contract includes a one-way clause that allows the club to extend it 
by a year if desired. The current terms end in summer 2019, so if United decide 
to exercise the option the Liverpudlian would be at Old Trafford as he 
approaches his 35th birthday.

Wayne Rooney honoured to equal Charlton’s Manchester United record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/wayne-rooney-manchester-united-goalscoring-record-bobby-charlton>
Rooney wants to stay on but will United do it? Will the forward be given an 
extra season to add to his goals for the club? This is what fascinates about 
the late-career Rooney: how long can he go on performing for United?

The 31-year-old lit up the 4-0 victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/07/manchester-united-reading-fa-cup-match-report>
 against Jaap Stam’s team that put the FA Cup holders into the fourth round. 
His was an all-round display of finishing and creativity in the classic No10 
mould as he tormented Reading all afternoon.

However, this is a player whose form has been poor all term – his 
seventh-minute opener was only a fourth goal this season – and who is no longer 
a regular in José Mourinho’s strongest XI. At 31 any remnants of the youthful 
zip that tore through defences is gone. And he is a calmer footballer than the 
once quick-to-anger force of nature who constantly performed on the edge.

So, how many more goals for him for United? After the strike off the top of 
his knee which put Rooney alongside Sir Bobby Charlton, he is almost certain to 
move on to 250 goals and stand alone at the head of the charts. He is also, of 
course,already England’s record marksman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/sep/08/england-switzerland-euro-2016-qualifier-match-report>
 with 53 goals in 119 appearances.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mourinho%20praises%20Rooney%20for%20equalling%20Manchester%20United%20goal%20record%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mourinho%20praises%20Rooney%20for%20equalling%20Manchester%20United%20goal%20record%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video&media=>
Mourinho praises Rooney for equalling Manchester United goal record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2017/jan/07/mourinho-praises-rooney-for-equaling-manchester-united-goal-record-video>
To be leading scorer for club and country is an inarguable statement of 
quality. So longevity is the next challenge. Afterwards Rooney offered a tacit 
acknowledgment of this, his most illuminating reaction to reaching the 249 
being when he said: “I’m enjoying my football.”

This pointed reference to having no thoughts of his career being near its end 
echoed the statement he issued following the pictures of him being out late 
when on England duty. Then, Rooneyfelt moved to call his treatment “disgraceful”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/19/wayne-rooney-disgraceful-treatment-hotel-wedding-photos>
 as he said: “It feels as if the media are trying to write my obituary and I 
won’t let that happen. It’s not finished yet.”

Rooney-battering has become an unpalatable national quasi-pastime. He 
constantly hears how he is not the footballer he once was. The eagerness to 
play on at United beyond his current contract will hardly please his detractors 
yet his enthusiasm is admirable considering the 15 years at the very top amid 
the constant stream of negativity.

Rooney may be more appreciated by his critics when he does finally retire. Yet 
as Marcus Rashford, who scored twice on Saturday, said: “It’s an unbelievable 
achievement. If you look back at all the games he’s played and all the goals 
he’s scored for the club, it’s amazing and, for young players coming up and any 
striker growing up, then it’s amazing for them to be able to watch him. We all 
have to [enjoy] the [record-breaking] moment once it goes in.”

Rooney’s dressing-room influence is viewed as a key asset by Mourinho and it 
is also acknowledged by senior squad members. As Daley Blind, a seasoned and, 
in his own way, similarly versatile operator for United and Holland, said: 
“It’s great for Wayne with how many goals he’s scored. He’s a great personality 
and a great legend at the club. I’m happy for him.”

At the moment it appears unlikely United will trigger the 12-month extension. 
But this is football and Rooney is a special player, so who knows? For him to 
force his way back and become integral to United again would surely thrill 
anyone who is invigorated by sport’s romance.

For the time being witnessing Rooney reach 250 strikes, whenever he reaches 
the milestone, should suffice. Mourinho has said a changed side will face Hull 
in Tuesday’s EFL Cup semi-final first leg so it may not be then.

However, the next visitors to Old Trafford are Liverpool in the Premier League 
on Sunday. As a confirmed Evertonian, how Rooney would love to break the record 
against the fiercest rivals of both his boyhood club and United.
 