
Mae and I thought we were well informed when it comes to vaginas (between us, 
we have 58 years’ experience of them), but the more we researched the subject 
forour new video series, Vagina Dispatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/vagina-dispatches>, the more 
we discovered that, like most people, we don’t know our asses from our elbows – 
let alone our vulvas from our vaginas.

Does it matter that we don’t know what a perineum is, never mind where to find 
one? It turns out it does. Even though there are lots of parts of our bodies we 
don’t know well (neither of us can explain the full process from sandwich to 
stool), there is something particularly damaging about vagina ignorance.

Despite the fact that we spend more time peeing or menstruating out of them 
than anything else, sex remains the primary association when people think of 
female genitalia. And that emphasis distracts from the stuff that really 
matters: health.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> (or, to 
be more specific, anyone with a vagina) can struggle to understand how much 
menstrual blood is too much, what healthy labia look like, or what to expect 
during childbirth. Those blind spots make it hard to understand when or whether 
we need treatment. So, in a spirit of generosity, we wanted to share some of 
the things we learned.

1 That thing you’re calling a vagina? It probably isn’t a vagina

You’re likely thinking of a woman’s external genitalia. But that’s actually 
the vulva; the vagina is on the inside.

A survey released earlier this month by the Eve Appeal 
<https://eveappeal.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/The-Eve-Appeal-Vagina-Dialogues.pdf>
, a gynaecological cancer charity, found that two-thirds of women were unable 
to identify the vulva. More shocking is that women know men’s bodies better 
than they do their own: 60% of women could correctly label a diagram of male 
anatomy, but only 35% could do the same for female anatomy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2F10-things-you-need-to-know-about-vaginas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44404539b3cc16200ceccbceed9d771c36dfa735%2F0_0_1920_1920%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=10%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20vaginas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2F10-things-you-need-to-know-about-vaginas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=10%20things%20you%20need%20to%20know%20about%20vaginas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F24%2F10-things-you-need-to-know-about-vaginas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44404539b3cc16200ceccbceed9d771c36dfa735%2F0_0_1920_1920%2F1920.jpg>
 According to a recent survey by Eve Appeal, half of women aged 26- 35 were 
able to label the vagina in a diagram like this one. Illustration: Laura 
Callaghan 
These days, there are endless articles claiming every woman should have body 
confidence. Body knowledge, on the other hand, seems like a nice bonus. That 
emphasis is misplaced: if women don’t know what their vulva is, how can they 
check it for changes in colour –a potential symptom of gynaecological cancer 
<http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/gynecologic/basic_info/symptoms.htm>?

2 No one really knows what a female orgasm is

The male orgasm isn’t exactly ambiguous. But there’s no standard way to 
measure a female orgasm, which means that research has begun to question 
whether some women are experiencing them at all.

Dr Nicole Prause is a neuroscientist who founded Liberos 
<http://liberoscenter.com/>, a research firm that studies sexual desire and 
function. In men, as well as ejaculation, there are regular, measurable muscle 
contractions. Ina 1980 study <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/7458658> in 
the journal Archives Of Sexual Behaviour, 11 male participants all behaved in a 
similar way during orgasm: the muscles in their anus contracted in spasms that 
were 0.6 seconds apart and continued for 10-15 contractions. But in the women 
Prause has studied, while some had these same contractions, others reported an 
orgasm without any being measured. (How do they measure these? Using a butt 
plug that monitors sound waves.) We said we were interested in measuring our 
own orgasms, so Prause is sending us some. Stay tuned.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvagina-dispatches-part-one-what-vulvas-look-like&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20one%3A%20the%20vulva%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvagina-dispatches-part-one-what-vulvas-look-like>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20one%3A%20the%20vulva%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fvagina-dispatches-part-one-what-vulvas-look-like&media=>
Vagina Dispatches episode one: the vulva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/sep/23/vagina-dispatches-part-one-what-vulvas-look-like>
3 Orgasms can make you need a wee

From a biological perspective, there has long been curiosity about what 
function the female orgasm serves (from our own personal perspectives, the case 
is closed). According to Prause, one reason might be that women who orgasm are 
more likely to urinate after sex. And urinating after sex is a great idea 
because it helps prevent bacteria from getting into the urethra, reducing the 
chances of a urinary tract infection. Win, win.

The clitoris is often depicted as a little button. A more realistic image 
would be similar to the Starship Enterprise

4 You can build a vagina from a penis and scrotum

At first glance, vulvas and penises look pretty different, but they are 
actually quite similar. That’s because we all started out as foetuses with the 
same genitalia; our sex organs don’t start to differentiate until the end of 
the first trimester (around about nine to 12 weeks). That skin fold line 
between the testicles? It’s because the male scrotum is the homologue of the 
female labia majora. Learning that was a real “aha” moment.

We met Callie, an American trans woman who was waiting for bottom surgery, a 
procedure where a vulva and vagina are created from the penis and scrotum. 
Aside from price (the surgery costs around $20,000 and isn’t always coveredby 
health insurance 
<http://www.hrc.org/resources/finding-insurance-for-transgender-related-healthcare>
), we were interested in knowing what concerned Callie when she booked her 
procedure. We’d mostly been discussing aesthetics, so Callie’s response caught 
us off guard: functionality. She is considering whether she wants a vagina that 
would self-lubricate (this can be possible using tissue from the anus 
<https://www.auanet.org/university/abstract_detail.cfm?id=V8-01&meetingID=14ORL>
) and whether it would be painful to pee (the surgery is complex andrecovery 
can take weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/oct/08/transgender-journey-recovering-from-surgery>
). In other words, really important health issues that most women take for 
granted. Prettiness? Not so much.

Draw a vulva | Vagina Dispatches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/draw-a-vulva>
5 You can buy weed tampons

Menstrual cramps affect up to 91% of women, and can have a huge impact on 
quality of life <http://epirev.oxfordjournals.org/content/36/1/104.abstract>. 
Given that so many women experience this pain, and thatpainkillers don’t always 
work <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmedhealth/PMH0072507/>, some women have 
tried alternative treatments including cannabis.

There’s very little scientific research into the effectiveness of cannabis in 
treating menstrual cramps, partly because that research would be illegal in 
many countries. But some entrepreneurial companies that are part of a growing 
US cannabis market are investigating. Once you’ve confirmed that you’re over 21 
and a resident of either Colorado or California, the websiteforiapleasure.com 
<http://www.foriapleasure.com> offers a four-pack of “weed tampons”, priced at 
$44 (£33). It’s not actually a tampon; it’s a pessary containing cannabis oil.

Actor Whoopi Goldberg has teamed up with businesswoman Maya Elisabeth (who 
used to sell award-winning edible cannabis) to market products they claim are 
designed to provide relief from period pain. Their company,Whoopi & Maya 
<http://whoopiandmaya.com/>, produces a bath soak, an edible spread (which “may 
be enjoyed plain with a spoon, on fruit or toast”), a rub and a tincture.

6 The clitoris looks like a spaceship

If you’ve been looking at medical diagrams lately (just us?), the clitoris is 
often depicted as a little button. A more realistic image would be something 
similar to the Starship Enterprise. Underneath the labia, there are two long 
structures that fall on either side of the clitoris (the protruding bit). If 
you’re interested in female sexual arousal, you should know about those – 
they’re called the clitoral crura. They can become engorged with blood when a 
woman is aroused, which causes the vulva to expand outwards, creating a tighter 
vaginal opening (bonus fact: women have nearly as much erectile tissue as men).

On the subject of sex tips: stop searching for the G-spot. Not only because 
it’s weird to use terms for women’s bodies that are named after men (the 
Gräfenberg spot, after the German gynaecologistErnst Gräfenberg 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ernst_Gr%C3%A4fenberg>, who also developed the 
IUD). It probably doesn’t exist, at least not in the push-button way it’s often 
imagined.

An article published in Nature Reviews Urology 
<http://www.nature.com/nrurol/journal/v11/n9/full/nrurol.2014.193.html> in 
2014, titled Beyond The G-spot, found that women can experience sensitivity in 
lots of different places, including but not always the area where the G-spot 
was thought to be (the upper side of the vaginal wall). In other words, it’s 
complicated.

7 Your vagina might benefit from a personal trainer

Sex doesn’t always feel good – especially if you have vaginismus 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/Vaginismus/Pages/Introduction.aspx> (a painful 
condition that results in involuntary vaginal muscle spasm) orvulvodynia 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/vulvodynia/Pages/Introduction.aspx> (chronic pain 
around the opening of the vagina).

One possible treatment is pelvic physical therapy, which can involve external 
and internal massages of the pelvic floor area, and the use of dilators (they 
look like oversized plastic crayons) and lubricants. The treatment is 
frequently misunderstood, saysJessica Powley 
<https://pelvicguru.com/2013/08/05/10-common-misconceptions-about-pelvic-physical-therapy/>
, a pelvic physical therapist. For one thing, it’s not just women, or 
postpartum women, who get this therapy; men can get it, too, to treat pelvic 
floor pain. You can also buy vaginal weights and create your own home gym to 
tighten your pelvic floor muscles.

If you’re under 60, the best sex of your life may well be to come

8 Things change with age, but it’s not all bad 

Ageing, and menopause in particular, causes a woman’s oestrogen levels to 
decline. According to theNorth American Menopause Society 
<https://www.menopause.org/for-women/sexual-health-menopause-online/changes-at-midlife/changes-in-the-vagina-and-vulva>
, the vagina can become shorter and narrower in menopausal women who aren’t 
sexually stimulated. Then, when those women do have sex, it can be painful. 
Their advice? Menopausal women should have vaginal sex on a regular basis. So 
if you’re an older woman who enjoys sex, you should continue to have it 
regularly (hooray), and if you don’t enjoy sex, don’t bother (hooray, too).

What’s more, in 1998, the US National Council on the Aging 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/09/29/science/older-people-enjoy-sex-survey-says.html?_r=1>
 found that 70% of sexually active women over the age of 60 said they were as 
satisfied, or even more satisfied, with their sex lives as they were in their 
40s (74% of men in the same age group said the same). So, if you’re under 60, 
the best sex of your life may well be to come.

Vagina 101: can you pass this anatomy quiz?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/ng-interactive/2016/sep/23/vagina-anatomy-quiz-dispatches>
9 Breastfeeding can make you horny 

We spoke to Christen, a performance artist and writer, who wrote about 
maternal sexuality in a one-woman show called BabyLove. She told us that she 
got aroused when breastfeeding; one time, she tried to use a vibrator while 
feeding, but got interrupted by a delivery man. She claimed lots of other women 
felt the same way. Of course we wanted to investigate.

Many forums for mothers 
<https://www.sharecare.com/health/breastfeeding-a-baby/is-normal-sexually-aroused-nursing>
 confirm Christen isnot alone 
<http://naturalparentsnetwork.com/sexual-feelings-breastfeeding/>. In a 1999 
study inThe Journal Of Perinatal Education 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3431754/>, the author, Dr Viola 
Polomeno, explained that sexual arousal during breastfeeding “is a normal 
phenomenon”, although women often feel guilty when it happens to them. Arousal 
can happen because there are some parallels between breastfeeding and having an 
orgasm: both situations involve contractions of the uterus, nipple erection and 
skin-to-skin contact, and both can involve strong, uninhibited emotions. 
Neither of us has ever breastfed, but if and when the time comes, boy is this 
information handy.

10 You can make art with menstrual blood

From Judy Chicago’s 1972 installation Menstruation Bathroom 
<http://dome.mit.edu/handle/1721.3/2403> to Ingrid Berthon-Moine’s 
<http://www.ingridberthonmoine.com/work> 2009 work Red Is The Colour 
(photographs of 12 women wearing their menstrual blood as lipstick), lots of 
artists have explored the use of menstrual blood.

We met Jennifer Lewis, who was one day removing her menstrual cup and wondered 
why the blood on her fingertips disgusted her. With the help of her partner 
Rob, she began taking photographs of her menstrual blood in water. We watched 
Jennifer and Rob using refrigerated bottles of the stuff to makeBeauty In Blood 
<http://www.beautyinblood.com/>. The images look beautiful, but if we’re 
honest, the smell wasn’t so pretty. We went there to challenge our attitudes 
because, like so many, we think of periods as a gross inconvenience. We both 
use a hormonal IUD that stops us menstruating, which has always just seemed 
like a bonus.

Jennifer challenged these attitudes, not just because her art is beautiful, 
but also because she made us reconsider the health consequences of stopping our 
periods. Like us, Jennifer also used a contraceptive that stopped her period – 
until she found out it had caused her early-onsetosteoporosis 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Osteoporosis/Pages/Causes.aspx>.

When Jennifer told us this, we looked at each other wide-eyed. Even though we 
had been researching this subject for months, there was still so much we didn’t 
know. The point is, we, like so many others, had put convenience ahead of being 
informed about our health. And that’s our final tip: get smart, get a mirror 
out and find out what’s up down there.

 * This article was amended on 25 September 2016 to clarify that urine does 
not come from the vagina.  