
Fewer than one in six autistic adults are in full-time employment

Under 16% of survey participants have full-time paid work. This figure has 
hardly changed since 2007, when a previous National Autistic Society survey put 
the figure at 15%.[1]

A further one in six have part-time work

The survey finds that 16% are in part-time employment. This, at least, is an 
improvement on 2007, when that figure was 9%.[1]

In all, less than a third of autistic adults have any kind of paid work

Only 32% are in some kind of paid work, compared with 47% of disabled people 
and 80% of non-disabled people.[2]

These businesses are redefining public space for autistic people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/jun/20/these-businesses-are-redefining-public-space-for-autistic-people>
And yet the vast majority do want a job

Over three-quarters (77%) who are unemployed say they want to work. Four in 10 
autistic people currently working part-time say they want to work more hours.

The work they do get is often beneath their skill set


Just over half (51%) of autistic people in work who responded to the survey 
said their skills were higher than those their job required.

Don’t believe the stereotypes


Autistic people have different passions and interests like anyone else and 
want to work across all sectors, not just tech. The survey found that a similar 
number of autistic people want to work in the arts (11%) as in IT (10% of 
respondents).

Bullying in the workplace is rife…


Roughly half of respondents reported experiencing bullying or harassment in 
the workplace (48%), or other discrimination or unfair treatment (51%) due to 
their autism.

… and it appears to be getting worse


Shockingly, this figure has increased since 2012, when a third of adults 
responding, who had worked, reported bullying, unfair treatment, or 
discrimination at work because of their autism.[3]

Most managers admit they do not know how to support autistic employees …


In a YouGov survey of businesses of various sizes, carried out between 31 May 
and 3 June 2016, 60% of employers said they worry about getting support for an 
autistic employee wrong, and an equal number say they do not know where to go 
for advice.

… and many autistic employees agree


Over a third (35%) said that the support or adjustments made by their current 
or most recent employer were “poor” or “very poor”.

Autistic jobseekers are being let down by the system too


Six in 10 (61%) of autistic people rated their experience of Jobcentre Plus as 
“poor” or “very poor”; over half (56%) gave the same assessment of the Work 
Programme.

100% of people who read this article should be concerned 

You can make a difference: sign the National Autistic Society’s petition 
<http://Bit.ly/autism-employment-gap>, which calls on the government to take 
decisive action to double the number of autistic people in work.

Sources: All statistics taken from Too Much Information: The Autism Employment 
Gap, NAS (2016), except for the following: 1. I Exist, NAS (2008); 2 Office for 
National Statistics (2016) Dataset:A08: Labour market status of disabled people 
(20 July 2016) 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/labourmarketstatusofdisabledpeoplea08>
; 3 Bancroft, K et al (2012)The Way We Are 
<http://www.autism.org.uk/~/media/20F5BD5ADBDE42479F126C3E550CE5B0.ashx>, NAS.
 