
Andy Murray’s annus mirabilis

In the moments after beating Milos Raonic in straight sets to win the 
Wimbledon singles title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/jul/10/andy-murray-wins-wimbledon-2016-video>
 for the second time in July, Andy Murray glanced up at the royal box and saw
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> beaming down. 
Murray, whose politics lean towardsScottish independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence>, observed for the 
benefit of Sue Barker, an enthralled Centre Court and those watching worldwide, 
“A huge thank you to everyone who came out to support me. The prime minister’s 
here, as well, I see. Playing in a Wimbledon final is tough, but I wouldn’t 
want to be prime minister. It’s an impossible job.”

Who knew then that within two months Cameron would have left politics 
completely and Murray would beadding a second Olympic title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/aug/14/andy-murray-v-juan-martin-del-potro-olympic-mens-tennis-final-live>
 to his second Wimbledon championship? He then capped the most impressive 
season of his 11-year career by beating his long-time bete noir,Novak Djokovic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/novak-djokovic>, to win the ATP World Tour 
Finals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/nov/20/andy-murray-wins-atp-finals-to-end-the-year-as-world-no1-video-highlights>
 at the O2 Arena in Greenwich last month, sealing his position as the world’s 
number one. At 29, he was the oldest player to do so since John Newcombe in 
1974.
 Photograph: @bbctennis 
In 2016, Murray not only established his status as Britain’s most outstanding 
athlete, but he finally won a permanent place in the affections of an audience 
that was once reluctant to embrace the sometimes angry Scot. Just about 
everything went his way this year, both on and off the court. He and his wife, 
Kim,celebrated the arrival of their first child, Sophia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/feb/29/andy-murray-grand-slam-daughter-fatherhood>
, in February; and once he found a rhythm with the racket after an uncertain 
start to the season, includingdefeat by Djokovic in the French Open final 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/05/french-open-2016-final-novak-djokovic-beats-andy-murray>
, Murray returned from Rio to win five tournaments and 25 matches in a row.

He is back with coach Ivan Lendl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/12/andy-murray-ivan-lendl-coach>, 
afterthe surprise departure of Amélie Mauresmo earlier in the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/09/andy-murray-amelie-mauresmo-splits-coach>
, and finished the season free of the injuries that have plagued him in 
previous years. There are strong rumours of a knighthood in the New Year’s 
honours list.

However ill-equipped Murray might be to run the country, Cameron would gladly 
have traded places with him that July Sunday, and certainly thereafter. Murray 
might not have been so keen.Kevin Mitchell

Michelle Obama does James Corden’s Carpool Karaoke
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94713d7919d3e04ebb8fb9f59d670720cd81a9fd%2F2_29_2542_1316%2F2542.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94713d7919d3e04ebb8fb9f59d670720cd81a9fd%2F2_29_2542_1316%2F2542.jpg>
 Singing star Michelle Obama with James Corden. Photograph: Late Late Show 
Where to start with Michelle’s Carpool Karaoke 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ln3wAdRAim4>? Well, first of all, imagine any 
British PM or PM’s spouse doing this. So in your car withJames Corden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/james-corden> you’ve got, say, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> or that fella in the specs 
she’s married to, Call Me Dave Cameron orSam Cam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/samantha-cameron>, Gordon Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> or Sarah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sarah-brown>, Tony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> or Cherie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/cherieblair>, Maggie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> or Denis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/jun/26/obituaries.politics>? Imagine just 
what teeth-clenchingly, bottom-wrigglingly uncomfortable viewing that would 
make.

But this was positively joyous. Michelle is funny, smart, gorgeous, caring and 
cool. She is the antidote to everything we despise about the political class. 
And what makes it even better is that she did it in a year when we’ve never 
despised them more.

All credit to Corden, who has created a wonderful slot on his Late Late Show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2016/jul/04/james-corden-late-late-show-uk-sky>
. But there was only one star this time: this is all about Michelle. While most 
politicians would look lost, weird, desperate, unhinged (possibly all four), 
Michelle is just having a great time, singing her heart out, car-seat 
boogie-ing while enjoying a jaunt around the White House lawns. It’s impossible 
not to love her.

There are so many highlights, from Michelle’s first words (“Hey there, you 
wanna go for a spin?”), to giving up their secret service codenames (hers is 
Renaissance, Barack’s is Renegade), toMissy Elliott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/missyelliott>’s surprise pop-up appearance 
in the back seat. And then there’s the music: Stevie Wonder’s Signed, Sealed, 
Delivered I’m Yours, Beyoncé’s Single Ladies and Missy’s Get Ur Freak On. 
Michelle knows all the words and every move.
Goodnews list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
At the same time, she manages to promote her scheme to get every girl in the 
world educated, drops in the astonishing fact that66 million girls are not in 
school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/oct/11/international-day-of-the-girl-freida-pinto>
, and gets properly political: “So much could be corrected in the world if 
girls were educated and had power over their lives.”

This is already a reminder of everything we will miss over the next four 
years. (And no, I won’t ruin it all by saying his name.) Perhaps Barack wasn’t 
the transformational politician many had hoped for, but as a family there has 
not been a finer role model than the Obamas in the White House. Gracious, 
dignified, warm and, most important of all, human. Never has a first family 
appeared so normal, or to enjoy life so much – and not at the expense of the 
others. If you’re still not convinced, just picturePhilip May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/philip-may-theresa-may-quiet-husband-city-experience>
 rapping along to Get Ur Freak On.Simon Hattenstone

Misogyny gets official recognition as a hate crime

This year, I was tasked with training Nottinghamshire police to recognise a 
new category of hate crime: misogyny 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-nottinghamshire-36775398>. We added it to 
the existing list of disability, race, religion, homophobia, and transphobia. 
Our definition of it is “incidents against women that are motivated by an 
attitude of a man towards a woman, and includes behaviour targeted at a woman 
by men, simply because she is a woman”.

When the policy launched in July, most headlines disappointingly framed this 
definition around wolf whistling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/13/nottinghamshire-police-count-wolf-whistling-hate-crime>
. But we were not inundated with reports of whistling; actual reports included 
pregnant women being assaulted, girls being harassed in their school uniforms, 
and one incident that was recategorised as abduction.

If something happens to a woman that makes her uncomfortable, and she feels 
that it happened because she is a woman, she can now call 101 anywhere in the 
UK and report it as a hate crime. The difference in Nottingham is that instead 
of that report going into the “hate crime: other” folder, such incidents are 
now recorded in their own category, just as “hate crime: disability” would be. 
Women in Nottingham are guaranteed a specially trained officer to deal with 
their case. Investigations are launched, and if perpetrators are found, they 
are warned and hopefully enlightened. In serious cases, public order offences 
can be given. Where warnings are either too late, or insufficient, this hate 
crime allows us better to track offender behaviour.

Nationally, 64% of all women have experienced sexual harassment in public 
places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/29/sexist-hate-crimes-second-class-status-misogyny-maria-miller>
; that figure rises to 85% of women and girls under 25. By reporting, we can 
begin to identify hotspots, repeat offenders and women who are high risk for 
victimisation. It’s hoped that by taking these cases seriously, women will feel 
encouraged to disclose other gendered crimes.

In May, I began training every response officer, beat manager and police 
community support officer in Nottinghamshire, along with the control room. One 
focus was safety techniques women can use: avoiding certain areas, wearing 
silent shoes and carrying keys between their fingers. Female officers would 
often turn to each other, shocked to realise they did all these things 
unconsciously. Some officers were taken aback by the statistics and stories 
that were shared. I found it easy to sympathise. After all, if you’re a man who 
does not commit misogynistic hate crime yourself, it would be largely hidden 
from you. Perpetrators rarely harass women who are accompanied by men.

Violence against women needs to be understood as a continuum. We must 
challenge what’s taking place in the streets alongside our homes, campuses and 
the workplace. I hope this will become the national standard; the training is 
now available to all forces. I believe that we will look back in 20 years and 
wonder what took us so long.Martha Jephcott, campaigner

Rafaela Silva wins gold for Brazil
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191149e11c2d35ae8477a99575bf3cb3a6d2d2d9%2F0_10_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F191149e11c2d35ae8477a99575bf3cb3a6d2d2d9%2F0_10_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Brazil’s golden girl, judoka Rafaela Silva. Photograph: Reuters 
It is hard to imagine a more perfect antidote to the resurgence of misogyny, 
homophobia and racism in Brazil thanthe Olympic victory of Rafaela Silva 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/08/rafaela-silva-judo-wins-brazil-first-gold-rio-olympics>
. The gay black judoka from the City of God favela won the host nation’s first 
gold of the 2016 Games, lifting the spirits of a population mired in economic 
gloom and political crisis. The buzzer at the end of the final bout could 
hardly be heard above delirious cheering as Silva sank to her knees and raised 
her arms to the rafters. She then ran into the arms of her coach, sobbing with 
joy, as celebrations erupted across the country.

It was a triumph against adversity, and not just because Silva overcame world 
number one Sumiya Dorjsuren of Mongolia, who had beaten her on all four of 
their previous encounters. On her right bicep, Silva has a tattooed reminder of 
what she has been through: an image of the Olympic rings and the words “Only 
God knows what I suffered to get here”. She thought about quitting the sport 
after she was disqualified from the 2012 London Games (for an illegal hold), 
while furious critics back home posted hate-filled messages on Twitter and 
Facebook.

But the 24-year-old does not give up easily. Growing up in the City of God, 
Silva has seen friends and family members shot and arrested for drug dealing. 
The street games she played as a child were often interrupted by gunfights. At 
times, gangsters would forbid residents to leave because they were planning an 
ambush.

Silva credits her father with helping her find a way out: it was he who 
insisted she take up a sport. Initially she wanted to become a footballer, but 
boys dominated the community pitch and wouldn’t let her play. “So I had to do a 
sport I didn’t like – judo,” she tells me, grinning.

The day after the Olympics, Silva went on a victory parade through the favela 
on top of a fire engine. Her community was delirious. It was the best thing 
that had ever happened to the City of God, and she is all too aware of the 
significance: “I’m a black woman and I grew up in this community. I didn’t have 
big dreams, because there aren’t many opportunities. People here think they 
have nowhere to go beyond drugs and bullets. But I showed that you can achieve 
great things even if you don’t have much money.”

The timing was apposite. Shortly before the Olympics, the country’s first 
woman president, Dilma Rousseff of the Workers’ Party, wasousted in an 
impeachment plot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/dilma-rousseff-impeached-president-brazilian-senate-michel-temer>
 and replaced by the more conservative Michel Temer, who appointed an all-male, 
all-white cabinet.

Silva, who is a sergeant in the army, is reluctant to talk politics; she is 
just glad she was able to inspire people at a time when hope was in short 
supply. “People come up to me and say thank you, that their children have taken 
up sport because of me, and that I helped give them a lift. It has been a 
difficult year for Brazil because of the politics, and violence in the 
community. Many people doubted we were capable of pulling off an Olympics. But 
we did it, and we got some medals as well.”

Victory has changed her life, too. She is thinking of getting another tattoo: 
“I’d like something to mark the victory, but I haven’t decided on the best way 
to do that.” More significantly, she has paid for an extension on her parents’ 
home, and bought new houses for her sister and herself. As she says: “That’s a 
big thing for a girl who grew up in a family who couldn’t afford even to buy a 
new bicycle.”Jonathan Watts

Everyone falls for Team GB, again
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5f9be90ce9af5237356c6f69b997129cd4df4c1%2F0_10_2096_1258%2F2096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5f9be90ce9af5237356c6f69b997129cd4df4c1%2F0_10_2096_1258%2F2096.jpg>
 Gymnast Max Whitlock, winner of two gold medals. Photograph: 
Xinhua/Rex/Shutterstock 
The fact that the shortlist on this year’s BBC Sports Personality of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/bbc-sports-personality-of-the-year> is 16 as 
opposed to the more regular 10 is testament to the embarrassment of golden 
performances from Team GB at theOlympics and Paralympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> in Rio this summer.

Olympic and Paralympic sport gets into our hearts, it brings us to tears, to 
the edge of our seats – and all for people we’ve never heard of before. Every 
four years, the shot at glory is there. Screw up, and your chance might never 
come again: you may not even get selected next time. Sure, there are world 
championships and other titles in the cycle, but it’s the Olympics every 
athlete wants.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F674871b5130a3b85dc6982763c2ebad34666f3a3%2F879_249_3254_3399%2F3254.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F674871b5130a3b85dc6982763c2ebad34666f3a3%2F879_249_3254_3399%2F3254.jpg>
 Cyclists Jason and Laura Kenny celebrate their wins. Photograph: Patrick 
Semansky/AP 
Gymnast Max Whitlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/08/max-whitlock-gymnast-olympic-medals>
 is a man who didn’t just manage to peak at the right time within that cycle, 
but whopeaked twice in 90 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/gb-max-whitlock-floor-gold-gymnastics-rio-olympics>
, bringing home two gold medals for Great Britain in a sport in which there had 
previously been none. A history-maker, Whitlock will inspire the next 
generation of gymnasts to reach higher.

On a global level, the 2016 Olympics gave us moments to savour; we are blessed 
to be alive to watchUsain Bolt run 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/aug/20/usain-bolt-triple-treble-greatness-rio-olympics>
, to have seenMichael Phelps swim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/13/michael-phelps-olympic-career-swimming-gold>
 and to watchSimone Biles tumble and twist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/simone-biles-fourth-rio-gold-floor-gb-amy-tinkler>
. But it was a South African called Wayde van Niekerk who brought me to the 
edge of my seat. From lane nine,he ran a new world record on his way to Olympic 
gold in the 400m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/wayde-van-niekerk-olympic-gold-400m-world-record>
 – and the man who held the record,Michael Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-running-blog/2016/jun/03/michael-johnson-its-all-about-the-execution-and-i-like-that>
, was sitting by my side throughout. Talk about drama. Johnson’s reaction was 
as cool as you’d expect: “I have held that for 17 years. It’s time someone ran 
faster.”

Women’s sport still gets just 10% of all sports media coverage – except when 
the Paras and Olympics are on. The likes of the incrediblegold-medal-winning 
women’s hockey team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/aug/19/gb-women-historic-hockey-gold-rio-olympics-video>
,Laura Trott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/16/laura-trott-rio-2016-olympic-omnium-gold-medal>
 (now Kenny),Jessica Ennis-Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/i-want-to-end-on-a-high-says-jessica-ennis-hill-after-taking-silver>
,Kadeena Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/11/kadeena-cox-sarah-storey-hannah-cockroft-rio-paralympics>
 andDame Sarah Storey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/video/2016/sep/09/sarah-story-wins-record-breaking-gold-medal-rio-paralympics-video-highlights>
 help to redress that imbalance and boost the column inches. If you are a young 
girl with sporting ambition and you don’t see these women, how do you know 
what’s possible? This year’s Games gave us a better idea.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee9d286c9b511a22f2b96f6fd73c9033572c3a4b%2F0_64_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee9d286c9b511a22f2b96f6fd73c9033572c3a4b%2F0_64_3888_2333%2F3888.jpg>
 Britain’s women’s hockey team. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Who would have thought, 12 months ago, that a female hockey player would make 
it to the last four ofI’m A Celebrity… Get Me Out Of Here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/nov/08/im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-2016-meet-the-new-contestants>
? Great Britain’s hockey gold has given these women a platform and a voice, and
Sam Quek 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/29/sam-quek-hockey-team-gb-gold-rio-2016>
 used her elimination night interview very well: “Sport is fun, and that’s what 
I wanted to show young girls,” she toldAnt and Dec 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/ant-and-dec>. You did that, Sam.

Rio illustrated that we are truly in a golden age when it comes to the 
Olympics and Paralympics. There was a point at which we overtook China on the 
medal table, when I thought, “This is all a bit uncomfortably peculiar – such 
an unfamiliar feeling.” As a keen student of Olympic history (anda failed 
Olympian wannabe 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2012-07-29/i-could-have-been-a-contender---the-bbc-olympic-presenters-who-almost-had-careers-in-sport>
: I was a Commonwealth Games gymnast), I still remember the low of Atlanta 1996 
well (one gold and 36th in the medal table). How far we have come.Gabby Logan

‘Umbrella movement’ protester Nathan Law is elected in Hong Kong
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5d420ed0095bd9e8a9333b1c15e38931e845ed%2F0_198_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d5d420ed0095bd9e8a9333b1c15e38931e845ed%2F0_198_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
 Nathan Law: ‘People want me to carry on the fight.’ Photograph: Anthony 
Wallace/AFP/Getty Images 
When he became the youngest person ever elected to Hong Kong’s legislature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/05/hong-kong-poll-pro-independence-activists-poised-to-win-seats-in-record-turnout>
, Nathan Law felt the city’s hopes for democracy resting on his shoulders. Two 
years ago, the 23-year-old was a student leader during months of street 
protests that sawthousands occupy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/hong-kong-umbrella-movement-first-anniversary-democracy>
 the former British colony’s financial centre.

“There’s a symbolic meaning to my seat, showing the spirit of the movement 
continues,” Law says in his new office above the harbour. “It gained a high 
moral ground and people want me to carry on the fight.” His election victory in 
September has helped motivate others to become more politically active: his 
staff are almost all refugees of the 2014 “umbrella movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/-sp-hong-kong-umbrella-revolution-pro-democracy-protests>
” protests.

Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement has long fought an uphill battle, 
consistently outnumbered in the city’s parliament, where only half the seats 
are directly elected; the others are returned by professional associations and 
special interest groups. Law hopes the support he received will translate to 
more than just votes, and says it is critical to maintain pressure on a 
government responsible more to Beijing than toHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> citizens.

“People shouldn’t just lay their expectations on me, then go home to play 
video games, back to their ordinary lives,” he says. “I have to convince people 
to walk with me on the frontline, and use my position to facilitate civil 
disobedience and resistance on the streets. Even though we’re up against China, 
the strongest tyranny in the world, we can at least support human rights and 
freedom.”Benjamin Haas

The Church of England gets its first gay bishop
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F957be23281f19d9d0953ed9d5fd677988928db91%2F0_721_1544_1231%2F1544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F957be23281f19d9d0953ed9d5fd677988928db91%2F0_721_1544_1231%2F1544.jpg>
 Bishop of Grantham Nicholas Chamberlain. Photograph: CofELincoln 
As the CofE continued to tie itself in knots over whether same-sex couples 
could wed in church, or gay priests could marry, the bishop of Grantham 
publicly declared he was in a long-term relationship with a man.Nicholas 
Chamberlain told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/nicholas-chamberlain-bishop-of-grantham-c-of-e-gay-relationship>
 he hoped to be “judged by my actions as a parish priest, a bishop – and by the 
Lord, ultimately. My sexual identity is part of who I am, but it’s the ministry 
that matters.” He did not want to become known as “the gay bishop”, he added.

Justin Welby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/justin-welby>, archbishop of 
Canterbury and leader of the worldwide Anglican church, said he had known about 
Chamberlain’s relationship when he appointed him. To the fury of conservative 
Christians, Welby said, “His sexuality is completely irrelevant to his office.”

While Chamberlain says he has abided by the church’s requirement for priests 
in gay relationships to be celibate,Gafcon <https://www.gafcon.org/>, a group 
of conservative Anglicans, said his appointment was a “major error”. But to 
campaigners for LGBT rights within the church, the first serving bishop to 
declare he was gay was a major fillip.Harriet Sherwood

Pikpa refugee camp comes to the rescue
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d92bfa0a5de9b9ab415fb935d0d64176124e41d%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20July%20to%20September&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-andy-murray-team-gb-michelle-obama-gay-bishop%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d92bfa0a5de9b9ab415fb935d0d64176124e41d%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Efi Latsoudi at Pikpa: ‘I was very proud.’ Photograph: UNHCR/Gordon Welters 
At 7.30pm on 19 September, all was peaceful at Pikpa 
<https://www.facebook.com/pg/pikpalesvos/about/?entry_point=page_nav_about_item&tab=page_info>
, a small refugee camp on the Greek island of Lesbos. Most of the volunteers 
had gone home, and founder Efi Latsoudi was winding down for the day. Then the 
phone rang: the island’s main camp was on fire and children needed to be 
evacuated immediately.

Within 10 minutes, 20 volunteers had returned and started preparing to rehouse 
98 children. The camp already hosted 150 refugees, mostly families, so they had 
to improvise, quickly assembling huge tents and setting up beds in the communal 
kitchen. “The refugee children here were very excited and helped a lot,” 
Latsoudi says. “I was very proud.”

The new arrivals were terrified at first: “We told them there was nothing to 
fear – it’s an open camp and they were welcome. They soon relaxed.” Latsoudi 
laughs: “It was like a holiday for them.”

Pikpa is a former children’s holiday camp with wooden cabins, shady pine trees 
and play areas. Compared with the two major camps on the island, which 
routinely flood or catch fire, it’s paradise. The children stayed for three 
days before being taken back, and on the last night, the whole camp had a big 
dinner and dancing.

Latsoudi says those three days were among the happiest of her life. “Everybody 
was running around, working together – it was amazing. In all this mess, 
suddenly something worked out.”Helen Nianias

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 