
It came from beyond the Large Magellanic Cloud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/gallery/2015/apr/21/hubble-at-25-the-best-images-from-the-space-telescope#img-1>
. The signal, a mere 20 milliseconds long, captured the moment when two black 
holes slammed together – a cataclysm that sent ripples through spacetime and 
onwards to Earth, where they made instruments chirp and scientists cheer. “We 
have detectedgravitational waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/11/gravitational-waves-discovery-hailed-as-breakthrough-of-the-century>
,” said David Reitze of theLaser Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory 
<https://www.ligo.caltech.edu> (Ligo). “We did it.”

The announcement ranked as the physics discovery of the year, confirming 
Einstein’s century-old theory of gravity and putting the Ligo teamon course for 
a Nobel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/12/gravitational-waves-who-should-win-the-nobel-prize>
. But the real excitement is yet to come. For the first quarter of a million 
years, the cosmos was hidden from astronomers. Now scientists can build 
gravitational wave observatories and, with them, look back to the birth of the 
universe. We can study the moment of creation.

It wasn’t the only time astronomers celebrated in 2016. In August, the 
European Southern Observatory in the Chilean desert sawchanges in the light 
coming from Proxima Centauri 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/proxima-b-will-be-our-prime-laboratory-in-the-search-for-extraterrestrial-life>
, the star nearest to the sun. An Earth-sized planet was pulling the red dwarf 
around. What thrilled astronomers was that the newly discovered world lay in 
the star’s habitable zone, that Goldilocks region of space where the 
temperature is right for liquid water, and along with water, perhaps life. The 
discovery brought the question, “Are we alone?” to our cosmic doorstep – and 
with it the realisation that such planets are not rare.

Stephen Hawking <https://www.theguardian.com/science/hawking> is convinced 
that aliens are out there, but he’s wary of inviting them over. In his 2016 
film,Stephen Hawking’s Favourite Places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/23/stephen-hawking-warns-against-seeking-out-aliens-in-new-film>
, he warned that meeting up with a technologically advanced bunch of cosmic 
hooligans might do for humanity what Christopher Columbus did for the Native 
Americans.

Hawking is equally suspicious of artificial intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/19/stephen-hawking-ai-best-or-worst-thing-for-humanity-cambridge>
. Yes, superintelligent machines might solve our greatest challenges, but not 
if they wipe us out instead. Fortunately, that threat remains a distant one.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fbreakthroughs-science-2016-gravitational-waves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2286ce405b4d8d9038a691289509e231c1256d65%2F0_1186_4501_2701%2F4501.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20breakthroughs%20in%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fbreakthroughs-science-2016-gravitational-waves%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20breakthroughs%20in%20science&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fbreakthroughs-science-2016-gravitational-waves%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2286ce405b4d8d9038a691289509e231c1256d65%2F0_1186_4501_2701%2F4501.jpg>
 Magic mushrooms, or medicine? Photograph: Martin Bond/Science Photo Library 
For some people, merging with robots makes sense. Nathan Copeland, a 
28-year-old who broke his neck in a car crash, hada robot arm wired directly 
into his brain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/13/mind-controlled-robot-arm-gives-back-sense-of-touch-to-paralysed-man>
. He could move it by thinking, and through signals passed back to his brain, 
experience a sense of touch. By providing sensory feedback, researchers are 
edging towards their ultimate goal: robotic limbs that move and feel like real 
ones.

More than 25 US states have now legalised marijuana for medical uses, but 
could magic mushrooms be next? A handful of small studies found that psilocybin 
(the ingredient that made for happy hippies in the 1970s) could liftsevere 
depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/17/magic-mushrooms-lift-severe-depression-in-clinical-trial>
 in one group of volunteers, and reduce anxiety and depression incancer patients
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/magic-mushroom-ingredient-psilocybin-can-lift-depression-studies-show>
. For Stephen Ross, director of addiction psychiatry atNYU Langone Medical 
Center <http://nyulangone.org/>, the latter results were unprecedented. “We 
don’t have anything like it,” he said.
Goodnews list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
“More work needed” was the take home from another trial in 2016; this time for 
a male contraceptive. At last it seemed that men could shoulder the 
responsibility for birth control, and all it required was, well, a little 
prick. The bimonthlyhormone jab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/male-contraceptive-jab-as-effective-as-female-pill-trial-shows>
 was nearly as effective as the female pill, but the trial was halted after 20 
men dropped out. Some suffered from depression and acne; others had to contend 
with soaring libidos.

Of the 130 million or so babies born this year, one that arrived in April 
marked a scientific first. A Jordanian boy was created withDNA from three people
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/27/worlds-first-baby-born-using-dna-from-three-parents>
 (his parents, plus a healthy donor) to prevent him from inheriting a serious 
genetic disease. The US team who performed the treatment in Mexico say the boy 
is healthy, but such diseases can take hold later in life. In December, the 
fertility regulator in the UKgave clinics the green light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/15/three-parent-embryos-regulator-gives-green-light-to-uk-clinics>
 to apply for a licence to offer the procedure, known as mitochondrial 
replacement therapy, paving the way for similar births in Britain.

Every year has its own advances, but all tell the story of science. Great 
ideas work or fail. Achievements are lauded, but make us think twice. With 
each, we understand that little bit more about ourselves and the universe. And 
if none of it makes much sense yet? Well, we can always ask the aliens.

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 