
Danny Willett wins the Masters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/apr/11/danny-willett-masterrs-2016-jordan-spieth-lee-westood>

It wasn’t supposed to play out this way. At 5.05pm in Augusta, Georgia, on 
Sunday 10 April, there was no indication that it would. No Englishman had won 
the Masters, arguably golf’s most coveted individual event, since 1996. The 
American Jordan Spieth, who held a five-stroke lead, was in the midst of an 
extraordinary run, spanning 12 months. Step forwardDanny Willett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/danny-willett>, who seized an opportunity in 
the most emphatic way.

Then 28, Willett had enjoyed a decent professional career without scaling 
great heights. The Yorkshireman had played in the Masters only once before, 
when he tied in 38th place out of 97. But as Spieth stumbled, it was Willett 
who breezed to the summit of the leaderboard, with a closing round of 67 that 
took the title by the relatively comfortable margin of three shots.

Just 12 days earlier, Willett’s wife had given birth to the couple’s first 
child, Zach. “I always said I wouldn’t come here if Zach wasn’t born by now,” 
Willett said. “Fortunately, he listened to my prayers and came early. It’s just 
been the most ridiculously awesome 12 days.”Ewan Murray

Boaty McBoatface is born
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa533f048cfea260871728c6bd39e4d3b9d03126d%2F0_0_3500_1855%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa533f048cfea260871728c6bd39e4d3b9d03126d%2F0_0_3500_1855%2F3500.jpg>
 Polar research ship Boaty McBoatface, renamed the Sir David Attenborough. 
Photograph: NERC/PA 
New rule: from 2017 onwards, no referendums. Because it always ends in misery. 
Brexit proved that, butthe ballad of Boaty McBoatface 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/19/boaty-mcboatface-tyrants-have-crushed-the-peoples-will>
 proved it harder. The Natural Environment Research Council was about to unveil 
a new £200m polar research vessel, and asked the public to name it. The public 
– or at least the LOLsy, internet-dwelling slice of the population that 
Instagrams coffeeshop blackboards – decided to name it Boaty McBoatface. In the 
end, Boaty McBoatfacegained 124,000 votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/17/boaty-mcboatface-wins-poll-to-name-polar-research-vessel>
, four times as many as its nearest rival, and the vessel’s fate looked set.

But then it didn’t, because science minister Jo Johnson decided the whole 
thing was silly. He named it the RSS Sir David Attenborough, hoping that
aligning the craft with our greatest national treasure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/17/sir-david-attenborough-laughs-off-boaty-mcboatface-question-video>
 would calm everyone down. When that didn’t work, he promised to name one of 
the ship’s remotely controlled submersibles Boaty McBoatface instead, but it 
was too little too late.

Still, this wasn’t the end. Boaty McBoatface is a folk hero now. He is Robin 
Hood. He is Wat Tyler. Whenever there’s an injustice in the world, we will 
point our ears towards the wind and hear the words “Boaty McBoatface”.Stuart 
Heritage

The pope invites 12 Syrian refugees to Rome
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4521f02317660c020a11443145fdd9d7bd39b993%2F0_0_3500_2330%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4521f02317660c020a11443145fdd9d7bd39b993%2F0_0_3500_2330%2F3500.jpg>
 Pope Francis welcomes a group of Syrian refugees. Photograph: Reuters 
When the pope visited Lesbos in April, he returned with three families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/16/pope-francis-flies-to-lesbos-to-highlight-humanitarian-crisis-in-europe>
. At first they lived in a refuge run by theSant’Egidio charity 
<http://www.santegidio.org/index.php?&idLng=1064>; now the three families have 
paperwork, atitolo di viaggio allowing free travel in Europe, and homes of 
their own. “It’s what I dreamed of,” says Nour Essa, 31, who lives with her 
husband Hasan and son Riad in a two-room flat in Rome’s city centre. Bringing 
up a two-year-old in shared quarters had been a strain, and made Nour feel she 
couldn’t parent as she chose. Today, Riad attends nursery and is starting to 
talk. “We speak only Arabic to him,” Nour says. “He replies to us only in 
Italian.” A new life comes more easily to children.

Are they happier now? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/25/what-happened-pope-francis-syrian-refugees-rescued-lesbos-vatican-rome>
 “We are better, but we feel homeless,” Nour says. “Your studies, all your 
efforts, are thrown away because you must initiate a new life. You are like a 
child.” She studied microbiology for five years in Damascus and two years 
postgraduate in France; in Italy she must start again from the third year of an 
undergraduate degree. Hasan, a garden designer, must study architecture before 
he can practise in Italy; he attends university in Rome.

The second family, Suhila Ayiad and Ramy Alshakarji, live alongside a 
community of nuns. Suhila is learning Italian; their 16-year-old son thrives 
and wants to study dentistry, while their 18-year-old is “living the teenage 
years he couldn’t live in Syria”, a Sant’Egidio spokesperson says 
diplomatically. Little Quds, Ramy and Suhila’s youngest, is at school.

The third family, Osama Qawqaji and Wafa Eid, live a long way south of the 
charity’s language school. If they integrate, it will be through their 
children, the spokesperson says. “Probably they are planning to go back to 
Syria when they can.”Paula Cocozza

Hillsborough gets a verdict
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8352877a89792d0693fe15e4023f8fef12ba72d5%2F184_186_3992_2659%2F3992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8352877a89792d0693fe15e4023f8fef12ba72d5%2F184_186_3992_2659%2F3992.jpg>
 A banner after the Hillsborough verdict. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty 
Images 
To the terrible date of 15 April 1989, when 96 people died 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
 and hundreds more were injured and traumatised at an FA Cup semi-final, the 
bereaved Hillsborough families finally succeeded in adding 26 April 2016 as a 
historic landmark: the day the truth about the disaster was finally, legally 
established. Fully 27 years from the day their loved ones died, they crowded 
into the converted courtroom on a Warrington business park, all that suffering 
compressed into an awful wait for a jury to answer yes, or no, to 14 questions.

Questions six and seven were the heart of the matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/01/hillsborough-inquest-survivor-adrian-tempany>
, deciders in the families’ and survivors’ implacable struggle against the lies 
of South Yorkshire police, whose officers had organised a campaign to blame the 
victims, even as people were dying at the football ground. In 1991, South 
Yorkshire police made that case relentlessly at the first inquest, claiming the 
people who had paid to attend the event in an expectation of safety had drunk 
too much and somehow been recklessly too eager to watch the match. The families 
had to pay for their own legal representation; they could collectively afford 
£142,000 for a single barrister, pitted against the battery of publicly funded 
police lawyers, and the jury verdict was accidental death. This time, Theresa 
May’s Home Office provided funding for two rows of forensic and persistently 
combative lawyers to oppose the same allegations made again by the police.
Good news list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
This adversarial rerun of the old, already discredited police stories 
stretched the new inquests to two years, the longest case ever heard by a jury 
in British history. It had been agony for the families, forced to revisit every 
detail of the day their lives were devastated.

Finally, verdict day arrived. The forewoman of the jury answered questions one 
to five as expected, agreeing that there were appalling safety deficiencies in 
Sheffield Wednesday’s squalid Leppings Lane away end. Then came question six: 
were the 96 people unlawfully killed due to criminal gross negligence by the 
police officer in charge, Ch Supt David Duckenfield? “Yes,” the forewoman 
agreed, calmly, and the families’ years of struggle came to be vindicated. 
Next, question seven, key to whether this day would deliver justice or be 
another terrible chapter: did the behaviour of Liverpool supporters contribute 
to the dangerous situation? “No,” the forewoman said, with a kind note in her 
voice. The reaction was a gleeful outpouring of relief. People cheered, wept, 
hugged each other. For so many bleak years, this had been unthinkable, and now 
it really had come to pass:the lies had been overhauled by the truth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-inquests-jury-says-96-victims-were-unlawfully-killed>
.Outside, blinking, disbelieving, with film crews and photographers in front of 
them, a group of family members instinctively started to sing the Liverpool 
club anthem, You’ll Never Walk Alone. Ian Burke was 17 when his father, Henry, 
a builder, was among the 96 who died so needlessly, leaving bereft another son, 
daughter and a grief-stricken wife. Ian had taken time off work to sit through 
almost every day of the inquests; quiet, racked with stress. Just days before 
the verdicts, aged only 44, he had a heart attack.He is still suffering 
heart-related health problems, yet look atthe film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-victims-families-sing-youll-never-walk-alone-after-verdict-video>
 or photographs of the group outside the court on 26 April 2016, and there he 
is in the middle, with his suit and tie on, arm aloft, singing the beloved 
song, and smiling.David Conn

Leicester win the Premier League
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb948d9a1e599b881c8d307bfa66f8eda7439a83d%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb948d9a1e599b881c8d307bfa66f8eda7439a83d%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 Leicester City fans celebrate their Premier League win. Photograph: Nick 
Potts/PA 
You wouldn’t have dared suggest it as a Hollywood script: too unlikely. The 
unfashionable football, a toe-poke from relegation the previous season, 5,000-1 
outsiders to win it this time round, goes on tobeat the moneyed glory boys to 
the Premier League title 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/02/leicester-city-win-the-premier-league-title-after-fairytale-season>
. Impossible. You’d have got better odds on Piers Morgan being named Arsenal 
manager (2,500-1, since you asked). Yet it did happen. Leicester City’s the 
name, romance is the game.

And not just any old romance. Romance in the most cynical, spendthrift league 
in the world, where Manchester City regularly spend£40m on defenders who can’t 
defend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/09/manchester-city-complete-signing-of-john-stones-from-everton>
, Manchester United sell Paul Pogba for nothing (and later resign him for £89m 
without a blink), and Chelsea sack two managers a week for fun. And here was 
little Leicester City, a raggle-taggle army of rejects, has-beens and unknowns,
managed by an elderly Italian nicknamed the Tinkerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/claudio-ranieri> because he was so 
indecisive, winning the league title.

They didn’t even inch their way to the premiership, they blew their rivals 
away,winning 23 games, losing only three and finishing 10 points clear 
<https://www.premierleague.com/tables?co=1&se=42&mw=-1&ha=-1> of their closest 
rivals, Arsenal.Jamie Vardy <https://www.theguardian.com/football/jamie-vardy>, 
who had been playing non-league football for Fleetwood Town three years 
earlier, scored 24 goals and won a place in the England team; little knownRiyad 
Mahrez won player of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/24/leicester-riyad-mahrez-pfa-player-of-the-year>
; thirtysomething has-been Robert Huth (long since rejected by Chelsea) forged 
a mighty partnership with thirtysomething never-been Wes Morgan (who had spent 
10 years at Nottingham Forest and ran tattoo parlours on the side).

To say Leicester were penniless is untrue; all Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> teams have money. But to 
put it in context, their squad cost £52.8m, just over one 10th of Manchester 
City’s.

After Christmas 2015, the impossible became ever more probable. By March, it 
was a likelihood, by April an inevitability, and on 2 May they were crowned 
champions. The city was painted blue: foreign film crews embedded themselves in 
the East Midlands and taught themselves how to pronounce Leicester; literary 
bigwigs such asJulian Barnes waxed poetic about their favourite club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/may/06/julian-barnes-leicester-city-premier-league-stupid-love>
; andGary Lineker promised to present Match Of The Day in his smalls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/13/gary-lineker-presents-match-of-the-day-in-his-pants-video>
 (he did).

Order has been restored since those heady days. As I write, Leicester (with 
virtually the same team) are 14th in the league, four points off the relegation 
zone, with three wins and seven defeats. But it was wonderful while it lasted.
Simon Hattenstone

Sadiq Khan becomes London’s first Muslim mayor
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097e445428c12fcde6fbdb012e1947e0303e7e40%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F097e445428c12fcde6fbdb012e1947e0303e7e40%2F0_0_8688_5792%2F8688.jpg>
 London mayor Sadiq Khan. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
“This is our Obama moment,” said Aisha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/our-moment-tooting-muslims-sadiq-khan-london-mayoral-election-victory>
 from Tooting the day after the capitalelected Sadiq Khan as mayor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-elected-mayor-of-london-labour>
. For many other Londoners, it was the triumph of hope over fear, followingan 
ugly campaign waged by Khan’s chief rival, Zac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/07/top-conservatives-condemn-zac-goldsmiths-disgusting-mayoral-campaign>
.

In a year characterised by the electoral gains of people and parties 
associated with the right, racism, xenophobia and nationalism, Khan’s decisive 
victory in May was a sweet, bright moment for those on the flipside of an 
increasingly binary political landscape. The contest was principally between 
Khan, the Muslim son of a bus driver and seamstress who grew up on a council 
estate with seven siblings, andGoldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>, the son of a billionaire 
businessman and Eton alumnus.

On the advice of Conservative strategists, Goldsmith sought to portray Khan as 
a friend of Islamic extremists. The Tory candidate said Khan had “given 
platforms and oxygen and cover and excuses” to extremists. “London would be 
safer if I’m mayor,” he told voters.

Khan, meanwhile, celebrated the capital’s diversity. “I am a Londoner, I am 
European, I am British, I am English, I am of Islamic faith, of Asian origin, 
of Pakistani heritage, a dad, a husband,” he told voters, adding: “We do not 
just tolerate each other in London; we respect each other.”

When the votes were counted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/sadiq-khan-london-mayor-corbyn-labour-scotland-snp>
, Khan had the support of 57% of Londoners, compared with 43% who voted for 
Goldsmith. With around 1.3m votes, Khan also had the biggest personal mandate 
of any politician in UK history.Harriet Sherwood

Fabric nightclub gets unexpected champions
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e91ecfc4c178b43ffad5d68f4ea7c8d7b477c1%2F0_29_1024_636%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0e91ecfc4c178b43ffad5d68f4ea7c8d7b477c1%2F0_29_1024_636%2F1024.jpg>
 Fabric clubbers Wladyslaw Nykiel and Stanislawa Zapasnik. Photograph: Courtesy 
of Jacob Husley 
At 10pm on a Sunday in May, Jacob Husley was setting up at London nightclub 
Fabric <https://www.fabriclondon.com/> for his weekly house and techno night 
WetYourSelf! when he passed an elderly couple on the stairs: “They were walking 
down slowly and she was on crutches. I asked, ‘Are you OK?’ but they just 
smiled and kept going.” Husley, 36, who has DJed at Fabric for eight years, 
checked with security, who said the couple had turned up with tickets.

Husley went back in to find them at the bar. They were Polish and didn’t speak 
English. “I wanted to offer them a drink,” he says. “They had tequila shots and 
I thought, ‘This couple are wicked!’ But I still had a feeling there was a 
mistake.”

As the club filled up, Husley took them to the VIP lounge and when a Polish 
friend arrived, he had him translate. “They said they’d always dreamed of going 
to one of the big, great nightclubs in London.” They’d bought tickets online in 
Poland and were staying with their niece in London. Husley offered them another 
drink and when they asked for tea, fetched some from a cafe down the street.

Other guests embraced the first-time visitors. “They didn’t stay in the VIP 
area. He kept venturing out to the dancefloor and everyone was giving him lots 
of attention. She sat by the bar and couldn’t dance, but people were saying 
hello. They definitely enjoyed themselves.” At 5am, they took Husley up on his 
offer of a taxi home.

The next day, Husley put a photo of the couple on Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/17/dj-searches-old-couple-fabric-nightclub>
. It went viral. “I think it inspired people,” he says. “They posted to their 
friends, ‘This is us when we’re old.’” The story got international coverage, 
but Husley didn’t know the couple’s names and had no way of contacting them.

Then, a few weeks later, he received a letter from pensioners Wladyslaw 
Nykiel, 82, and Stanislawa Zapasnik, 79. Nykiel wrote: “We had a wonderful time 
dancing with young Londoners who welcomed us very warmly. There are no words to 
describe the atmosphere and great fun [of Fabric].”

When Islington council closed Fabric in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/london-nightclub-fabric-close-permanently-licence-revoked-drugs>
, Husley got back in touch. Nykiel sent a picture of him and Zapasnik holding a 
#savefabric placard. Fabric will now reopen on 6 January – and Husley has made 
sure the couple have tickets.Candice Pires

The vote for Brexit reveals some silver linings
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb642822e262c0d4a273bf1213915ab8677ad11%2F0_0_7172_4896%2F7172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb642822e262c0d4a273bf1213915ab8677ad11%2F0_0_7172_4896%2F7172.jpg>
 Sarah Olney wins Richmond Park for the Lib Dems. Photograph: Chris J 
Ratcliffe/Getty Images 
Two years ago, most of England was asleep, something that hit me every time I 
travelled there from Scotland. In the summer of 2014, people north of the 
border were in the midst of theirreferendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/15/-sp-britain-on-brink-real-story-scottish-independence>
, and life was full of talk about what was at stake. I’d immerse myself in the 
hurly-burly, then fly home to a country that felt sedated, where politicians 
still spoke in lukewarm platitudes.

Now look. In the wake of the EU referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, politics in England and 
Wales is crackling with life. I travel around the country for the Guardian, and 
getting people to talk used to be like pulling teeth. Now, I mention the EU,
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> or Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and off the conversation 
goes: people are awake.

This is not all on the pro-Brexit side, by any means. Remainers are starting 
to find their voices, too. New cross-party “progressive” groups have sprung up 
in Brighton, London and East Anglia, set on opposing the vision shared by the 
Tories and Ukip. In November, the Green party hadthe sense to stand down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/bravo-green-party-richmond-park-byelection-zac-goldsmith>
 in the Richmond Park byelection, with the aim of kicking out the pro-Brexit 
Tory “independent”Zac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>, thereby playing its part 
in his defeat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/01/richmond-park-byelection-results-counting-starts-live>
.

A new group, More United <http://www.moreunited.uk/>, is raising money for 
candidates from “the progressive centre”, pledged to a pro-European, 
egalitarian future. Meanwhile, the pressure groupCompass 
<https://www.compassonline.org.uk/>, which began inside the Labour party, then 
reached beyond it, is to start making the case against old-fashioned party 
divides and in favour of what it calls progressive alliances. As well as the 
Greens’ co-leaderCaroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolinelucas>, a handful of the most 
forward-thinking Labour MPs are giving it quiet support.

If the next few years are going to see a big thrashing out of what England is, 
the process will not be the preserve of the right. Old politics (the endless 
talk of “hard-working families”, “going forward” and the rest) is pretty much 
finished. That’s a good thing. And if what has replaced it is proving visceral 
and primary-coloured, there are voices on the left who can meet that challenge. 
Of course it will be difficult; the word “struggle” is part of the progressive 
vocabulary for a reason. But isn’t it better to be awake than complacently 
snoozing?John Harris

Tim Peake takes one giant leap for Britain
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47b8657990cbcb453e86f64d57bb29270f1ec318%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47b8657990cbcb453e86f64d57bb29270f1ec318%2F0_0_1920_1080%2F1920.jpg>
 Tim Peake runs the London Marathon in space. Photograph: ESA/AP 
On 15 January, Peake performed the first British spacewalk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jan/15/astronaut-tim-peake-first-spacewalk-international-space-station-gods-eye-view-tricky-repairs>
 outside theInternational Space Station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/international-space-station>, an event 
that took a dramatic turn when his colleagueTim Kopra 
<https://twitter.com/astro_tim?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
’s helmet began to fill with water. Peake had to take the lead and bring the 
other astronaut back to safety from the outer panels of the space station. He 
did this with the calmness they seem to breed in the bones of astronauts; they 
appear to be chosen these days not just for their ability to perform in 
ludicrously demanding environments, but to smile and enthusiastically explain 
things to awestruck children while doing it.

For six months, until he came back down to Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/18/astronaut-tim-peake-shuts-hatch-on-soyuz-capsule-for-trip-back-to-earth>
 in June, Peake did just that, his heavily scheduled days split between 
experiments and outreach. He sent videos to schools;ran a London Marathon in 
orbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/apr/24/british-astronaut-tim-peake-completes-london-marathon-space-video>
; he got people in Britain excited.

And that, in the end, was the point. Peake was not the first British astronaut 
in space; that honour belongs toHelen Sharman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/29/helen-sharman-tim-peake-space-flight>
, who spent a week on the Mir space station in 1991, and there have been five 
Britons on space shuttle missions (though they had to take US citizenship). But 
Peake was the first astronaut whose trip was directly funded by the British 
government, through theEuropean Space Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/european-space-agency>. Where our 
financial commitment to a pan-European body lies now, post-Brexit, remains to 
be seen. But for a few months there was a man from Chichester in space, and you 
just ask a nearby eight-year-old how cool that is.Dara Ó Briain

The ozone layer starts to heal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fab38a31516b1fc67d895f9e9cb2f09681119ed%2F0_0_5100_3387%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20%20April%20to%20June&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-golf-football-leicester-hillsborough-sadiq-khan-antarctica%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fab38a31516b1fc67d895f9e9cb2f09681119ed%2F0_0_5100_3387%2F5100.jpg>
 Paradise Bay in Antarctica. Photograph: All Canada Photos/Alamy 
As the world contemplates the calamitous prospect of Donald Trump unravelling 
the landmark Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
, we should take comfort in the fact that another international accord has 
begun remedying one of our biggest environmental messes.

Scientists reported this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/ozone-layer-hole-appears-to-be-healing-scientists-say>
 that the ozone hole above Antarctica, ripped open by our use of a group of 
chemical compounds, has started healing – good news that is the fruit of the 
1987Montreal Protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/sep/16/movingonfrommontreal>. 
This was when countries agreed the deal to first freeze and later phase out 
chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), mostly in aerosols and refrigeration. Because the 
ozone layer protects us from ultraviolet light, the UN estimates the CFC 
phase-out has avoided 2m annual cases of skin cancer.

The hole has not vanished: it still opens from September to November, only 
more slowly. Experts believe there is still a way to go. But “by 2060 you’ll 
have almost no years with an ozone hole”, said Susan Solomon, who ledthe study 
published in Science magazine 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/353/6296/269>. “Maybe one in every 15 
years, but it won’t be every year – bang, bang, bang – like it has been since 
the mid-80s.”

For Solomon, the healing of the hole is proof that the world can come together 
to tackle big environmental problems. “We made a mistake, and countries were 
willing to put their shoulders to the wheel and figure out how to fix it, and 
we did.”

The Montreal Protocol did have unintended consequences: the hydrofluorocarbons 
(HFCs) that largely replaced CFCs contribute to climate change, too. In October,
170 countries met in Uganda and reached a deal to fix that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/climate-change-environmentalists-hail-deal-to-limit-use-of-hydrofluorocarbons>
. Under the Kigali amendment to the Montreal Protocol, HFCs will also 
ultimately be phased out, which some estimates say could avoid up to 0.5C of 
global warming. US secretary of stateJohn Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> hailed the deal as “a 
monumental step forward”.Adam Vaughan

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 