
2016 was the hottest year on record, setting a new high for the third year in 
a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jul/11/we-just-broke-the-record-for-hottest-year-9-straight-times>
, with scientists firmly putting the blame on human activities that drive 
climate change.

The final data for 2016 was released on Wednesday by the three key agencies – 
theUK Met Office 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/news/releases/2017/2016-record-breaking-year-for-global-temperature>
 andNasa <http://go.nasa.gov/2016climate> and Noaa 
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/summary-info/global/2016/12> in the US – and 
showed 16 of the 17 hottest years on record have been this century.

Direct temperature measurements stretch back to 1880, but scientific research 
indicates the world was last this warm about115,000 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/global-temperature-climate-change-highest-115000-years>
 and that the planet has not experienced such high levels of carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere for4m years <http://climate.nasa.gov/climate_resources/7/>.

Arctic ice melt 'already affecting weather patterns where you live right now'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/19/arctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now>
In 2016, global warming delivered scorching temperatures around the world. The 
resulting extreme weather means the impacts of climate change on people are 
coming sooner and with more ferocity than expected, according to scientists.

The natural El Niño climate phenomenon, which helped ramp up temperatures to 
“shocking” levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/14/february-breaks-global-temperature-records-by-shocking-amount>
 in early 2016, has now waned, but carbon emissions were the major factor and 
will continue to drive rising heat. Scientists expect 2017 to be another 
extremely hot year.

The new data shows the Earth has now risen about 1.1C above the levels seen 
before the industrial revolution, when large-scale fossil fuel burning began. 
This brings it perilously close to the 1.5C target included as an aim of the
global climate agreement signed in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
 in December 2015.
Temperature map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/hothothot-zip/giv-3902UuYUKsR0i522>
The declaration of 2016 as a year of record-breaking heat comes just ahead of 
the inauguration of Donald Trump as US president. Trump has called global 
warming ahoax <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/428414113463955457> 
and is filling his administration withclimate change deniers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
 and former ExxonMobil boss Rex Tillerson. Tillerson said  
<http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/11/tillerson-says-climate-change-poses-risks-breaking-with-trump.html>
recently that climate change does exist but that theability to predict the 
effects of greenhouse gas emissions is “very limited” 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2017/01/11/tillerson-says-climate-change-poses-risks-breaking-with-trump.html>
, a statement most climate scientists would reject.

The three temperature records are independent but reached very similar 
conclusions. Thedata from Noaa 
<https://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/sotc/summary-info/global/2016/12> showed 2016 saw 
the global average temperature break records for eight months is a row from 
January to August in 2016, while no land area experienced an annual average 
temperature that was cooler than 20th-century average. Noaa also found Arctic 
sea ice fell to its lowest annual average extent on record and Antarctic sea 
ice to the second smallest extent on record.

Prof Michael Mann, a climate scientist at Pennsylvania State University, said: 
“The spate of record-warm years that we have seen in the 21st century can only 
be explained by human-caused climate change. The effect of human activity on 
our climate is no longer subtle. It’s plain as day, as are the impacts – in the 
form of record floods, droughts, superstorms and wildfires – that it is having 
on us and our planet.”

“While there may be some cost in mitigating climate change, there are already 
major costs in damages,” said Prof Kevin Trenberth, a scientist at the US 
National Center for Atmospheric Research, who estimates the costs as already 
tens of billions of dollars a year. “Yet if sensible approaches are implemented 
in the right way for [cutting emissions] and building resilience, the increases 
in energy efficiency can actually make it a net gain, not only for the planet 
for for everyone.”

Bob Ward, policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change 
at the London School of Economics, said: “Any politician who denies this 
evidence from world-class climate scientists will be wilfully turning a blind 
eye to rising risks that threaten the lives and livelihoods of their citizens.

“I hope that president-elect Trump and his team in particular will acknowledge 
and act on this important scientific information.”

Peter Stott, acting director of the Met Office’s Hadley Centre, said: “A 
particularly strong El Niño event contributed about 0.2C to the annual average 
for 2016. However, the main contributor to warming over the last 150 years is 
human influence on climate from increasing greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.”

The head of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), Petteri Taalas, said 
in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
: “The extra heat from the powerful El Niño event has disappeared. The heat 
from global warming will continue. Because of climate change, the occurrence 
and impact of extreme events has risen. ‘Once in a generation’ heatwaves and 
flooding are becoming more regular.”

A WMO report said human-induced global warming had contributed to at least 
half the extreme weather events studied in recent years, with the risk of 
extreme heat increasing by 10 times in some cases.

The record-smashing temperatures in 2016 led to searing heatwaves across the 
year: a new high of 42.7C (108.9F) was recorded in Pretoria, South Africa in 
January; Mae Hong Son in Thailand saw 44.6C (112.3F) on 28 April; Phalodi in
India reached 51.0C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 (123.8F) in May, andMitribah in Kuwait recorded 54.0C 
<https://www.wunderground.com/blog/JeffMasters/eastern-hemispheres-alltime-temperature-record-kuwait-fries-in-54>
 (129.2F) in July. Warm oceans saw coral mortality of up to 50% in parts of
Australia’s Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
 and bleaching of75% of Japan’s biggest reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/almost-75-of-japans-biggest-coral-reef-has-died-from-bleaching-says-report>
.

The level of CO2 in the atmosphere also broke records in 2016, with May seeing 
the highest monthly value yet – 407.7 ppm – atMauna Loa, in Hawaii 
<https://www.esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends/full.html>, the site of the 
longest-running measurements dating back to 1958.

Global carbon emissions have barely grown in the last three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/fossil-fuel-co2-emissions-nearly-stable-for-third-year-in-row>
, after decades of strong growth, according to an analysis published in 
November. The main reason isChina burning less coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/25/china-coal-peak-hailed-turning-point-climate-change-battle>
, but CO2 is still being emitted into the atmosphere at record levels. “CO2 
will continue to rise and cause the planet to warm until emissions are cut down 
to near zero,” said Prof Corinne Le Quéré at the University of East Anglia.

Global warning: a live digital event, Thursday 19 January, 7am GMT

Amid fears Donald Trump’s administration will shatter decades of hard-won 
progress on climate change, the Guardian, Univision and Tumblr are uniting to 
deliver 24 hours of live coverage from around the world on what is at stake. 
Hours from Trump taking power, we will be reporting from all seven continents, 
in English and Spanish, hearing from those most affected, the experts and 
publishing our audiences appeals to Trump to protect the planet.
 