
Chibok girls are released by Boko Haram

With a smile as brilliant as her gold and green headtie, Margaret praised the 
Lord. “We never imagined we would see this day,” she said. “With the help of 
God, we were able to come out of bondage.” Around her, another 20 young women 
and their relatives, many in equally spectacular traditional dress provided by 
delighted authorities, danced and sang, and sometimes sobbed.

For more than two years, the girls, from a small Christian town in the 
predominantly Muslim far north-east of Nigeria, had been held byBoko Haram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/boko-haram>, the Islamic militant group 
linked to Islamic State. They were among more than 250 female students abducted 
from their school duringa night raid in April 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/15/schoolgirls-kidnapped-suspected-islamists-nigeria>
. At least 50 managed to escape hours after the attack, but the rest, kept by 
their captors in a series of forest camps, were given a choice: convert and 
marry, or become a servant.

The mass abduction prompted a global outcry, and an international campaign to 
#BringBackOurGirls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/14/nigeria-bringbackourgirls-campaign-one-year-on>
. Yet the story slipped from the headlines. Desultory negotiations for the 
girls’ release went nowhere. The bloody campaign against the militants ground 
on, with some success but no sign of the students, other than a glimpse in a 
propaganda video released by the extremists. Some were said to have been killed 
in a government bombing; others by disease. Two made their own way to freedom, 
one with a child fathered by a militant. But the rest remained.

The girls were released on 13 October, after weeks of talks brokered by 
western officials, and flown to the capital, Abuja, where they received medical 
attention and counselling. Their families, travelling from Chibok, faced a 
500-mile drive on potholed roads, slowed by military checkpoints and the fear 
of attack by insurgents. But they made it at last, embracing their children in 
emotional scenes at a church service.

Almost immediately came more worries. The father of one of the girls told 
reporters he was concerned their release would be exploited for political gain. 
“People’s children are not money, people’s children are not clothes you wear to 
campaign,” he said. “People’s children are their pride.”

Other observers quietly pointed out that the girls who had escaped earlier had 
faced ostracism and abuse.Mausi Segun 
<https://www.hrw.org/about/people/mausi-segun>, a researcher in Nigeria for 
Human Rights Watch <https://www.hrw.org>, said the negative reaction of 
conservative communities would mean it was unlikely those released would be 
able to return to Chibok. “Any sign that there has been sexual contact with any 
man – and these men are Boko Haram – will cause a backlash. The likelihood they 
will return home is slim.” There have been reports that many of those still in 
captivity, aware of the stigmatisation they will face, were unwilling to return 
to their communities.

But on that day in October, there was simple celebration, and the problems to 
come were forgotten.Jason Burke. Margaret is a pseudonym

The Ross Sea becomes a marine protected area
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3ce967290ed6488abf1b2b1764ef3a211c17736%2F0_0_4500_2826%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3ce967290ed6488abf1b2b1764ef3a211c17736%2F0_0_4500_2826%2F4500.jpg>
 An Adélie penguin jumps on to the ice in the Ross Sea. Photograph: John 
Weller/AFP/Getty Images 
“The Ross Sea is a polar garden of Eden – it’s truly astonishing when you sail 
there,”Lewis Pugh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/mar/02/lewis-pughs-antarctic-swim-in-pictures>
 says. A British endurance swimmer who has plunged into icy waters around the 
world in the name of conservation, he says this part of Antarctica deserves its 
reputation for being one of the few almost pristine ecosystems left in the 
world.

“You see humpback whales, leopard seals, Adélie and Emperor penguins and 
albatrosses. You get a feel for what the world used to be like before man put 
his and her hand on it,” the 47-year-old says.

On 1 December 2017, 1.5m sq km of the region will be declared a marine 
protected area (MPA), with two-thirds off limits to fishing, underan agreement 
reached in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/worlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal>
. Illegal fishing in the area has devastated stocks of the Patagonian 
toothfish, which ledPrince Charles to write to government ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/13/prince-charles-black-spider-memos-stranger-topics-badgers-patagonian-toothfish>
, pleading with them to save the species and the birds that depend on it.

Reaching consensus on the MPA’s creation was tortuous, with Russia and China 
blocking a deal for years. That’s partly why conservationists celebrated 2016’s 
breakthrough so loudly. “It’s hugely significant and historic, and not just 
because of the number of players,” saysAndrea Kavanagh 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/about/experts/andrea-kavanagh>, an Antarctic 
expert atPew Charitable Trusts <http://www.pewtrusts.org/en>, of the EU and 24 
other nations involved. “This was also the first time a multilateral body [
CCAMLR <https://www.ccamlr.org/>] had decided to protect the high seas in a 
huge way.”
Goodnews list 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/article-embeds/series-vertical-good-news-stories-2016/embed.html>
While John Kerry <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry>, the US 
secretary of state, lobbied the Chinese, Pugh’s job was to meet and persuade 
the top levels of Russian government using his brand of “Speedo diplomacy”. “I 
think the real tipping point was whenPutin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin> appointed Sergei Ivanov as 
ecologist tsar,” the swimmer says. A former chief of staff for Putin, Ivanov is 
“passionate about the environment” and a “very hands-on, practical type of 
person”, Pugh says.

Both Kavanagh and Pugh see the deal as a victory not just for the environment, 
but for international cooperation. “It’s a sign of hope in a very difficult 
year,” Kavanagh says. “There are still things all countries can agree on 
together.”

“We can still see Antarctica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> as 
a place for peace- and bridge-building,” Pugh agrees.

Conservationists have their sights set on three more MPAs around Antarctica, 
and Pugh isback among the wild waves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/13/briton-swims-antarctic-campaign-overfishing-three-marine-sanctuaries>
 to campaign for them. After speaking to the Guardian from Cape Horn, he swam 
around the tip of South America, only to have to get back into the roiling 
waters a second time; he had misjudged the distance and stopped 150m short on 
his first attempt.Adam Vaughan

Lord of the dance: Ed Balls does Gangnam Style
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10421041bf51dd7af5ec9947e88215778dadf576%2F0_0_842_1111%2F842.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10421041bf51dd7af5ec9947e88215778dadf576%2F0_0_842_1111%2F842.jpg>
 Ed Balls with dance partner Katya Jones. Photograph: Pixel 8000 
BBC1 could have broadcast round-the-clock coverage of vomit slowly evaporating 
on a hot pavement that second weekend of November and we’d have fallen to our 
knees, thankful for the distraction. Instead, just when we needed it most, we 
got a full-strength punch of joy:Ed Balls dancing Gangnam Style on Strictly 
Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/ed-balls-gangnam-style-the-strictly-dance-that-became-a-phenomenon>
.

Find a video of the routine and look at his face. Look into his eyes. This is 
the former chair of the Fabian Society, indiscriminately smashing his hips 
around to a song about overt consumerism. His cheeks are puffed out, and he’s 
mouthing the word “bum” over and over again. At one point, he hops up and down 
like a happy little horse, while his partner kicks and flails between his legs. 
This is theformer cabinet minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>, a senior fellow at Harvard, 
jerking around as if he’s being defibrillated – and it might count as the best 
thing he’s ever done.

That same weekend, the BBC broadcast footage of a bear, pole dancing against a 
tree <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l6yuv_-I4Z0>, captured during the making 
of Planet Earth II. The impact was the same – a powerful figure cutting loose 
and making a fool of itself – but the context subtly different. That bear had 
no cultural touch points. It needed to scratch its back. Balls, though? He was 
doing the whole thing on purpose.

Two weeks later, he was eliminated from Strictly, and Planet Earth II once 
again became a show about scorpions stabbing bats in the head. Bloody 2016.
Stuart Heritage

The year of the elegant exit
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1efe2c94fdfbac8ad45ad268761abe3728fc920%2F0_0_4345_4345%2F4345.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1efe2c94fdfbac8ad45ad268761abe3728fc920%2F0_0_4345_4345%2F4345.jpg>
 David Bowie, who bowed out in January. Photograph: Terry O'Neill/Getty Images 
The invisible machinations of “PJS”, the showbiz spouse who this year 
persuaded the courts to prevent reporting of a threesome, renewed discussion 
about whether there is a human right to a private life. Meanwhile, a number of 
artists and broadcasters made their claim on a private death:Terry Wogan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/31/terry-wogan>, Alan Rickman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-obituary>, David 
Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/obituary-david-bowie>, 
Victoria Wood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/20/victoria-wood-obituary>, 
Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne> and 
Ronnie Corbett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/mar/31/ronnie-corbett-obituary> all 
died from terminal illnesses in such a way that the news came as a terrible 
shock.Leonard Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary> had 
inadvertently let the raven out of the bag, telling the New Yorker that he was 
“ready to die” just before he did; but he won a victory for privacy by managing 
to die in Los Angeles and be buried in Montreal, before either event was 
reported.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42bb9b4972a3e42ce3e55acc9342111a9a1b315b%2F0_984_3608_4385%2F3608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42bb9b4972a3e42ce3e55acc9342111a9a1b315b%2F0_984_3608_4385%2F3608.jpg>
 Leonard Cohen, who left us in November. Photograph: Jack Robinson/Getty Images 
Cohen and Bowie were remarkable for having achieved the artistic equivalent of 
putting their affairs in order: both wrote and recorded albums that they knew 
to be final testaments; each dropped a hint derived from scripture.Bowie’s 
Blackstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
, released three days before his death, featuredthe song Lazarus 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=y-JqH1M4Ya8>, (“Look at me, I’m in Heaven”), 
while Cohen’sYou Want It Darker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/20/leonard-cohen-you-want-it-darker-album-review>
, released 17 days before the singer died, employs as a chorus “Hineni”, or 
“Here I am”, the Hebrew words used by Moses and Abraham when called by God.

Rickman also left a memorial for his fans, playing a British general in the 
excellent and posthumously released movie,Eye In The Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/apr/17/eye-in-the-sky-review-helen-mirren>
. Wogan had just publishedhis first book of fiction 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/those-were-the-days-478740.html>, a form in 
which he had long wanted to write. Wood was so private her friends say she 
would not want her final weeks to be discussed, even posthumously. More 
importantly, all the quietly departed seem, from the accounts that have 
emerged, to have had the conversations and made the last arrangements they 
wanted.

This autumn, the BBC broadcaster Steve Hewlett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/15/hewlett-cancer-radio> and the 
writer AA Gill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/20/aa-gill-opens-restaurant-review-with-cancer-diagnosis>
 chose the opposite approach, writing or talking publicly about their 
experiences as late-stage cancer patients. Both routes towards the exit should 
be available, but the discreet path has opened up in a way that few would have 
imagined possible for the very famous. In the year of Brexit, hard or soft, the 
quiet exit became a way of death.Mark Lawson

Prince Harry gets angry
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33e2b17d60d17fd858a00808e34aa294936ccde8%2F217_81_1980_1187%2F1980.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F33e2b17d60d17fd858a00808e34aa294936ccde8%2F217_81_1980_1187%2F1980.jpg>
 Prince Harry, speaking out against racism. Photograph: Tim 
Rooke/Rex/Shutterstock 
In a year that will be remembered for the normalisation of bigotry, it was 
uplifting to hear a member of the royal familycondemn racism and sexism 
<https://www.royal.uk/statement-communications-secretary-prince-harry>. For any 
lucky sod who hibernated through the year, Prince Harry’s new girlfriendMeghan 
Markle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/08/who-is-meghan-markle-video-profile>
 is, controversially, a US actor who has removed items of clothing on screen. 
Even more controversially, she is a divorcee. And most controversial of all, 
she is mixed race.

The Sun ran a front page story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/prince-harry-lambasts-press-over-meghan-markle-coverage>
 with the headline “HARRY GIRL’S ON PORNHUB”, a reference to the internet 
pornography site that featured her in clips from the TV seriesSuits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/01/suits-box-set-review>. A 
number of newspapersnoted with surprise that she was a “brunette” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/living/2083316/heres-why-meghan-markle-is-nothing-like-prince-harrys-identikit-ex-girlfriends/>
, which appeared to be a euphemism of sorts. TheDaily Mail ran a story 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3896180/Prince-Harry-s-girlfriend-actress-Meghan-Markles.html>
 headlined “Harry’s girl is (almost) straight outta Compton”. And that headline 
is (almost) straight outta the textbook of racist stereotyping.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F209a0634c2937bf97fa173dedb44be8cec56c83f%2F511_305_708_881%2F708.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F209a0634c2937bf97fa173dedb44be8cec56c83f%2F511_305_708_881%2F708.jpg>
 Harry’s girlfriend Meghan Markle. Photograph: George Pimentel/WireImage 
Prince Harry <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-harry> responded with a 
statement commenting on “the wave of abuse and harassment” to which Markle had 
been subjected, referring to “the smear on the front page of a national 
newspaper; the racial undertones of comment pieces; and the outright sexism and 
racism of social media trolls and web article comments”.

I’ve always associated the British royal family with fuelling prejudice rather 
than combating it: from the Queen Mother supporting white supremacist rule in 
Rhodesia and telling Woodrow Wyatt she had“some reservations about Jews” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/sep/15/tanya-gold-queen-mother>
; toPrince Philip 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/prince-philip/9883276/Duke-of-Edinburghs-best-gaffes.html>
 telling a student in China, “If you stay here much longer, you’ll go home with 
slitty eyes”; to Harry himself in a swastika armband at a fancy dress party in 
2005, and talking of a fellow soldier as“our little Paki friend” 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/7822883.stm> in 2009.

Harry’s swastika was offensive and stupid, as was his racist description of 
the soldier. And yes, he might only have condemned the press this time because 
it was personal. But the fact is, he spoke out against racism, and as far as I 
know that is a first for Britain’s royal family. He deserves a big pat on his 
overprivileged back.Simon Hattenstone 

The sound of breaking glass: the US election brings some gains
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69718f581494f2913dd7e50dc087680cb595a5a4%2F0_0_4458_3210%2F4458.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69718f581494f2913dd7e50dc087680cb595a5a4%2F0_0_4458_3210%2F4458.jpg>
 Kate Brown, the US’s first openly LGBT governor. Photograph: Don Ryan/AP 
For Americans expecting shattered glass on 8 November, the election of Donald 
Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was devastating. But 
the night did usher in a handful of Democratic women whose elections broke 
barriers and made history.

Pramila Jayapal <http://www.pramilaforcongress.com> was the first 
Indian-American woman elected to the US House of Representatives. Having 
immigrated to the US from India at 16, election night was “bittersweet” for 
her. The team learned of Jayapal’s victory just as the news networks declared 
Trump the next president. “It is not the Congress I wanted to come into, but 
I’ve never backed down from a fight before, and I won’t start now,” Jayapal 
tells me.

Democrats are preparing for long battles over equal rights and justice. “I 
will fight to make sure we don’t backtrack on the human and civil rights of our 
people,” saysOregon governor Kate Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/18/kate-brown-oregon-first-lgbt-governor>
, who is bisexual and the nation’s first openly LGBT governor.Minnesota elected 
Ilhan Omar as state representative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/ilhan-omar-first-somali-american-legislator-minnesota>
, the first female Somali-American Muslim lawmaker.

These elections, alongside those of Kamala Harris in California 
<http://www.kamalaharris.org/about-kamala/>, who became the first 
Indian-American senator, andTammy Duckworth in Illinois 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/25/tammy-duckworth-senate-race-illinois-profile>
, the first Thai-American senator, were celebrated as glimmers of hope in the 
face of Trump’s victory.

As was Nevada’s election of Catherine Cortez Masto 
<http://catherinecortezmasto.com>, the first Latina in the US Senate. “I have 
received letters and emails from little girls who are excited to see a woman in 
a big role,” she says. “It’s humbling.”Lauren Gambino

Austria rejects the far right
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6061ebdc88ed713cf60aef0999fd1757cf5eef1a%2F0_13_4644_2786%2F4644.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6061ebdc88ed713cf60aef0999fd1757cf5eef1a%2F0_13_4644_2786%2F4644.jpg>
 Alexander Van der Bellen wins in Austria. Photograph: Matthias Schrader/AP 
In a year when the liberal left lost elections across the globe, would anyone 
have batted an eyelidif Austria, of all places 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/far-right+austria>, had presented the EU 
with its first far-right head of state of the postwar era?

In May, Norbert Hofer, the youthful, puppy-eyed deputy leader of the 
anti-immigration Freedom party, lost the presidential vote by the narrowest of 
margins. Then, thanks to irregularities in the postal vote count, his partywon 
an appeal for a rerun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/austrian-presidential-election-result-overturned-and-must-be-held-again-hofer-van-der-bellen>
 and everything seemed to be going in their favour: a year of campaigning had 
softened the radical right’s image and most polls had Hofer ahead. And yet, on 
4 December,Austria bucked the western trend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/victory-for-van-der-bellen-and-the-left-is-a-sigh-of-relief-for-europe>
, sidelining Hofer in favour of Alexander Van der Bellen, a former leader of 
the Green party, who had run as an independent.

To call it a sea change might be to overstate it (after all, 46.2% of 
Austrians voted for a candidate from a party founded by former Nazis) but 
there’s a positive here that should not be forgotten. Van der Bellen, 72, a 
mellow retired economist, gave a glimpse of what unusual shapes the fightback 
against rightwing populism can take. An unshaven chain-smoker from a 
disadvantaged background, with an aversion to buzzwords, he was arguably a 
better “anti-establishment” candidate than Hofer, who entered political life at 
23 and worked as a rhetoric coach. Van der Bellen ran a positive, inclusive 
campaign, summed up by his slogan: “Those who love their homeland don’t divide 
it.”

A clear majority of female voters (62%, up from 54% in May) voted for him. 
One, an 89-year-old Holocaust survivor, approached Van der Bellen’s campaign 
the week before the election.The resulting video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WVR2QaMjVRs>, in which she warned that Hofer’s 
party brought out “the basest in people, not the decent, but the indecent”, 
became a viral hit and may have helped swing the vote in the liberal 
candidate’s favour.Philip Oltermann

I’m A Celebrity… breaks the reality TV mould
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1f1c82277184e0c43e4717209a24456af70426%2F0_0_3584_2151%2F3584.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016's%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%27s%20best%20bits%3A%20October%20to%20December&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fgood-news-2016-chibok-girls-famous-deaths-prince-harry-driverless-cars%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e1f1c82277184e0c43e4717209a24456af70426%2F0_0_3584_2151%2F3584.jpg>
 The 2017 I’m A Celebrity… love-in. Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Just when we thought reality television couldn’t sink any lower, having 
delivered a summer of public sex followed by public shaming, the unexpected 
happened:the 16th season of I’m A Celebrity… 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/nov/08/im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-2016-meet-the-new-contestants>
 featured a bunch of polite people getting along very nicely. And hugging a lot.

“I think it was just what the country needed,” says Joel Dommett, the comedian 
who came second in the contest. “Viewers enjoyed watching people having nice 
conversations around a campfire. I sat there thinking, ‘I am being horrifically 
unentertaining’, but everyone seems to have enjoyed it.”

It was an unlikely group of new BFFs. The 69-year-old actor Larry Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2013/nov/22/larry-lamb-languages-video>
 became a second father to the street dancerJordan Banjo 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-12-13/who-is-jordan-banjo-im-a-celebrity-get-me-out-of-here-2016-profile>
.Gogglebox <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gogglebox> star (and 
eventual winner)Scarlett Moffatt 
<http://www.radiotimes.com/news/2016-12-07/meet-goggleboxs-moffatt-family> was 
delightfully starstruck byCarol Vorderman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/vorderman> as they ate turkey testicles 
and camel nipples. Even the bloke fromHomes Under The Hammer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006v5kb> eventually stopped whining and 
became agreeable. “He was the first person in the camp who wasn’t positive,” 
Dommett says, “but we sort of infected him with our positivity, and then he was 
flying.”

Did the producers deliberately cast an uncontentious group as a tonic to a 
year overrun by conflict? Or, more likely, did they just strike a bit dull? 
Either way, the result was unexpectedly heartwarming. As Dommett says, “People 
were just being normal and real with each other. Instead of pissing on the 
street and giving blowjobs in a hot tub.”Abigail Radnor

• Joel Dommett is on tour with Joel Dommett: Live In 2017; go to 
joeldommett.com <http://www.joeldommett.com> for details.

Look, no hands: driverless cars move into the fast lane
 Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
Thousands of Britons are killed on the road every year. It’s one of those 
things we seem to have quietly accepted as the cost of modernity, alongside 
climate change, internet piracy and Facebook. So it’s odd to think that, within 
a decade, road deaths could plausibly be a thing of the past. Self-driving cars 
have the potential to reshape society, leading to a world in which the 
boundaries blur between public and private vehicles, ownership and hire, 
delivery and transportation. But before they have any of those effects, they 
will hopefully save the lives of tens of thousands of people around the globe.

By the end of 2017, we’ll have a better idea of how this is going to shake 
out. This coming year will be a gamechanger for self-driving cars, with Tesla 
Motors ramping up its Autopilot programme and shipping the first of its Model 3 
cars; Google potentially spinning out its own project into a stand-alone 
company; and the rapid proliferation of other organisations working in the same 
space, fromOxford University <http://mrg.robots.ox.ac.uk/application/robotcar/> 
to San Franciscan startups.

The safety potential of self-driving cars took a knock in 2016, when Tesla 
Motors admitted to thefirst fatal crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/30/tesla-autopilot-death-self-driving-car-elon-musk>
 involving the company’s Autopilot feature. Joshua Brown, who owned an 
Autopilot-enabled Tesla Model S, was killed when his car ploughed into the side 
of a truck. Brown’s death forced Tesla to re-emphasise that the Autopilot 
feature, as it currently exists, isn’t self-driving. Instead, it’s a 
driver-assist feature: it still requires a qualified driver to supervise and 
take over in the case of a mistake.

Some companies developing real self-driving technology disagree with this 
approach. For Google, whose X labs have been developing self-driving cars since 
2012,there’s no point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/google-x-self-driving-cars> 
shipping such vehicles until they don’t need a driver at all.

But even a driver-assist feature may still end up saving huge numbers of 
lives. As of July, when Tesla went public about Brown’s death, a cumulative 
130m miles had been driven with Autopilot turned on. Among normal American 
drivers, there’s a fatality roughly once every 94m miles. A robot doesn’t get 
drunk, distracted or drowsy and its reactions can be faster than are humanly 
possible.

The numbers carried on getting better and better for Tesla. Six months later, 
and hundreds of millions more miles have been driven with Autopilot turned on, 
yet no other confirmed fatality has been reported. A revolution has quietly 
begun.Alex Hern

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 