
Whatever model of Android or iOS tablet you have available, it’s a hugely 
versatile tool when it comes to educating and entertaining children. Here are 
some of the best apps and features you can make use of in the classroom – some 
of which you have to pay for and others that are free.

1 Dive into 360-degree videos

This is the most basic form of virtual reality, a full sphere of video centred 
on the spectator who can view an environment in any direction. The content 
works with VR headsets but is also available through browsers and mobile 
devices. Launch a 360-degree video in the Facebook orYouTube apps 
<https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCzuqhhs6NWbgTzMuM09WKDQ> and children can 
tilt it around to change the view as the clip plays (a simple search should 
turn up some 360-degree content that will be clearly labelled). It’s a more 
interactive way of exploring everything from distant countries to underwater 
shipwrecks (check outDiscovery’s YouTube channel 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLiCk2I6PXl5qm0CTvO6zXt3k33GTmcIvk> for 
some great educational content).

2 Get creative with photo taking

The Android and iOS camera apps are simple enough to use and can be deployed 
to record anything from a field trip diary to the results of a science 
experiment or a class art show. A number of additional apps let you stitch 
pictures together and add stickers on top;Pic Collage for Kids 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/pic-collage-for-kids-best/id977081997?mt=8> is 
one of the best but there are others out there, whilePicLab 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/piclab-photo-editor-collage/id597851882?mt=8> 
lets children add filters, text and various other effects.


How to teach coding and programming
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/sep/01/how-to-teach-coding-programming>
3 Make music – no experience required

Tablets are well-known as music-making devices, even among professionals, and 
there are a plethora of apps available that make good use of the tablet’s extra 
screen space compared with a mobile phone screen. These range from apps that 
enable you to add effects to existing tracks to apps to help you compose 
something from scratch, note by note.GarageBand 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/garageband/id408709785?mt=8> (iOS) and Music 
Studio <https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/music-studio/id328608539?mt=8> (iOS, 
£10.99) andCaustic 3 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.singlecellsoftware.caustic&hl=en_GB>
 (Android) are worth a look, while for younger children apps such asABC Music 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/abc-music/id420949855?mt=8> (iOS, £2.29) and 
Animal Band <http://storytoys.com/apps/animal-band/> (Android and iOS) can help 
nurture the musical creativity of your kids. There are plenty of more 
specialised music apps available, so you should be able to find something to 
suit your children’s age and even particular topics or instruments.

4 Record radio shows and podcasts

Alternatively, you can make music (or indeed any kind of audio) and then use a 
tablet to record it. Again, there are a lot of apps available for the job, from 
the free and basic to the feature-packed and premium. Have a look at the 
retro-lookingVoice Recorder Free 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/voice-recorder-free/id685310398?mt=8> (iOS), 
the rather spartanSmart Voice Recorder 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.andrwq.recorder> (Android) 
or the professional toolCubasis 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/cubasis-music-production-system/id583976519?mt=8>
 (iOS, £39.99), for example. Tablets have basic recording apps as standard, but 
there are plenty of third-party alternatives available if you have the budget 
for them.


5 Make immersive and interactive notes

In iOS 9, Apple revamped the native Notes application to make it much more 
powerful than before. Along with extra formatting controls, individual notes 
can now incorporate web links, checklists, photos taken within the app, 
sketches and miniature maps, making the app perfect for a whole range of tasks. 
Children could use Notes to record what happens on a field trip, to research a 
particular event in history, or for any other purpose where different media 
needs to be mixed with text.

6 Do the maths with Angry Birds

One of the most successful mobile games of all time, Angry Birds 
<https://www.angrybirds.com/play> or one of its sequels (iOS/Android, £0.79) 
can also be educational. For example, assign numbers to the different coloured 
birds (or the pigs) to give each level a score and test if kids can calculate 
the highest and lowest possible scores. Or take advantage of the game’s 
realistic (if cartoonish) physics engine to predict what’s going to happen with 
each strike – if a bird hits a structure at a certain angle where will it fall? 
Get the children to identify the optimum place to strike and then see if 
they’re correct. You can get children to write stories about the game, design 
their own levels, and create related artwork as well.

7 Add augmented reality to the real world

The free Aurasma apps <https://www.aurasma.com/> (Android/iOS) allows children 
(and adults) to overlay real-world objects with digital graphics, including 
posters and doorways. It might sound complicated, but it’s easy to use. When 
viewed through Aurasma and a tablet’s camera, targeted post-it notes and 
classroom displays can launch photos and videos or interactive graphs and 
charts.

 8 Start up a class blog

Starting a blog through a browser app can be confusing and difficult – 
something such asEasy Blog Jr 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/easy-blog-jr/id716354615?mt=8> (iOS, £2.99) 
makes the process much more straightforward. Kids log in by tapping on their 
picture (so it’s suitable for shared devices), and they can then combine text, 
video and images into a blog post that goes live with a couple of taps. It 
makes web publishing as simple as it should be. For older students,Blogsy 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/blogsy-for-wordpress-blogger/id428485324?mt=8> 
(iOS, £3.99) is a more complicated alternative with a host of extra 
capabilities, while Google’s ownBlogger <https://www.blogger.com/> 
(Android/iOS, free – requires a Google account) is another option to consider. 
In each case there are controls that give you final approval over what’s posted 
online.


9 Test your children against Siri and Google Now

When you buy a tablet you get Siri <http://www.apple.com/uk/ios/siri/> or 
Google Now <https://www.google.co.uk/landing/now/> included – the digital 
assistants that respond to your voice and can look up almost anything on the 
web. Whether you want to compile questions for a quiz or you’d prefer to test 
the knowledge of your class against these artificially intelligent apps, there 
are many ways to use them. For simple questions, have your pupils race to 
answer first; for more difficult ones, they can write down their answers in 
advance and see if they’re right. Try “When was the battle of Trafalgar?”, “How 
far is it to the moon?”, “What’s four times six?” or “What’s the capital of 
France?” and you can see what they’re capable of.


What are the best time-saving apps for teachers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/nov/12/time-saving-apps-teachers>
10 See the world

It’s easier than ever to take a virtual tour of the world for whatever lesson 
or topic you want to link the idea with. Apple’sMaps app 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/ios/maps/> (iOS) includes a detailed 3D-flyover for 
some major cities (the options appear automatically when available).Google Maps 
<https://www.google.co.uk/maps> (Android/iOS) has added 3D buildings in some 
areas and includes street view too (press and hold on any road for a closer 
look).Google Earth <https://www.google.co.uk/intl/en_uk/earth/> (Android/iOS) 
lets your kids see the contours and landmarks of the planet and can even 
overlay nuggets of information thanks to Wikipedia.


11 Get someone else to read the story

If story time is a regular event there are various ways you can save your 
voice or just give the kids some variety.iBooks 
<http://www.apple.com/uk/ibooks/> (iOS) has an extensive audiobook library but 
which is rather plain in appearance; on the other hand you can choose something 
aimed directly at children likeRead Me Stories <http://readmestoriesapp.com/> 
(Android/iOS, free),Farfaria Story Time Best Book Reader 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/farfaria-story-time-best-book/id491771721?mt=8>
 (Android/iOS, free) andThe Fantastic Flying Books of Mr Morris Lessmore 
<http://morrislessmore.com/> (iOS, £3.99). Some of these apps are more like 
interactive movies than ebooks – with animations and clips that children can 
respond to – though the costs can quickly add up if you’re buying individual 
titles.


12 Study the night sky

A tablet makes a great stargazing tool if your children are studying the 
pattern of the cosmos, and with the right app you don’t have to wait for the 
sun to go down – you can simply point the tablet up at the sky and it will show 
the constellations as you move it around.SkySafari 5 
<http://skysafariastronomy.com/> (iOS, from £0.79), Star Walk Kids 
<http://starwalkkids.com/> (Android/iOS, £2.29), SkyView Free 
<https://itunes.apple.com/app/skyview-free-explore-universe/id413936865?mt=8&ign-mpt=uo%3D4>
 (Android/iOS) andGoSkyWatch Planetarium 
<http://www.gosoftworks.com/GoSkyWatch/GoSkyWatch.html> (iOS, £2.99) are among 
the best apps, though there are more. While most are premium priced, many also 
provide a basic free edition so you can try them out before buying. The apps 
can even be used in daylight, but are most effective when pupils can see the 
stars in the night sky as well as on their device display.

13 Tune into worldwide radio

There’s almost no end to the number of hats a tablet can wear – jukebox, map, 
e-reader, television and, importantly, radio. Using an app such asTuneIn Radio 
<http://tunein.com/> (Android/iOS, free), one of the best radio apps available, 
kids can experience music and talk shows from all across the world in dozens of 
different languages, with more than 100,000 stations to choose from. If you’re 
studying a foreign culture, it’s one way of bringing a taste of it into the 
classroom.

14 Document learning progress

Seesaw <http://web.seesaw.me/> (iOS/Android, free) is a relatively new app, 
but it’s hit the ground running with a suite of excellent tools enabling 
students to keep a record of what they’re learning (and parents can get 
involved as well). Photos, videos, drawings, text, web links, pdfs and material 
from other apps can all be incorporated, and teachers have the option to log 
into the journals (and approve work) from any device. A recent update added 
blogging capabilities to the app and, thanks to the intuitive accounts system, 
a whole class can alternately share one tablet device if necessary.


15 Set up a class webcam

If you can fix a tablet somewhere suitable and have a few pounds to spare then 
iCam 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/icam-webcam-video-streaming/id296273730?mt=8> 
(Android/iOS, from £3) does a great job of turning the device into a private 
webcam that you and the children can log into and view from any web browser. 
Perhaps you want to keep an eye on the class vegetable patch or some wildlife 
outside the window, or maybe there’s another class somewhere else in the world 
that you have a special partnership with and would like to contact on a regular 
basis – there are all kinds of different ways to use the app.


16 Make your own movies

You probably know how to use a tablet’s camera app to record a movie, but you 
might not realise just how versatile it is. The default iPad app includes a 
time-lapse mode for recording a scene over a long period of time and then 
shortening the results (scroll up in the mode list to find it). Other apps can 
lend a hand too: useStop Motion Studio 
<http://www.cateater.com/stopmotionstudio/> (Android/iOS, free) to build a 
movie from a series of pictures,Shadow Puppet Edu 
<http://get-puppet.co/education/> (iOS, free) to add voice narrations, music 
and text, orChatterPix Kids 
<http://www.duckduckmoose.com/educational-iphone-itouch-apps-for-kids/chatterpixkids/>
 (iOS) to turn inanimate objects and drawings into animated talking heads.


17 Produce your own comics and storybooks

The process of producing a comic (or storybook) develops writing, drawing and 
design skills all at the same time, and apps such asBook Creator 
<http://www.redjumper.net/bookcreator/> (Android/iOS) and ComicBook! 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/comicbook!/id436114747?mt=8> (iOS, £2.29) give 
kids everything they need to put together their own creations through a tablet. 
Whether you want your class to adapt existing images into something new or 
would prefer to allow the kids to start from scratch, there’s a wealth of 
creative features available covering text, graphics and drawings, and you can 
easily export the results in physical or digital form for others to enjoy as 
well. You could get a class to write their own superhero story or fairy tale, 
or start a story which children can then finish off.


Five of the best apps that help teachers communicate with parents
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/apr/28/five-best-apps-teachers-communicate-parents>
18 Create 3D digital models from photos

With the right software, a digital 3D-model can be created from a series of 
photos taken at different angles, which is exactly what123D Catch 
<http://www.123dapp.com/catch> (Android/iOS) from Autodesk does. It turns any 
photographed object into a model that children can then view from any angle 
inside an app, upload to the web for other people to look at or even turn into 
a physical object through a 3D printer. In a digital world that’s becoming more 
and more about virtual reality and 3D space, it’s a useful introduction into 
how these digital models are created and applied inside apps (and it’s a lot of 
fun too).


19 Translate foreign words and phrases instantly

From the simplicity of the post-it note approach applied by FlashSticks 
<http://flashsticks.com/> (Android/iOS, free) to the full-scale language 
learning
experience offered by Duolingo <https://en.duolingo.com/> (Android/iOS, free), 
there’s no shortage of apps out there to help children get to grips with a 
foreign tongue. As far as classroom fun goes,Google Translate 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.apps.translate&hl=en>
 (Android/iOS, free) is worth trying out: there’s a special camera mode that 
converts text into a specified language on the fly, so you can play around with 
signs, headlines, blocks of text and more while exploring the basics of a 
foreign language. Audio and text translation features are also included.


20 Learn the basics of programming

Is the next Mark Zuckerberg hiding in your class? Children are being 
encouraged to get coding earlier than ever, andCargo-Bot 
<http://twolivesleft.com/CargoBot/> (iOS, free) is one of the best ways of 
teaching them the basics while keeping them entertained – the music and visuals 
are all to the highest standard and the levels pack in plenty of replay value 
as well. If Cargo-Bot doesn’t seem suitable thenHopscotch 
<https://www.gethopscotch.com/> (iOS, free), Tynker <https://www.tynker.com/> 
(Android/iOS, free),Lightbot <https://lightbot.com/> (Android/iOS, £2.29) and 
Move The Turtle <http://movetheturtle.com/> (iOS, £2.99) are all excellent 
alternatives you might want to investigate.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 