
Alex Jones* has to switch his phone off at work so the constant text messages 
do not distract him. He gets around 20-25 a day from payday lenders and brokers 
offering high-cost loans of up to £1,000 a time.

“Need cash? We have reviewed your application …” a typical text reads. “A loan 
of up to £900 is ready to complete,” says another. “We’ve received your loan 
inquiry. Are you able to take our call? Reply YES …”.

His email inbox is just as full, with spam messages from brokers and lenders 
arriving as often as every five minutes at some points during the day. The same 
lender might send messages at 10.59am and 12.39pm, while two for the same 
broker arrive one after another. Taking up any of these offers of credit would 
not be cheap – all the firms offer short-term high-cost borrowing, often at 
annual rates of more than 1,000%.

Related: Payday loan complaints to financial ombudsman nearly triple in a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/payday-loan-complaints-to-financial-ombudsman-nearly-triple-in-a-year>

Jones, who is in his early 40s and has a wife and young son, is upfront about 
the fact he opened the door to these lenders. A gambling addict, he took out 
short-term loans over a few years, his debts mounting up until he became 
insolvent in late 2014. Recent money worries saw him searching for loans this 
summer, and the floodgates opened.

“Once you put the feelers out, as lots of people do, they start to show their 
true colours,” he says. “There are firms out there who have taken a lot of 
flak, but even with that negative press and extra regulation they are still 
happy to bombard and harass and even lend to someone who has a history of not 
being able to pay it back and is in insolvency.”

He says he feels like a drug addict being constantly offered temptation. 
“Addiction is a very complex and difficult thing,” he says. “You have bumps in 
the road, and when you have those bumps the very last thing you need is 
temptation. My life would be immeasurably easier if my drug of choice wasn’t as 
readily available. If it wasn’t so in my face it would be less of a problem.”

Jones may have fallen victim to what is known as a “ping tree” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2014/nov/01/payday-loans-ping-tree-lending-broker>
, whereby an application is made through a particular type of site that is 
itself not a lender but a “lead generator”. It passes (or “pings”) your request 
on to many other firms. Although the rules around payday loans have been 
tightened, it seems some lenders and brokers are still playing fast and loose 
with people’s contact details.

It is not the first time Jones has fallen into this trap. Several years ago he 
was being similarly inundated with messages from lenders and brokers, but since 
then the industry has come under the stewardship of a new regulator, and Jones 
thought things had changed. Also, his credit record is worse. In late 2014 he 
and his partner entered into an IVA, an insolvency arrangement that allows 
borrowers to negotiate part-repayment of their debts over a set period of time. 
At the time the couple could manage to pay £380 a month into the IVA after 
bills and the cost of travelling to work, but this summer the rented home they 
had lived in for eight years was put on the market and they found that their 
monthly costs had fallen behind the market rate. Their new home, in a less nice 
part of town, costs them £1,200 a month, compared with the £800 they were 
paying, and as a result they are behind on the IVA.

Even with negative press and extra regulation they are still happy to bombard 
and harass someone who is insolvent
Alex Jones 
Despite the IVA Jones found he was able to take out new loans from two 
lenders, neither of whom asked him to disclose previous money problems. His 
terrible credit record proved no barrier.

In the summer Citizens Advice said some payday lenders were still flouting the 
FCA’s guidance on responsible lending, with around a quarter of borrowers 
saying they hadn’t been asked, or could not remember being asked, about their 
situation. It cited the example of a client who was granted a payday loan 
following checks despite suffering from depression and alcoholism, having no 
permanent address, being previously declared bankrupt and having only benefit 
income.

For Jones the emails and texts flood in, even as the lenders he is now behind 
with get in touch to ask for payments; the IVA company is also chasing him. He 
has considered changing his phone number, but at the moment just turns it off. 
He says he doesn’t think unsubscribing will make a difference.

Meanwhile, the FCA reaffirms that under existing rules lenders are not allowed 
to send emails telling people that they have been approved for a loan. “Our 
rules require that firms do not state or imply to customers that credit is 
available regardless of the customer’s financial circumstances or status. We 
also require that all communications are clear, fair and not misleading. If a 
financial promotion is misleading it is likely to contravene our rules.”

Jones says he wants people to know that lenders and brokers are still 
aggressively targeting borrowers, despite the new rules. “If you fill in your 
details, it doesn’t just go to the one company – it gets fired out to all of 
the sharks in the pool.”

* Alex Jones is not his real name

Related: Over half a million in UK have their debt written off over 'unfair 
practices' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/over-half-a-million-in-uk-have-their-debt-written-off-over-unfair-practices>

Charity urges ban

The debt charity StepChange has called on the City watchdog to ban unsolicited 
calls for “high-risk financial products” such as payday loans.

“Firms are contacting people who are financially vulnerable with offers of 
loans that can cause serious financial harm,” says the charity’s head of policy 
Peter Tutton. “The problem for many people is they have lost control of their 
personal data and do not know which organisations have or will use their 
information – and sometimes this can result in being bombarded.”

In a report published on Wednesday the charity said that nearly two years on 
from the introduction of tough regulations, the payday loans market “continues 
to show signs of irresponsible lending and poor treatment of people in 
financial difficulty”. It said inappropriate lending was still occurring, 
people were still building up multiple loans, and affordability checks carried 
out by lenders were still not always effective.

In the first six months of the year, StepChange helped 28,000 people with 
payday loan debts, with more than a third (37%) having three or more such 
debts. The average amount owed was £1,380 – just £17 lower than in 2014 before 
the regulations came into force. However, the proportion of people coming to 
the charity with payday loan debts has fallen from its peak of 23% prior to the 
regulations to 16% this year.

A number of additional rules came into force in January 2015, including a 
requirement that interest and fees on all high-cost short-term credit loans are 
capped at 0.8% per day of the amount borrowed. If borrowers do not repay their 
loans on time, default charges must not exceed £15. In addition, the total cost 
(fees, interest etc) is capped at 100% of the original sum, which means no 
borrower will ever pay back more than twice what they borrowed.

Tutton added that the government’s digital economy bill, currently going 
through parliament, was an opportunity to tighten the rules around firms 
selling and sharing personal data.

If you are struggling with debts, there are many places you can turn to for 
free advice. They include:

• StepChange Debt Charity Stepchange.org <https://www.stepchange.org/> or call 
0800 138 1111

• Citizens Advice Find your local bureau at Citizensadvice.org.uk 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/>

• National Debtline Nationaldebtline.org <https://www.nationaldebtline.org/> 
or call 0808 808 4000

• PayPlan A service financed by the credit industry at Payplan.com 
<https://www.payplan.com/> or call 0800 280 2816
 