
When I was a child, I had a picture book called Where the Forest Meets the 
Sea. It is a beautiful story of a boy and his father who travel to a place that 
magically transports them from the modern world, back to a world millions of 
years old.

It is set in far north Queensland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland>, where the Daintree 
rainforest meets the Coral Sea.

Ever since then, the ancient and unique worlds of the Daintree and the Great 
Barrier Reef <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/great-barrier-reef> have 
been a source of deep fascination for me.

They’re the only two world heritage sites that adjoin one another. The 
Daintree is the oldest rainforest in the world, having existed for 140m years. 
And the Great Barrier Reef is among the most biodiverse marine environments on 
the planet, and is by far the biggest reef coral reef system.

At the time the children’s book was written, the area was under threat from 
development. Now both these ecosystems are being threatened by climate change. 
But from the luxurious launching pad of Port Douglas, they can still be seen in 
all their glory, allowing you to travel back in time … before time runs out for 
them.

Friday 9.45pm

The end of the week is always a relief. But knowing you’ll be in a luxury 
hotel before bedtime, ready to start a weekend mini-break, is something else 
entirely.

48 hours on the Sunshine Coast: even storms can't spoil an idyllic escape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/06/48-hours-on-the-sunshine-coast-even-storms-cant-spoil-an-idyllic-escape>
We arrive at Cairns airport, hop on a shuttle ($21.50) and alight at the 
Sheraton Mirage <http://www.sheratonportdouglas.com/> Port Douglas resort a 
short while later.


The Mirage is the grand old lady of Port Douglas. It was built by the (now 
late) notorious white-collar fugitive, Christopher Skase, in the 1980s and 
underwent a major renovation in late 2016.

And it is quite something. Situated on Port’s famous Four Mile beach, it has 
almost 300 rooms (from $294 a night), many of which have their own private 
access to the saltwater lagoon pools that surround the buildings.

Saturday 9am

We wake to the sounds of tropical birds, then wander to the dining room. After 
breakfast we lounge by one of the artificial sandy beaches that line the pools. 
Although the resort is right on the beach, the possibility of being served 
drinks while swimming – and avoiding any potential crocodiles and stingers – is 
too tempting.

Saturday 12.30pm

After a nap by the pool, we make our way to the lobby and a shuttle takes us 
to the marina. There we are met by Steve Edmondson, the owner ofSailaway Port 
Douglas <http://sailawayportdouglas.com/>, who takes us on a simply stunning 
tour of the Great Barrier Reef.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe30741e3963f28403ae56c299d3c86e63fc4aa11%2F0_0_1280_1280%2F1280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe30741e3963f28403ae56c299d3c86e63fc4aa11%2F0_0_1280_1280%2F1280.jpg>
 ‘The fact we were are just a few hours from Sydney and an otherwise normal 
weekend seems impossible to comprehend.’ Photograph: Michael Slezak for the 
Guardian 
There are lots of options for seeing the reef from Port. You can shoot out 
there on a speedboat. Or you can take one of the many slower boats that will 
get you there and back in a few hours.

But Sailaway’s sunset cruise ($261) is something different. Their fleet 
features two luxury sailing boats that make the journey to the reef almost as 
much of an experience as seeing the reef itself. The serenity of 
travellingthrough theCoral <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coral> Sea 
on a boat that makes no sound other than a gentle splish-splash is hard to 
describe.

Our destination is the Low Isles – one of the most accessible places on the 
upper half of the reef and just a stone’s throw from Port. It’s a collection of 
two small islands – or coral cays, which are simply mounds of broken coral 
skeletons that have collected there over the centuries.

48 hours in the Gold Coast: rainforest walks, organic food and fine dining 
shake up expectations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/jun/06/48-hours-in-the-gold-coast-rainforest-walks-organic-food-and-fine-dining-shake-up-expectations>
By now, most people will have heard about the devastating bleaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
 that hit coral reefs around the world in 2016. While it hit the Great Barrier 
Reef hard, the worst damage was experienced in its most remote northerly parts, 
and from Port Douglas south the damage was less severe. That makes it easy for 
Port’s tourism operators to ensure that their customers see reefs that are in 
essentially pristine condition. Although it won’t affect your time in there, 
visitors should be aware that climate change has had its toll near the town too 
– withsome spectacular reefs devastated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/its-a-depressing-sight-climate-change-unleashes-ghostly-death-on-great-barrier-reef>
.

But the Low Isles remain spectacular. The water is teeming with life – small 
colourful fish, large curious fish, giant blue clams that are as big as a 
human. And the seafloor is covered in brilliant coral. There are delicate brown 
branching corals with blue tips, enormous boulder corals, layers of plate coral 
and a veritable encyclopaedia of soft corals that sway with the gentle currents.

After snorkelling for about an hour, as I take off my flippers back on shore, 
we see what looks like a dark cloud moving through the water. Our guide tells 
us it’s a “bait ball” – a dense school of small fish. She says where there’s a 
bait ball, there’s usually a reef shark.

They’re harmless unless harassed, so I jump back in the water for what turns 
out to be a magical experience.

The dense school of fish seem mostly unconcerned by my presence. They simply 
keep a constant distance from me as I move through them, parting then 
recombining behind me.

For about five minutes I swim through them, watching them mould around me. And 
then a five-foot black-tip reef shark appears below me. It’s slow, purposeful 
movement is such a contrast to the fast, reactive movements of the smaller 
fish. The shark glides through the bait ball, creating a tunnel as the fish 
keep their distance. After watching their interaction for a while, I head back 
to the shore.

A little reluctantly, we pile back on to the boat and begin heading back to 
Port. On the way back, the boat quietly travels under the power of a gentle 
wind, and the crew serve champagne and canapes as we watch the sun set behind 
the rainforest.

With our feet dangling over the side of the boat, the cooling breeze in our 
hair and feeling the tingle of the second glass, the fact we are just a few 
hours from Sydney and an otherwise normal weekend seems impossible to 
comprehend. As far as we’re concerned, we’re a million miles away – in another 
time.

Saturday 6.30pm

It’s decision time when we arrive back at Port. The town has several excellent 
restaurants and bars. We decide to stay near the water for dinner. We wander 
randomly into one of the excellent fish restaurants in the marina,On the Inlet 
<http://ontheinlet.com.au/>.

Being on the Great Barrier Reef, I feel I have to try its classic eating fish 
– a coral trout($42). It comes cooked in the simplest manner with a mild lemon 
caper butter sauce and is perfectly done. My dining partner orders a fish and 
chips (or “beer-battered line-caught local Spanish mackerel”)($28), which is 
about as good as the dish can be.

Sunday 9am

We’ve experienced the sea, now it’s time to see the rainforest. We grab our 
hats and walking shoes and jump on a coach which takes us on the short journey 
toMossman Gorge <http://www.mossmangorge.com.au/>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F035fa4c0b5cc13ef99afa24b4eea4e50e1c7f282%2F0_0_1632_1224%2Fmaster%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F035fa4c0b5cc13ef99afa24b4eea4e50e1c7f282%2F0_0_1632_1224%2Fmaster%2F1632.jpg>
 Mossman Gorge, where crystal-clear freshwater slides down granite boulders. 
Photograph: Michael Slezak for the Guardian 
There we are taken in a small tour group by an Indigenous guide whose 
ancestors lived in the region for millennia on a “Dreamtime Gorge Walk 
<http://www.mossmangorge.com.au/experience/dreamtime-walks>” ($62).

Over millions of years, Mossman river cut a deep gorge into the mountainside. 
Crystal-clear freshwater slides down the large granite boulders, creating a 
series of spectacular pools.

The deep and lasting connection to country is a pleasure to witness as our 
guide shows us his land. He shows us the lizards and berries and plants – 
explaining which are poisonous, which are taboo, and which are good bush tucker 
or medicine. He shows us how to make body paint from the various coloured 
rocks, and how to attract fish to the surface of the water – should we ever 
need to feed ourselves.

The juxtaposition of the ancient rainforest and coral sea is astounding. Just 
a short drive from the salty reef is a completely freshwater river in a 
rainforest that has stayed roughly the same for more than 100m years.

Sunday noon

At midday we make our way back into town and, after perusing the local markets 
(and buying a few small locally made clothing items), we settle in for lunch at 
the Port Douglas institutionSalsa Bar & Grill <http://salsaportdouglas.com.au/>
. It’s been there for more than 20 years, and locals and visitors rave about it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F863b93d8bab87c18bf953fa1422bc77529d77c33%2F0_0_1632_1224%2Fmaster%2F1632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=48%20hours%20in%20Port%20Douglas%3A%20where%20ancient%20rainforest%20meets%20coral%20sea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2F48-hours-in-port-douglas-where-ancient-rainforest-meets-coral-sea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F863b93d8bab87c18bf953fa1422bc77529d77c33%2F0_0_1632_1224%2Fmaster%2F1632.jpg>
 Redclaw crayfish linguini at a Port Douglas institution, Salsa Bar & Grill 
Photograph: Michael Slezak for the Guardian 
It turns out their raving is justified. The restaurant looks out over the 
water and, in the distance, are cloud-topped mountains. The service is casual 
and friendly, and the menu is moderately sized.

My partner and I share a crayfish linguini ($28.50) and a mushroom gnocchi (
$22.90). Both are divine.

We don’t need dessert but can’t resist the idea of a ginger creme brulee (
$16.50) and a chocolate souffle ($17.50). 

With bellies full once again, and feeling that we have been away for much 
longer than a mere two days, we hop on a bus to the airport and are home in 
time for dinner, an early night and a fresh start back at work on Monday.

• Guardian Australia was a guest of Tourism Port Douglas and Sheraton Mirage 
Port Douglas Resort
 