
Efforts have been made to challenge traditional stereotypes, but there is 
still pressure on men to be strong, independent, stoical, competitive and 
tough. According to research published by the American Psychological 
Association, these “masculine traits” have been linked with mental healthissues 
such as depression and substance abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/sexist-men-mental-health-study-playboy-misogyny>
.

'Sexist' men more likely to have mental health issues, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/sexist-men-mental-health-study-playboy-misogyny>
Joel Wong, who led the research team at Indiana University Bloomington, said: 
“In general, individuals who conformed strongly to masculine norms tended to 
have poorer mental health and less favourable attitudes toward seeking 
psychological help, although the results differed depending on specific types 
of masculine norms.”

The research collated results of more than 70 US-based studies involving more 
than 19,000 men over 11 years. It focused on the relationship between mental 
health and conformity to 11 masculine norms. They included a desire to win, 
need for emotional control, and risk-taking.


The traits most closely linked to mental health problems were playboy 
behaviour or sexual promiscuity, Wong said.

We asked a group to talk about their own experiences of mental health and what 
they thought of this new analysis.


Daniel Briggs, 44, from Stockton-on-Tees: ‘The pressure to be manly stopped me 
getting help earlier’

 Depression feels like there’s a fog surrounding me. It is closing in and I 
cannot see what’s in front of me. It’s all-consuming and nothing else matters. 
I can see the fog building but I am powerless to stop it.

I experienced depression for about a decade before accepting what was going 
on. As a man it’s definitely much harder to talk about your emotions. It was my 
wife who made me go to the doctor. I had been behaving erratically: talking 
about killing myself, disappearing off for hours and leaving her worried sick. 
I was eventually diagnosed with clinical depression.

I used to work in a shipyard. Among those I worked with there was an 
old-fashioned view of being a man
Daniel 
The pressure to uphold the traditional idea of masculinity stopped me getting 
help earlier. I come from the north and used to work in a shipyard. Among those 
I worked with there was an old-fashioned view of being a man – we don’t talk 
about our feelings. If you get upset about anything other than football you are 
considered a “sissy”. When people say, “How are you doing?”, if you say “A bit 
crap” the classic response was: “Could be worse.”

It was the same with older members of my family, who’d say, “Just get on with 
it”. Don’t complain or talk about what’s going on with you. It took me a long 
time to open up. Even going to a counsellor was difficult; talking about 
feelings was something women did.

But talking was exactly what I needed to do, and I am now training to be a 
counsellor. I lost a lot of friends, especially male ones, opening up about my 
depression. There’s a huge stigma around it. Doing counselling and getting 
involved with local charities, people have said talking to me made them feel 
better. I’ve had men thank me because it made them realise they are not alone. 
Men need to accept that talking is good and that the hardest part is showing 
emotion. Walking around with a smile on your face, telling jokes – that’s the 
easy part. But talking about life and your feelings, rather than how your 
football team did or how many pints you drank on Saturday night, is much harder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F020ed26d180dd85c6aa0931f04d19ba762c1dc8e%2F128_0_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='As%20boys%2C%20we%20are%20told%20to%20be%20brave'%3A%20men%20on%20masculinity%20and%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27As%20boys%2C%20we%20are%20told%20to%20be%20brave%27%3A%20men%20on%20masculinity%20and%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F020ed26d180dd85c6aa0931f04d19ba762c1dc8e%2F128_0_2745_1647%2F2745.jpg>
 Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
Chama Kay, 25, from London: ‘My African parents wanted me to understand: you 
keep this to yourself’

I have suffered from poor mental health since I was about 16; I remember this 
vividly because I began to self-harm. It was also around this time that people 
started saying to me, “You need to talk to someone”. It took three years, two 
failed relationships and one botched suicide attempt for me to finally take 
this advice.


Looking back now, aged 25, I can see why, like many men, I found accessing 
mental healthcare so difficult. Masculine ideals of self-reliance, stoicism, 
sexual promiscuity and dominance over women do not lend themselves to emotional 
vulnerability. But it’s important to realise that this is not a mindset that 
suddenly appears. Rather, it’s instilled into men from a young age. I have 
personally lost count of the times I have heard parents of young boys admonish 
their own or other people’s sons for being “too sensitive” or “soft”. So 
acknowledging and addressing how we raise boys is vital here.

We must not dismiss the role culture plays in how men view and approach mental 
health. When I was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder there was one 
clear message my African parents wanted me to understand: you keep this to 
yourself. For years I was discouraged from getting help and actually felt 
guilty when I did. For many black communities taboos around mental health 
undoubtedly exist. But more than this, there is the awareness within these 
communities that structural racism means black boys, as well as black girls, 
are already at a societal disadvantage. Higher unemployment rates, longer 
prison sentences, lack of representation in media, politics and business and 
numerous other statistics will attest to this. The fear that poor mental health 
will simply be another stigma for black men to have to fight, coupled with many 
preexisting taboos, makes for a very tough battle for many.

With all this in mind, I often ask myself what can be done to help. I do not 
believe any man wants to feel emotionally closed off, lonely and isolated and I 
know they don’t want to be taking their own lives at the rate they are. By 
looking at the most sacred commandment of alpha masculinity, I believe it is 
possible to start to allow many men to address what they truly value, ask 
whether they are living according to their own standards and hopefully in this 
way begin to form a healthier relationship with their mental health.

Robert Smith, 50, from Brighton: ‘It’s not about gender or masculine traits – 
it’s about how much empathy you have’

Over the years I’ve had bouts of depression and anxiety. I’ve experienced 
severe sleep problems and suicidal thoughts. With years of psychotherapy I now 
know that all these are symptoms of complex post-traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). This is like PTSD but instead of being caused by a single traumatic 
event with flashbacks, it is caused by chronic or long-term exposure to 
emotional trauma.

My mental health has been helped almost exclusively by strong friendships and 
professional relationships with women and their empathy towards me. Had I been 
sexist, I can’t see how these important relationships would have developed. So 
I imagine there is a correlation with sexism and poor mental health, but I 
doubt that “masculinity” is the cause of poor mental health, rather that 
classical masculinity, which involves objectifying others, is non-empathetic 
and perhaps indicates other issues. I would imagine there is a similar 
correlation with racists and poor mental health. So I would consider the key 
factor to be one that is not exclusive to men, but affects all people who 
severely lack empathy and isolate themselves as a result.

In the past I’ve maybe found it harder as a man to talk to people about mental 
health, but not nowadays. I used to find it harder, because to talk, you need a 
support network but with severe mental health problems you can scare people off 
and have no support. Now I have this and I have different people to talk to. 
But to have empathetic friends, it really helps to be empathetic too, so you 
can share problems.



Tom Ogier, 31, from London: ‘I’ve only quite recently felt comfortable talking 
about vulnerability’

It can be very hard to admit vulnerability. Perhaps being a fairly big guy 
it’s easy to appear manly, to play that role, but the traits of “manliness” 
leave so little space for other important elements of our humanity. Traits that 
society might portray as more “feminine,” such as compassion, understanding and 
care, are essential, and sources of great strength.

Men feel they aren’t allowed to open up, even to themselves, for fear of being 
seen as weak or unattractive.
 From boyhood we are told to be brave and ambitious, overcoming obstacles on 
sports fields, battlefields, boardrooms. But we don’t see many of the mental 
challenges we face in this way. They are seen as weaknesses that shouldn’t be 
there, rather than parts of everyone’s lives.

We will all face grief, loss, and relationship issues, and these challenges 
take their toll, so we’d do well to seek to equip ourselves with understanding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11fe6be2d56c9e8e38990e304e8dc73ae9785e75%2F122_331_5372_3222%2F5372.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='As%20boys%2C%20we%20are%20told%20to%20be%20brave'%3A%20men%20on%20masculinity%20and%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27As%20boys%2C%20we%20are%20told%20to%20be%20brave%27%3A%20men%20on%20masculinity%20and%20mental%20health&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fas-boys-we-are-told-to-be-brave-men-on-masculinity-and-mental-health%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11fe6be2d56c9e8e38990e304e8dc73ae9785e75%2F122_331_5372_3222%2F5372.jpg>
 Photograph: Rob Mattingley/Getty Images 
Being a man: it’s hard to know where to start
Thomas 
There’s a Leonard Cohen line I often think of, when he went on stage and 
couldn’t perform for some reason. He said he didn’t feel strong enough because 
“somehow the male and female parts of me refuse to encounter one another 
tonight”. I like the idea of acknowledging that both need to combine in an 
individual for a person to function. The same is true of society. By balancing 
notions of strength which tend to be thought of in a binary way, as either 
feminine or masculine, people might be much healthier. A world without sexism 
would be better for everyone. Not only would women be respected, but men might 
be better able to appreciate more feminine traits and strengths, in others and 
in themselves.
 