
What’s the best way to organise your notes? How should you frame an argument? 
Is it normal to start hating your subject? We askedGuardian readers 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4> what 
lessons they learned from writing their postgrad dissertations – here are the 
results:

Help! I'm a postgrad: how to combat the stress of doing a master's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/29/help-im-a-postgrad-how-to-combat-the-stress-of-doing-a-masters>
‘Start early, so you can still enjoy the summer’

Darren Mason <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/Darren%20Mason> says: 

I should have started earlier, story of my university life! Although it’s 
finally finished, I do wish I’d started my dissertation earlier and been able 
to enjoy the summer a bit, rather than spending every day either at work or the 
library. If only I could turn back time...

‘Do the opposite of what I’ve done’


T <https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5002219>
mss921 <https://witness.theguardian.com/user/mss921> says: 

With less than a month to go, this dissertation is still in its infancy. My 
only saving grace has beenSCONUL <http://www.sconul.ac.uk/> (Society of 
College, National and University Libraries) giving me access to my hometown 
university’s library, and with it, the ability to actually get some work done.

 Presumably like everyone else, I feel as though all the ideas are mapped out 
in my head but actually writing the damn thing is a whole different story.

It has taken me 19 years of education to realise that I work better in the 
morning; as soon as it hits 1pm, my mind goes blank. With the added pressure of 
trying to find a job worthy of the time, effort and money that has been put 
into this MA, everything seems pretty terrible at the moment.

My tip? Do the exact opposite of everything I have done thus far. I need to be 
more productive with my free time rather than making the excuse that I have too 
much work to do. The brain needs a rest, after all.

‘Remember the basics’

Handing in my dissertation was the most accomplished I've ever felt

Sunsoo 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5001619> 
says:

I was so focused on being original and creative that I didn’t focus on the 
simple things: format, method and theory. Don’t try to reinvent the wheel, keep 
it simple and classic. I am now a university lecturer and I find the best 
dissertations are the ones that focus on one topic, one argument, one question.

‘Give yourself time out’

ChristinaW 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5002524> 
says:

As all-consuming as a dissertation feels, you have to give yourself time off. 
I had a family wedding last weekend, with my deadline on 1 September, and while 
it felt like I was never going to get finished, taking that one day off was the 
best thing I could’ve done.

Also, using a programme like EndNote or Zotero is a lifesaver, it’s so much 
easier to have all your notes and references in one place.

That said, the last week was the most stressful time I’ve had, but when I 
handed it in on Thursday morning, it was the best feeling and the most 
accomplished I’ve ever felt. A whole summer of work and staring out of the 
window wishing it wasn’t hot and sunny was worth it for that.

‘Decorate your workspace’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fboredom-is-inevitable-how-we-survived-our-postgrad-dissertations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1e289ccd753abcd89291244c5cb70f4e0f3a6f%2F0_0_640_253%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Boredom%20is%20inevitable'%20%E2%80%93%20%20how%20we%20survived%20our%20postgrad%20dissertations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fboredom-is-inevitable-how-we-survived-our-postgrad-dissertations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Boredom%20is%20inevitable%27%20%E2%80%93%20%20how%20we%20survived%20our%20postgrad%20dissertations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Fboredom-is-inevitable-how-we-survived-our-postgrad-dissertations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd1e289ccd753abcd89291244c5cb70f4e0f3a6f%2F0_0_640_253%2F640.jpg>
 About 20% of this junk is related to my thesis, the rest is 
procrastidecoration, saysEuclideanSabotage 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/user/EuclideanSabotage> Photograph: 
EuclideanSabotage 
‘Allow yourself to dislike what you are doing’

HumanumGenus 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5002899> 
says:

I’m about three weeks from handing in my dissertation on early English drama. 
I have to say it has been a much harder slog than I expected. It is certainly a 
massive jump from undergraduate work.

I have found the work over the summer especially challenging. Keeping myself 
motivated has been the real trial. This is especially true now that the actual 
writing is finished and I am trying to edit and proofread the work.

To anybody starting their master’s this year, I would say that the most 
important piece of advice is to allow yourself to dislike what you are doing at 
times. A year is a long time to be so entirely focused on one subject and so 
some frustration and a tiny bit of boredom is inevitable. Academia is presented 
as a career of passion, but we are all human.

How to make your part-time master's worthwhile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/02/dont-underestimate-your-part-time-masters>
‘Question yourself’

Olivia Havercroft 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5002971> 
says:

Writing a dissertation takes a lot of introspection. Mine started to become a 
list of facts with no explanatory detail because I was so immersed in it I 
assumed the reader knew as much as I did. Make a point, give your evidence, 
explain. Be clear and constantly refer back to why your work is relevant. 
That’s the best advice I can give.

‘Have time to focus before your deadline’

sarahlouq 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5001069> 
says:

I had to submit mine in July for my psychology conversion course. As I am 
working as well as studying, it meant I had to fit it in around work, so I 
spent the final weekend before submission writing it on a plane to New York.

I completed it in the hotel but it was a rush and my referencing looked 
terrible and I lost marks. If you are studying and working, take leave if you 
can in the weeks coming up to submission.

‘Have on days and off days’

Hawk22 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/assignment/57bb217fe4b047b85f6028d4/5000969> 
says:

I am 10,500 words into a 16,000-word text, which I’m quite chuffed about (but 
I am including the bibliography in that figure, which doesn’t count).

I haven’t had any disastrous episodes but my morale has certainly fluctuated. 
My advice, however, would be to have on days and off days – keep work and play 
separate. If you want to have a long day of work, go to the library. If you 
want to watch TV or go out with friends, definitely do so, because a bit of 
recreation will clear your head.

The important thing is to do one thing or the other; if you don’t, you may 
have many long days of sporadic concentration and mindless procrastination.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 