
A pressure group backed by a string of former Vote Leave campaigners from 
Michael Gove <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> to Gisela 
Stuart has claimed that exiting the EU with a “clean Brexit” could save the 
country £450m a week.

During the referendum campaign, Vote Leave controversially argued that leaving 
the EU would leave an extra£350m a week to spend on the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
.

But research from Change Britain <https://www.changebritain.org/> goes a step 
further by arguing that a complete break with the EU could be even more 
beneficial.

The group includes some former remain supporters but its founding members are 
largely made up of those involved in the Brexit campaign, including Tory former 
chancellor Nigel Lawson, Tory donor Peter Cruddas, Digby Jones, who is a former 
head of the CBI, and David Owen, the former Labour foreign secretary who went 
on to help found the Social Democratic Party (SDP).Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the foreign secretary and leading 
figure in Vote Leave, recorded a video supporting the group’s launch, although 
he is not formally affiliated.

Its research suggests many of those linked to the Vote Leave group do not 
repudiate the claim that leaving the EU would save £350m a week for the health 
service, despite it being criticised for failing to take into account Britain’s 
rebate, the possible budgetary costs of leavingand the lack of any indication 
that this cash will go to the NHS. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>

The report from Change Britain claims the UK economy could benefit by £24bn a 
year by leaving the single market and customs union, calling this scenario a 
“clean Brexit”.

It argues that in a likely outcome this would deliver annual savings of 
£10.4bn from contributions to the EU budget and £1.2bn from scrapping 
“burdensome regulations” while allowing the UK to forge new trade deals worth 
£12.3bn.

The cabinet is split over the issue of how to approach Brexit, with some of 
the most hardline members such asLiam Fox, the trade secretary, keen to leave 
the customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/liam-fox-pre-brexit-deal-setback-european-union>
, while others such as Philip Hammond, the chancellor, arepushing for an exit 
from the EU that leaves the UK as close to the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
as possible.

Theresa May has not indicated which type of Brexit she wants to pursue other 
than to say issues such as the customs union are not a “binary choice” about 
staying in or out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-hosts-brexit-summit-for-scottish-welsh-and-northern-irish-governments-politics-live>
. The prime minister has also madecontrols on immigration a red line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
 and said she wants thebest possible trading relations with EU nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/britain-seeking-ambitious-brexit-trade-deal-to-benefit-uk-and-eu-says-pm>
.

Groups pushing for the UK to stay in the single market, such as Open Britain, 
backed by Lib Dem former deputy prime minister Nick Clegg andformer Labour 
leader Ed Miliband, argue that a “hard Brexit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/10/brexit-must-be-fair-to-working-people-ed-miliband>
 would be damaging to the economy because of the risk of tariff and non-tariff 
trading barriers.

But Change Britain claimed its estimate was “very conservative” and that the 
benefits of withdrawal from the single market and customs union could be as 
much as £38.6bn a year.

Even the lowest forecast within its range of likely outcomes was a boost of 
£20bn, although the figure does not appear to factor in the possibility of
large-scale loss of exports to the remaining 27 EU nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/how-will-brexit-affect-britains-trade-with-europe>
, which advocates of a “soft Brexit” argue could happen in the worst-case 
scenario.

Britain exported around £220bn of goods and services to the EU in 2015, while 
imports from the EU totalled around £290bn.

Brexit will set UK back £11bn in EU trade costs, research finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/16/brexit-uk-11bn-extra-costs-eu-trade-research>
Change Britain said that the biggest prize on offer was in potential trade 
agreements outside the EU which Britain could strike if it left the customs 
union, which requires it to take part only in deals negotiated by the European 
Commission.

Depending on how many deals the UK secures, GDP could be boosted by between 
£8.5bn and £19.8bn, Change Britain claimed. The lobby group said the single 
market would allow Britain to scrap 59 of the 100 most burdensome regulations 
on business, potentially saving more than £4bn in the highest estimate.

However, the group has estimated likely savings at only around £1.2bn as the 
government has pledged to transfer all EU laws into UK law and particularly to 
preserve protections for workers.

It also said that the government’s promise to continue with subsidies for 
farmers and other industries means 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2016/oct/17/how-bad-will-brexit-be-for-uk-farmers-retailers-and-consumers>
 that the total saving from ending contributions to Brussels budgets will be 
around £10.4bn, rather than the £14.7bn which the UK currently pays.

The research coincides with comments from Mervyn King, the former governor of 
the Bank of England, who told the BBC on Monday thatBritain may be better off 
going for a hard Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/mervyn-king-britain-should-be-more-upbeat-about-brexit>
that would mean leaving the single market and customs union.

Lord King, who has been more optimistic about leaving the EU than many 
economic commentators, acknowledged that Brexit would bring great political 
difficulties and would not be a “bed of roses”. But he also said there would be 
many opportunities economically for the UK striking out on its own.

The crossbench peer, who led the bank for a decade until 2013, said the UK 
should leave the European single market and warned there were “real question 
marks” over whether it should seek to remain in the customs union, which would 
limit its ability to forge trade deals on its own.

 