
Google announced a ban on search ads from payday lenders on Wednesday, 
classifying them in their “dangerous products 
<https://support.google.com/adwordspolicy/answer/6014299?hl=en>” category with 
guns, tobacco and explosives.

Banning ads from payday lenders is a big move for Google, the most visited 
website in the world, against a massive and mostly legal market. Payday lending 
is a$46bn industry 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/03/26/395421117/payday-loans-and-endless-cycles-of-debt-targeted-by-federal-watchdog>
, and there are more payday loan storefronts in the US than McDonald’s and 
Starbucks combined.

The lenders – who generally give out small loans – use extremely high interest 
rates and target vulnerable, low-income communities, oftenentrapping people in 
circles of debt 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/03/26/395421117/payday-loans-and-endless-cycles-of-debt-targeted-by-federal-watchdog>
.

“Financial services is an area we look at very closely because we want to 
protect users from deceptive or harmful financial products,” said David Graff, 
director of global product policy forGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>.

Payday loan borrowers: ‘When are we going to be done paying these people?’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/us-money-blog/2015/mar/26/payday-loan-borrowers-when-are-we-going-to-be-done-paying>
Google did not disclose how large a percentage of ad revenue payday lenders 
accounted for. The ban will go into effect on 13 July 2016. Google will also no 
longer allow ads for loans where repayment is due within 60 days of the date of 
issue or ads for loans with anannual percentage rate 
<http://www.consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/44/what-is-a-credit-card-interest-rate-what-does-apr-mean.html>
 (APR) of 36% or higher.

Microsoft and Yahoo have not made similar changes despite being lobbied by 
consumer advocates, according to those advocates on a press call this morning.


Ads for payday loans appear not only on searches for lenders but also on 
related searches such as “I need money to pay rent,” according to Aaron Rieke, 
a principal at Upturn, a technology and civil rights group.


A typical two-week payday loan has an APR of almost 400%, according to the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau 
<http://www.consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/1567/what-payday-loan.html>, while a 
credit card APR generally ranges from 12% to 30%.


“You go to a search engine when you need help, when you’re in trouble, when 
you’re broke, and you reveal to a search engine what you’d never reveal to 
anyone else,” said Alvaro Bedoya, executive director of the Center on Privacy 
and Technology at Georgetown Law. “You trust that search engine.”

Most search engines still allow payday lending ads that can charge up to 
1,000% interest, according to Bedoya, who said Google’s move is toward a better 
internet that stops “profiting from your weaknesses”.

“If you’re broke and search the internet for help, you should not be hit with 
ads for payday lenders charging 1,000% interest,” he said.

Several advocates of the ban argued the internet can be “an agent of harm” 
when advertisers use it to prey on low-income consumers.

Janet Murguía, president and CEO of the National Council of La Raza, an 
advocacy group for Latinos, said the ban was an example of civil rights 
organizations and tech companies coming together “to help protect the rights of 
all Americans online”.

“Unscrupulous payday lenders prey on the most vulnerable, including millions 
in communities of color in neighborhoods across America, and in the 21st 
century, they are increasingly doing so on the internet,” Murguía said.

Payday loans <https://www.theguardian.com/money/payday-loans> have come under 
scrutiny in recent years after an explosion in short-term lending following the 
2008 financial crash. Problems experienced by some people in meeting payments 
have provoked concerns both in the US and the UK.

Wonga losses more than double
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/04/wonga-losses-more-than-double-payday-loans>


Payday lenders were also unhappy with the decision. The first comment on 
Google’s policy update about the ban 
<http://googlepublicpolicy.blogspot.com/2016/05/an-update-to-our-adwords-policy-on.html>
 was from Manjush Varghese, ‎whose Google Plus account identifies him as 
vice-president of e-commerce at ACE Cash Express, a payday loan lender.


“Extremely disappointed. I would love to know some of the facts and research 
you are referring to. I have been a long-standing, responsible advertiser on 
Google. Our prior attempts to engage with the policy group at G have been 
consistently rebuffed,” he wrote.
 