
Emotions will be as raw as the wind whipping off icy Lake Michigan. On Tuesday 
night,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> will 
stand before family, friends and supporters in his adopted hometown of Chicago 
to deliver a valedictory speech, looking back on the grace notes of his 
presidency – and forward to an uncertain future.

Barack Obama forever changed black America | Peniel E Joseph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/barack-obama-forever-changed-black-america>
It will be just over eight years since Obama addressed a rapturous crowd in 
the same city after being elected as America’s first black president. “Change 
has come to America,” he proclaimed to nearly a quarter of a million people in 
Grant Park.

Next week he will dig deep one last time for oratory to match the moment, but 
the euphoria that greeted him that night in 2008 will be tempered by the 
hardness of experience, a streak of wistfulness and, above all, a piercing fear 
about whether his legacy can survive the presidency ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

“I’ve had an opportunity to review a very early draft, and what I can tell you 
is that the president is interested in delivering a farewell address that’s 
forward-looking,” Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary,told reporters 
on Friday. 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/01/06/press-briefing-press-secretary-josh-earnest-162017>

“The president is obviously proud of the progress that we have made and 
continues to be optimistic about our future, and he’s looking forward to an 
opportunity to talk about why.”

But it was Obama himself who warned during the uniquely rancorous election 
campaign that “all the progress we’ve made is on the ballot”. Hillary Clinton 
lost on 8 November and now that progress is imperilled. Anyone seeking a 
metaphor need look no further than the White House vegetable garden,
painstakingly tended by first lady Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/05/michelle-obama-plants-last-white-house-garden>
 to promote healthy eating for children. It could now be dug up at the roots, 
both literally and figuratively.

There is barely a policy that might go untouched, from the economy to 
healthcare to education, from balancing the global order to combating climate 
change. In areas where Obama’s record is built on regulations and executive 
actions, Trump has the potential to hit a reverse gear without consent from 
Congress.

The world can also expect a fundamental shift in tone. Obama is a cerebral 
African American lawyer who sang Amazing Grace in memory of shooting victims in 
a black church and welcomed the multiracial cast of the musical Hamilton to the 
White House. Trump is a white, 70-year-old celebrity businessman whom critics 
describe as capricious, who questioned Obama’s birthplace and who made campaign 
pledges to round up illegal immigrants, ban or register Muslims and build a 
wall on the Mexican border.

“Fair to say that you’re going to take a wrecking ball to the Obama legacy?” 
the interviewerChris Wallace asked Trump 
<http://www.foxnews.com/transcript/2016/12/11/exclusive-donald-trump-on-cabinet-picks-transition-process/>
 on Fox News Sunday recently. The president-elect insisted: “No, no, no, I 
don’t want to do that at all. I just want what’s right.”

His words and actions, however, appear to tell a different story. His close 
ally Newt Gingrich, speaking last month at the Heritage Foundation, a rightwing 
thinktank in Washington, insisted: “This is a genuine watershed.

“There is an old world that’s much deeper than just liberalism and there is 
the post-8 November world, if we can make it real. I tell everybody: the Trump 
rally has to be turned into the Trump reality.”

‘Trump has many more advantages’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-makes-emotional-farewell-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michelle%20Obama%20makes%20emotional%20farewell%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-makes-emotional-farewell-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michelle%20Obama%20makes%20emotional%20farewell%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichelle-obama-makes-emotional-farewell-speech-video&media=>
Michelle Obama makes emotional farewell speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-makes-emotional-farewell-speech-video>
Obama did not achieve everything he wanted to during two terms in the White 
House, notably failing to heal the partisan divide or halt Russian aggression 
in the deadly quagmire of Syria. But in his first year he did arguablystave off 
a new Great Depression 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/the-obama-legacy-that-cant-be-repealed/2016/12/18/a4075212-c3c1-11e6-9a51-cd56ea1c2bb7_story.html?utm_term=.3e0030e14353&wpisrc=nl_headlines&wpmm=1>
 and save the automotive industry. Unemployment, then in danger of touching 
10%, is now at4.7% <https://www.bls.gov/news.release/empsit.nr0.htm>.

Trump, who ran for president as a business expert and dealmaker, will have the 
luxury of not inheriting a financial crisis as Obama did.

“President Trump, not for the first time in his life, will inherit a much more 
financially beneficial situation,” Earnest said on Friday. “And he’ll have an 
opportunity to build on that momentum. So I think you can make a strong case 
that the standard that he should be held to is even higher. He’s got many more 
advantages. He’s got the wind at his back.”

Trump has vowed to cut taxes, eliminate regulations, scrap or renegotiate 
trade deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
 and punish companies that send jobs offshore. He has surrounded himself with
arch capitalists, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
 Wall Street bankers and corporate CEOs.

Bill Burton, former deputy press secretary under Obama, said: “Trump has shown 
he has an economic vision not unlike Ronald Reagan and George W Bush, and those 
had negative consequences. Trickle-down economics still doesn’t work.”

The word “Obamaism” never quite took off, but the president can settle for 
“Obamacare”. His signature legislation came in health as he defied inertia and 
opposition topush through the Affordable Care Act 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2009/09/10/us/politics/20090910-obama-health.html?action=click&contentCollection=Money%20%26%20Policy&module=RelatedCoverage&pgtype=article&region=EndOfArticle&_r=0>
. Despite its teething troubles, it has delivered health insurance to more than 
20 million people, the administration says, with more than nine in 10 Americans 
insured for the first time in history.

But even before Trump’s inauguration on 20 January, Republicans in Congress 
this weekset about Obamacare’s destruction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/barack-obama-republican-healthcare-repeal-vox-interview>
. Vice-president-elect Mike Pence declared its repeal “the first order of 
business”, hinting that Trump could take action on his very first day in the 
Oval Office. The president-elect’s choice of health secretary, theGeorgia 
congressman Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
, is an ardent critic of the law.

However, the difficulties of supplanting Obamacare could be seen as metaphor 
for supplanting his legacy as a whole. Pence and other Republicans failed to 
provide specific details of what its replacement will look likeor how long the 
process will take 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/rand-paul-donald-trump-obamacare-repeal-replace>
. The House speaker, Paul Ryan, promised not to “pull the rug out” from under 
anyone, but the Urban Institute has estimated that the number of people without 
health insurance could more than double to 58.7 million, with the 
non-college-educated constituencies who typically voted for Trump the hardest 
hit.

The president-elect himself has acknowledged that some parts of the 
legislation might yet be preserved.Some Republicans appear to agree with him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/obamacare-repeal-republicans-us-healthcare>
. Democrats warn of unprecedented chaos in America’s healthcare system. This 
battle is clearly just beginning.

‘America first’

Obama made a slow start on climate change but raced to catch up, notably with 
the Paris agreement, involving nearly 200 countries. He says America’s 
dependence on foreign oil has been cut by more than half, while its production 
of renewable energy has more than doubled. There has been a trebling of wind 
power and 30-fold increase in solar, creating hundreds of thousands of jobs. 
The thriving clean energy industry would therefore be a difficult genie to put 
back in the bottle.

Trump is said to be looking at ways to extricate the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
 from the Paris agreement while aggressively exploiting fossil fuels. He has 
said that on his first day in office, he will lift “the restrictions on the 
production of $50tn worth of job-producing American energy reserves, including 
shale, oil, natural gas and clean coal, and we will put our miners back to 
work”.

His nominees to lead the Environmental Protection Agency and Department of the 
Interiorquestion the science of human-caused climate change. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 Rex Tillerson, his choice for secretary of state, is head of the world’s 
biggest oil company, ExxonMobil. And the president-elect himself has previously 
claimed that climate change is a Chinese hoax. There are few legacy issues that 
could be more consequential.

Internationally, Obama won the Nobel peace prize in his first year and was the 
president who killed Osama bin Laden, struck the Iran nuclear deal and led a 
surprise rapprochement with Cuba. Trump has criticised the Iran deal but again 
may receive advice that it has merits worth protecting and feel pressure from 
international allies. He has vowed to put “America first”, apparently with 
Russia not far behind,upended relations with China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
 before even taking office and raised fears of a conflict of interests with his 
business empire.

On nuclear defence, Trump threatened to preside over a major ramping up of the 
US arsenal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
 in atweet <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/811977223326625792> just 
before Christmas. Trump’s unrestrained language stands in sharp contrast to the 
stance adopted by Obama over the past eight years. Though Obamastruggled to 
deliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/17/obama-nuclear-arsenal-disarmament-russia-congress>
 on his early promise to oversee a significant reduction in the US nuclear 
arsenal, agreeing to a $1tn modernisation program over 30 years for air, land 
and sea delivery systems, he has adopted the vocabulary of disarmament.

‘An unparalleled grace and complexity’
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20'flying%20blind'%20if%20he%20ignores%20intelligence%2C%20warns%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20%27flying%20blind%27%20if%20he%20ignores%20intelligence%2C%20warns%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video&media=>
Trump ‘flying blind’ if he ignores intelligence, warns Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/trump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video>
Then there are questions of temperament, personality and how that can 
translate into soft power. “Poise”, “panache” and “dignity” are words commonly 
used about Obama. “Narcissist” and “vulgarian” have been applied to Trump. In 
this most polarised of countries, Trump’s friends and foes can agree on one 
thing:two men more unlike each other 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/25/opinion/campaign-stops/the-obama-theory-of-trump.html?_r=0>
 are hard to imagine.


Cooler than all of us: how the Obamas upheld African American pop culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/obama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle>
Neil Sroka 
<https://twitter.com/nsroka?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, who worked as a new media director on Obama’s 2008 election campaign, said: 
“Overall, the legacy of Barack Obama will be millions of Americans remembering 
that’s what a president looks like and sounds like. That will stand in contrast 
to this billionaire bigot putting out insults on Twitter whenever he feels like 
it. Obama has given a voice to the American people with an unparalleled grace 
and complexity, and that’s not Donald Trump.”

Richard Danzig, <https://www.cnas.org/people/richard-j-danzig> navy secretary 
under President Bill Clinton, said: “President Obama’s greatest legacies are 
the measured rationality of his decision-making and the inclusiveness of his 
politics. President Trump will counter both.”

From the day he stepped into the Oval Office, one central Obama legacy was 
assured: he was the first African American president in the two-century-plus 
history of the republic. The symbolism mattered.

Writing in the Atlantic, 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2017/01/my-president-was-black/508793/>
 the journalist Ta-Nehisi Coates reflected: “Against the specter of black 
pathology, against the narrow images of welfare moms and deadbeat dads, his 
time in the White House had been an eight-year showcase of a healthy and 
successful black family spanning three generations, with two dogs to boot. In 
short, he became a symbol of black people’s everyday, extraordinary 
Americanness.”

Trump was endorsed by the Ku Klux Klan. His chief strategist, Steve Bannon of 
Breitbart News, has been accused offanning white nationalism, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
 a charge he denies. The Trump cabinet is dominated by older white men. Loretta 
Lynch, an African American woman, will be replaced as attorney general by 
Jefferson Beauregard Sessions III, a senator for Alabama named for a 
Confederate president and general. Sessions’ long career includes accusations 
of racist comments and crackdowns on immigrants. Sessions angrily denied the 
racism allegations at the time. Activists are braced for a shift toward 
hardline policing and criminal justice enforcement.

Gingrich – whose 1994 “Contract with America” is blamed by many 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/steven-m-gillon/the-gingrich-revolution-a_b_8272054.html>
 for the hyperpartisanship of today’s politics – told the Heritage Foundation 
the president-elect thought “we should speak bluntly and deliberately and 
methodically break up political correctness”. He also mocked Obama for failing 
to condemn Colin Kaepernick, an American football player who has beenstaging 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/27/colin-kaepernick-donald-trump-america-people-of-color>
 during the US national anthem in an attempt to highlight racial injustice.

“We should be sympathetic to the level of confusion multimillionaire athletes 
have at a country that has treated them so badly that they only have seven 
Rolls Royces and three houses?” Gingrich said. “This is why the country voted 
for Trump, because they look at this kind of junk and they say, ‘OK, I’ve got 
these two futures: I get nutcake weirdness and I get normalcy.’

“And to the great shock of the Washington Post and New York Times, nutcake 
weirdness lost.”

‘I don’t think you can undo the march of progress’

All this … and a supreme court vacancy that Trump intends to fill with a 
hardline conservative, 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/donald-j.-trump-adds-to-list-of-potential-supreme-court-justice-picks>
 potentially threatening abortion rights and gun control for a generation. For 
some liberals, the potential erasure of the Obama White House is devastating. 
The president himself, however, has learned the hard waythe limits of 
presidential power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/barack-obama-second-term-achievements-sandy-hook>
.

More than 'mom-in-chief': Michelle Obama bows out as dynamic first lady
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/michelle-obama-legacy-first-lady>
He failed, for example, to close the prison at Guantánamo Bay and felt 
helpless when 20 children and six adults were shot dead at Sandy Hook 
elementary school in Newtown, Connecticut, four years ago. He argues that 
American government and democracy is an ocean liner, not a speedboat.

The political strategist Anita Dunn, 
<http://www.skdknick.com/staff/anita-dunn/> Obama’s former White House 
communications director, said: “I don’t think you can undo the march of 
progress in the country. I think the view of America’s challenges always looks 
very different from inside the White House gates than it does outside during a 
transition or campaign.

“Obviously there are going to be some fights about trying to preserve some of 
the progressive policies the president has put into place, but I think the 
broader changes in this country aren’t things that you can turn back. You can’t 
turn back people’s attitudes on marriage or the need to address climate change 
even if we can differ about how to do it most effectively.”

Sroka, now communications director for the liberal campaign group Democracy 
for America, <https://www.democracyforamerica.com/> was more cautious but also 
believes that at least some of the legacy will endure.

“Obama’s policies are going to be far harder to untangle than many Republicans 
believe and far easier to untangle than many Democrats believe,” he said. 
“Obama spent eight years planting a complex shrub befitting a complex, 
measured, thoughtful president. Trump is going to take a chainsaw to it but 
won’t be able to kill it at the roots.”

As he spends the weekend polishing his farewell address – an elegiac tradition 
dating back to George Washington – the man who once asked a nation to believe 
in the audacity of hope will now have to put his faith in the tenacity of hope.
 