
John Myers opens up his son Ryan’s email account. Among the junk and spam, one 
message stands out. “A £5 Casino bonus is waiting for you – go grab it!” it 
reads. Promotional adverts from betting companies are regularly sent to Ryan, 
which infuriates his father. Two years ago, Ryan killed himself after 
struggling with a secret gambling addiction. But still the emails come.

A few days before his death, Ryan, 27, was on holiday with his family in 
Turkey. He was his “usual happy, bubbly” self, John recalls. But shortly after 
his return home, an ominous message appeared on Ryan’s Facebook wall. “I am so 
so sorry, I didn’t mean to let anyone down,” he had written. His family were 
baffled.

John and his wife, Alison, Ryan’s mother, frantically tried to call their son 
but there was no answer. Eventually someone rang them from Ryan’s phone, but a 
moment’s relief quickly faded. It was not Ryan. It was someone urging John and 
Alison to come to their son’s home in Croxteth, Liverpool, as soon as possible. 
When they arrived and saw the police cars and ambulances parked outside, John 
leapt from his car and ran into the property. The officers wouldn’t let him up 
the stairs. “They said Ryan had self-harmed. Alison thought he’d just hurt 
himself so tried to get past. The officer said: ‘No, life is extinct.’”

The big gamble: the dangerous world of British betting shops | Tom Lamont
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/31/big-gamble-dangerous-british-betting-shops>
Later, when John and Alison were allowed back into the two-up, two-down that 
Ryan had rented with his fiancée, John spotted a piece of paper on the floor. 
It was a betting slip with the words “card declined”. It was the first clue to 
the desperate circumstances that led to Ryan’s death.

Ryan was a sports fan; as a child he was particularly deft at golf, at one 
point playing with a handicap of three. “He was doing very well,” John says. “I 
used to drop him off at the golf club during the summer and he’d play golf all 
day. He loved his golf.” Ryan was a Liverpool FC fan, and he played pool, darts 
and occasionally rugby league.

After school he put himself through college, studying for a carpentry diploma. 
He gained employment with Bell Group and took pride in his work, which often 
involved repairing housing association properties. “He was always telling me 
what he’d done and how he’d done it,” John says. “He was a bit of a 
perfectionist when it came to his carpentry.”

Ryan earned good money as a carpenter, his father says. John knows that 
earlier in his son’s career he had “thousands in the bank”. But on the day he 
died, Ryan transferred all he had left to his father’s bank account – £300. 
After looking at their son’s bank statements and post, John and Alison started 
to put together a troubling picture: a payday loan of £1,000 from a company 
called Pounds to Pocket, an account with a pawn shop and that final, 
heart-rending transaction. Ryan had clearly been in serious financial 
difficulties. But how and why?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f587e11fa5f792d26aa9b18840bc1c9b52fc79%2F113_195_2968_1781%2F2968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%20haemorrhaged%20money'%3A%20the%20bereaved%20parents%20taking%20on%20the%20gambling%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%20haemorrhaged%20money%27%3A%20the%20bereaved%20parents%20taking%20on%20the%20gambling%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5f587e11fa5f792d26aa9b18840bc1c9b52fc79%2F113_195_2968_1781%2F2968.jpg>
 Ryan Myers, who died in 2014. Photograph: Handout 
“You go through so many emotions, start thinking about all the things he said 
when we were on holiday, trying to work out what happened,” John says. “What 
had happened? You couldn’t understand – our Ryan was such a happy, bubbly 
character.”

The source of Ryan’s money problems became clear as John and Alison went 
through his emails and Facebook account. Dozens of adverts and promotional 
offers from betting companies cluttered Ryan’s inbox. Then they discovered that 
Ryan had been attempting to “self-exclude” himself from a range of gambling 
websites.

In one email sent to a betting company five months before his death, he wrote: 
“Just wanted to know how I go about self excluding me self? I’m finally 
admitting I have a serious gambling problem and I know I’m always going to log 
on … so I need you to ban me please. Last night I got drunk and was winning on 
the roulette, then I started losing and I’ve woke up this morning to find out 
I’ve pretty much emptied my bank account and don’t even remember doing it.”

The bookies regulator is taking a gamble over protecting the vulnerable | Matt 
Zarb-Cousin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/02/gambling-commission-paddy-power-bookies-regulator-protecting-vulnerable>
Self-exclusion is when addicts ask a gambling company or operator to prevent 
them from gambling for a period of time, usually around six months. 
Self-exclusion schemes are supposed to be regulated by theGambling Commission 
<http://www.gamblingcommission.gov.uk/Home.aspx>. Currently, if an individual 
wishes to self-exclude entirely, they need to do so separately with each 
operator that they gamble or might gamble with. Supporters see the schemes as 
an effective tool to prevent harm from gambling, but critics see them as weak 
and too easy to manipulate. There have been calls for a “multi-operator” 
approach to self-exclusion.

Ryan also reached out to James Petherick, a reformed gambling addict who has 
catalogued his struggles invideo diaries on YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLLy6o1-1u2trbVwPa_LSelOH1b4G2r3Mm>. 
John and Alison discovered a number of private Facebook conversations between 
Ryan and James, who appears to be the only person with whom Ryan shared details 
of his addiction.

In one message sent four months before his death, Ryan speaks of his 
frustration at the relentless barrage of gambling adverts luring him back in. 
He tells Petherick he has not gambled for five days. “Finding it tough,” he 
writes. “What’s making quitting tough for me is everywhere I turn there is some 
form of gambling advertisement. I go facebook and zynga poker or castle 
jackpot. I go on twitter and there is like £50 matched deposit, even buying a 
newspaper and just random advertisement, it’s unbelievable.”

John and Alison now know Ryan had been gambling for at least a few years 
before he took his own life on 18 May 2014. He was placing bets on football, 
playing online roulette and, on the day he died, he lost £500 on a fixed-odds 
betting terminal at a betting shop in Croxteth. These highly addictive machines 
have been described as the crack cocaine of gambling. Each betting shop is 
allowed to have up to four FOBTs, which allow stakes of up to £100 to be laid 
on casino games with a maximum delay of 20 seconds between wagers. “We found at 
least three occasions when Ryan spent all his wages on gambling and had to 
scramble around to pay bills,” John says. “He was just haemorrhaging money.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c10fcf03e1fce0da3faba9464446df754e647f%2F0_182_5540_3324%2F5540.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='He%20haemorrhaged%20money'%3A%20the%20bereaved%20parents%20taking%20on%20the%20gambling%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27He%20haemorrhaged%20money%27%3A%20the%20bereaved%20parents%20taking%20on%20the%20gambling%20industry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fjul%2F15%2Fryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01c10fcf03e1fce0da3faba9464446df754e647f%2F0_182_5540_3324%2F5540.jpg>
 A fixed-odds betting terminal. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
Ryan’s grave was topped with red and white roses, as is often done for 
Liverpool FC fans. A humanist funeral was held at St Helens crematorium and 
attended by more than 300 relatives and friends, all of whom were shocked by 
his death and the problems that may have contributed to it. “If you’re in the 
pub and you’ve got a guy who’s an alcoholic, you can see him, he’s stumbling 
around all over the place, he’s drunk, he’s always drunk,” John says. “The guy 
in the corner keeping nice and quiet on his mobile phone, he’s gambling 
thousands and thousands of pounds and no one can see it and you have no idea.”

John, a softly spoken man who works night shifts as a DHL supervisor for 
Jaguar Land Rover, has been left with a deep-seated anger towards the gambling 
industry. “They’re parasites,” he says. “They’re absolute parasites.” John 
wants to see a host of changes and haslaunched a petition calling for increased 
and improved regulation of the industry 
<https://www.change.org/p/british-government-regulate-the-gambling-industry-more-robustly-especially-where-advertising-and-online-gambling-is-concerned-the-adverts-on-uk-tv-always-infer-that-gambling-is-socially-acceptable-and-that-everyone-is-a-winner-it-never-shows-the-deva?recruiter=290345365&utm_source=petitions_show_components_action_panel_wrapper&utm_medium=copylink>
. The aggressive advertising and promotion are among his primary concerns.

He says that Ryan’s email account still receives promotions and adverts from 
betting companies, and it sickens him. “I wrote to one to say, my son has 
killed himself, can you stop sending stuff here,” John says. “They sent me an 
email saying, as an executor of his will can you please send a death 
certificate and we’ll look at his accounts.”

New rules ‘will crack down’ on exploitation of gambling addicts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/09/gambling-regulators-new-rules-problem-addicts>
John takes issue with the self-exclusion policy, particularly the time limit 
offered to addicts, including Ryan. He has since spoken to addicts who have 
revealed that, after a period of self-exclusion, the moment a ban is lifted 
they receive emails offering free £20 bets. “It’s making a mockery of 
self-exclusion,” he says.

A spokesman for the Association of British Bookmakers <https://www.abb.uk.com/>
 said it was committed to tackling problem gambling. “We deeply sympathise with 
Mr Myers and his family for their tragic loss. The industry takes responsible 
gambling very seriously and we have introduced a number of new measures to help 
tackle problem gambling.

“Action taken by the industry, over and above regulatory requirements, include 
a new mandatory code of practice for all betting shops, the banning of gaming 
machine advertising in shop windows and the introduction of a national 
multi-operator self-exclusion scheme.

“The ABB and our members have also introduced player awareness systems, built 
on evidence published by theResponsible Gambling Trust 
<http://www.responsiblegamblingtrust.org.uk/> in December 2014, which showed 
‘markers of harm’ could be identified in patterns of gaming machine play. Those 
indicating potential for the highest level of harm are subject to an 
interaction with a member of staff.”

Two years on from Ryan’s death, John is reaching out to other families 
affected by gambling addiction, in the hope that he can help prevent them from 
experiencing such a tragic loss. He says not a day goes by when he does not 
dwell on his son’s experience.

“I feel angry with him sometimes, but then you realise what he must have been 
going through,” John says. “I look at pictures of him as a young child and I 
think: what a waste. What a waste of a talented, lovely boy.”

 * In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14.
 