
Sir Michael Wilshaw has cleared his diary and set aside a generous chunk of 
the morning for our interview. His press officer promises he will be in 
forthright mood and she’s not wrong. At the end of December, Wilshaw, 70, will 
complete his five-year stint as chief inspector of schools and he’s not going 
quietly.

Ofsted chief slams Theresa May’s ‘obsession’ with grammar schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/ofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession>
He wants to talk about how standards have improved since he took charge at 
Ofsted in 2012. But he is not one to do so in a vainglorious way. A former 
headteacher at one of the first academies in the country, in north-east London, 
he is proud of his legacy but also brutally honest about what more needs to be 
done, and about the difficulties of working with government.

“When people ask what has been the toughest part of my job,” he says, “it has 
been to deal with the politicians, particularly ministers of education. Because 
sometimes you have to say fairly uncomfortable things to them like, ‘Some of 
your free schools aren’t working very well’ or ‘Some of your academy trusts 
aren’t working very well’ or whatever, and that’s sometimes been difficult.”

Wilshaw <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw> has 50 years of 
experience in education and says he understands the pressures under which 
ministers operate. “They come in and they have got to make a difference and 
they have got to do it quickly and be seen to be making a difference. I 
understand that – but as the guy who is responsible for standards in schools 
they are obviously looking for me to say lovely things about their policy and 
that has been tough,” he says.

He’s mainly – but not solely – thinking of the man who appointed him as chief 
inspector, Michael Gove.Wilshaw  
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>says he likes Gove and 
thinks he will be remembered as a “great secretary of state”. He supported him 
over the need for more autonomy and accountability in the school systems, and 
over his reforms of the exam system and curriculum.

In my last year we sent a dozen kids off to Oxbridge. That would not have been 
possible without the top-end children
On non-selective education 
“All good, all good,” he says. “But,” he adds, raising his voice, “here’s the 
thing, I think. And I have learnt this not just as chief inspector but also as 
a headteacher: that change sometimes has to be slow and incremental.”

Gove  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>tried to go too fast, 
was badly advised, offended too many people and ended up losing his job. They 
had rows. “If you push it too hard it becomes counterproductive. I am very 
conscious that politicians don’t often have time and therefore they push and 
pull and shove and that gets them into trouble. Inevitably they come up against 
people like me who say, ‘Sorry, that is not working and I am not prepared to do 
that’ because I don’t think it will work. So there was a tension. If I had been 
his adviser I would have said, ‘Don’t do that yet’. Michael needed better 
advice but didn’t get it.”

Wilshaw is proud of the improvements they jointly oversaw and many of the 
changes that are still in train, with the expansion of academies and free 
schools, though it is standards he cares about more than structures. “When I 
came in January 2012, 68% of primaries were good or better. Now it’s 89%. 
Secondaries 66%, now it’s 78%. We introduced greater demands into the system, 
had higher expectations and teachers and heads have risen to it.” Early on in 
his tenurehe abolished the category of “satisfactory”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/17/ofsted-satisfactory-rating-scrapped>
for schools. The education establishment protested. “Michael Gove and I were 
seen as the terrible twins.” Teachers and the unions said it was all too 
difficult.

“Their argument was that it’s too demanding, that some schools will be 
satisfactory. There were two million children in 6,000 schools that had been 
judged satisfactory year after year after year, inspection after inspection, so 
you could be in a satisfactory school forever and a day, primary or secondary.”

Just 2.6% of grammar pupils are from poor backgrounds, new figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/very-small-percentage-of-grammar-school-pupils-from-poorer-families-new-statistics-show>
Wilshaw began teaching in London’s Docklands in 1968 and rose to be executive 
head of the newMossbourne Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jan/05/mossbourne-academy-wilby-profile>
 – formerly troubled Hackney Downs comprehensive – in 2004. He turned it round 
fast, and that made him believe anything is possible if heads aim high and are 
given more freedom.

But he opposes blanket solutions. He was not, for instance, in favour of 
getting rid of all local education authorities or forcing all schools to become 
academies, as Gove’s successor, Nicky Morgan, tried to do earlier this year 
before she dropped the plan because of huge opposition. “I didn’t see much 
point in banging headteachers over the head who were running very successful 
schools within a local authority and saying, ‘You’ve got to become an academy’. 
If somebody had done that to me when I was in Newham I would have said, ‘No, 
I’m quite happy, thank you’.”

That said, he thinks the trend away from local authorities running schools is 
irreversible. “The big criticism of [many] local authorities was they didn’t 
know what was happening in these schools …They didn’t challenge schools as 
effectively as they should have done … They allowed drift and decay to take 
place.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a28a9b1d5891937249b5f64bcc2ef692db41ee%2F0_104_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98I%20came%20into%20teaching%20to%20raise%20standards%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Michael%20Wilshaw's%20forthright%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98I%20came%20into%20teaching%20to%20raise%20standards%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20Michael%20Wilshaw%27s%20forthright%20farewell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13a28a9b1d5891937249b5f64bcc2ef692db41ee%2F0_104_3861_2317%2F3861.jpg>
 As headmaster of Mossbourne Academy, formerly the troubled Hackney Downs 
comprehensive, in 2011. Photograph: Felix Clay for the Observer 
In his half century in schools, and during his years at Ofsted, he has seen 
huge progress. Wilshaw recalls thinking as a young teacher in the 1960s how 
wrong it was that the job of education secretary was not seen as a top Cabinet 
slot. Even in the 1980s that was still the case. “I remember Ken Baker saying 
to me that when he was transferred from the Department of Environment to 
Education it felt like a demotion, like moving from Arsenal to Charlton 
Athletic.”

Now, however, as he prepares to leave Ofsted, he sees big dangers on the 
horizon. One is that too many multi-academy trusts are poorly run, failing to 
intervene when their schools are underperforming, replicating the failures of 
local authorities.

Some have built up financial surpluses, and spent the money on “consultancies” 
not children. A few who run them have abused the system, awarding contracts 
with schools to their own companies. “There are some rogues out there who use 
the greater freedoms that are given to headteachers and chief executives to 
line their own pockets. We have seen examples of that.”

Even more worrying to him, though, is the determination of new prime minister 
Theresa May to expand the number of grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
. Wilshaw believes this risks reversing all the progress of recent years, and 
creating social division as well.

He turns May’s own rhetoric about wanting to govern for everyone against her. 
“I came into teaching and I came into this job to raise standards for all 
children, not just for the few. By their very nature, grammar schools are for 
the few, otherwise why have them?”

Which great education system has selection at 11? I don’t know any
On grammar schools 
Grammars, he says, will “siphon off the best children, the most academic 
children” and end the vital “transfer of intellectual capital across the 
school”. He cites his work atMossbourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/jan/05/mossbourne-academy-wilby-profile>
. “In my last year we sent a dozen kids off to Oxbridge, 60% to Russell Group 
universities. That would not have been possible without top-end children who 
were so influential in the rest of the school.”

More grammars “will actually lower standards for the great majority of 
children. That is my view. And it is socially divisive as well.” He can’t 
understand May’s assertion that grammars can be introduced in a way that lifts 
up all schools, and is aghast at her claim that the plans will not mean a 
return to a “binary system”. “What does that mean? If you are taking away the 
most able kids from the comprehensive system, you’re creating by another name 
secondary moderns. You can call it what you like. You can call it a technical 
school, a creative school, a red-white-and-blue school, but people will know 
that the most academic children are not going there.” Those who do not make it 
to grammars will be regarded as second best at 11. “Which great education 
system has selection at 11? I don’t know any.”

May should, he says, not “obsess” about grammars  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
but about capacity issues and attracting the best teachers, who can deliver the 
further essential “systematic change” that will be crucial now that Brexit has 
thrown up so many vast challenges. He is worried that exit from the EU will 
exacerbate teacher recruitment problems, as those from other EU countries 
leave. But more critical, he says, will be the need to develop vocational 
education in the system so the country produces young people with skills to 
replace immigrant workers.

“If you’re going to make a success of Brexit, this should be the number one 
priority of government. Not grammar schools … Otherwise we won’t have the 
skills. And the prospects for growth in the economy and productivity in the 
economy will suffer.”

Every multi-academy trust should run a university technology college for 
youngsters aged 14 to 19, he says. This will need leadership from someone at 
the top of government who can “bang the heads of the CBI together, with 
headteachers, trade unions, to make it work”. He adds: “We need to say to 
youngsters, ‘There are other paths than university’.”

As he prepares to leave Ofsted, Wilshaw says his wife wants him to have a 
quieter life. But as he has done with successive education secretaries, and now 
the prime minister, he will resist. He wants to work with Baker on a new 
revolution – embedding vocational education into the school system. So, “no” to 
a quieter life? “I’m not that sort of personality. I’ve been in education 
nearly half a century and I want to carry on doing stuff.”
 