
Since becoming the US president-elect, Donald Trump has left some people 
worrying about their rights. He has vowed toroll back on abortion freedoms 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/14/us/politics/donald-trump-twitter-white-house.html?_r=0>
 and deportmillions of illegal immigrants with criminal records 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-deportation-immigration-criminals>
. He has also appointed Steve Bannon, who has been labelled a “white 
nationalist”, asWhite House chief strategist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
.

Many of the liberties being challenged were fought for and won in the 1960s. 
The women’s liberation movement, for example, battled forabortion to be made 
legal (it happened in the UK in 1967 and the US in 1973) 
<http://www.socialistworld.net/doc/1189>. In America, the civil rights 
movement, led by Martin Luther King, campaigned for racial equality and against 
discrimination.

So how do those who stood up for these freedoms feel about Trump? We spoke to 
activists in the US and the UK about the 1960s and whether they believe what 
they battled for is now at risk. We also asked their advice on dealing with 
political uncertainty and standing up for what you believe in.

The interview includes Benjamin Chavis, an assistant to Martin Luther King, 
who fought for the civil rights movement 
<http://www.notablebiographies.com/Ch-Co/Chavis-Muhammad-Benjamin.html>. At 24, 
he was sentenced to 34 years in prison for arson, alongside nine other black 
men. The conviction was later overturned.

Benjamin Chavis, 68, from Washington DC: ‘I am opposed to cynicism. There’s 
too much of that about the election result’

I believe that there are more good-willed people in the US than there are 
those of ill-will
Benjamin Chavis 
In the 1960s I worked with Martin Luther King and the Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Southern_Christian_Leadership_Conference>, and 
later I worked with the National Association for the Advancement of Colored 
People (NAACP). In the 1960s we struggled for voting rights, civil rights and 
housing rights and we were successful, but our success also brought a reaction 
– that’s how Republican candidateRichard Nixon got elected in 1968 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/richard-nixon-elected-president>, 
he ran on a law and order campaign.

So similarly, fast forward to today and President Barack Obama’s election in 
2008 was, in a sense, a fulfilment of Martin Luther King Jr’s dream, but after 
eight years it has brought a reaction. Every time you make progressive steps 
forward there is a reaction so I am not disillusioned by recent events. I 
understand the counterbalance of history, not just in the US but also in the 
UK. President-electDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has both now an opportunity 
and a responsibility to lead America forward, rather than backwards. I believe 
that there are more good-willed people in the US than there are those of 
ill-will, it’s the same in Britain and Europe. But the problem is that people 
of good-will have to exercise their participation in civic engagement. We had a 
low voter turnout in US this year and when that happens it opens the door for a 
reaction rather than a more progressive move forward. As I said, I am concerned 
but not disillusioned because I believe the forces of history will always move 
towards justice, equality and freedom. Freedom, as we say in the movement, is a 
constant struggle. If you want freedom you have to always stand up for it and 
push for it, you cannot just relax.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfdd493dfe1ce01149b11531f3cb9ffdb26b7cea%2F0_76_3766_2260%2F3766.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight'%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight%27%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfdd493dfe1ce01149b11531f3cb9ffdb26b7cea%2F0_76_3766_2260%2F3766.jpg>
 American civil rights leader Martin Luther King with his wife, Coretta Scott 
King, and colleagues during a civil rights march. Photograph: William 
Lovelace/Getty Images 
The 1960s were a period of social transformation but to make changes you also 
need to transform the consciousness of people and that’s what we have to work 
at now. I hate cynicism and there’s too much of that about the election result. 
We have to deal with what happened from a much more optimistic perspective. In 
the 1960s, when we sang, “We shall overcome”, we were not overcoming but we 
sang it because that was our hope and desire. We must continue to do that, to 
show we are overcoming injustice, and setbacks. There will always be setbacks 
and struggle. The question is whether we are willing to overcome.

Hildy Johnson, 65, from Virginia: ‘The next four years are a time to hunker 
down and organise’

I grew up in Arlington County, Virginia, about a mile from Washington DC. I 
went to state-funded schools, mainly populated by white students. There was a 
lot of racism at the time in Virginia and the south as a whole, but where I 
lived was more diverse and accepting, although it was felt that black people 
should stay in their communities.

My own views changed based on two things: the 1968 George Wallace candidacy 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Wallace_presidential_campaign,_1968> (he 
was a national spokesman for resistance to racial change) and the assassination 
of Martin Luther King that same year. The strength of Wallace’s support and the 
riots in Washington DC and other cities brought the grievances of black people 
to the forefront, at least for me. Still, my cause was the anti-[Vietnam] war 
movement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe256916630b54cd1edf5d36337b0ccdfc17f2ecd%2F0_89_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight'%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight%27%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe256916630b54cd1edf5d36337b0ccdfc17f2ecd%2F0_89_3000_1799%2F3000.jpg>
 Segregationist politician George Wallace addresses a 1976 rally in California. 
In 1968, he attracted 13.5% of the vote and won five southern states. 
Photograph: George Rose/Getty Images 
To my mind, over the years, all the movements (including women’s rights and 
civil rights) gradually effected changes in policies but didn’t effect a change 
in the mindset of many of the Americans who had supported those policies. In 
196813.5% of Americans voted for Wallace 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=vVDeCQAAQBAJ&pg=PA200&lpg=PA200&dq=13.5%25+of+Americans+voted+for+Wallace&source=bl&ots=aza2prmuqg&sig=MqGquAdfpq5LYQlhI6VRbUBxE3U&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjhyuPBrqrQAhUHkRQKHX40DlwQ6AEIOzAF#v=onepage&q=13.5%25%20of%20Americans%20voted%20for%20Wallace&f=false>
 and I assume that all of them were, to some degree, racist. I would not be at 
all surprised to find that 13.5% of Americans are still racist (and that they 
all voted for Trump). While women have gained rights, there is still a large 
group of men who are more comfortable with men in charge and issues such as 
access to abortions still create major sexist voting blocs (also for Trump).



I believe that most actual rights that I fought for in the 1960s are safe
Hildy Johnson 
I believe that most actual rights that I fought for in the 1960s are safe, but 
regulations will be sent back to the states who will use them to curtail 
abortions and push down black turnout. Immigrants who are here illegally will 
be deported by the millions until employers make a stink. A ban on Muslim 
immigrants wouldn’t pass even a Trump supreme court. Police presence in cities 
will climb and police shootings will continue but it’s not like police officers 
are currently being convicted for killing unarmed suspects. The next four years 
are a time to hunker down and organise. Protests will only serve to energise 
the “alt right” and give Trump someone to blame for his policy failures.

Manek Dubash, 62, from Lewes, East Sussex: ‘Back in the 1960s and 1970s there 
was less inequality and people were happier’

I was 16 in 1970 and, as a young socialist, I was involved in the youth wing 
of the Labour party. I was mainly involved in the trade union movement: I 
helped to get the policy of gay rights equality on to the trade union policy 
book in 1977. I also campaigned to improve women’s rights and fight for equal 
pay. There was a huge amount of optimism back then. We felt like we were moving 
the agenda forward and changing the world, but of course all that was trashed 
when Margaret Thatcher came to power. She dismantled workers’ rights and, since 
then, successive governments have taken it apart further.

If my younger self could see the world now, he would ask:, was all that effort 
worth it?
Manek Dubash 
Most of my life has been spent under regimes that are officially Tory or 
nominally Tory. But when we started getting political we hoped this wouldn’t be 
the case, we wanted progress. There has been progress in some areas, it’s not 
all doom and gloom: there’s less war and we’ve tackled major diseases. However, 
the way we treat one another in public life and the relationship between state 
and citizen has got markedly worse. Union rights have gone backwards and 
there’s been huge growth in inequality Back in the 1960s and 1970s there was 
less inequality and people were happier as a result. There was a feeling we 
were all going in the same direction and part of a big enterprise. If my 
younger self could see the world now, he would ask, was all that effort worth 
it? I would like to see the young fight now like we did; they are, after all, 
the ones affected by all the decisions made today. People need to get out there 
and protest, it’s not just about voting.

Sara Fitzgerald, 61, from Yorkshire: ‘Everything we fought for seems to be 
being dismantled’

In the late 1960s I was passionately interested in leftwing ideas and 
politics, even though I was very young. I went on the big anti-Vietnam war 
demos and I was a somewhat naive member of the Young Communist League. In the 
1970s I was into feminism and Rock Against Racism. I’ve always been firmly on 
the left, that hasn’t changed at all.

I’m utterly horrified, terrified and appalled by the world’s lurch to the 
right. The latent racism and xenophobia that’s emerged and been whipped into a 
frenzy by the rightwing media is disgusting, highly dangerous and 
destabilising. Any hopes and beliefs I had that we were making slow and painful 
progress towards a better working model of human community and progress are in 
tatters. I don’t fully understand why it’s happening and I feel powerless to 
change it. Working on that, fear is stultifying and must be overcome. If the 
left doesn’t start fighting back it could get unspeakably ugly.

Stephan Marsh, 67 from London: ‘I wish you younger people had made your voices 
heard more’

When there was the big anti-Vietnam war demo in 1968 I went to the rally in 
Trafalgar Square but I didn’t join the march on the US embassy. Later I heard 
that it ended in serious violence and people being arrested, and I was glad I 
hadn’t gone because I was then, and still am, a pacifist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb324b813698976c6bb29ee4a58b4c5c8e4666dce%2F106_88_3340_2004%2F3340.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight'%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20hate%20cynicism%3B%20you%20have%20to%20fight%27%3A%201960s%20activists%20on%20modern%20politics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fi-hate-cynicism-you-have-to-fight-1960s-activists-on-modern-politics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb324b813698976c6bb29ee4a58b4c5c8e4666dce%2F106_88_3340_2004%2F3340.jpg>
 Anti-Vietnam war demonstrators run past Downing Street, 27 October 1968. 
Photograph: David Newell Smith/taken from Newsroom 
The biggest issues we were fighting for were women’s rights, an anti-war 
movement and civil rights. Black Americans had been fighting for their civil 
rights ever since the days of Abraham Lincoln and the civil war and still those 
rights were being denied them. In Britain immigration from the Caribbean and 
later from India and Pakistan and Africa had been met with fear and prejudice 
among the indigenous white working class whose homes and jobs they were seen as 
taking. Britain now needed to ensure the civil rights of black British people. 
This did become something of a generational conflict, as the older generation 
who had struggled through the 1930s depression and then had to fight for their 
country in the second world war had a sense of entitlement to the homes, jobs 
and security they had fought for and resented having to share them, or 
sometimes even lose them to foreign newcomers.


I don’t think the rights my generation fought for are being dismantled, at 
least not so far. They have actually become orthodoxies. However, I think 
Brexiteers and Trumpery are the manifestations of a rebellion by the new 
alienated and dispossessed. I wish you younger people had made your voices 
heard more. After all, you are the ones who have inherited the mess my 
generation have evidently made, so who are we to start advising you?

Sue McGovern, 62, from Massachusetts: ‘I believe humanity will prevail’

When I was in high school in a comfortable Boston suburb, I was a member of 
the Young Socialist Alliance, the youth group to the Socialist Workers party. 
Mostly my work focused on women’s rights and ending the Vietnam war. I did 
“paste ups” at night (affixing leaflets to telephone poles, the precursor to 
today’s internet). One of my first paid jobs was at the Boston Women’s Abortion 
Action Alliance. I remember the power of mass movements – the thunder of 
protest voices marching down New York City avenues, the feel of the nubby grass 
underfoot as you ran from one part of the demonstration in DC to another. I 
remember folk music being baked into our lives. Saying, “Right on!” a lot. Blue 
jeans were political, so was hair.
 Sue McGovern and her daughter. 
Because we are in an urgent situation with the planet, I am very worried about 
saving our environment – that needs to come first. Especially because I have a 
daughter, I worry about women’s rights to control our own bodies. Because of 
the “alt right’s” views towards people who are not white, I also worry about 
fascism and history repeating itself. I worry about the economy. The 
overwhelming majority of us no longer know the basics: how to use the soil to 
create food, how to care for others when they are sick. And I worry that the 
old order’s need to survive will lead us into war. But I have a powerful belief 
that when you have lost everything that is when the beginning comes. And we 
will have a new beginning, we will learn from one another. Humanity will 
prevail.
 