
A colony of dozens of rabbits behind an abandoned tire store in Brooklyn 
started with one cottontail – Snowflake.

In 2000, Dorota Trec, a recent Polish immigrant, was living alone in Brooklyn 
and looking for an animal companion, so she adopted the rabbit.

Trec, 36, is now facing up to two years in jail and hefty fines. She was 
convicted of animal cruelty after the city removed 176 rabbits she was keeping 
a vacant lot in Brooklyn, and is being sentenced on Friday 13 January at the 
Brooklyn criminal court after a two-year trial.

But Trec maintains her innocence. She claims she is the victim of a 
“witch-hunt” led by extremist animal activists, who accused her of hoarding the 
rabbits in such squalid conditions that the animals developed numerous 
ailments, including syphilis.

Peta files complaint against leading Hollywood animal talent company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/11/peta-files-complaint-against-hollywood-animal-talent-company-birds-and-animals-limited>
“This whole trial has been ridiculous, starting with the accusations that were 
based on nothing,” Trec says. “This is a group of individuals who don’t want 
people to have animals. They are just using the situation to assume I 
mistreated them.”

Trec, a piano and flute teacher, kept Snowflake as a pet in her Bay Ridge 
apartment. As Trec spent more time with Snowflake, she not only became very 
attached to him, but also fascinated with rabbits. She says she believes 
everyone has a destiny – and that hers was to dedicate her life to them. 

“By having this one rabbit for 10 years, I noticed how special rabbits are,” 
she says. “They are really outstanding and cannot even compare to dogs and 
cats. The day he died [in 2010], I realized that not only did I miss him as a 
friend, but something clicked in me: I’m a rabbit girl and that I will have 
rabbits forever.”

Trec, who spent her childhood regularly visiting the farm her mother grew up 
on, read up on rabbits and researched their zoology in order to understand how 
best to keep them as pets. “I always had a vision of keeping rabbits outside,” 
she says.

Rabbits by nature are social creatures that live in groups in the wild and 
have a lifespan of up to 10 years. General advice on keeping them as pets 
encouragesowners to keep the animals indoors 
<https://www.petfinder.com/pet-care/rabbit-care/care-domestic-rabbits/> for 
safety reasons. Unlike for cats and dogs, however, there is not a wealth of 
literature on best practices for looking after rabbits, with manywebsites 
<http://www.rabbitcare.org/9-reasons-indoors-vs-outdoors.pdf> citing 
<https://www.spca.org/page.aspx?pid=430> advice 
<http://www.humanesociety.org/animals/rabbits/tips/rabbit_tips.html> that was 
written between five and 15 years ago.

In 2012, Trec started building an outdoor rabbit colony in a lot behind the 
Mexico Tire Shop in the Gowanus neighborhood. Trec says the owner of the 
building and its adjacent backyard, Sixto Ulloa, gave her permission to do so. 
She referrs to Ulloa as the rabbits’ “sponsor”, saying he had helped her turn 
the space into a rabbit run. The rabbits were free to roam around the enclosure 
tucked underneath a subway track overpass. Trec also built wooden hutches for 
them and says they burrowed their own tunnels and caves.

She developed a call for the rabbits – singing the Polish word for rabbit, 
zajaczka – to let them know she was there with fresh water and carrots and 
apples.

Caring for the rabbits started taking up most of Trec’s spare time, as she 
would spend up to four hours a day with them. “Most of the work is the 
supervising,” she says. “I had to stay as long as it took to make sure I saw 
every rabbit that’s supposed to be there. If he didn’t come out of the tunnel, 
I had to stick around until he did.”

‘That became my priority, to save these rabbits one by one’

Soon enough, Trec found herself rescuing a growing number of rabbits from 
slaughterhouses, adding them to her colony.

“I started to save rabbits from the poultry market, where they sell and kill 
them for food,” Trec says. “That became my priority, to save these rabbits one 
by one.” She visited meat markets around the city, bought the animals, and 
would encourage people at the markets not to buy them for food.

Trec didn’t spay or neuter any of them, because she opposes the practice on 
the grounds that it is not natural. Despite her installing a barrier to keep 
the female and male rabbits separate, they quickly bred – and soon there were 
dozens of rabbits hopping about the yard.

The garden of semi-wild rabbits, which Trec says she always intended to be a 
community project, started to draw attention. At the end of 2014, the local 
Brooklyn news website DNAInfowrote a story 
<https://www.dnainfo.com/new-york/20141230/gowanus/meet-rabbit-colony-that-lives-next-gowanus-tire-shop>
 about Trec and her rabbits. The piece caught the eye of Natalie Reeves, an 
attorney and founder of the Big Apple Bunnies rabbit advocacy Facebook group.

Reeves visited the lot in 2015, found the living conditions to be substandard 
and called on the district attorney, local police and the American Society for 
the Prevention of Cruelty toAnimals <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> 
(ASPCA) to investigate Trec.

In a letter, seen by the Guardian, that Reeves sent the judge ahead of Trec’s 
sentencing, she described the lot as having “deplorable living conditions” and 
urged the judge to impose the maximum two year sentence on Trec, ban her from 
owning animals, and register her as an animal abuser with the city’s health 
department.

Animal hoarding is understood as a pathological disorder in which someone has 
more than the typical number of companion animals, and where there is a failure 
to provide the minimum standards of nutrition, sanitation, shelter and medical 
care to them.

Tufts University’s Hoarding of Animals Research Consortium (HARC) describes 
the act as a “poorly understood phenomenon 
<https://vet.tufts.edu/hoarding/about/> which transcends simply owning or 
caring for more than the typical number of pets”. The condition iscomplex and 
remains unclear 
<https://www.vice.com/en_us/article/the-psychology-of-animal-hoarding>; the 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) only started 
recognising it as anofficial mental health disorder in 2015 
<http://www.psychiatrictimes.com/addiction/hoarding-animals-update>. It is 
unknown whether Trec has been or would be diagnosed with it.

Caught in a rabbit hole

In January 2015, as New York was in the grips of a bitter winter storm, police 
officers and ASPCA workers fearing for the rabbits’ welfare raided the lot and
seized 176 rabbits 
<http://nypost.com/2015/03/05/it-was-a-bunny-house-of-horrors-cops-bust-hoarder-with-over-170-rabbits/>
.

The rabbits were examined by an ASPCA vet and found to have injuries that 
included bite wounds from fighting each other, syphilis and lameness. Nine of 
the rabbits later died. Trec was charged with the mistreatment of 125 of the 
animals and found guilty of 100 of those charges by a six-person jury.

“These rabbits were undeniably living in squalid conditions and suffering from 
multiple injuries and illnesses,” Stacy Wolf, senior vice-president at the 
ASPCA’s Anti-Cruelty Group, says. “A joint effort between law enforcement and 
animal welfare organizations from across three states was required to rescue 
and rehabilitate the rabbits, and it’s heartening to see them thriving in their 
new loving homes where they are safe and their needs are being met.”

Conservationists get their talons out for Japan's owl cafes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/03/conservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes>
Trec denied that she abused the animals, claiming that the injuries suffered 
by the rabbits were caused by the authorities during the raid. In the trial, 
Glorianna Cabassa, a neighbour, testified that the police officerswho rounded 
up the rabbits 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/nyregion/brooklyn-woman-is-found-guilty-of-cruelty-to-100-rabbits.html?_r=0>
did so in a “violent” manner. During the trial, a judgeruled 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/brooklyn/seized-rabbits-euthanized-aspca-judge-rules-article-1.2302658>
 that the ASPCA could not euthanize any of the rabbits, something the 
organization is legally permitted to do.
Trec, who shows no regrets, says there “was a lot of talk about what the 
rabbits have, but no one talked about what they didn’t have. All sorts of 
things could have happened to them, but they didn’t because they were taken 
care of.”

She says her aim for the rabbits was to provide them with a way to live that 
was a close to their natural habitat as possible, while still under her close 
watch. The occasional scrape was bound to happen, she says, but the animals 
were always well fed and looked after.
She’s nervous about the sentencing hearing but says that whatever happens, she 
won’t give up her dream of having rabbits in her life.

“The rabbit represents the magical part of our lives. The playful part, the 
mystery,” she says. “They are full of humor and can do the unexpected. They are 
worth it for me to work for the rest of my life for them.”
 