
Standing in a cold cell in a former East German secret police prison, Gilbert 
Furian explains how he approached his imprisonment here in 1985. “I tried to 
numb myself,” he says. “ thought that if I reacted the way my heart wanted to, 
I would go crazy. So I put myself in a kind of standby mode.”

Furian was working for a company that produced heating facilities when he was 
arrested at the age of 40. He recalls the fear he felt as four Stasi agents 
dressed in plain clothing turned up at his office and took him away. Though 
they didn’t specify the charge at the time, Furian knew it must be about the 
interviews he had conducted with punks in East Berlin a few months earlier.

Furian had interviewed them as an act of protest; he gave the transcripts to 
his mother to smuggle across to West Berlin, hoping to spread the word about 
dissenters. This was seen as treason, because the punks were so critical of the 
government. He would later find out that for 20 years, three spies had 
monitored him around the clock.

When Furian got to prison, he was led to a 3m x 3m cell. The jail was 
notorious for psychological torture; guards would interrogate prisoners for 
hours at night and keep them awake during the day, inspecting cells every three 
minutes. “The guards were like machines, like robots,” Furian says. “I remember 
I asked one of my interrogators, during an actual interrogation, why the guards 
are like that. He replied matter-of-factly and with a pinch of pride: ‘Well, 
they were raised to harbour a healthy portion of hatred, of course.’”

In turn, Furian distanced himself from his emotions. “I tried not to take any 
of it personally. Instead, I thought of it as an abstract process, like in a 
Kafka novel. I said to myself, ‘You are a character, you do what you’re told.’”

But the most remarkable part of Furian’s story is not the macabre details; 
it’s how soon he recovered and how little resentment he bears now, aged 71. He 
suffered no post-traumatic stress. In fact, after his release in 1988, he 
worked at a radio station, spending his days holed up in a tiny, windowless 
booth. He even interviewed his former tormentors. “As I spoke to them, it felt 
as if a very heavy rucksack was falling off my shoulders,” he says. “Now there 
is no bitterness.”

Furian displays a much-revered character trait now receiving increased 
academic attention: resilience, or the ability to withstand or recover from 
intense trauma and stress. In 2015, Europe’s firstresilience research centre 
opened in Mainz, Germany <https://www.german-resilience-center.uni-mainz.de>. 
The centre researches the genetic and neurological factors that allow someone 
to bounce back from agonising experiences that leave others depressed or 
suicidal. Researchers will follow 5,000 students as they make the transition 
into the professional world. As individuals inevitably experience difficulties, 
one of the goals is to isolate which genes make them more robust in the face of 
adversity.

The interest in resilience is not purely academic, however. Professor David 
Nutt, president of the European Brain Council 
<http://www.braincouncil.eu/activities/news/ebcs-president-prof-david-nutt-highlights-the-cost-of-poor-brain-health/>
, says, “Traumatic brain injuries, mental illness and cognitive disorders are 
likely to afflict more than a third of EU citizens, 179m people. They cost 
Europe €798bn [£668bn] a year, more than any other medical area.” Understanding 
and promoting resilience is therefore both socially and economically wise. But 
can we do things to increase our resilience?

This elusive quality has been the subject of research for more than 30 years, 
in which time three broad categories of protective factors have been linked to 
resilience: internal psychological fortitude, which covers things such as 
self-esteem and a sense of self-worth; societal forces, such as access to 
healthcare, education and recreation; and, crucially, the presence of a strong 
support network. “My friends and family held me in a big net of solidarity,” 
Furian says. After his release from prison, he joined a choir, which, he says, 
provided him with a sense of fellowship.

A seminal study by Emmy Werner <http://psycnet.apa.org/journals/ort/59/1/72/> 
surveyed all the children born in 1955 on the island of Kauai in Hawaii for 
more than 32 years. Life there was beset by social problems such as alcoholism, 
abuse and poverty. Unsurprisingly, two-thirds of the children went on to become 
violent and addicted to alcohol, but every third child did not, despite facing 
identical social circumstances. The difference: each child who “made it” had an 
emotional connection to at least one person. Whether it was a sister, uncle, 
teacher or pastor, all had someone to help them navigate their difficulties. 
Emotional support is central to establishing self-esteem and, in turn, 
overcoming crises.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83ac2cf3a0d2fe88cb00079e8e965e7f98b77e10%2F0_992_3779_2268%2F3779.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode'%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode%27%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F83ac2cf3a0d2fe88cb00079e8e965e7f98b77e10%2F0_992_3779_2268%2F3779.jpg>
 Andreas Lang: ‘I grew up in a society in which my politics determined my place 
in it.’ Photograph: Dominik Gigler for the Guardian 
For Andreas Lang, however, it was a family relationship that formed the basis 
of his struggle. Lang, now 58, grew up in communist Hungary, the son of a 
priest. Because of his father’s religious affiliation, he was denied access to 
education and could not fulfil his ambition to become a teacher. “I grew up in 
a society in which my politics and not my willingness to work determined my 
place in it,” Lang says. He was eventually permitted to study education for 
children with disabilities, people the government deemed to be “subhuman”. Once 
he married and had children, he became desperate to leave, concerned that they, 
too, would be barred from following their chosen life paths.

Lang was not alone in his feelings of dismay – in the 1980s, Hungary had the 
highest suicide rate in the world 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3698008/> – but he realised he had 
a choice: he could become depressed, like many of his friends, or he could 
change his circumstances. So in 1986 he hatched an elaborate plan to flee. This 
involved getting passports under false pretences and smuggling his three small 
children across the border to Austria, at great risk to all their lives. They 
sold property and bought an expensive car in order to pass as party members at 
the border.

Fortunately it worked: no one checked their story and, once in Germany, they 
were able to apply for citizenship because they had German relatives. They 
changed their names to the more German-sounding “Lang” and settled in Augsburg, 
where Lang is now a teacher.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7be256255542d6fb2a24bc64bbd3f5637a7361%2F904_577_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode'%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode%27%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcb7be256255542d6fb2a24bc64bbd3f5637a7361%2F904_577_2875_1725%2F2875.jpg>
 Andreas Lang and family on the day they escaped Hungary in 1986. Photograph: 
Courtesy of Andreas Lang. 
Part of the reason Lang overcame his situation, when so many others saw death 
as the only option, was because of the way he chose to view his circumstances. 
He turned stress and repression into motivation. No matter how hard the trials 
we face, the final freedom we possess – one that no one can take away from us – 
is the power to choose how to view our plight. According tomedical sociologist 
Aaron Antonovsky <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Aaron_Antonovsky>, when it 
comes to the internal psychological factors that bolster resilience, ascribing 
meaning to our calamity is one of the most important factors to overcoming it. 
His research, interviewing women who had undergone severe stress, including 
some who survived the Holocaust, shows that we need to be able to create a 
narrative out of capricious events in order to turn our present defeat into a 
turning point on our path to victory. He calls this his“sense of coherence” 
<http://psychcentral.com/lib/your-sense-of-coherence/> model.

It is this kind of “meaning-making” that links some of the most influential 
people of our time.Nelson Mandela 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela> could have allowed himself to 
be crushed by 27 years of prison; instead, he emerged saying, “No axe is sharp 
enough to cut the soul of a sinner who keeps on trying, one armed with the hope 
that he will rise even in the end.” It is the mechanism that enables people 
such as the Nobel laureateMalala Yousafzai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/malala-yousafzai>, shot in the head by the 
Taliban, to turn away from the quicksand of self-pity. Instead, she sees her 
difficulties as a platform for the advancement of her cause.

Lisa Lyssenko <https://www.researchgate.net/profile/Lisa_Lyssenko>, a 
psychologist on a team that has been researching resilience for more than six 
years, cautions that some trials are harder to make sense of than others. “The 
research has shown it is easier for us to derive meaning from catastrophes not 
caused by humans,” she says. “Take someone who is raped by a group of soldiers: 
if they try to find meaning in that, they will very quickly be confronted with 
the question of good and evil. Coming to grips with such an issue is much more 
difficult than choosing to see a tsunami, say, as a reminder of the power of 
nature, or whatever other meaning mechanism people choose to apply.”

No matter how hard the trials we face, the final freedom we possess is the 
power to choose how to view our plight

Lyssenko has found that no single factor can be seen as wholly good or bad 
when it comes to building resilience. “For instance, social support is 
generally considered to be good. But if you have grown up in an environment in 
which all decisions are made for you and you lose your agency that can damage 
your self-esteem, making the net effect negative.” Similarly, suppressing 
emotions has long been thought to be detrimental to recovery. But research has 
found that, directly after a trauma, it can be helpful to suppress the memories 
for a time in order simply to get on with daily life: getting dressed, going to 
work, feeding your children.

It has long been established that self-esteem and confidence are vital for 
resilience, but Lyssenko was surprised to find that self-acceptance was even 
more crucial. This was the factor that Adam Emil (not his real name) had to 
fight for after being in a cult for six years. At 18, he was a student in 
Australia when he met an older man called Christopher, who claimed to receive 
messages from the spiritual realm. Emil was fascinated. The messages were 
instructions that Emil and his family were meant to carry out. At the start, 
they were benign, even helpful tasks: a cousin might be told to change his 
diet, another relative might be instructed to cook some food and distribute it 
to the poor.

As the messages became more demanding, so did Emil’s relationship with 
Christopher. By then, he had begun to love him. “No one ever says, ‘OK, 
tomorrow we are starting with the brainwashing – prepare yourself,’” Emil says 
now. It all happens in incremental steps.

At first, his parents were pleased their son had found a spiritual friend, but 
when the spirits demanded that Emil’s sister travel to Afghanistan, they 
realised it had gone too far. They asked him to break off the relationship, but 
it was too late: Emil had begun to call Christopher “master” and their 
relationship had become sexual. As time progressed, a few others joined them 
and they swept through Vienna, Cologne, Düsseldorf and Berlin, stealing 
supplies for a spiritual community that Christopher promised to build in 
Romania. Emil was totally dedicated to this vision, which allowed him to 
rationalise the crimes they had to commit to realise the dream. “If 95% of what 
I am doing is right, why worry about the other 5%?” Christopher would say.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a47b68a1e292e6de0dd3f2d251dc91485368db6%2F428_1046_4060_6268%2F4060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode'%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20put%20myself%20in%20standby%20mode%27%3A%20what%20makes%20a%20survivor%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fput-myself-standby-mode-what-makes-a-survivor%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a47b68a1e292e6de0dd3f2d251dc91485368db6%2F428_1046_4060_6268%2F4060.jpg>
 Adam Emil: ‘Without self-acceptance, there can be no joy or peace in your 
life’. Photograph: Michael Danner for the Guardian 
Over time, Emil became disenchanted. He got a job and, when Christopher 
demanded he quit, he refused. He left the group and moved in with an 
acquaintance, gradually developing an independent life, but his sense of self 
was shattered. He had lost contact with his parents – they assumed he was dead 
after not hearing from him for seven years. Although Emil had broken away from 
his tormentor, in another sense he had lost his primary orientation in life.

The first part of his demolished identity that he needed to restore was his 
sense of self-acceptance. “It was easier to forgive Christopher than it was to 
forgive myself,” Emil says. The more he attempted to rebuild his sense of self, 
the more his feelings of self-hatred would destroy all the gains made. “Without 
self-acceptance, there can be no joy or peace in your life,” Emil explains. He 
has since become a Christian, and his faith has helped. Today, he is married 
and runs a successful financial services business in Berlin.

Harrowing experiences such as Emil’s have the power to crush us; but, as 
research is starting to show, they can also leave us stronger, through a 
process called post-traumatic growth.Malcolm Gladwell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/malcolm-gladwell> looks at this phenomenon 
in his bookDavid And Goliath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/oct/02/david-goliath-malcolm-gladwell-review>
, in which he investigates the effects of the London Blitz. In the late 1930s, 
when it became clear that bombs would soon be whistling down on the capital, 
the government was worried about panic breaking out. Various evacuation schemes 
were undertaken, yet what happened to those who stayed and endured the bombing 
shocked everyone: not only was there no panic, but some seemed almost 
indifferent to the experience.

Europe is failing to help a generation of traumatised children | Joan Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/europe-traumatised-children-child-refugees-mental-health>
Gladwell quotes Canadian psychiatrist JT MacCurdy to explain this. When a bomb 
falls, MacCurdy argues, the population is divided into three groups. The first 
is comprised of the people killed. Then there is the “near misses” group: they 
see or feel the blast and suffer fear, flashbacks and other symptoms typically 
associated with post-traumatic stress. Next come the “remote misses”: they hear 
the blasts and sirens, but are unscathed. The bomb tends to have an opposite 
effect on them; they are often so thrilled at the prospect of having survived 
that they begin to feel invincible. “We are all of us not merely liable to 
fear, we are also prone to be being afraid of being afraid, and the conquering 
of fear produces exhilaration,” MacCurdy writes.

Beyond courage, we all instinctively recognise that tribulations can produce a 
rare and rarefied commodity: character. It is not the people with enormous 
wealth whom we admire, rather those who have gone through unspeakable 
circumstances and have come out the other end with wisdom unattainable by any 
other means. If resilience is one of the most praised attributes in our world 
today, we are confronted with an uncomfortable truth: if we want to develop it, 
we cannot wish away the trials that test and produce it.

Gilbert Furian, the former East German prisoner, doesn’t think of his 
experiences in terms of psychological cause and effect. He believes that simple 
hope got him through: “I had a naive belief that things would work out,” he 
explains. “Even in the worst situations, I believed, at the end of the day, 
everything would be OK.”
 