
An award-winning Paralympic athlete, Anne Wafula Strike, has spoken out about 
beingforced to wet herself on a train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
 without an accessible toilet. Wafula Strike, a disabilities campaigner, was on 
a three-hour journey when the accessible toilet was out of order.

What are your experiences of disabled facilities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/people-with-disabilities-experiences-public-transport>
Despite feeling humiliated, Wafula Strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/disability-accessible-toilets-paralympian-train>
 said she felt she had to speak out to expose some of the injustice faced by 
people living with disabilities. “People with disabilities don’t want 
perfection, we just want the basics and to have our independence. But lack of 
access and inclusive facilities make us feel as if we are an afterthought,” she 
said.

We asked people with disabilities about their experiences of access to 
toilets, transport and other public facilities. Here is a selection of our 
readers’ responses.


Chloe Timms, 28, Kent: I’ve had to beg people to find someone to help me get 
off the train
 Chloe Timms 
I am a wheelchair user and was born with spinal muscular atrophy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/spinal-muscular-atrophy/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. 
I am a recent masters graduate in creative writing, currently writing a novel. 
Public toilets are out of the question for me because they don’t suit my needs 
– if I want to go out for the day then I have no choice but to hang on. 
Unfortunately it’s a way of life now. A large toilet with a changing table and 
ceiling hoists are the answer to many disabled people’s prayers, however they 
are a rare sight. Most toilets just have grab rails and adjustable sinks, 
though an initiative calledChanging Places <http://www.changing-places.org/> is 
campaigning to change this.

A lot of hotels also might meet the box tick of “accessible” but rarely have 
completely suitable facilities, meaning trips are a military operation of 
organisation. I look for hotels with ceiling hoists –of which there are [fewer] 
than 20 in the entire country 
<http://www.chuc.org.uk/index.php/accommodation-with-hoists/hotels-in-uk>.

Assistance at train stations is also hit and miss. Some stations are good at 
having staff there ready and waiting with a ramp but other stations are less 
good. It’s stressful because I mostly travel alone. There are times I’ve had to 
beg members of the public to find someone to help me get off the train, as even 
though I’ve booked well in advance there is no one waiting with a ramp to get 
me off the train. I worry, as the train empties and I’m left alone, that I will 
be forgotten about. Station accessibility is still a huge issue for old 
Victorian stations. My local station is inaccessible on one side meaning I have 
to travel a further five miles by car to use the train.

Shona Louise, 19, Hull: the space was occupied by people and luggage
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21199d32c4f9a0636cb77817ede33d03af11eb2%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20worry%20I'll%20be%20forgotten%20on%20the%20train'%3A%20our%20readers'%20experiences%20of%20accessible%20facilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20worry%20I%27ll%20be%20forgotten%20on%20the%20train%27%3A%20our%20readers%27%20experiences%20of%20accessible%20facilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd21199d32c4f9a0636cb77817ede33d03af11eb2%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
 Shona Louise 
I was recently on a train to London. As a powerchair user I have worries every 
time I use public transport because of the possibilities of what could go 
wrong. When boarding the train we found that the space was occupied by people 
and luggage, luckily they moved without too many dirty looks. Once I got into 
the space the train filled up around me. Some time into the journey I needed to 
use the toilet but a quick look round the corner showed me that it wasn’t going 
to be possible. The train was so packed. Luckily my boyfriend had his crutches 
with him and I can walk a little so I had to make my way there like that. 
Without my ability to walk a little and his crutches though I dread to think 
what would have happened.

Rachel George, Cornwall: even attending hospital and doctors’ appointments is 
difficult
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b8ddcff9034df579a6cd42a69529ddfefcb980%2F0_17_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='I%20worry%20I'll%20be%20forgotten%20on%20the%20train'%3A%20our%20readers'%20experiences%20of%20accessible%20facilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27I%20worry%20I%27ll%20be%20forgotten%20on%20the%20train%27%3A%20our%20readers%27%20experiences%20of%20accessible%20facilities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fas-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04b8ddcff9034df579a6cd42a69529ddfefcb980%2F0_17_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Rachel George and her son 
I am the mother of a child with disabilities and I am actively campaigning – 
and writing about my efforts <http://www.ordinaryhopes.com> – for better toilet 
provision. Facilities for disabled people are often well below what is needed. 
Legislation is old and people hide behind meeting the minimum required 
standards. My son is able to use the toilet but needs a hoist to lift him from 
his wheelchair and a changing table to lay him down on to sort clothes and 
switch to his toilet sling before hoisting him to the toilet. Very few places 
have these facilities and I’ve been working to change that.

We no longer use public transport, last time we needed to use a bus we 
couldn’t get on because there was a pushchair in the wheelchair space. The 
second bus came but also had pushchairs in the wheelchair space. Luckily we 
were able to get on the third bus but this should not happen. My son cannot 
stand up at all, pushchairs can be folded. A lack of accessible toilets also 
makes public transport really hard. We need to cut down travel time as much as 
possible in order to make the most of our time away from home.

At our local zoo we cannot get the powered wheelchair inside the disabled 
toilet and close the door. Even if he could stand, it would be no use to him. 
We can’t easily go out for meals, or visit the theatre or tourist attractions. 
Even attending hospital and doctors’ appointments is difficult. These 
facilities are vital to hundreds of thousands of people in this country.

Yragael Drouet, 41, London: my friends had to lift me up stairs into a 
restaurant


I am a 41-year-old man living in Hackney, London, who uses a manual wheelchair 
full-time due to spina bifida. As I do not drive I use public transport 
frequently.

Most of the time things work fine. People vacate the wheelchair space when 
asked on buses and people move on other forms of transport. However, sometimes 
it goes disastrously wrong. For instance, on New Year’s Eve my partner and I 
were on our way back home via Woodford, north-east London. Woodford [tube] is 
accessible on both platforms but you have to access the southbound platform via 
an underpass. Now, this is normally fine but on this occasion the gates to that 
platform where closed with only an intercom. I pressed [the button for the] 
intercom but the disembodied voice didn’t understand my situation. I lost the 
connection. So I sent my partner to find someone who eventually came to open 
the gate. There was little or no consideration of whatTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London would do if a disabled 
passenger wanted to use the southbound train on their own. Without a 
non-disabled person there would have been great difficulty.

Restaurants can also be hard to access. We went out for dinner last night and 
the place we ate at had two big steps. My friends had to lift me up them but 
without their help it would have been impossible to get in. The legislation 
isn’t strong enough – just as it isn’t on public transport – to protect people 
with disabilities.

Tricia Williams, 66, South Yorkshire: I’ve ended up stuck in aisles or 
knocking down displays when Christmas shopping


I have fibromyalgia, asthma and osteoarthritis – this means it’s variable how 
far I can walk. I fall over easily and use a mobility scooter.

Going shopping is always an interesting experience, particularly coming up to 
Christmas. At this time of year a large number of shops fill their aisles with 
extra displays which makes it hard to move around. I have ended up stuck in 
aisles before or knocking down displays. I never do this deliberately but I 
rarely regret it given how hard they are to navigate.

Not being able to find a dropped curb also makes life harder. In Lincoln 
recently I detoured a quarter of a mile up the road before I could cross 
because of this. I couldn’t find a single place to get over the road. It was 
pouring with rain at the time too and I ended up 20 minutes late for 
appointment. Going anywhere requires a lot of planning. I usually look up 
routes first on [Google] Street View.

 