
In 2013, police came across a man in the US state of Maine stealing food from 
a local summer camp at night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/apr/12/inside-maine-hermits-lair>. It 
appeared to be a simple case of theft at first. But what was going on was far 
more unusual. According to reports, Christopher Knight, then 47, had walked 
into the woods at the age of 19 and never came out. He built himself a 
makeshift shelter and survived by taking food from nearby homes and camps, just 
as he was doing on the night he was caught. Knight had hardly spoken to anyone 
during his entire time in solitude.

It’s not clear why Knight dropped out of society, but it happened a year after 
he graduated from Lawrence high school in Fairfield about 1986. The only big 
interview he did was with Michael Finkel, an American journalist.The article 
appeared as a series of conversations for GQ magazine 
<http://www.gq.com/story/the-last-true-hermit>. Knight, who has been given a 
possible diagnosis of Asperger syndrome, a form of autism, said he couldn’t 
explain why he left society. He told Finkel: “I found a place where I was 
content.”

The tradition of the hermit has endured in some cultures for millennia. Those 
who do so for religious reasons tend to live in contemplative silence. The 
first known Christian hermit was Paul of Thebes and his disciple, Anthony the 
Great, followed Jesus’s lead by going into the wilderness in about AD270. Many 
have since emulated him. There are also Buddhist and Hindu hermits. It’s 
thought there are still 200 religious hermits in Britain today.

Then there are those, perhaps more common in modern times, who are cut off 
because of mental or physical ill-health. In Japan, there is a a phenomenon
called hikikomori 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/17/growing-band-young-people-reclusive-life>
 where young men and women withdraw from society.

We asked our readers for their experiences of living as a recluse. We 
approached five people to find out more. Here are their stories:


‘I worked as a science teacher before committing myself to a life of celibacy 
and contemplative silence’

Rachel Denton has lived as a religious hermit for the last decade.

It was in 2006, after five years of preparation, that I formally took my vows 
at a special mass to become a diocesan hermit. You have to get permission from 
the church before you can do this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02f41a6004109ec42eaf0e42b2277153c493583a%2F0_0_768_768%2F768.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can't%20be%20lonely'%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can%27t%20be%20lonely%27%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02f41a6004109ec42eaf0e42b2277153c493583a%2F0_0_768_768%2F768.jpg>
 ‘Solitude has always been important to me.’ 
It took some time to get to this point. When I first asked the bishop he said 
that the Catholic church “did not do hermits”. It was only after I showed him a 
reference in canon law that he changed his mind. It was a great feeling to 
stand in front of the bishop, my family and all my friends and say: “I entrust 
myself to the life of the hermitage.”

I now live deep in the Lincolnshire countryside and try to live in a simple 
manner. I don’t have a TV and I allow myself only an hour of radio each day. I 
have a phone and internet, but mainly use this for work. I run a calligraphy 
business, do a bit of tutoring and occasionally write pieces for religious 
publications.  I have an income of about £8,000 a year. It’s enough as I don’t 
have much expenses. I try to be self-sufficient, growing my own vegetables and 
fruit and enjoying the companionship and eggs from two bluebell chickens.

Prayer is an important part of the day. I get up at 5.30am and pray for an 
hour, then again at 8.30am pondering the eucharistic liturgy of the day. Work 
begins at 9am and I usually have an hour for lunch. At dinner, I listen to the 
radio for an hour, followed by more prayer and a quiet evening before bed. If I 
do anything else it will be sewing, reading or going for a wander around my 
garden. And I love DIY. On a feast day I might enjoy watching a DVD.

Solitude has always been important to me and I wanted to be a nun from a young 
age. I was part of the Carmelite order, living in a convent as a young women 
but I found the community life too difficult. I felt I couldn’t spend enough 
time on my own. I left to become a science teacher, but never felt content 
until I came here. I’d always had this romantic idea of living in a remote 
cottage. The ex-council house I eventually found certainly did not live up to 
those romantic ideals, but over the years I have transformed it into a very 
suitable hermitage.


Of course, there are days when it’s hard. I miss my friends and family 
sometimes, but I chose this. My parents visit me once a year and I try to stay 
in touch with regular phone calls. I meet friends annually and they accept my 
way of life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886c0c25f8d3e6d876d04bc3ff9acb87958ffe85%2F0_106_721_433%2F721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can't%20be%20lonely'%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can%27t%20be%20lonely%27%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F886c0c25f8d3e6d876d04bc3ff9acb87958ffe85%2F0_106_721_433%2F721.jpg>
 Rachel Denton runs a calligraphy business. 
I spend alternate Christmases with my family. This year will be a 
hermit-Christmas. It begins around now – the beginning of advent. My wreath is 
set up in my prayer room and I will light the candles on it each day as we get 
closer to Christmas. The week before Christmas is very special as I begin to 
set up my crib. Christmas Day is very relaxed – all the usual goodies for 
dinner, and a walk around the local countryside.


After 15 years I sometimes think I should get more lonely, but I enjoy my own 
company. Of course I love to see family and close friends, but while occasional 
visitors are very welcome and enjoyable, I usually breathe a sigh of relief 
when they go away again. I feel very fortunate to be here, to have been given 
this opportunity. It still feels like an adventure.

‘I have social anxiety. Before I go out I feel a sense of existential dread’

Our anonymous writer has not chosen to live in a reclusive manner, but 
experiences extreme social anxiety.

I am not reclusive for religious reasons or for any other philosophical cause, 
and unlike others I haven’t chosen to live this way. At 27 I am bound by social 
anxiety, so crippling that it has left me afraid to leave the house. I’ve been 
like this for three years, going out maybe only a dozen times.

I’ve had anxiety my whole life – sporadic panic attacks coupled with a sense 
of impending doom. It got worse as I got older but it never affected my ability 
to go about my daily life until I graduated. I never left home for university 
because my anxiety didn’t allow it. Instead I stayed at home with my mum and 
studied nearby. But it was good for me to have structure and push myself to 
make friends.

Social anxiety ruined my life – until I found the one place I felt at home | 
Simon Wilson-Cortijo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/19/social-anxiety-disorder-suicidal-city>
When I left university everything changed. I no longer had the routines that 
kept me busy and I drifted further and further into myself. I was still working 
at this stage, but wasn’t as good at going out and meeting people. I distanced 
myself from colleagues, missed friends’ birthdays and other events. I mainly 
just spent time with my partner who I live with now. I met her at a friend’s 
party at university. My best mates thought I was just letting them down. I 
never told them the truth and many stopped talking to me as a result.

I put on weight (in excess of 100lb), which led to me not wanting go out even 
more. It might sound arrogant to think anyone gives a toss, but in my head I 
felt people judged me as fat and ugly. I dreaded simple activities such as 
going to the supermarket because I worried about people watching me. Looking at 
what I bought and ate. Food is an easy comfort when I’m feeling anxious. It is 
a wanted distraction, and something to look forward to.

Then three years ago I lost my job, and decided to work from home. I am a 
freelance writer, so this was an easy transition. Now I never go out unless I 
absolutely have to. It’s easy to survive indoors. I have everything delivered. 
In the past year I’m not sure how much I’ve been out, maybe less than 10 times. 
Even then I find the prospect draining, horrible and depressing. I only really 
go out if there’s a family emergency. I accompanied my partner, for example, 
when her sister was in hospital. It was difficult but I felt I had to be there 
to support her.

Before I go out I have a sense of existential dread mixed with complete and 
utter exhaustion. I don’t know how I’m even going to be able to keep myself 
upright to walk five steps, let alone further. It’s not just because of my 
weight gain that I have this fear, although that makes it worse. It’s a control 
thing. I just think of the world beyond my house as this big “other” that is 
scary. The world is frightening. Don’t you think so? No one seems to be in 
control of anything, terrible things happen all the time.

My partner is supportive and cares for me when I have my panic attacks. But 
she is also worried. She encourages me to get help and has tried in the past. 
But it’s too much of an emotional burden for her I think. I need to be able to 
sort this out by myself. I went to one counselling session and then I never 
went again. I found it too difficult and felt it didn’t help.

The alternative isn’t much better though. I feel unhappy, lonely and scared. 
Like I am unable to change my circumstances due to a paralysing fear. I am 
stuck. That’s why I’m trying to turn things around. I am losing weight, 
although that is difficult. I’m determined to go back to a counsellor after 
Christmas. The first step is talking about it, and saying I have a problem. 
I’ve done that here.

‘I went from a busy job in London to living off-grid and I couldn’t be happier’

Jade Angeles Fitton fell into a hermitic existence, working from home in a 
remote Devon village, after years working in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23cd10dc30e527fb5cfa7f7fabe487496a95e74%2F42_7_1012_607%2F1012.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can't%20be%20lonely'%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27If%20you%20choose%20to%20be%20alone%20you%20can%27t%20be%20lonely%27%3A%20meet%20the%20modern-day%20hermits%20%7C%20Guardian%20readers%20and%20Sarah%20Marsh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Fmodern-day-hermits-share-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa23cd10dc30e527fb5cfa7f7fabe487496a95e74%2F42_7_1012_607%2F1012.png>
 ‘Sometimes I feel like I am living out one long day over and over again’ 
Photograph: Alex Waespi 
I live in Devon, in village by the sea. It’s remote from October to May as 
most of the houses in the village are second homes now, but gets busier in the 
summer. I have lived here on my own for the past six months; for four months 
before that I lived alone in the middle of nowhere on the moors. I work from 
home as a writer and spend days on end without seeing anyone. Sometimes I feel 
like I am living out one long day over and over again: I work all day and take 
a stroll to the headland that looks over the sea before dinner.

My life used to be very different. I worked as a producer in advertising and 
fashion in London, so, my life was more stressful and filled with a lot of 
people and deadlines. It was a constant blur of trying to achieve people’s 
unrealistic expectations, and trying not to cry when I looked at spreadsheets. 
I went out a lot, but I still worked hard: on the nights I wasn’t returning 
home from a party at 5am, I was leaving home for early call-times.

I moved because London was too stressful and expensive. Now I feel calmer and 
more connected to planet Earth somehow. In cities you can, and I certainly did, 
forget where you are – as in, on a miracle planet spinning in space – because 
all (or the majority of what) you see in cities is manmade. It’s like this 
horrible endless, concrete hall of mirrors where every face reflected back at 
you is slightly angry.

Since being in Devon I see people maybe once a week or less. I’ve made 
absolutely no new friends and been on no dates since living here. On weekends I 
usually just stay in and work. I do get lonely quite a lot, but I’m fine with 
my own company. Recently, I’ve missed London’s galleries and just being able to 
leave my house and walk to a friend or an exhibition. But instead I walk to the 
sea and remember it’s not so bad where I am.

I’ve not spent this much time alone since I was about 12, and it’s let me be 
selfish without worrying about anyone else. Being on my own has been great for 
my writing. It’s surprising what can get done if you’re not willing to give 
yourself a day off and have no one to persuade you to have a laugh. I have such 
a set routine of work nowadays, going to bed early and getting up early.

I have become a bit more like my childhood self, which I prefer, so I have 
gone back to being tomboy. I used to dress up and wear lipstick and high heels, 
but now I rarely brush my hair and have got really into wildlife and 
birdwatching again. I have more energy when I do see people too because I’ve 
been alone for so long. I get genuinely excited to see another human being.

‘If you choose to be on your own you cannot be lonely’

Neil Ansell lived in a remote village on his own for five years. He rarely saw 
anyone except a local farmer.
 ‘You have to exercise a certain amount of caution because if you are on your 
own and you break your leg you’re in trouble.’ Neil Ansell photographed as he 
was when he lived in the cottage in the 1990s. Photograph: Neil-Ansell1 
As a child I took great pleasure in being close to nature. I was outdoorsy and 
passionate about birds. On weekends I would go out after breakfast and not come 
home until the evening, spending days in the south coast of England’s marshes.

So I suppose it wasn’t completely out of character when I decided to pack up 
my life in London in search of adventure. In 1990 I moved to a remote cottage 
in Powys, mid-Wales, high in the Cambrian mountains, which I found out about 
through a friend. I ended up living in this basic stone cottage in a pretty 
much as a hermit for the next five years. I had no electricity, no clock, no 
mirror, just three rooms, and no company.

It faced the hillside and took in the whole of the Brecon Beacons. When I 
first arrived I wasn’t sure how long I’d stay. I’d gone from living in big 
chaotic squats in London with 20 to 30 homeless people to solitude. The only 
person I ever saw from the cottage where I lived was a tenant hill farmer, a 
single man whose father had farmed the same land before him. He had never 
travelled from home. Other than him, in the five years I was there, there was 
not a single passerby. I would go for weeks without seeing anyone even in the 
distance. I would go to village shop occasionally, but I mainly tried to become 
self-sufficient, growing my own food and eating a vegetarian diet.

My daily routine involved waking up with the sun and trying to light a fire 
for cooking. I would then work the land and do a bit of forestry. I didn’t need 
much money as I had no expenses – I paid a bit of poll tax and rent but had no 
bills. The money I did have was for occasional travel, but I always stayed 
there for Christmas and birthdays.

If you choose to be on your own you cannot be lonely if you know what I mean. 
In winter I would sometimes think, “You won’t see anyone for few weeks” but I 
knew this wouldn’t be forever and friends did visit.

Everything changed for me when I met a woman at a wedding during one of my 
rare trips out of the cottage. She started visiting me and we embarked on a 
long-distance relationship. Eventually, we made plans to start a family 
together and she wanted me to move and live with her. So it was this that made 
me leave. What I found most difficult about moving back into society was the 
constant need for conversation. But I coped in the same way as I had adjusted 
to solitude. Ever since, though, I have made an effort to try to spend some 
time alone whenever I can.

Living as a hermit for five years made me more self-sufficient and emotionally 
strong. I never had any fear. The only thing in life really to be scared of is 
other people. You’re actually less in danger being on your own. Obviously you 
have to exercise a certain amount of caution because if you are on your own and 
you break your leg you’re in trouble.
 