
Matt Stuart

‘Don’t just photograph the obvious’

I got a phone call from a friend saying he had seen loads of Santa Clauses 
walking towards the law courts in London. I changed direction quickly, and ran 
across two or three hundred of them, which, on paper, sounds like a 
photographer’s dream. They were demonstrating for Fathers for Justice, but I 
realised – after taking a roll or two – that it just looked like a bunch of 
guys dressed up as Santa Claus. One of the things I have always been told in 
photography is to look the other way – don’t just photograph the obvious. 
Sometimes it is better to zag rather than zig. So, I turned to the police who 
were overlooking the event, plus one solo Santa. I like it because you don’t 
know what’s happening on the right-hand side of the frame – is it a horrendous 
crash involving a sleigh and reindeer, or some sort of massacre at Christmas 
time?

Little did I know that I would end up potentially being one of those Fathers 
for Justice guys – I’m divorced, and, while I don’t have any problems with 
access to my child, I understand their plight even more now. But when I’m there 
taking photographs – and this may sound a little harsh – I’m more interested in 
taking a good photo than a particular cause. This Santa was just a colourful 
element.

I spend pretty much every day walking around, without a brief, just seeing 
what comes up. I train myself to see certain things, or to know a situation has 
potential and has a pregnant moment – you wait for the climax of that moment, 
and sometimes it crescendoes, sometimes it falls into a whimper. Street 
photography holds even more appeal now in the age of Photoshop, where things 
are more and more fake. It is very revealing to see people not posing, not 
showing their best sides, just being human.

To be honest, winter is probably my least favourite time of year to work in 
London. The light goes so quickly – it’s dark by 4pm, but 5.30pm is rush hour 
when a lot of stuff tends to happen. Also, I photograph in colour, and in 
winter everyone starts to wear black and grey. Spring and autumn are probably 
my favourites. Summer is great and garish, but it’s bloody hot. Walking through 
Oxford Street, one of the most polluted streets in the world – by two o’clock 
you’ve had it.

Matt Stuart’s CV

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1362377b4304ccbed1ebb5161512ed0273c442%2F455_0_880_857%2F880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b1362377b4304ccbed1ebb5161512ed0273c442%2F455_0_880_857%2F880.jpg>
 Matt Stuart 
Born: Harrow, London, 1974.

Trained: Assisted Marcus Lyon for three years.

Influences: Garry Winogrand, Tony Ray-Jones, Joel Meyerowitz, Lee Friedlander.

High point: “Becoming a nominee at the Magnum agency this year.”

Low point: “Getting divorced in 2009, and losing all inspiration.”

Top tip: “It sounds weird and Zen, but if you go out with a good spirit, 
you’ll come back with good work.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb7a2fd18888a8a70206f8a464743ced3147c95%2F0_0_4724_1997%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb7a2fd18888a8a70206f8a464743ced3147c95%2F0_0_4724_1997%2F4724.jpg>
 Pentti Sammallahti’s Solovki, White Sea, Russia, 1992: ‘The dog went quietly 
past, and didn’t pay any attention to the sardines or the cat.’ Photograph: 
Pentti Sammallahti 
Pentti Sammallahti

‘I was there two weeks to take this’

This was taken 25 years ago on the Solovetsky Islands, on the White sea in 
northwest Russia. The place is like a fairytale, with this huge monastery, 
which you can see in the background, built in the 16th and 17th centuries. But 
it also has a very sad history – in the 20s and 30s it was a harsh labour camp 
and prison under the Soviets. That sad history is always one part of the 
feeling of being there.

In Russia, all the animals are free – horses, dogs and cats, all of them 
walking everywhere. I was living in the only small guesthouse on the island, 
and one morning I was having breakfast and looked up to see a dog walking 
along, carrying a bag. I was told that the dog was owned by a lonely, legless 
man, who dispatched it every morning to the only shop on the island. In the bag 
was a shopping list, and the dog walked some kilometres to the shop, gave the 
bag to the saleswoman, who put the groceries in the bag, and the dog went back 
with it. Usually, I heard, the list was just bread and vodka.

When I learned the route the dog went, I chose this place with these sheds and 
firewood and the monastery in the background, and put a can of sardines on the 
snowbank to tempt the dog to stop. But then it happened that this cat smelled 
the sardines, and stayed there to feast. I was looking forward to the dog 
coming: what is going to happen? But it came quietly past on his way home, and 
didn’t pay any attention to the sardines or the cat. It was at work.

I very much like photographing in winter. It’s not technically difficult – the 
snow beautifully simplifies the landscape, and there is always enough light. 
Even the nights in the north are bright because of the snow; the days 
themselves are short but the dusk is very long. And because I’m from Finland, I 
don’t like it when it’s hot! Of course, when it is very cold, the cameras don’t 
work so well. This was taken with a large-format panoramic camera, with only 
six shots a film. It’s difficult to change the film when it’s very cold, so I 
had to think all the time: when exactly should I push the button? I was there 
two weeks and I took 120 shots – nowadays that’s very little.

I have a saying though: the worse the weather, the better the picture. There 
is more feeling. When you are shooting in sunlight, with cumulus clouds, it 
always looks like a postcard. But when it is raining or snowing, it gives you 
something more.




Pentti Sammallahti’s CV
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b7473f37ca451fdabcff1ca2a41242d88613a5%2F211_121_714_787%2F714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F53b7473f37ca451fdabcff1ca2a41242d88613a5%2F211_121_714_787%2F714.jpg>
 Pentti Sammallahti 
Born: Helsinki, 1950.

Trained: “At school in the 1960s, where every boy’s hobby was photography.”

Influences: Paul Strand. “When I saw his photographs for the first time, it 
was like reading the Bible.” Also: André Kertész, Josef Koudelka, Kristoffer 
Albrecht.

High point: “It’s very common for photographers to be most active between 40 
and 50 – their children are no longer young, and they have more time. That was 
the case with me!”

Low point: “Being 67 – I can’t work so hard any more. You become lazier and 
slower and you don’t see so well.”

Top tip: “Study photography – think about why a photo has been taken, and why 
at that moment.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe35d4dae7085535f6555a98704f2388f609e30c4%2F0_0_3750_3000%2F3750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe35d4dae7085535f6555a98704f2388f609e30c4%2F0_0_3750_3000%2F3750.jpg>
 Todd Hido: ‘I have a warm feeling when I look at it this.’ Photograph: Todd 
Hido 
Todd Hido

‘I was looking for something magical’

I was lost until I found photography. I had a difficult childhood and, during 
high school, all the academic stuff just didn’t really work for me. I started 
taking pictures to record my friends skateboarding or racing their BMX bikes, 
and I discovered that you really had to try to get a good photograph, so that 
was the main impetus at that point.

After that, I enrolled in a photography class. Two of my tutors entered my 
work into a state contest and I won. All of a sudden, I was on a roll: I felt 
supported, and I haven’t looked back.

Taking photographs helps me to sort through my emotions. It also provides me 
with an excellent excuse to explore the world. I’m fortunate enough to be able 
to spend the day driving around, looking for something magical to photograph – 
such as this peculiar pocket of east Washington, which I was immediately struck 
by. Unlike its neighbouring towns, it remains completely untouched – free from 
the bullshit Walmart or Home Depot stores. I was instantly drawn to the place 
because it transported me back to my past. I grew up in Ohio, in a new suburb 
that was built in the middle of large cornfields during the 1970s. This duality 
between suburbia and the middle of nowhere is very curious to me, and is 
expressed in much of my work.

As a photographer, when you find somewhere that moves you, you come back to 
it. I’ve continued to go back to that crossroads for the past 10 years, at 
least once a year. I tend go in the winter, because I live in San Francisco 
now, so I love to visit places where it snows. The morning light in this 
particular shot – which pierces through the fog that was lifting quickly that 
day – is so spectacular that it took me by surprise. I also love how it seems 
as though lightning has shredded that tree.

I took the photograph through the windscreen of my car using an analogue 
camera and developed the film in a darkroom by myself. I have a warm feeling 
when I look at it, as I do with many of my pictures. But then, I’m a very 
vicious editor, so I don’t let anything go out into the world that I feel 
halfway about.

Todd Hido’s CV

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151991ed7eb67550c50fa83ea63acb21c5d04db2%2F1706_0_1031_1134%2F1031.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151991ed7eb67550c50fa83ea63acb21c5d04db2%2F1706_0_1031_1134%2F1031.jpg>
 Todd Hido Photograph: Whitten Sabbatini 
Born: Kent, Ohio, 1968.

Studied: California College of the Arts and Crafts, Rhode Island School of 
Design, and the School of the Museum of Fine Arts, Massachusetts.

Influences: “Photographer Larry Sultan, who was my advisor at graduate school 
and became a close friend. He taught me how to draw from within – how to use my 
own life experiences in my work.”

High Point: “Having a large, mid-life survey of my work published [Intimate 
Distance, 2016] was very special. I spent a long time sifting through my 
archive to compile an edit that felt right – context is just as important as 
the photographs themselves.”

Low Point: “My first photography job, which I was told I’d be paid for and 
never was. It was an interesting learning curve straight out of the gate.”

Top Tip: “Follow your intuition and don’t look to others for the answers 
because you already have them, you just have to believe that you do.”

• Intimate Distance 
<http://aperture.org/shop/intimate-distance-twenty-five-years-of-photographs-a-chronological-album/>
 by Todd Hido is published by Aperture.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61469e6593097f47026baba6f7ebd3a2e138ec80%2F813_183_2312_5004%2F2312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61469e6593097f47026baba6f7ebd3a2e138ec80%2F813_183_2312_5004%2F2312.jpg>
 Susan Derges’s River Taw: ‘Going out in the landscape at night is a very 
magical experience.’ Photograph: Susan Derges 
Susan Derges

‘I was interested in dramatic rivers’

I had recently moved from Japan to Dartmoor in Devon, and I was very 
interested in these dramatic torrent rivers that flowed off the moor – rain 
pours off the land due to deforestation, because there is nothing to stop it. I 
wanted to get away from the distance that the camera lens can create, and I 
decided that this landscape at night could be my darkroom. So I put silver 
gelatin photographic paper straight into the bed of a river, and illuminated it 
with a microsecond burst of light from a flash – I would get all the flow forms 
and detail of the river, even passing pebbles and twigs, exposed directly on to 
the paper.

I would tape the paper to a sheet of aluminium and lay it in the water, then 
once I was done, I would put a lid on it and take it back to my darkroom to 
develop it. I once left a wet lid in my studio, and the next morning it had 
frozen over. I decided to expose that block of ice. I turned it upside down on 
to a fresh sheet of paper in my darkroom, and gave it a flash of light – this 
image was the result.

I also wanted to get away from large-format landscape photographs. I had a 
desire for a completely different relationship with the landscape – being 
involved with it, rather than looking down on it from a privileged vantage 
point. Going out in the landscape at night is a very magical experience – one’s 
senses wake up a lot because you are not relying on vision – and there is a 
photographic quality to the landscape, in terms of events carving themselves 
out into other materials.

You might see a vortice in water, and also a print of that in rock, because 
that vortice has been operating in that place for hundreds of years. On the top 
of the hills, water freezes in rock and expands and cracks it, and the wind 
will then carve and sculpt these extraordinary forms in it over time. You have 
this powerful, fluid, weather-related stuff going on, and then this much deeper 
geological time, revealing those processes in a physical way.

Landscapes are so complex you can’t really say anything about the totality of 
them, so I think the best way to make any kind of response is to have a very 
intimate involvement in it. It’s more honest.

Susan Derges’s CV

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbdbe9b33e93c6d4b1e86b8cf4e95ee21a184e77%2F167_94_720_932%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F'%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Is%20it%20a%20reindeer%20crash%3F%27%20Photographers%20on%20their%20best%20winter%20shots&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fis-it-a-reindeer-crash-photographers-on-their-best-winter-shots%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbdbe9b33e93c6d4b1e86b8cf4e95ee21a184e77%2F167_94_720_932%2F720.jpg>
 Susan Derges 
Born: London, 1955.

Trained: Studied painting at Chelsea College of Art, and the Slade School of 
Art.

Influences: Helen Chadwick. “She was very intelligently and playfully dealing 
with this art and science – there’s a really visceral tactility in her work.”

High point: “The River Taw period. It was something quite powerful that has 
informed what I’ve done since.”

Low point: “Six years ago, Ilford started halting its production processes, I 
became allergic to the chemicals I was using, and digital technology started to 
replace the medium I was working with.”

Top tip: “Go for what really interests you, no matter how mad, irrelevant or 
ridiculous it may seem.”



 