
Our news story on SNP’s draft proposal for a new independence referendum 
before Britain exits the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference#comment-85340571>
 attracted almost 10,000 comments - many reflecting an atmosphere of 
post-Brexit frustration.


Nicola Sturgeon: 'no rush to referendum' on Scottish independence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/14/nicola-sturgeon-snp-no-rush-to-referendum-scottish-independence>
SNP leader Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> told the BBC Radio 4’s 
Today programme on Friday that she is “not rushing to another independence 
referendum”, but later told BBC Breakfast that a new referendum was “highly 
likely” within the next two years.

Here are 10 reader views on whether the time is right for another independence 
referendum.


Scotland voted to Remain
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12430612> joropofever  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12430612> 13 October 2016 12:42pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85329378> 
Brexit has changed everything. Eurosceptics and Brexiteers played down 
Scotland's likelihood of voting remain in such numbers and now it has happened 
like people warned. Independence is back on the cards and very likely to 
succeed. What must European politicians think listening to the English ranting 
about the declining, despotic and 'Hitler-esque' (thanks Mr Johnson) situation 
on the continent whilst on this island there is discord, division and the Union 
itself under threat.

The SNP has to ask the question
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3819879> mikebhoy  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3819879> 13 October 2016 12:29pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85327833> 
Not sure this is a good idea but they probably feel they have to ask the 
question given the Scottish vote on Brexit and the lurch to the right by the 
Tories.

Given it needs Westminster approval I don't see an indyref happening any time 
soon anyway. If it did I'd hope that maybe more people might be prepared to put 
their trust in our own determination rather than be shackled to a right-wing 
post-Brexit UK.

It’s too early for another referendum
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1298603> ID0585151  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/1298603> 13 October 2016 12:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85328572> 
This is too early - polls show there isn't sufficient support - which could be 
used as a moral argument for Westminster passing another referendum. We at 
least need to understand what Brexit entails.
It's more akin to the horrible mess we are in as a result of Tory infighting. 
The SNP are trying to keep their varied ship afloat as the die hards are 
constantly wanting their voice to prevail.

Sturgeon is playing to her own supporters
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3793506> bluesqueakpip  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3793506> 13 October 2016 12:41pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85329284> 
Playing to her own supporters, I think. 

About 54% of those polled do want IndyRef2 - either during or after 
negotiations and Brexit. Fair enough, given that the constitutional position 
has changed drastically - but that number has gone down from 60% in June. And 
as the article says, there's no real movement in the numbers who want 
independence.

Figures are here 
<http://whatscotlandthinks.org/questions/when-do-you-think-anotherscottish-independencereferendum-should-be-held-asked-a#table>
.

EU membership is more valuable than UK membership

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12280628> EssoBlue  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12280628> 13 October 2016 12:44pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85329574> 
During the last Scottish referendum, I was strongly against Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> separating from the UK. I spent some 
time reading and commenting on here for a No vote.

Now, I have changed my mind. Nicola Sturgeon is quite right that she has a 
mandate to defend Scotland's vote to stay in the EU.

Scotland should now leave the UK, to avoid the Brexit disaster that is 
unfolding before our eyes.

In the 21st century, EU membership is a lot more valuable than UK membership.

It’s a means to push back against a ‘hard Brexit’

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fits-a-fudge-10-readers-on-a-second-scottish-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef7c7b5a068cfb287bbb91ff8f406ead1765dd71%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='It's%20a%20fudge'%3A%2010%20readers%20on%20a%20second%20Scottish%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fits-a-fudge-10-readers-on-a-second-scottish-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27It%27s%20a%20fudge%27%3A%2010%20readers%20on%20a%20second%20Scottish%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fits-a-fudge-10-readers-on-a-second-scottish-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fef7c7b5a068cfb287bbb91ff8f406ead1765dd71%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Yes and No Thanks signs on a lamp post in Blantyre during the 2014 referendum 
campaign. Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4580980> Dubdemon  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4580980> 14 October 2016 8:49am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85402240> 
Nicola doesn't want a referendum just now - she knows she would lose.

She is also playing both sides very adeptly.
Ms Sturgeon is very aware of the mounting political pressure on Theresa May, 
and is now instrumental in trying to pull together a coalition to oppose 
aspects of hard brexit, and is taking plaudits for keeping a cool head during 
the whole brexit process.
An opportunity perhaps to get serious gains for Scotland without running the 
risk of losing a second referendum, and by making this announcement she has 
kept the SNP party faithful pot boiling nicely.

Clever wee scone, isn't she?

It’s a fudge
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16277049> BarenakedSciolist  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16277049> 13 October 2016 12:46pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85329862> 
It's a fudge. The SNP appear to intend to use the EU referendum vote as a 
mandate to separate the people who live in the north of the island from those 
who live on the rest, on an issue separate from the question of Independence. 
I'll ignore that the SNPs brand of 'Independence' also meant leaving the EU and 
of course the irony that the SNPs General Election campaign direction (being in 
League with Labour) is responsible, in part, for the tories winning and the EU 
referendum in the first place.

I'm reminded of their 'bull in a china-shop' approach to politics also 
produced the fall of a Labour leadership and the emergence of Thatcher.

Noone in Scotland is surprised by this
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10026013> billforsyth  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10026013> 13 October 2016 12:53pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85330726> 
No one in Scotland is surprised by this announcement given that there is a 
majority at Holyrood for a second referendum and the Westminster government 
knew well in advance that the SNP and the Greens would call for a second 
referendum if Scotland was taken out of the EU against the wishes of the 
country's voters .

Cameron may have decided that the vote was UK wide, one binding all of the 
countries in the UK to abide by the outcome but the SNP at Westminster which 
has 95% of the Scottish representation there disagreed and called for a block 
on brexit should one country of the UK vote against it . This was dismissed by 
the British government and the SNP duly voted against the EU referendum bill . 
There is no alternative to Scotland being taken out of the EU against the 
wishes of the country's voters other than independence .

The UK’s government is increasingly UKIP-inspired

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16144129> LoveNeighbour  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16144129> 13 October 2016 2:19pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85340155> 
Well done the SNP for defending Scotland against Brexit and against the UK's 
new UKIP-inspired government. It was clear before the referendum that if the UK 
voted leave, Scotland would go for independence again. Keeping the UK together 
should have been reason enough for anyone who cared about the UK to vote 
Remain. However, England is increasingly being taken over by right wing 
nationalists who are hostile not just to the EU, but to Scotland and even to 
the English who support Remain. The UK government at the very least has to go 
for a soft Brexit if it is to save the UK politically and economically.

Sturgeon is overplaying her hand
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12344265> Richard857  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12344265> 13 October 2016 2:24pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/85340571> 
Sturgeon is overplaying a very weak hand, due to her need to appease the 
activists. It will not be many years before the Scots realise that the SNP is 
acting in its own interests, not that of the people. And that realization is 
the factor that crushed Labour in Scotland. Scottish voters are nothing if not 
demanding and fickle.
 