
If you know where to look online, you can buy a 2,000-word, original, 
written-to-order essay directly from an individual for £20. Go to one of the 
bigger companies advertising on Google or Facebook and you might pay £50.

Contract cheating – where students pay for others to complete their coursework 
– is a huge problem. All sorts of assignment requests can be fulfilled, by a 
growing number of online sites. I’ve seen examples across all levels and 
subjects, from aviation to zoology, with some students even choosing to 
outsource their undergraduate dissertations.


The companies have prominent websites showing how cheap and easy it is to have 
one of their writers work on an assessment. They have adverts plastered all 
over social media. Some are even more brazen, getting their representatives to 
go into universities, pinning up adverts on noticeboards, leaving flyers on 
canteen tables and handing out business cards to students as they arrive on 
campus. Earlier this year, one such site ran a prominent advertising campaign 
at London Underground stations.


These essay cheating sites are global, and they take advantage of gullible 
students to rake in profit. Students are promised that essays and assignments 
will be returned quickly, often within 24 hours. In the panic of a looming 
deadline, the temptation is understandable. They are supposedly guaranteed 
original, plagiarism-free work that will earn them first-class grades. They are 
often in for a disappointment when the work they receive back is far from the 
promised standard.


Why is so much research dodgy? Blame the Research Excellence Framework
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/17/why-is-so-much-research-dodgy-blame-the-research-excellence-framework>
A deceptive industry

Behind each flashy website, the requests are sent to a pool of writers who are 
desperate for the work. Many of them are outside the UK, based in countries 
such as Kenya, India and Pakistan, and are under intense pressure to turn 
essays around quickly. The ones who’velifted the lid on the industry 
<http://www.alternet.org/i-helped-college-kids-cheat-inside-academic-fraud-industry>
 talk about needing to write multiple essays a day.


When students get drawn into an industry that is by its very nature deceptive, 
there’s no guarantee that they’ll get the work they paid for. I’ve seen many 
examples of students being sent work bad enough to raise alarm bells with any 
academic. I’ve also seen them asked to pay far more money than they were 
originally quoted to get work edited into sensible English.

Some have been blackmailed with the threats of “keep sending us more money or 
we’ll release the work we’ve done to your university”. And, of course, there’s 
the obvious risk that if they are caught, students face being excluded from 
their academic institution.


I’ve been researching contract cheating since 2006 and what I always find most 
difficult is the impact it has on the vast majority of students who work hard 
for their qualifications. I’ve travelled the world to speak about these 
problems and, whether it’s Greece, Australia or Macedonia, I see the same 
upsetting issue: students who know others on their course are cheating but are 
powerless to do anything about it.


Taking action

This is not a victimless crime. It devalues the awards of those who are doing 
everything they can to complete high-quality work, and risks making degrees 
look worthless while hitting the reputation of those universities letting the 
cheats get away with it instead of actively rewarding honesty.

I'm a researcher from the EU and Brexit has left me in limbo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/14/im-a-researcher-from-the-eu-and-brexit-has-left-me-in-limbo>
But what can we do? Combatting the problem will not be straightforward, but I 
hope today’sInternational Day of Action 
<http://contractcheating.weebly.com/the-event.html> and the work we are doing 
at Coventry University will push for change within the UK.

In the meantime, I encourage academics to support this fight by thinking about 
the type of assessments that they set. The essay mills thrive because they have 
writers who are very good at writing essays. They know how to structure them, 
how to use sources and how to build up an academic argument. There are valuable 
skills there, but they’re not the same ones that students will use in the 
workplace. Let’s think about how to make assessment more authentic. We can 
still test out the same skills, but that way we know that students are doing 
the work, and not the essay companies.


We need to take action against cheats. By working together, we can stop these 
companies hooking students in, selling them essay after essay, and preventing 
them from mastering the skills that they’re paying the university to help them 
learn.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>

 