
Last month in Wiesbaden, the picturesque German city famous for champagne and 
hot springs, around2,000 parents protested 
<http://hessenschau.de/tv-sendung/video-23826.html> over changes to the school 
curriculum. The cause of the furore? That children would be bombarded with 
lessons about anal sex, dildos and dark rooms.

How to teach … sex education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teacher-blog/2013/jun/10/sex-education-teaching-resources>
Despite their fears, anal sex is not being snuck into lessons. What schools 
are being asked to do is encourage acceptance of different lifestyles and 
identities. The Hessian ministry of education has said that, from this autumn, 
teachers must have conversations about sexual and gender diversity with 
children – not only in sex education classes, which are mandatory in Germany, 
but in subjects like English and maths too.

“The idea is to show children that there are different ways to love and live,” 
says Markus Ulrich, of the German LGBT rights groupLesben und Schwulenverband 
(LSVD) <http://www.lsvd.de>. The issue is brought in on a day-to-day basis. 
“For example, in maths, a teacher could set a question that includes a gay 
family,” says Ulrich. “Or in English when they study Romeo and Juliet, they 
could ask about other types of relationships that are sometimes disapproved of.”

Germany’s 16 states set their own curriculum, and Hesse is the latest to say 
teachers must cover LGBT acceptance in schools, following Berlin and 
Brandenburg, which led the way. But whenever it’s introduced, “it’s always the 
same, it alwaysgoes with protests 
<https://www.welt.de/regionales/nrw/article156317177/Kinder-sollen-Analsex-in-der-Schule-spielen.html>
,” says Ulrich.

Keeping parents informed from the beginning helps to keep them on side
Regine Wlassitschau, from Pro Familia 
So, what are teachers actually teaching? Guido Mayus, an openly gay biology 
teacher in Potsdam, a city close to Berlin, teaches sexual and gender diversity 
during sex education and biology classes.

“I cover the different ways to live and the difference between sex and 
gender,” he says. “And we discover that a lot of sexism is based on 
stereotypes.”

Ahead of sex education lessons, Mayus asks his class for anonymous questions. 
“The questions are really simple, which shows they are missing a lot of 
knowledge,” he says. Past questions include, “how do I know if I am gay or a 
lesbian?” and “how do you come out?”

To get the children to think about gender differences, Mayus asks what 
advantages girls and boys have over each other (according to one class, girls’ 
have the advantage of being able to cry when they want, while boys can wash 
their short hair quickly). The class then talk about how gender is constructed. 
“There are a lot of old-fashioned things in their minds, because we are 
training them to think boys are athletic and strong and girls aren’t,” he says.
 Guido Mayus, brings “cool, my teacher is gay” balloons to class Photograph: 
Guido Mayus 
Mayus also talks about sexual diversity in his biology classes. Every year at 
an LGBT march in Berlin he picks up balloons that say “cool, my teacher is gay” 
on them to use in school. Then, when he is teaching the volume of the lungs, he 
asks the children to blow the balloons up to demonstrate and gets a laugh when 
they realise what’s written on them.

Mayus says the children enjoy learning about sex and diversity. “They’ve never 
talked about it before, so we make it fun and we laugh a lot,” he says.

But not all teachers are comfortable bringing the subject up. And school 
leaders, along with the German Education Union (GEW), are calling for better 
training.


Mareike Klauenflügel, a teacher in Frankfurt and speaker for the GEW group of 
LGBT teachers, says some teachers lack the confidence to talk about sex and 
diversity. Others feel they don’t have the time, alreadyfacing pressures 
created by the refugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/29/german-schools-taking-refugee-children-syria>
. “You have to talk to your colleagues, share material and coordinate,” she 
says. “Typically the head is responsible for making sure it’s enacted in 
schools. And some do, but others ignore it.”

The issue needs to be included in teacher training courses, Klauenflügel says. 
“There needs to be guidelines from theGerman Ministry of Education 
<https://www.bmbf.de/en/index.html> and they need to offer training that covers 
all states.” That way, teachers can feel more comfortable talking about the 
subject.


School leaders may also be put off by the possibility of parent complaints. 
Keeping parents informed from the beginning helps to keep them on side, says 
Regine Wlassitschau, from Pro Familia, the leading association on sexuality, 
partnership and family planning in Germany. “It’s important to involve parents 
in sex education,” she says. “This means they can express their concerns.” 
Ulrich also points out that school heads can make it clear that acceptance of 
diversity is part of the school policy, by having it included in school rules 
or on their website.

Young volunteers can also help bring the subject up. Lukas Chinczewski, 22, a 
medical student at Heidelberg University 
<http://www.uni-heidelberg.de/index_e.html>, coordinates sex education programme
 Safety in Love 
<https://fachschaft-medizin-rostock.de/projekte/msv/#Wir-MSV-Rostock>, where 
student volunteers talk about all aspects of sex education in schools – and 
they make sure acceptance of diversity is included. “In one game we show photos 
of celebrities who are openly gay or heterosexual and ask what kind of sexual 
orientation the class think they have. Often they say ‘oh yeah, he looks really 
gay’, or not. So then we discuss stereotypes.”

Growing far-right attitudes mean protests always follow when new states try to 
bring diversity education into schools

Frederike Booke, 21, studying at the University of Luebeck 
<https://www.uni-luebeck.de/en/university/university.html> and also part of the 
programme, says: “When I’m teaching sex education and someone in the class asks 
me if I have a boyfriend, I always answer, ‘why shouldn’t I have a girlfriend?’ 
to give them an idea of it.”

The student volunteers also run workshops for teachers, allowing them to 
participate in a class themselves to witness how they talk about the issues. 
Chinczewski and Booke say the teachers are often grateful for the help and 
training they provide.

It’s important that teachers are comfortable and that diversity isn’t only 
taught once as a special class, school leaders say. “Teachers should think 
about it in all their lessons,” says Sarah Kleemann, from GEW. “They shouldn’t 
just use heteronormative families in their examples, with a father, mother and 
child. It’s a subtle influence, but it’s important.”

In the current political climate, many feel that teaching acceptance all the 
more important. “It creates an open environment in schools, for everybody, not 
only LGBT people,” says Stefanie Fichter, 28, fromABqueer 
<http://www.abqueer.de/>, an NGO that organises for young LGBT volunteers to 
talk in schools about anti-discrimination and their experience of coming out.

Sex education: giving straight answers without blushes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2012/nov/07/sex-education-teacher-action-questions>
Growing far-right attitudes mean protests always follow when new states try to 
bring diversity education into schools – the furore began two years ago when
almost 200,000 people signed a petition 
<https://www.openpetition.de/petition/online/zukunft-verantwortung-lernen-kein-bildungsplan-2015-unter-der-ideologie-des-regenbogens>
 in Baden-Württemberg, afraid schools would sexualise children by promoting gay 
lifestyles, and they have since followedin Bavaria 
<https://www.gew-bayern.de/presse/detailseite/neuigkeiten/gew-bayern-zu-bayerischen-richtlinien-fuer-familien-und-sexualerziehung/>
 and Hesse.

The far-right Alternative for Deutschland (AfD) party, which made gains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/04/mecklenburg-vorpommern-german-anti-immigrant-party-strong-regional-election-exit-polls-merkel>
 in the regional elections this year,has also published a proposal 
<http://www.dw.com/en/afd-publishes-sex-education-proposal-focusing-on-classical-family-values/a-36401503>
 to strip out much of the homo- trans- and bisexuality teaching in schools and 
instead focus on “classical family values” and on how marriage between a man 
and woman is “life’s primary purpose.”


Klauenflügel says this cannot happen. “It’s very necessary to connect LGBT 
acceptance with an acceptance of all different diverse ways of living,” she 
says. “I think it’s particularly important to teach diversity in schools now – 
it’s a human rights issue and is about accepting people with different 
lifestyles, religious beliefs, sexual orientations, genders and backgrounds. 
It’s a kind of diversity competence that we really need in our society right 
now.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 