
The president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> has stunned nuclear weapons 
experts by appearing to call for a renewed arms race on his Twitter feed and in 
a TV interview.


Trump calls on US to 'greatly strengthen and expand' nuclear weapons capability
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/22/donald-trump-tweets-expand-nuclear-weapons>
“Let it be an arms race,” the president in waiting was reported to have told 
Mika Brzezinski, co-host of MSNBC’s Morning Joe programme, in an early phone 
call on Friday.

According to Brzezinski he went on to say: “We will outmatch them at every 
pass and outlast them all.”

The incendiary comment followed a tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/811977223326625792> on Thursday in 
which Trump threatened to preside over a major ramping up of the US nuclear 
arsenal.

“The United States must greatly strengthen and expand its nuclear capability 
until such time as the world comes to its senses regarding nukes,” he wrote.

The volley of remarks had Trump aides scrambling into damage limitation mode, 
but their efforts were powerless to neutralise the shock waves of alarm and 
bewilderment provoked by the president-elect’s remarks.

They appeared to fly in the face of 35 years of bipartisan US policy geared 
towards reducing the number of nuclear weapons around the world. Nuclear arms 
specialists were quick to cry foul.

“It is irresponsible and reckless for the president elect to be articulating 
future US nuclear policy in a tweet and on a morning news show,” saidDaryl 
Kimball <https://www.armscontrol.org/about/dkimball>, executive director of the 
independent Arms Control Association.

He added: “Just the words have damaging effects. It invokes confusion and can 
stir hostility among our adversaries.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd28b8a3a24a384dbd9dac63dc791314b084b1379%2F0_14_800_1000%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Let%20it%20be%20an%20arms%20race'%3A%20Donald%20Trump%20appears%20to%20double%20down%20on%20nuclear%20expansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Let%20it%20be%20an%20arms%20race%27%3A%20Donald%20Trump%20appears%20to%20double%20down%20on%20nuclear%20expansion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd28b8a3a24a384dbd9dac63dc791314b084b1379%2F0_14_800_1000%2F800.jpg>
 A letter, purportedly from Vladimir Putin, released by the Trump campaign. 
Photograph: Trump Transition 
In tune with many of his Twitter-based pronouncements, Trump’s intervention 
prompted confusion about exactly what he was saying. One issue that remained 
particularly opaque was whom his threats of a renewed arms race were directed 
against.

The only world power that can match the 1,800 deployed strategic nuclear 
weapons the US commands is Russia, whose president Vladimir Putin has been
showered with praise 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/12/18/politics/donald-trump-praises-defends-vladimir-putin/>
 by Trump.

On Friday, Trump put out a statement in which he said he had received a “very 
nice letter from Vladimir Putin” and added: “His thoughts are so correct.”

More ominously, the president-elect said: “I hope both sides are able to live 
up to these thoughts, and we do not have to travel an alternate path.”

A copy of a letter 
<https://drive.google.com/file/d/0B2EjtJyT2ZyScmpDajY2VE9VSVk/view> dated 15 
December accompanied the statement, in the name of Putin and bearing the postal 
address “Moscow, Kremlin”. It was billed as an “unofficial translation” – the 
identity of the translator was unclear.


Putin supposedly wrote: “I hope that after you assume the position of the 
President of the United States of America we will be able – by acting in a 
constructive and pragmatic manner - to take real steps to restore the framework 
of bilateral cooperation in different areas as well as bring our level of 
collaboration on the international scene to a qualitatively new level.”

It was unclear whether the release of Putin’s supposed letter was prompted by 
an exchange of remarks with Moscow on nuclear weapons. Earlier on Friday, Putin
said at a press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/vladimir-putin-defeated-democrats-blame-game-not-very-dignified-trump>
 that “if someone is stimulating a nuclear arms race it’s not us”.

“We don’t violate anything,” he said. “We are in line with our obligations as 
to the number of our warheads.”

On Thursday, Putin had gone further 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/putin-calls-strengthening-russias-military-nuclear-potential-101800687.html>
 and said Russia needed to “strengthen the military potential of strategic 
nuclear forces, especially with missile complexes that can reliably penetrate 
any existing and prospective missile defence systems”.

Trump’s unrestrained language stands in sharp contrast with the stance adopted 
by President Obama over the past eight years.

Though Obama has struggled to deliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/17/obama-nuclear-arsenal-disarmament-russia-congress>
 on his early promise to oversee a sharp reduction in the US nuclear arsenal, 
agreeing to a $1tn modernisation program over 30 years for the triad of air, 
land and sea delivery systems, he has consistently adopted the vocabulary of 
disarmament.

In 2013, the White House worked with Pentagon chiefs to carry out a detailed 
review of the US nuclear capability. It concluded that the country already had 
a third more strategic weapons than were necessary to ensure nuclear deterrence.

Kimball said the findings of the 2013 review proved that “from a military 
strategy and security standpoint, there’s absolutely no need to get into any 
arms race”.

Trump’s comments to MSNBC were revealed by the host Joe Scarborough 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/23/trump-to-putin-lets-have-a-nuclear-arms-race.html>
, who like Brzezinski was presenting the Christmas-themed show while dressed in 
pyjamas and slippers, sitting in front of a roaring fire.

He said: “Mica asked the president-elect while we had the opportunity … to 
clarify the tweet yesterday regarding the nuclear arsenal. And the 
president-elect told you what?”
 Mika Brzezinski and Joe Scarborough on Morning Joe Friday. Photograph: MSNBC 
“‘Let it be an arms race’,” Brzezinski said. “‘We will outmatch them at every 
pass.’”

“‘And outlast them all’,” Scarborough added.

Trump intervenes to sideline Obama over Israeli settlements
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/trump-intervenes-to-sideline-obama-over-israeli-settlements>
“And outlast them all,” Brzezinski repeated.

“You can put that down as breaking news,” Scarborough said.

Trump’s pick to be the incoming White House press secretary, Sean Spicer, led 
the damage limitation push.

He told NBC Trump would not allow an arms race, because he would stop other 
countries from increasing their stockpiles of nuclear weapons.

“He’s going to ensure that other countries get the message that he’s not going 
to sit back and allow that,” Spicer said. “And what’s going to happen is they 
will come to their senses, and we will all be just fine.”

Trump, who also tweeted on Friday morning 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/812264762981675008> a complaint 
about his son Eric being forced to give up charity work over perceptions of 
selling access to the president-elect and his family, is spending Christmas at 
his Mar-a-Lago resort in Florida. His main engagement for the day was a round 
of golf with Tiger Woods.




























 