
Every public office-holder will have to swear an oath of allegiance to 
“fundamental British values”, if proposals by the communities secretary are 
adopted.

Sajid Javid proposes 'British values oath' in wake of Casey review of social 
integration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/sajid-javid-british-values-oath-casey-review-social-integration>
The pledge would be expected to cover members of parliament and other elected 
officials, civil servants, and council workers, and would cover values such as 
freedom of speech, equality and democracy.

Sajid Javid, writing in the Sunday Times in response to Dame Louise Casey’s 
report on social cohesion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/social-integration-louise-casey-uk-report-condemns-failings>
, said he was “drawn” to such an oath because “civic and political leaders have 
to lead by example” in upholding values such as “tolerating the views of 
others, even if you disagree with them.”

Javid also wants all migrants, not just those seeking UK citizenship, to swear 
an oath of allegiance.

“Without common building blocks of our society, you’ll struggle to play a 
positive role in British life”, Javid said.

Readers reacted with scepticism to Javid’s proposal, citing, among other 
things, the difficulty in quantifying uniquely British values -something Javid 
himself acknowledged 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/our-excluded-need-to-feel-more-british-and-we-can-help-them-5fmslftdp>
.

Below, we highlight some of their arguments.

Britishness is laughing at silly oaths
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10849411> lisalane  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10849411> 18 December 2016 6:19pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89716020> 
Probably the best thing about British values is we laugh at swearing silly 
oaths like they sometimes have to do in tin pot banana republics

It’s window dressing
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4022418> vigdis  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4022418> 18 December 2016 6:20pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89716067> 
... it's just ill-thought-through 'window-dressing' (IMO).

Just an attempt to be seen to be doing something about the fractures within 
society at the moment which are a tad complex and nuanced and which Javid's 
'oath' will do nothing to solve.

British values vary person by person

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16350258> leftylass62  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16350258> 18 December 2016 6:35pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89716813> 
If you asked a hundred British people what are British values, there'd be a 
hundred different answers. There's no such thing. This is just the tories 
trying to get some tabloid headlines so it looks like they're actually doing 
something.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dafae47553a33781aab17b0a30f9b1251c480c5%2F0_98_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Meaningless'%3A%20readers%20on%20Sajid%20Javid's%20British%20values%20oath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Meaningless%27%3A%20readers%20on%20Sajid%20Javid%27s%20British%20values%20oath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dafae47553a33781aab17b0a30f9b1251c480c5%2F0_98_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Patriotic revellers wave flags at the Royal Albert Hall. Javid said he is not 
‘demanding everyone bobs up and down at Last Night of the Proms’. Photograph: 
Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty Images 
Would there be a list?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15184284> Physiocrat  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15184284> 18 December 2016 6:47pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89717380> 
This sounds like a remarkably silly idea. How would one even define and make a 
list of these values which people were meant to swear an oath to uphold? Are 
these values even constant?

Oaths only make sense in specific contexts
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15144155> Merelyadequate  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15144155> 18 December 2016 7:34pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89719698> 
Oaths make sense in tightly defined situations - and where there are clear 
repercussions for breaking it.
You swear an oath before giving evidence - as a reminder not to commit perjury.
New soldiers swear allegiance - as a reminder not to fall asleep on sentry 
duty.
Promising to be "tolerant" and to "try and fit in" - it's just so vague as to 
be meaningless.

Absence of oaths is a sign of a healthy nation
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3791221> Lysicamus  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3791221> 18 December 2016 7:53pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89720620> 
British values are constantly changing and the drivers of change are often 
those reformers who rejected certain British values. In any case, oaths of 
allegiance are devices abused by extremists while the absence of oaths of 
allegiance is a sign of a mature, confident nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127c5a5ad92f079c328eeb774cdbb0671e97fd99%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Meaningless'%3A%20readers%20on%20Sajid%20Javid's%20British%20values%20oath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Meaningless%27%3A%20readers%20on%20Sajid%20Javid%27s%20British%20values%20oath&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F127c5a5ad92f079c328eeb774cdbb0671e97fd99%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Javid isn’t insisting you like cricket either. Photograph: Richard Sellers/PA 
A pacifist alternative is needed

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16779896> MrDorrit  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16779896> 18 December 2016 8:20pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89721918> 
I swear I will never ever allow my government to attack a foreign country that 
presents no threat to us. I swear I will never allow my government to kill 
civilians again whilst I have strength

Tolerance is a cornerstone of all democracies - not just Britain
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4668358> beedieman  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4668358> 18 December 2016 8:25pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89722119> 
What exactly are "British values"? Javid seems to be promoting "Tolerance, 
equality, democracy and the democratic process" as being in some way uniquely 
British. That is utter piffle. Shades of Cameron hailing Britain as having 
Christian values! And is Javid's oath to begin with "I swear by almighty 
God...."? For an atheist like me, such an oath is meaningless.

An oath would be meaningless without a proper constitution
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14788173> nobrandloyalty  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14788173> 18 December 2016 7:56pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89720762> 
When we have a proper written Constitution that cannot be steamrollered by an 
extreme Govt that has been elected by a minority yet has attained a technical 
legislative majority (such as our current Govt) in Parliament, there may be 
some point in devising an appropriate oath; but by then we shan't need it.

We shall also then be able to discuss "Democracy" with some genuine meaning 
rather than the jingoistic, lowest common denominator, and ultimately hollow 
and meaningless distractions such as those produced by the likes of Louise 
Casey and Said Javid.

Would tax dodgers be included?
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12688572> David Drysdale  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/12688572> 18 December 2016 6:31pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/89716580> 
Would this include the British values of dodging tax and preserving inequality?
 