
Italians will vote on a series of changes to the country’s political system on 
Sunday, in a vote that could have far-reaching implications for the country’s
politicians, banking sector and future in the Eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
. But what began as a vote on whether to simplify the country’s elaborate 
political system has, for many, morphed into a complicated decision over who 
governs the country.

According to Italian voters who responded to a Guardian callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/are-you-voting-in-italys-referendum>
, prime minister Matteo Renzi’s leadership is under close scrutiny. If Italians 
vote against Renzi’s reforms, the prime minister has said he will resign – a 
promise that is proving too enticing for some.

“Renzi is unelected. He promotes banking and politicians’ interests while 
people drown in debt and unemployment. There are a lot of nice words about 
cutting expenses and speeding up a slow legislation but it’s just a 
smokescreen,” says Marco, one of the 3 million unemployed people in the country.

Italy referendum: all you need to know about Renzi's crunch vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
Renzi says the reforms will streamline the country’s elaborate political 
structure and speed up decision making by abolishing bicameralism – a system 
with two chambers in parliament, each holding equal power. But given the 
reforms will also abolish elected senators and remove power from the country’s 
20 regional governments, Marco says a yes vote does nothing but strip even more 
power from the Italian people.

“I don’t care what people call no voters: populists, communists. We’re just 
trying to save the little still left to save on a sinking ship. I can’t account 
for nothing good done by Renzi, apart from serving the system and himself,” he 
says.

The Five Star Movement (M5S), which Marco supports, was founded seven years 
ago by comedian Beppe Grillo. It attracts both rightwing voters through its 
stance on immigration and leftwingers through its devotion to the environment 
and political accountability, and isnow the country’s main opposition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/italy-m5s-became-a-real-contender-five-star-politics>
. It is campaigning hard against Renzi.

Francesca, 27, who is unemployed and lives in Bologna, has supported M5S in 
the past and sympathises with their cause. But this time she will vote against 
the party’s position, for the stability of the country.

“I am not 100% sold on this reform, but … if this referendum fails, the 
government will have to resign, and we don’t need the instability, especially 
not after Brexit, Trump’s victory, and the rise of fascist parties in all of 
Europe” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fradical-solutions-are-needed-italians-on-the-countrys-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff93a88bf52de46f8fa3f7b0e1fa755a15012d7bd%2F0_0_3500_2489%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='More%20radical%20solutions%20are%20needed'%3A%20Italians%20on%20the%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fradical-solutions-are-needed-italians-on-the-countrys-referendum%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27More%20radical%20solutions%20are%20needed%27%3A%20Italians%20on%20the%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fradical-solutions-are-needed-italians-on-the-countrys-referendum%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff93a88bf52de46f8fa3f7b0e1fa755a15012d7bd%2F0_0_3500_2489%2F3500.jpg>
 A man holds a banner reading ‘I say no’ during a march. In the final polls 
released before a pre-vote blackout, the campaign to reject Renzi’s reforms had 
a five-point lead. Photograph: Alessandro Bianchi/Reuters 
Voters like Paolo Scorroto, a public sector worker living in Ireland, find 
themselves torn. He does not approve of Renzi but, like Francesca, says a yes 
vote would improve stability and entice foreign investors.


“Renzi has not been as good or done as much as he should and has lost 
credibility as part of a political elite. This is why so many will vote against 
him. But I fearItaly <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> could get deeper 
into debt and face a Greek-style crisis.

“I am tired of the constant changes of government in Italy and even if it 
means giving more power to the executive and fewer numbers in the senate I 
think it is a price worth paying to have stable government,” he says.

A no vote could trigger an early election and M5S – who are ahead in opinion 
polling – could make significant gains. And current policy, written by Renzi’s 
government, says the winning party would receive an automatic majority of seats 
in parliament in future elections.


M5S, as well as the rightwing Lega Nord, have promised a referendum on leaving 
the euro. For those angry over the economy and immigration, a no vote could 
push the country towards a eurozone referendum.


First Brexit then Trump. Is Italy next for the west’s populist wave?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/matteo-renzi-politics-italy-european-union-brexit-trump>
Elena, 39, who describes herself as leftwing, worries about the future of 
Italy if a no vote wins. She says Renzi is not her ideal candidate and could do 
better, but that the other politicians scrambling for power are unfit to run 
the country.


“The risk that Grillo or Salvini [leader of Lega Nord], or even worse Meloni 
[leader of the Eurosceptic party Brothers of Italy] will be in charge of our 
country is far too worrying than having Renzi. [M5S] plays an important role in 
society … However it has gone too far … [Grillo] is far too vulgar and rude in 
his debates. He cannot represent a country, especially at an international 
level,” she says.

Renzi has been accused by others on the left of implementing a rightwing 
agenda. The liberalising Jobs Act failed to improve permanent employment and 
curtailed workers’ rights, and his educational reforms stripped power away from 
teachers. Lorenzo Conti, 28, a journalist from southern Italy who has 
previously voted for Renzi’s party, is voting no as he is fearful that the left 
is being slowly eroded.


“I have always been a socialist democrat … but now, the world has drifted so 
much to the right, and this is so dangerous for the very survival of our 
societies … more radical solutions are needed.

“The Five Star Movement <https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement> 
are a dangerous bunch of political clowns. Some of their positions are 
borderline fascism. Two years ago, I would have never considered even the 
possibility of voting for them. But if Renzi stays in power the left will 
disappear from Italy altogether, and this is the greatest danger,” he says.

As Italians head to the polls, many are still undecided. Software developer 
Luca, 52, who lives just outside Milan, is one of the conflicted. Although he 
is edging towards a yes vote, and dislikes the country’s populist forces, he 
has little hope that any outcome will improve the country.

“Renzi made a lot of mistakes proposing a reform that divided Italians and his 
own party. This is bad constitutional reform, but it is a reform anyway. And 
Italy needs it.

“Just after Renzi became our prime minister, a German friend asked me what 
were my expectations about him. I answered that I didn’t trust him too much but 
that he was our last hope,” he says.

“After the mess he made, I don’t trust him anymore. There is just no hope left 
for Italy.”
 