
Some useful reading for the new work and pensions secretary Damian Green 
<http://www.damiangreen.co.uk/>: another report providing compelling evidence 
that the most significant factors driving UK food bank use are problems caused 
or exacerbated by the welfare system he oversees.

Still Hungry 
<https://westcheshire.foodbank.org.uk/2016/07/19/stillhungry-report/>, a 
detailed study published this week byWest Cheshire food bank 
<https://westcheshire.foodbank.org.uk/>, says benefit-related issues accounted 
for 41% of all referrals to its services over two years. Its findings arein 
line with national food bank research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/reliance-food-banks-new-normal-trussell-trust-charity>
, and it reaches similar conclusions toother studies  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/19/cuts-benefit-changes-driving-up-use-food-banks-study>
as to why peopleend up in food banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2016/may/26/poverty-six-steps-from-the-jobcentre-to-the-food-bank>
.

Most of West Cheshire’s six recommendations on how to reduce the rising 
numbers of people dependent on its charity food handouts focus on welfare 
policy: more efficient jobcentre administration, a less punitive sanctions 
system, adequate levels of benefit payment, and a properly functioning local 
welfare safety net.

The study shows how benefits error, delays and sanctions cause chaos and 
misery by effectively shutting off income to vulnerable claimants already 
teetering on the financial brink. Here’s the experience of Alice, a West 
Cheshire food bank user:

“Alice’s husband (51 years old) was on ESA as he previously had a stroke and 
an epileptic fit. A few weeks ago he was told he was fit for work and he should 
sign on for JSA. As a result of this he was sent on a work programme to college 
in Ellesmere Port, had another stroke and epileptic fit at college and was 
taken to hospital where the doctors said he wasn’t fit for work. Jobcentre Plus 
agreed he should be on ESA. He had no money for over a month. It will be 
another two weeks before Alice gets any money. Alice is legally responsible for 
her grand-daughter.”

West Cheshire’s report claims to be one of the “most systematic and detailed” 
studies of food bank use the UK has seen. The food bank, together with 
academics from the Universities of Chester and Oxford, analysed data collected 
between 2013 and 2016 to map trends in referrals and food crisis duration.

Delays in benefit payments accounted for nearly 20% of all food bank 
referrals, the study found. Benefit changes - especially people moving from 
employment support allowance (ESA) to Job seeker’s allowance (JSA) - triggered 
14% of referals, and sanctions 8%.


Benefit delays typically saw food bank clients in “crisis” (that is, the 
length of time they needed charity food support) for up to four weeks; benefit 
changes resulted in a crisis of two-to-four weeks; sanctions triggered 
lengthier crises - 13% of sanctioned food bank clients estimated their crisis 
would last at least 13 weeks.

It may not surprise you, however, that the Department for Work and Pensions 
(DWP) currently refuses to accept that welfare policy is a significant driver 
of food bank use. It doggedly continues to defend itscatastrophic sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/jan/08/benefit-sanctions-absurd-and-dont-work-mps-told-welfare>
 regime, and it appears not to recognise that benefit delays are a pressing 
problem.


Responding  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmworpen/522/52204.htm>
earlier this month to a Commons work and pensions committeereport on benefit 
delivery 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmworpen/372/37202.htm>
 the DWP largely brushed aside MPs concerns, instead petulantly taking them to 
task for failing to recognise that its benefit processing performance was “the 
best since records began”.

The majority of benefits were paid on time, it protested, despite it having 
made tens of thousands of staff redundant. Delays were at their lowest ever 
level. There was even a sly implication that delays were often the customer’s 
fault for failing to send correct supporting evidence along with their benefit 
claims.

Everything is fine, nothing needs to change, was the complacent message. It 
neglected to mention its abjectjudicial humiliation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/05/disabled-payment-delay-unlawful-judge-rules-iain-duncan-smith>
 a year ago following grotesque delays in processing Personal Independence 
Payments. That disaster forced it to hire 800 staff to get the chaotic 
administration of that benefit back on track.

Nor did it mention the work and pensions minister Lord Freud’s extraordinary 
admission to MPs 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmworpen/372/37206.htm#_idTextAnchor033>
 that there was no point fixing problems with what he called “dying legacy 
benefits” because the DWP’s energies were better off making their replacement, 
Universal Credit (UC) work “slickly” (just this week the DWP admitted thatthe 
full roll-out of UC was to be delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/20/universal-credit-five-year-delay-2022-damian-green>
 for a further year, until 2022 ).

Boasting that most benefit customers have never had it so good is not the same 
as proving the system is fit for purpose. Hitting dubious internal targets for 
benefits processing does not justify the calamitous impact of delays on 
thousands of vulnerable customers who cannot afford 16 day target waits.

The work and pensions committee is rightfully angry on this point. It heard 
copious evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/19/welfare-system-failing-thousands-vulnerable-claimants-mps-long-waits-payments>
 describing the byzantine dead zones of the benefit system, and the miserable 
consequences for unlucky claimants. The Royal British Legion, which spent 
£133,000 in the first half of last year on food parcels for ex-servicemen left 
hungry by late benefit payments, for example; or the Trussell trust food banks 
network, which told MPs that clients referred as a result of benefit delays 
typically waited between five and 20 weeks for payment.

I asked the committee chairman Frank Field what he made of the DWP’s formal 
response. He was witheringly brief:

They [the DWP] have not actually got the message that these delays are 
disastrous for people.

Benefit delay crises are not going to go away if even legacy benefits do. The 
consequences of designed-in 42-wait for a first universal credit (UC) benefit 
payment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2016/jun/09/debt-and-food-banks-the-legacy-of-universal-credits-long-hello>
 have been alarming welfare advisers, housing associations and food banks for 
some time. Whether UC-triggered food bank use and rent arrears worry ministers 
too is not clear - Lord Freud was evasive whenasked about it in the Lords 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/lords/2016-07-19/debates/16071944000560/UniversalCredit>
 this week, though he did claim that the DWP was “keeping a close eye” on 
matters.

For how much longer, you wonder, can the government - especially one that 
purports to have the interests of the poor in mind - dismiss the evidence of 
its own social security system’s role in the march of food poverty? As West 
Cheshire food bank’s chair of trustees the Rev. Christine Jones put it:


It is completely unacceptable that national policy consistently fails to 
respond effectively to the evidence that on-going hunger remains a reality for 
increasing numbers of people.

• This article was amended on 4 August 2016 to correct a figure from the Still 
Hungry report: 13% of people visiting West Cheshire foodbank because of 
sanctions estimated their crisis would last at least 13 weeks, not 20%.
 