
Plans to tunnel under a Stonehenge road 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/stonehenge-a303-tunnel-chris-grayling-world-heritage-site#comments>
 as part of a transformation of traffic management around the site have again 
hit headlines and stirred discussion among our readers. Here we look at some of 
your responses to Chris Grayling’s £2bn investment scheme.

The Stonehenge tunnel will bring us closer to a mythic past
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2017/jan/12/stonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable>
The transport secretary said the tunnel could enhance the Stonehenge site by 
removing traffic and the concept has been backed by its custodians, English
Heritage <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage> and the National Trust. 
Last year, the historians Dan Snow and Tom Hollandattacked the proposals.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/17/dan-snow-attacks-stonehenge-road-and-tunnel-plans>

Stonehenge tunnel is a monumental error | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/15/stonehenge-tunnel-is-a-monumental-error>
Many readers commenting on the story were not sure of the benefits. Here are 
some of your views – you can get involved in the conversation by clicking on 
the comments.


‘There is plenty of available land to obviate the need for a tunnel’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3978770> martybishop  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3978770> 12 January 2017 11:41am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91025339> 
Surely boring a tunnel is rather like taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut 
isn't it? There is plenty of available land to obviate the need for a tunnel. 
If the idea is to obscure the view of the monument to deter gawkers and 
accidents then sure a high fence or embankment would be a better and cheaper 
option. Totally OTT.

‘Go see Stonehenge while it’s still standing I say’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4431782> melrosechick  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4431782> 12 January 2017 11:44am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91025507> 
Absolutely insane. Go see Stonehenge while its still standing I say. I note 
the Tories are happy to spend a bloody fortune doing up their palace of 
Westminster but are more than happy to put our national heritage site of
Stonehenge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge> in serious peril in 
order to save a few quid. No wonder the Tories love Trump, 'its all about the 
money...money...money'.

‘Maybe if they introduced a £5 toll that would make people think twice’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3616907> ToffeeDan1  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/3616907> 12 January 2017 11:27am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91024447> 
I lived about 3 miles from Stonehenge for about a decade. I have to say I find 
this deeply disappointing news. The delays were long - but only now and then. 
Certainly it was easy enough to avoid but only laziness on the part of the car 
user prevents them finding an alternate route (M4 for example or other routes 
closer to Salisbury) and obviously a great number of minor roads in the 
vicinity.

However the incredible cost and impact on the local environment in the 
Amesbury region is significant. Maybe if they introduced a £5 toll that would 
make people think twice about travelling down the A303 in peak hours.

‘There shouldn’t really be a road in this area; the entire valley is filled 
with various barrows, earthworks and other ancient structures’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11079613> gbrading  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11079613> 12 January 2017 11:29am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91024592> 
My opinion was that it would be cheaper and more efficient to redirect the 
A303 between Amesbury and the roundabout with the A360. There shouldn't really 
be a road in this area; the entire valley is filled with various barrows, 
earthworks and other ancient structures. Yes, journeys will be made slightly 
longer by doing this, but we'll be protecting some of the most ancient 
structures in Britain. We should not demolish our heritage for the sake of 
getting to work 5 minutes quicker.

‘Where will it end?’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4094945> MapKing  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/4094945> 12 January 2017 11:04am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91023012> 
The A303 how it currently stands is marvellous. The most interesting long 
distance route in the country. Leave it how it is.

The last thing that is needed is for more traffic (including freight traffic) 
to be encouraged onto the M3/A303/A30 route to Devon and Cornwall.

If the Stonehenge bit is sorted, it will put more pressures on Wylye, 
Chicklade, Sparkford. Sort those bottlenecks and it will just place more 
pressures on the A358 and the Blackdown Hills. Sort those bottlenecks and it 
will just place more pressures on the M5 south of Taunton and impact on the 
nationally designated Blackdown Hills AONB.

Where will it end? A still full M4/M5 route. A doomed M3/A303/A30 route, with 
the Blackdown Hills even more screwed. And an even more buggered south coast 
A31/A35 route as people look for alternatives to get the the South West. It's 
anachronistic 20th Century thinking at its worst.

‘If English Heritage and the National Trust back it what’s the problem?’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16844130> JCFORPMASAP  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/16844130> 12 January 2017 11:45am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91025587> 
If English Heritage and the National Trust back it what's the problem? I would 
think as long as they employ the best engineers to ensure that the site is not 
damaged or spoilt by neither the building or the subsequent traffic then fine. 
Problem is will a government who knows the price of everything and the value of 
nothing do that?

‘A complete violation of the land under one of the most important sacred sites 
in Britain’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2391194> sunshine2  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2391194> 12 January 2017 12:03pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91026645>  This comment 
has been chosen by Guardian staff because it contributes to the debate 
This is a complete violation of the land under one of the most important 
sacred sites in Britain. It is a tragedy.
And why? In order to cut minutes off a road journey. A pathetic waste of 
money; but also a clear indicator of how our government know the price of 
everything and the value of nothing. It is the complete opposite of protecting 
and honouring our heritage. It is allowing the capitalist culture to destroy 
everything we hold dear.
It seems nothing is sacred. 
This is just as bad, if not worse, than fracking under Sherwood Forest.
It would be interesting to know how much money the contractor has donated to 
the Tories.
We all know that English Heritage only care about visitor numbers and profits 
at Stonehenge. But the National Trust? I had thought better of you. Have you 
got your noses in the corporate trough, or are you just selling out?
Either way, I am cancelling my NT membership today.

‘The site has already been partially ruined by the ugliest, most hideous 
“visitor centre”’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15681384> zinopus  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/15681384> 12 January 2017 12:23pm 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91027905> 
The site has already been partially ruined (but thankfully a reasonable 
distance away) by the ugliest, most hideous "visitor centre" (£27 million) 
perhaps ever designed. Similar visitor centres have ruined many other UK 
heritage sites, including the Needles and Land's End. Most of these ghastly 
places are corporatised money spinners and do precisely nothing to enhance or 
enlighten anyone. If you want to research a site all you have to do is google 
it and all the info you could possibly want is available.

‘People bemoaning this should take a look at the Devil’s Punch Bowl scheme’

 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2293922> GarfieldTheCat  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/2293922> 12 January 2017 11:08am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91023290> 
People bemoaning this should take a look at the scheme which was undertaken on 
the A3 a few years back around Devil's Punch Bowl - an area of outstanding 
natural beauty.

The tunnel (which was supported by the National Trust) has resulted it traffic 
being removed from the immediate area and a restoration of some of the 
landscape.

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devil's_Punch_Bowl 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Devil's_Punch_Bowl>

‘Tom Holland and Dan Snow are not “experts”. They are historians, not 
archaeologists. UNESCO is supportive.’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14679647> S Tilbury  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/14679647> 12 January 2017 11:29am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91024554> 
Tom Holland and Dan Snow are not "experts". They are historians, not 
archaeologists. UNESCO is supportive.The National Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust> and the Council for British 
Archaeology are broadly supportive, although they say the tunnel should be 
longer. Why doesn't the article mention this?

 ‘The tunnel won’t, of course, go directly under the stones’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11761966> Yeokel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/11761966> 12 January 2017 11:03am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91022973> 
Yet another totally misleading headline from the Guardian.

Despite the many idiotic comments below, the tunnel won't, of course, go 
directly under the stones. Could you people really be so stupid as to believe 
that is what they would do?
As far as I am aware, it will go underneath or very close to the current A303 
route and will eventually restore much peace and tranquillity to the area.

‘I am willing to listen to the archaelogists’
 <https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10273939> Rob Steel  
<https://profile.theguardian.com/user/id/10273939> 12 January 2017 11:21am 
<https://discussion.theguardian.com/comment-permalink/91024040> 
You've missed the point. The whole area is replete with ancient artifacts and 
eveidence of history, above and below ground. I don't know much about all this 
but I am willing to listen to the archaelogists who do...
 