
A fresh warning about the impact Brexit would have on the City has been issued 
after a powerful committee of MPs published data showing that almost 5,500 UK 
firms rely on corporate “passports” to conduct business across the EU.

Andrew Tyrie, chairman of the Treasury select committee, said the business put 
at risk if the UK lost its access to the single market – and associated 
passporting rights for individual companies – was significant.

The Conservative MP published data provided by the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> showing 
5,476 UK-registered firms hold at least one passport to do business in another 
EU or European Economic Area member state. Just over 8,000 companies authorised 
in other EU states use these rules to do business in the UK – which could be 
seen as a sign that the passporting rules are also important to non-UK firms.

London’s standing in global finance at risk as City faces loss of ‘EU passport’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/london-city-eu-passport-brexit>
“These figures give us an initial idea of the effects of losing full access to 
the single market in financial services. The business put at risk could be 
significant. Almost 5,500 UK firms are using passports to do business inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and over 8,000 European firms 
are using passports to provide services in the UK,” said Tyrie.

The issue of passporting – which allows UK authorised firms banks and fund 
managers to conduct business in the other 27 states – has also been highlighted 
by the Bundesbank president, Jens Weidmann, whotold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/hard-brexit-will-cost-city-of-london-its-hub-status-warns-bundesbank-boss>
 that UK companies would lose these rights if it did not remain part of at 
least the EEA (EU countries and Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway).


This “hard Brexit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/tory-eurosceptics-push-for-hard-brexit-eu-single-market>
 is favoured by some Conservatives although on Monday ratings agency Moody’s
downplayed the impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/hard-brexit-would-have-only-modest-impact-on-city-says-moodys>
, saying that while there would be a loss of business the impact would be 
manageable.

Weidmann said “passporting rights are tied to the single market and would 
automatically cease to apply if Great Britain is no longer at least part of the 
European Economic Area”.

Tyrie has published a pamphlet 
<http://openeurope.org.uk/intelligence/britain-and-the-eu/giving-brexit-meaning>
 for Open Europe which argues the government must now set out what it hopes to 
achieve from Brexit talks and explain much of what was promised will come at 
considerable economic and fiscal cost.


The Norway option: what is it and what does it mean for Britain?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/28/the-norway-option-what-is-it-and-what-does-it-mean-for-britain>
Tyrie said: “None of the current off-the-shelf arrangements can preserve 
existing passporting arrangements, while giving the UK the influence and 
control it needs over financial services regulation as it develops. Efforts to 
secure an appropriate arrangement for UK-based firms will be one of the most 
challenging aspects of the negotiations about the UK’s future relationship with 
the EU.”

He urged the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney, and the chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, to put the issue at the top of their in-trays. “No doubt the hard 
grind of establishing what best protects UK interests is already under way,” 
said Tyrie.

The Treasury select committee comprises both pro-Brexit and anti-Brexit MPs.

In a letter to Tyrie, Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the FCA said: “A 
passport is a mechanism through which firms may exercise their right to provide 
services and their right to establishment ... As such, a passport obviates the 
need to obtain separate authorisations from other member states.”
 