
When Maciej Fabrycki, a student at Warwick University, spoke to his parents 
over the summer, they told him to be careful. His parents, who live back home 
in Poland, had read about a rise in racist abuse following the vote for Brexit.

“They tell me when I’m coming back from a night out not to speak Polish or not 
to show off the fact that I’m Polish because it might provoke some British 
people,” says Fabrycki, who came to the UK to study management and finance. 
“But they’ve never lived here, so what they hear is from the media, and the 
image in the media is negative.”

Fabrycki is one of 125,000 EU students studying at UK universities – a further 
312,000 international students, who pay higher fees, come to the UK from 
outside of the EU. He chose the UK because the course had a good reputation and 
he wanted to experience a new culture, but he’s not sure he would make the same 
choice if he were a school-leaver today.

The vote for Brexit, endless headlines promising a crackdown on international 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 and arise in racist incidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 have left many students feeling unwelcome.

Saffy Allayna, vice-president for international students at Essex University 
Student Union, says some new students are “slightly careful”. “They really try 
to behave, to avoid speaking too much of their own language, so that people 
don’t say: ‘You should be speaking English, you’re in England’,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f43feea22bb135cb9f0b0efca608b413e9dc3a6%2F0_141_1247_974%2F1247.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20tell%20me%20not%20to%20speak%20Polish'%3A%20students%20on%20life%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20tell%20me%20not%20to%20speak%20Polish%27%3A%20students%20on%20life%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8f43feea22bb135cb9f0b0efca608b413e9dc3a6%2F0_141_1247_974%2F1247.jpg>
 Saffy Allayna says some new international students avoid speaking too much of 
their own language. 
In the week following the Brexit vote the number of racist incidents reported 
to the policeincreased fivefold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/police-report-fivefold-increase-race-hate-crimes-since-brexit-result>
. Sorana Vieru, NUS vice-president for higher education, who is also an EU 
student, says the NUS is now helping student unions to become hate crime 
reporting centres.

“We are worried about any possible rise in racism, xenophobia, antisemitism 
and Islamophobia resulting recent votes in the referendum, US election but also 
the rise of the far right in France,” she says.

UK students – who overwhelmingly voted remain 
<http://www.youthsight.com/uk-students-brexit/> – have rallied around their EU 
and international classmates by organising advice sessions and cultural events, 
adds Vieru. At Essex University, students are running special trips around the 
UK as well as Christmas events.


Fabrycki says that he does feel safe in his local area, where there is a big 
Polish community, but he knows others living in the UK do not. Some Polish 
friends have already turned down university places because they fear they are 
not welcome. “There is concern about this, Polish people are worrying about 
racism.”

They want our money, they want our trade, but they don’t want the people
Rishabh Kumar, an Indian student 
Although he enjoys his course and feels at home on campus, he adds: “The fact 
the majority of British people voted to leave the EU, and one of the main 
reasons was immigration from eastern Europe – including Poland – this, in a 
nutshell, makes me feel less welcome.”

University application figures show the number of EU students applying for 
places on some of the most competitive programmes – including medicine, 
dentistry, and all Oxford and Cambridge courses – havedropped 9% on last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/27/uk-university-applications-from-eu-down-9-ucas>
.

The EU referendum follows a series of policy changes that universities say 
have damaged their reputation abroad. Since the removal of post-study work 
visas in 2012, the number of Indian students in UK higher education fell by 
more than 50%, from 39,090 in 2010-11 to 18,320 in 2014-15. Last month, home 
secretary Amber Rudd proposed a further clamp down on overseas students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 while, during a visit to Delhi, prime ministerTheresa May rejected calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/uk-will-not-offer-more-work-visas-to-indian-nationals-says-may>
 to relax the rules surrounding Indian visas.

 “What many people in India perceived was something like a postcolonial 
arrogance there,” says Rishabh Kumar, an Indian student who is in studying 
economics at Sheffield University. “In the whole Brexit debate the government 
said we’ll have closer ties with the commonwealth. People were expecting after 
Brexit that the government’s attitudes would have changed, but it was the same 
story: they want our money, they want our trade, but they don’t want the 
people.”

University in Europe: how to know if it's right for you
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/08/university-in-europe-how-to-know-if-its-right-for-you>
Professor Michael Arthur, president and provost of UCL, says he is “intensely 
worried” about the UK’s image overseas and that the university has been working 
to reassure students.

“The international flavour, the culture of organisations, would change if 
there were fewer international students. We would feel that quite acutely. But 
there would be very significant financial pressures if the downturn was 
significant,” says Arthur.

 Fees from non-EU students contributed nearly 30% of the higher education 
sector’s tuition income 
<http://blog.hefce.ac.uk/2016/01/19/universities-recruit-and-retain-more-international-students-than-ever/>
 in 2013–14, despite international students accounting for only 13% of 
enrolments.

Increasing fees for home students would be “one possible outcome”, he says, 
though these are currently capped by government. “We would have to look at our 
programmes and decide which ones we can no longer continue because we don’t 
have enough students.”

Arthur also fears that future researchers, who would previously have come to 
the UK for their postdoc or PhD, will go elsewhere.

Professor Simon Marginson, director of the Centre for Global Higher Education 
at the UCL Institute of Education, says the US and Australia are competing with 
the UK to attract students.

“If the UK cuts its international student numbers – and there’s every 
indication there’ll be some kind of major cut in non-EU students over the next 
few years – then they will simply give market share to other countries,” he 
says. “If you suddenly decide in three years’ time that you want to let more 
international students in, they won’t necessarily spring back.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bc081eb12153474d91cf03ffce28bc51684a80b%2F0_195_750_450%2F750.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20tell%20me%20not%20to%20speak%20Polish'%3A%20students%20on%20life%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20tell%20me%20not%20to%20speak%20Polish%27%3A%20students%20on%20life%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Finternational-students-life-after-brexit-universities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9bc081eb12153474d91cf03ffce28bc51684a80b%2F0_195_750_450%2F750.jpg>
 Mishark Orji moved to the UK from Nigeria. 
Mishark Orji, who came to the UK from Nigeria to study, and is now at 
Birmingham City University, says that friends are already deciding to go 
elsewhere. “International students pay for visa fees to come here, sometimes 
they get denied, they don’t get a refund back, they pay the institution fees, 
which are way, way more than UK and EU fees.

“I know a couple of people in my university who are in their final year – 
they’re saying they’re going to go to Canada and the US to do their master’s.”

Kumar says his university has done lots to make him feel welcome, but that 
national policies do not. “Other countries like Canada or Australia offer 
post-study work visas,” adds Kumar. “Their wages are also the same. The 
standard of living is good there. Why would you want to go somewhere where 
you’re not treated as well?”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 