
On the outskirts of Stockton-on-Tees, upstairs in a church, there’s a setup 
that’s now uneasily familiar: crates of donated food for families who can’t 
afford to eat, and a charity volunteer – filling the gap left by the state – 
there to feed them.

Steve, a 53-year-old on jobseeker’s allowance (JSA), knows both sides of that 
coin. Over the past three years he has used thefood bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/food-banks> twice himself, but volunteers 
each week to help others who are struggling. “Society doesn’t make it easy,” he 
says. “They’re stopping this; they’re stopping that. It’s hard for people now.” 
The food bank, he tells me, is a symbol: “I can survive.”

That has particular meaning for Steve. From the age of eight, he was in a 
local children’s home. When he was 11, he was sexually abused by one of the 
superintendents. He spoke out to a female care home worker (“I said, ‘If I tell 
you, he won’t get me, will he?’”) – and after going to court, his abuser was 
convicted. But by the age of 14, Steve found himself bouncing between youth 
detention, borstal and care.

“It was like, ‘These people can’t protect me, so I’ve got to protect myself.’ 
Like I was getting back at them.” He pauses. “I couldn’t cope.”

Before the age of 18, he had been put in men’s prison (“I was trouble so they 
put me in with the adults”). Over the next three decades, he fell in and out of 
crime – including claiming JSA while working, and eventually armed robbery. In 
turn, he was in and out of prison.

It was this that led him to the food bank. After 10 years in prison, in 2013, 
he was released to a hostel – a safe bed with all meals provided – and six 
months later he moved to supported housing. “The thing was, I left the hostel 
on the Tuesday but my JSA didn’t come in until the Friday,” he says. “I had no 
money, no way to get food.” He was referred to the bank, and a few months later 
he started volunteering there.

Steve tells me the food bank and the church where it’s based have “turned my 
life around”, but financially he’s struggling. As we speak, he’s waiting for a 
call back for a job – “Just driving,” he says – and until he finds work, JSA is 
his only income.

Currently he is repaying £26 each fortnight for the JSA he had previously 
falsely claimed, and some more of his benefits go straight to the council to 
pay his rent. That leaves him with £96 to live on for two weeks: for his 
electricity, gas and food.

Without the security of a good wage, finding ways to feed yourself, 
affordably, can become a full-time job.

“I don’t go to one shop; I go into several. It takes time but you have to,” 
Steve explains.

“I buy dented tinned food because they’re cheap. I don’t waste. I eat mash on 
a Sunday and then on the Monday I’ll put some cheese with it,” he says. “A bag 
of chips, that’s luxury to me.”

Steve’s experience of food poverty is featured in Hunger Pains 
<https://policypress.co.uk/hunger-pains> – the academic Kayleigh Garthwaite’s 
soon-to-be-published chronicle of what she calls Foodbank Britain. As the book 
starkly shows, the circumstances change but the hunger is a constant – from a 
child eating out-of-date food after her mum stopped working, because of mental 
health problems, to a zero-hours worker ashamed he isn’t earning enough to eat.

Our children’s mental health crisis is shocking. But so is the Tory silence | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/19/children-mental-health-crisis-tory-silence-austerity-natasha-devon-axed>
At the end of 2013, Steve had to use the food bank for the second time: he was 
suffering from severe anxiety but was caught in the backlog for out-of-work 
sickness benefits, and had to wait a year for his Work Capability Assessment 
(WCA) – the test the Department for Work and Pensions uses to judge whether 
someone is “fit for work”.

“When I came out of prison … I was petrified. It was like coming into an alien 
world. Even the traffic. People everywhere,” he says. “But by the time I [had a 
WCA], I was all right. I told the doctor that. That’s part of the government’s 
plan, I guess” – by which he means holding off assessment for full sickness 
benefits until the potential claimant has recovered anyway.

Nowadays, as he looks for work, he’s building ideas for how to get by: buying 
a loaf of bread and putting it in the freezer; cutting a joint into bacon 
(“Boil it and you lose half the size”); or finding ways to stretch product 
dates. “I take the milk top off – break the seal – and make it air-tight,” he 
tells me. “It’ll last a week that way.”

Ask Steve how he is, and he speaks positively – listing recipe ideas as we 
talk – but he admits he doesn’t feel healthy. “Veg, it’s not cheap,” he says. 
“It’s easier for me to buy two bags of sugar for a pound. If you can afford 
Marks & Spencer, you can afford healthy living. When you’ve got no money, your 
‘five a day’ go out the window.”

As if reinforcing Steve’s point, there’s a small corner shop across the road 
from where he talks. For some, food can still come from a shelf and a till, 
easily available and convenient. But for others, caught in Foodbank Britain, 
it’s now breakfast clubs,pay-what-you-can cafes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/05/cafe-older-people-hungry-surplus-food-gateshead-malnutrition>
 and food parcels above the local church.

 * Hunger Pains by Kayleigh Garthwaite 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407994/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 (Policy Press, £14.99). To order a copy for, go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/407994/?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min. p&p of £1.99.

Sarah’s paraplegic – and now she’s been penalised for trying to work | Frances 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/paraplegic-work-esa-benefits> 