
Two months ago, the National Labor Relations Board ruled that PhD students who 
are also teachers at private universities in the US count as employees under 
federal labour law. This means they are entitled tovote for a union 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/08/24/nlrb-says-graduate-students-private-universities-may-unionize>
. A change in labour law may not seem very exciting – but the day of the ruling 
was one of the most thrilling of our lives.

Academic staff: we graduate teaching assistants need you to fight for us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/28/academic-staff-we-graduate-teaching-assistants-need-you-to-fight-for-us>
We are graduate teachers at Yale University: Robin is a geologist, Aaron is a 
political theorist , and Josh is an English literature scholar. We have been 
campaigning for recognition for our work as graduate teachers for some time.

In fact, graduate students at Yale have been organising for 26 years. Ours is 
the longest-standing union effort at a private university in the country. 
Generations of graduate employees before us have fought for and won 
improvements to our working conditions.

But we still have a long way to go in order to improve our conditions – which 
is why this ruling, and our chance to unionise, is so crucial. We have 
colleagues who spend more than half of their teaching salary on childcare. 
Others have seen their teaching workload double without any increase in their 
pay. And last year some graduate teachers faced a cut in their pay of nearly 
22% for doing the same type of teaching assignment that they did the year 
before.

Persistent protest

In the past few years, we’ve demonstrated time and time again for our desire 
to be part of a union. We’ve marched by the hundreds in the pouring rain, and 
we’ve persistently presented statements on the teaching issues we want to 
address through the negotiations. Last spring, we officially chartered our 
union: “UNITE HERE Local 33 <http://www.local33.org/>”. 


It’s an extraordinary time for academics who want better terms and conditions

After the NLRB’s ruling, our university can’t ignore us any longer. The ruling 
means that we finally have the right to elections to win official recognition 
of the union we’ve chartered.

It’s an historic moment, and an exciting time to be teaching at Yale. It’s 
also an extraordinary time for the academics who want better terms and 
conditions beyond New Haven. In the past few years we’ve been joined by a surge 
of organising efforts at universities across the country. From Harvard, to the 
University of Chicago, to Columbia, graduate teachers are insisting that our 
work is crucial to the educational mission of our universities, and should be 
recognised as such.

After we heard the decision, celebrations erupted. Messages of support and 
congratulations poured in from around the country: from our peers at public 
universities who have unions and know how they improve lives; from our 
colleagues at private universities who, like us, are thrilled to finally have 
the right to vote; and from former Yale graduate teachers who’ve campaigned for 
this in the past.

The heart of universities

Graduate teachers teach the classes that are at the heart of college education 
at Yale. The three of us have taught Yale undergraduates to read fossil 
records, political arguments and poetry, and to see the world differently as a 
result.

Graduate teaching assistants deserve more than £4.40 per student per week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/mar/08/university-graduate-teaching-assistants-pay-phd-academic>
We came to graduate school because learning about these things – the 
fossilised death spiral of horseshoe crabs, the evolution of democratic 
thought, the technique of verse composition in early 19th-century poetry – 
changed our lives. And in turn, we wanted to change the lives of our students 
through our teaching.

We still want that. But we also want the university to recognise and support 
the work of teaching. We want to make Yale a better place to teach. And we know 
that a union is the way to do it.

In the process of organising our union, we have talked to our colleagues and 
each other about the vision of the university workplace we want, and we have 
advocated for the things that will bring it about.

We want our female colleagues to have recourse to a grievance process in 
response to sexual harassment at work. We want to secure the mental health 
resources necessary for teachers to combat stress.

We want a union so we can campaign for affordable childcare for graduate 
teachers who are parents that struggle to work and care for their families. We 
want the chance to hold the university accountable for discrimination in the 
workplace. We are ready to take steps to make these visions a reality.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 