
Passersby have been known to burst into tears when first catching sight of 
Jackson. “It’s very unusual to come across an eight-year-old boy walking with a 
white cane, after all,” acknowledges his father, Kevin Coghlan.

He and his wife Alicia were devastated in 2008 when their two-month-old son 
was diagnosed with Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) – an inherited retinal 
degenerative disease, characterised by severe loss of vision at birth, that 
affects just two to three in every 100,000 UK newborns.

“Initially we were told – in a very matter-of-fact way – that Jackson was 
blind and would never be able to see,” says Kevin. “We were panicked, angry and 
blaming ourselves, thinking: ‘What did we do wrong?’”

Fight for Sight: opening doors for ground-breaking glaucoma research
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fight-for-sight/2016/oct/31/fight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research>
Seeking answers, the couple “camped out” at the world-renowned Moorfields Eye 
Hospital in London, and their persistence paid off: they were granted an 
appointment with LCA expert Prof Tony Moore. “He diagnosed Jackson with LCA – a 
condition which leads to poor central vision but a small percentage of 
peripheral vision. He told us it was extremely rare, but reassured us that 
Jackson would be able to live a full, enjoyable life,” continues Kevin. “More 
than anything we wanted him to be treated like a normal, confident little boy.”

As Kevin and Alicia wished, their son now lives an orthodox life, and is 
certainly neither excluded nor shy. He attends a primary school in Hertford, 
where the trio moved almost three years ago, and although he has a specialist 
teaching assistant, he enjoys all the classes with his schoolmates, with 
English and mathematics his favourites.

Like most eight-year-olds, he is currently obsessed with Pokémon GO, the 
augmented reality game that was launched last summer. “He holds his iPad close 
to his ear and then I have to help catch the figures when he hears that they 
are there,” explains Kevin.

“At his brilliant primary school, he is accepted as a normal child. And 
sometimes when he has vision training all his class wear blindfolds and play 
‘goalball’, which involves listening to a ball with a bell in it. They all love 
it, and it helps Jackson’s friends understand what his life is like.

“Unsurprisingly, music is really important to him, and when he first joined 
the school he volunteered to sing a solo for the Christmas concert. He has no 
inhibitions about going on stage and performing – he’s really confident and 
loves being centre of attention – and he sang the song so beautifully, the 
majority of the audience had a little cry. It was a very special moment.”

Back in 2008, Moore also informed the Coghlans about Fight for Sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fight-for-sight>, the UK’s leading charity 
dedicated to funding pioneering eye research, and in eight years the family 
have helped raise nearly £20,000 to support vital LCA research that could one 
day help Jackson see.

“Fight for Sight has been outstanding, every step of the way,” says Kevin. 
“They do as much as they possibly can. And the great thing is we can work with 
the charity and have some say in the research projects we would like to see 
funded – whether this is lab research or funding equipment – so we have a 
direct ability to help Jackson.”

The motivation to raise awareness of LCA and funnel funds to directly improve 
their son’s life is – understandably – strong, despite no cure being available 
at present. But a breakthrough is close. “The last time we spoke to Prof Moore 
he was really hopeful that during Jackson’s lifetime they will find a cure to 
help improve his vision,” says Alicia.

Dr Dolores Conroy, director of research at Fight for Sight, says: “Several 
genes implicated in this disease have been identified and a better 
understanding of the function of these genes has been gained. Information from 
our research directly aids patient diagnosis, prognosis, as well as allowing 
appropriate counselling. As our knowledge of the genetic bases of LCA grows, 
there will be more possibilities to develop effective treatments.

“We will continue to invest funding into finding the remaining genes that 
cause the condition and developing new treatments. These will include 
gene-replacement therapy, new drugs and stem cells. Never before has the need 
for funding eye research been so important, and hopefully we can help create a 
future in which Jackson will be able to see.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwe-were-initially-told-jackson-was-blind-and-would-never-see-meet-the-family-fighting-to-save-their-sons-sight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51a0da19450131377d5851cb3c39750a2e753992%2F0_259_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20were%20initially%20told%20Jackson%20was%20blind%20and%20would%20never%20see'%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20the%20family%20fighting%20to%20save%20their%20son%E2%80%99s%20sight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwe-were-initially-told-jackson-was-blind-and-would-never-see-meet-the-family-fighting-to-save-their-sons-sight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20were%20initially%20told%20Jackson%20was%20blind%20and%20would%20never%20see%27%20%E2%80%93%20meet%20the%20family%20fighting%20to%20save%20their%20son%E2%80%99s%20sight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fwe-were-initially-told-jackson-was-blind-and-would-never-see-meet-the-family-fighting-to-save-their-sons-sight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51a0da19450131377d5851cb3c39750a2e753992%2F0_259_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘Jackson shows so much strength and courage living with his sight loss every 
day; he is intelligent, fearless and cheeky and he is an inspiration’ 
 You can bet the Coghlans will be doing their utmost to assist. Kevin and his 
stepmother Nicky are about to undertake an eight-day trek up Mount Kilimanjaro 
in Tanzania, in the latest fundraising challenge. “We have so far raised almost 
£5,000 – I even appeared on Songs of Praise last June walking up Snowdon, which 
was part of my training,” says Kevin. “Jackson, as usual, took the limelight,” 
he adds with a grin.

“The Kilimanjaro hike will be really tough, mentally and physically. The last 
two days, in particular, will be gruelling; we will have to start walking well 
before sunrise and trek for about 12 hours on both days. It will be difficult, 
too, to be away from Alicia and Jackson for nearly two weeks – easily the 
longest time since he was born.

“Knowing that I am helping better his life, and raising awareness and funds 
for LCA, will keep me going, I’m sure. Jackson shows so much strength and 
courage living with his sight loss every day; he is intelligent, fearless and 
cheeky and he is an inspiration. I wanted to show him he can face any challenge 
and that’s why I wanted to push myself to my limits and do this challenge.”

Kevin adds: “For Jackson’s future, the sky is the limit. He can do anything he 
puts his mind to.” With increased funding, Fight for Sight can help Jackson, 
and others diagnosed with LCA, to live an even more fulfilled life, by 
providing them with the hope that one day they will be able to see. That really 
would be the pinnacle.”

Help find a treatment for LCA
Leber congenital amaurosis (LCA) is an inherited retinal degenerative disease 
characterised by severe loss of vision at birth. LCA affects two to three 
newborns per 100,000 and is one of the most common causes of blindness in 
children. A variety of other eye-related abnormalities including roving eye 
movements (nystagmus) and sensitivity to bright light (photophobia) also occur 
with this disease. Mutations in any of the genes associated with LCA disrupt 
the development and function of the retina, resulting in early vision loss. For 
a third of LCA sufferers, the cause is unknown, and there are currently no 
treatments for most types of the disease.

Fight for Sight is the leading charity in the UK funding pioneering eye 
research to make sight loss a thing of the past. Please help us. Find out more 
atfightforsight.org.uk/get-involved/sight/ 
<http://www.fightforsight.org.uk/get-involved/sight/>

 