
There is no immediate reason to assume that Rupert Murdoch is a fan of the 
legendary Gil Scott-Heron, but if he can find an old compilation CD – and he 
should – he might enjoy Gil’s 1970 track,Brother <https://youtu.be/9moWet_gwfY>.

“There are,” noted Gil, “a lot of comments about who’s blacker than you are, 
and who’s blacker than she is, blacker than thou. In other words, it’s a sort 
of trend.” A malign trend that made it all the way to Rupert’s Twitter account 
almost half a century later.

Gil Scott-Heron obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/may/28/gil-scott-heron-obituary> 
As we know, Rupert last week entered the realms of race, culture and 
shadiology with his now-infamous tweet about President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/08/rupert-murdoch-apologizes-twitter-obama-real-black-president>
, who is of mixed heritage, and the Republican presidential candidate Ben 
Carson, who is not. “Ben and Candy Carson terrific,” tweeted the media mogul. 
“What about a real black president who can properly address the racial divide? 
And much else.”

Rupert Murdoch implies Obama is not 'real black president' in tweet praising 
Ben Carson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/08/rupert-murdoch-obama-not-real-black-president-tweet-ben-carson>
One furore and two hours later, the magnate returned to clear up the mess, 
tweeting: “Apologies! No offence meant. Personally find both men charming.” 
Appearing before the Leveson inquiry in 2011, Murdoch said that washis most 
humbling day <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14205909>. Can this have been far 
behind?

Worth saying that he isn’t the only luminary to stray into this contested 
territory. Three years ago, Morgan Freeman, who – unlike Murdoch – has some 
regard for Obama, said:“America’s first black president hasn’t arisen yet. He’s 
not America’s first black president – he’s America’s first mixed-race 
president.” 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2012/07/morgan-freeman-obama-isnt-a-black-president.html>

What to do? This is simple in many ways, and I say there is precedent. In the 
matter of racial attacks, which can be investigated in a particular way when so 
classified, and which can carry heavier sentences if proven, the police long 
ago resolved that if the subject of that attack says there was a racial 
motivation, we work on that basis. We accept their perception, until there is 
reason to do otherwise.

The president is similarly free to describe himself as he will and offer his 
perception with expectation that we will respect it. There are a variety of 
terms that have emerged and evolved over time. He can choose any one of them. 
And he has done so, on numerous occasions, but for the avoidance of doubt,turn 
to YouTube <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=B6HCp3R4dUc> and watch him 
self-describe quite unequivocally. “I am a black man who grew up without a 
father,” he says.

That’s his right, Brother Rupert. He can be as real black as he wants to be.
 