
Eventually the chairs and tables had to go, chopped for firewood as the 
temperature sank further below freezing. It was new year in northern Greece and 
inside Thessaloniki’sSoftex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/13/child-refugees-sexually-assaulted-at-official-greek-camps>
 refugee camp, the wooden furniture that refugees had assiduously made to 
provide some comfort was sacrificed to help them survive another night.

About 66,000 refugees are stranded in Greece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>, of whom an estimated 26,400 are 
children, mostly Syrian. No one knows what 2017 holds for these youngsters, 
where they will end up or what language they must learn. But as winter’s 
numbing cold is replaced by summer’s mosquitoes, they will probably remain in 
situ, trapped between worlds.

Last Friday, Labour peer Alf Dubs, who last year forced the UK government to 
accept more unaccompanied minors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/lone-child-refugees-unaccompanied-dubs-amendment-arrive-uk-calais>
, arrived in Thessaloniki to visit the city’s emergency refugee camps and 
immediately felt despair. He saw babies crawling on frost-crusted paths, and 
families shivering in flimsy tents. One volunteer told him how 60 Syrian 
families had been found surviving in an apartment block beyond Thessaloniki 
airport. Their only support was cash cards to access state handouts. The 
nearest shop was an hour’s walk away.

Dubs, who was brought to Britain from Czechoslovakia in 1939 as part of the 
Kindertransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/lord-dubs-refugees-face-greater-hostility-than-ever-in-2017>
 project,predicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
 during a visit to the Calais “Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/02/child-refugees-calais-failed-by-britain>
” camp last August that the squalor he saw would induce nightmares.

Speaking on Friday as the afternoon temperature sank to -4C, Dubs said it was 
the slow suffocation of hope, evident in the hollow stares of the children he 
saw, that this time had left him crushed. “I thought the Jungle was bad enough, 
but the lack of hope here is more depressing than anything I saw in Calais. 
Conditions in the camps can be horrific. Parents should not have to burn 
furniture in order to keep warm in sub-zero temperatures.”

In April, Dubs drove through an amendment to the Immigration Act committing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/child-refugee-fight-caught-publics-imagination-lord-dubs>
 the UK government to helping some of the estimated 88,000 child refugees 
believed to be travelling alone across Europe. But ministers appearreluctant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/home-office-criticised-for-opaque-child-refugee-transfer-process>
 to honour the deal. Around2,300 
<http://reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/EKKA%20dashboard%2028-12-2016.pdf>
 unaccompanied child refugees are currently in Greece, of whom at least 300 are 
confirmed as eligible to come to the UK under the Dubs amendment. So far, not 
one has been allowed entry. Eight months after Dub’s famous victory, charities 
say the actual criteria under which children would qualify have not even been 
published.

Dubs refuses to accept the status quo. Accompanied by volunteers from Help 
Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>and Safe Passage 
<http://safepassage.org.uk/>, two organisations whose prodigious efforts have 
helped protect and resettle hundreds of child refugees in the UK, Dubs last 
week met Greek ministers and government officials to try to kickstart the 
movement of children from there.

More tangible was the way the visit of Help Refugees, Safe Passage and Dubs 
succeeded in lifting spirits. On Friday, they travelled to Thessaloniki’s 
Asterókosmos fair to present a belated Christmas for 1,300 Syrian refugee 
children under the age of 12. Organised by Help Refugees, their Greek partner 
organisationIntervolve 
<http://www.northerngreecevolunteers.com/project/intervolve/> and the country’s 
ministry of migration, children gathered from the dozen refugee camps in and 
around the city.

The youngsters and their families spent hours on fairground rides, 
ice-skating, driving dodgems or enjoying arts and crafts sessions before 
meeting Father Christmas to receive a gift their parents had specially chosen 
for them. For a few, fleeting hours the monotony of life in the cold, drab 
camps was forgotten.

Help Refugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> volunteer Tracey 
Myers told how one Syrian mother hailed the day as the best her child had 
enjoyed for six years: “Another said they had been able to forget where they 
were and why. Then there was the mother who thought her child might actually 
sleep well tonight. To see the wide eyes, the bright smiles and insuppressible 
enthusiasm of the children on seeing the fair – they were beside themselves 
with excitement.”

Dubs, who helped Father Christmas dish out gifts to the children, added: “It 
was fantastic to see hundreds of refugee children having the time of their 
lives, a real change from the depression and terrible conditions of the camps.”

Chloe Kousoula of InterVolve, which works with Help Refugees to distribute 
emergency food and clothing, noted how the majority of children could barely 
believe their luck when initially confronted by the fair. “They kept asking: 
‘This is for all of us? We can go everywhere?’.”

Josie Naughton, co-founder of Help Refugees, appreciated the day’s joy was 
largely because it was so different from the norm. “As the cold kicks in, and 
the camps remain particularly hard places to survive, everyone knows there is 
so much to be done to meet basic needs.”

The year ahead promises to be gruelling for the continent’s child refugees, 
stateless and increasingly unwanted as anti-immigrant rhetoric engulfs Europe. 
With the EU deal with Turkey potentially on the verge ofcollapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/turkey-threatens-end-refugee-deal-row-eu-accession-erdogan>
, their numbers may also rapidly swell.

For now, more immediate factors are at play. On Saturday temperatures fell to 
-9C in Thessaloniki, and Naughton is keenly aware that 1,000 unaccompanied 
child refugees are currently homeless, forced to survive on the city’s streets.

Her task is to find them sanctuary while Safe Passage presses ahead with its 
ambition to ensure another 1,000 unaccompanied child refugees make it to the UK.

Dubs openly wonders what might have happened had the two organisations not 
existed. “In many instances Help Refugees and Safe Passage are the only NGOs 
doing something positive for refugees, as particularly large charities seem to 
be keeping away from this most pressing of issues.”
 