
Let me make a prediction. Over the next year, Theresa May’s Tories will tack 
right – but it will not be immediately obvious. The NHS budget will stay 
ringfenced. Ministers can say what they like about grammar schools, but major 
changes to education will first need to be dragged past local government, the 
teachers’ unions and parents.

A letter to Priti Patel, the new international development secretary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jul/18/letter-priti-patel-international-development-secretary-dfid-trade>
No, if you want to see how far to the right our new prime minister will go, 
watch one area that most papers barely cover. Watch international development.

By development, I mean emergency relief for Syrians bombed out of their homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/i-filmed-the-syrian-boy-pulled-from-the-rubble-his-wasnt-a-rare-case>
, healthcare for new mothers and their kids inSierra Leone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sierraleone> and school lessons for girls in 
Pakistan. Who could be against any of that? The answer is: no one in mainstream 
politics. It may have been Labour that pledged a target for government aid 
spending, but it was the Tory-led coalition that made that promise reality so 
that, of every £100 Britain earns, 70 pence goes to poor countries. That, David 
Cameron claimed on his last day at No 10, was one of his proudest achievements.

Even then, Cameron heard a constant hum of discontent from the Brexit brigade: 
taxpayer-funded blimps such as Peter Bone and Philip Davies (he of the recent 
attacks on“feminist zealots”  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/12/tory-mp-philip-davies-claims-uk-legal-system-favours-women-at-mens-rights-event>
. Their line never changed: development money funds corrupt Africans and 
charity begins at home. Penned in for years on the fringes of politics, the 
Brexit brigade took a big stride on 24 June towards the mainstream of their 
party. And now one of their number controls spending on aid and development.

In all the hilarity over Boris Johnson sharing Chevening with Liam Fox and 
David Davis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/23/chevening-house-share-rules-liam-fox-boris-johnson-david-davis>
, one of the most remarkable of May’s appointments went almost unnoticed. 
Because by makingPriti Patel international development 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/09/priti-patel-new-special-adviser-robert-oxley-critic-uk-foreign-aid-spending-target>
 secretary, the new prime minister placed the department in the hands of 
someone who is on record as calling for it to be shut down.

If you want to see in which direction Britain’s right wing is travelling, 
follow Patel’s career. In the same generation as Cameron, she shares none of 
his anxiousness to “modernise” and claim the centre ground. Patel is an 
out-and-out rightwinger, of a kind that senior Tories have been trying to keep 
out of the cabinet for a generation. On Question Time,she called for the return 
of the death penalty, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_5aodBfdFTA> in 
parliament she voted against same-sex marriage. The woman who would go on to 
become employment minister co-wrote a book attacking Britons as “among the 
worst idlers in the world 
<http://labourlist.org/2012/08/tory-mps-attack-brits-as-lazy-labelling-us-among-the-worst-idlers-in-the-world/>
”. The austerity maven, who spent years banging on about the need to bring down 
the budget deficit, was last summerasked by a BBC interviewer how much the 
deficit actually was <https://youtu.be/ehLPWr6Scsg?t=336>. She blinked. She 
squirmed. She patently didn’t have a clue.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_5aodBfdFTA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_5aodBfdFTA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D_5aodBfdFTA&media=>
 Priti Patel calls for the return of the death penalty on Question Time. 
Before entering politics, she worked as part of an expensive team of lobbyists 
at Shandwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/30/priti-patel-worked-as-spin-doctor-tobacco-firm-burma-scandal>
 on behalf of British American Tobacco. In correspondence unearthed by the 
Observer, a senior BAT executive complained at the time: “We have felt a sense 
that Shandwick does not actually feel comfortable or happy working for BAT.” He 
made an exception for Patel:“Priti [and another employee] seem quite relaxed 
working with us.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/may/30/priti-patel-worked-as-spin-doctor-tobacco-firm-burma-scandal>
 So relaxed, in fact, that as an MP, Patelcampaigned against plain packaging on 
cigarettes. 
<http://www.rmif.co.uk/press-room/press-releases/retailers-join-mps-fight-to-oppose-plain-packaging-02-05-14/?y=2014&m=5>

As for development, our new secretary of state has called it “low priority” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3690578/Meet-minister-low-priorities-New-international-aid-secretary-Priti-Patel-previously-demanded-ABOLITION-department-wastes-money.html>
. All this is remarkable, as is the fact that Patel has brought along as one of 
her key aidesRobert Oxley, formerly of the TaxPayers’ Alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/09/priti-patel-new-special-adviser-robert-oxley-critic-uk-foreign-aid-spending-target>
. As campaigns director for the pressure group, Oxley spent years vilifying 
government spending – with a special assault on development. The TPA provided 
the Mail on Sunday with a good chunk of its knocking copy for its campaign 
against aid – which made claims so ludicrous that government officialswere 
forced to declare them as “simply incorrect”. 
<https://www.bond.org.uk/news/2016/03/dfid-hits-back-at-unfounded-allegations-on-aid-spending>

Doubts may have been voiced about the commitment of Patel’s predecessor, 
Justine Greening. Visitors may have noted that her office at the Department for 
International Development was festooned with model planes and other memorabilia 
from her stint at the Department for Transport. But Patel and Oxley have been 
actively hostile to the jobs they are now being paid handsomely to do. As 
Stephen Doughty, on the Commons international development committee, says: 
“These are two of the most ideological critics of aid. They’ve got an agenda to 
pursue – against the very department they’re in.”

Cash earmarked to help people in poor countries will instead be offered to 
middle-income giants like India and China

As much as Patel and Oxley detest the aid-spending target, I cannot see them 
junking it – not when it was in the Tories’ last election manifesto. Much more 
likely is that they will erode it. Cash earmarked to help people in poor 
countries will instead be offered to leaders of middle-income giants such as 
India, China and South Africa, to get them to buy British exports. Look at 
Patel’s announcement last week of a new “partnership” with India, which 
promised “support for India to boost economic growth, jobs and trade, which 
will also benefit Britain”. It contained blah about “smart cities” and equity 
funds, even a rupee-denominated bond. Only in the very final sentence was there 
any clue that this document had come not from the former minister for hi-vis 
jackets, with the casual, dubious claim that “investing in India’s private 
sector benefits India’s poorest people”.

Looming over this is the shadow of Malaysia’s Pergau Dam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/dec/23/hamiltonvalfayed.comment>, that 
milkiest of white elephants funded by Thatcher over official objections, in 
return, it was alleged, for Kuala Lumpur buying British arms. While the first 
Tory development secretary,Andrew Mitchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrew-mitchell>, says people “should 
wait and see what Patel says and does”, insiders have already seen enough. As 
one former senior DfID employee says: “It’s a choice between a fast death for 
the department – and a slow death.” That demise will not be prevented by the 
NGOs, who have gone quiet while awaiting their government grant settlements. 
Nor will it be mourned by a largely hostile press.

One of the tragedies of this is that over two decades, Britain has led the 
world in both its commitment to development and its thinking on the subject. 
And the need for money going to the poorest and most vulnerable people, whether 
hit by climate change or by war or by decades of underinvestment – often linked 
to empires such as Britain’s – hasn’t gone away. A couple of weeks ago, I was 
talking to a Syrian violinist who played at this summer’s Proms. He told me 
about his home of Damascus, about his aunts and uncles still there. About his 
neighbours who would sometimes get maimed or killed by a stray bomb. “You can’t 
have a European heaven while you have a Middle Eastern hell,” he said.
 