
Proudly branding itself as Asia’s world city, Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> is famous for many things – from 
its savoury cuisine and efficient transport system to its modern city skyline, 
just to name a few. Under the glamorous billboards and ubiquitous skyscrapers 
of this fast-paced metropolis, the city is home to nine – soon to be 10 – 
universities, attended by hundreds of thousands of pupils.

The 10 best cities in the world to be a student in 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/dec/01/10-best-cities-in-the-world-to-be-a-student-2016-in-pictures>
“I chose Hong Kong because it’s a global city,” says Anastasia, an Indonesian 
undergraduate student at the University of Hong Kong (HKU). “There are a lot of 
people from different backgrounds and many of them can speak English. That’s 
why it is easier for foreigners to live here.”

The cosmopolitan city has been rated as the eighth best city for students 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/best-student-cities> in the world by the higher 
education data experts QS. But what sets it apart from the pack?


Strong academic reputation

Hong Kong is home to some of the best universities in Asia. The top three 
tertiary institutions in the city; HKU, the Chinese University of Hong Kong 
(CUHK) and the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) – are 
among the best on the continent,according to QS 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/hong-kong>
. These university rankings attract talent from all over the world.

A blending of east and west

Hong Kong is also renowned for its unique cultural blend. Henry Zhao, a 
second-year Australian student at CUHK, describes Hong Kong as “the melting 
point of western and Asian cultures”. He says the city has an advantage because 
of its close proximity to mainland China, and the fact that it remains largely 
free from the level of government censorship seen in the mainland.

“Hong Kong is like a huge hinge where you may get access to many other parts 
of the world,” adds Liu Zehui, a mainland Chinese student at Hong Kong Baptist 
University (HKBU). Having studied in China for 17 years, she decided to further 
her studies in Hong Kong because she was fascinated by the city’s 
cosmopolitanism.

Even though over 90% of the population is ethnically Chinese, the autonomous 
city still inherits influences from its colonial past. All universities in Hong 
Kong use English as the primary medium of instruction, and English is an 
official language in the territory, alongside Cantonese.

What makes Paris the best city in the world for students?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/paris-best-city-in-the-world-for-students>
Hong Kong’s cultural diversity is visible on the streets. Traditional 
Cantonese cuisine, such assiu mei <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Siu_mei> 
(roasted meat) anddim sum <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dim_sum>, is available 
alongside western food like hamburgers, pasta, steak and pizza in almost every 
corner.

Student mix and student activities

Universities in Hong Kong are famous for their countless student activities. 
There is a popular saying among students that undergraduates should accomplish 
five “objectives” before graduation: study well, live in a student dorm, become 
an executive member of a student society at university, get into a relationship 
and work part-time. This highlights the vibrant lives students lead in the city.

Executive members of student societies have the fun – and pain – of organising 
activities for their members. This may include orientation camps for new 
students, annual dinner events, and games for students to mingle with one 
another.


Some students consider this a good opportunity to build up their social 
network. Wong Joey Noelle, a local student at HKU and an executive member of 
the sociology society, says it was “a worthwhile experience that can nurture 
students’ interpersonal as well as leadership skills”. She also says she has 
made many new friends through the society.

But not everyone is satisfied with the way students engage with one another at 
university. Some international students say they find it difficult to mingle 
with locals.

What makes Sydney such a great city for students?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/02/what-makes-sydney-great-city-for-students>
“I found it a bit hard to feel accepted in the local community because of the 
language barrier,” says Anastasia. “When I want to participate in some 
activities, they’re organised in Cantonese so I am unable to join.” 
Nevertheless, she says students are generally welcoming.

An expensive city with relatively low unemployment

The main downside to studying in Asia’s world city, however, is that it’s far 
from cheap. Earlier this year, Mercerawarded Hong Kong second place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2015/aug/26/what-where-is-the-worlds-most-expensive-city>
 in its annual ranking of cities with the highest cost of living for 
expatriates. Depending on where you come from, you might find the city quite an 
expensive place to live in.

Nevertheless, Hong Kong remains a lively place in which to study. Whether you 
are initially fond of its cosmopolitan lifestyle, its international 
significance, or simply its crowdedness, you might be amazed by what the pearl 
of the orient has to offer.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 