
Against the milestone today of his first 100 days as Labour leader, we are 
having to reassess the common view ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. The accidental leader he 
may be; there is no pretence that he tilted at the job with any belief that he 
might get it. But the notion that he doesn’t really want it now seems wide of 
the mark.

How can we have a more balanced debate about Jeremy Corbyn and Labour? | Owen 
Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/15/balanced-debate-jeremy-corbyn-labour-media-attacks>
He has confounded the expectation, and for some the hope, that elevated to 
high office is a living, breathing version of Private Eye’s lefty halfwitDave 
Spart <http://www.private-eye.co.uk/eyeplayer/play-128>. Both sport beards, but 
there the similarity peters out. Spart harangues the ear with gobbledegook 
intelligible to the splinterists of the People’s Front of Judea and the Judean 
People’s Front, but unintelligible to anyone else. Corbyn, by contrast, 
outlines his position to ordinary people and the media very well, when 
permitted to do so unabridged. The ability to make his case, and to show 
certainty as to what that case is, allowed him to shine against the dull 
backdrop of the leadership campaign, in which he secured 59% of the vote. It 
serves him well whenever he submits to one-to-one inquisition with a Humphrys or
a Marr <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p039kw8f>.

A hundred days of spotlight have shown Corbyn to be a thoughtful, precise 
figure. He has wobbled, but having endured quite a media battering he has never 
fallen down, as those who look at him and see disaster hoped he might.

We were told he would be the dour, humourless lefty; and again he has been a 
challenge to expectations. Just last week he was to be found wisecracking with 
his tormentors from the mainstream media and pouring them drinks at the party’s 
Christmas get-together. The event was “on one level yours and my worst nightmare
 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2015/12/peace-in-our-time-jeremy-corbyn-befriends-hacks-at-labour-christmas-bash/>
,” he told them, which was both self-knowing and right. At Labour’s internal 
Christmas drinks party, he courted controversy bychannelling Enver Hoxha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/jeremy-corbyn-albania-labour-enver-hoxha>
, Albania’s communist dictator. “This year will be tougher than last year,” he 
said. Like many who seek to entertain, he’ll go to the edge of propriety for a 
laugh.

Detractors are forced to concede that his emergence has brought with it a new 
vitality

There is success on his terms and on the terms of the many thousands who have 
been attracted to and energised by his rise. Detractors are forced to concede 
that his emergence has brought with it a new vitality, a new energy to local 
parties that were demoralised and withered. He would have been pleased at the 
outset to have survived 100 days. He has more than achieved that, and gradually 
we see roots of permanence. And yet, at this point, it isn’t quite enough.

One hundred days is too short a time to expect completion of a reconstruction 
project of this magnitude, but surely it is ample time to see the first 
inklings of what, if any, long-term strategy exists.

Without question, Corbyn takes seriously his mission to bring hope to those 
who have lost faith in politics; those jaded by the requirement to fall in 
behind leaders with whom they only partially agree. The connection with them, 
as hespoke out against Trident 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/01/trident-corbyn-shadow-cabinet-labour>
, stood firm in his support for the Stop the War campaign and above all, as he
opposed the bombing in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/cameron-failed-show-bombing-syria-isil-work-jihadist>
, has been direct and immediate. When he failed to balance his shadow cabinet 
with talented Labour women and gave the top jobs to men, they attributed the 
error to teething problems. When he did not sing the national anthem during a 
Battle of Britain commemoration service – prompting the outrage of the 
rightwing press – they saw it as the same diversionary fluff that surrounded 
whether he might, as a privy councillor, bow before the Queen.

When he was castigated for not bowing low enough at the Cenotaph on 
Remembrance Sunday, with the precise angle of the bow subjected to pinpoint 
measurement, they took that as further evidence of media mendacity. When he 
said he would never press the nuclear button – allowing critics to cast him as 
weak on national security – and then appeared to suggest, prior to 
self-correction, that he might not a support a police shoot-to-kill policy, 
even to prevent a Paris-style attack, admirers knew precisely where he was 
coming from.

They liked his nous as he called for the government to scrap its questionable 
prisons contract with the Saudis – occasioning a U-turn. They applauded his 
championing of voters’ submissions on core-left issues such as austerity and 
welfare at prime minister’s questions. They have bought the brand and the brand 
does what it should.

Hence there is complete, understandable and legitimate brand loyalty. 
Yesterday’sOpinium/Observer poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/20/labour-could-split-to-survive-says-peter-hyman>
 showed 56% of all voters believe the Labour leader “sticks to his principles 
rather than just saying what people want to hear”, compared to 24% who 
disagree. That’s an admirable statistic. Many a politician would hanker for it. 
Only 34% felt the statement was true of David Cameron. But here’s the rub; 57% 
of all voters – including 30% of Labour supporters – thought it unlikely that 
Corbyn will lead Labour into the next election and only 54% of Labour voters 
thought he would be the best prime minister were he to win. He is a success on 
his terms and on the terms of his supporters, but these aren’t terms sufficient 
numbers can sign up to.

So what might happen in the next 100 days? On the evidence of the first 100 
days, that’s a question beyond the most talented soothsayer, but as the days 
pass, maybe word will emerge of a plan. How to consolidate Corbyn’s strong 
position into long and stable rule without driving the party deeper into 
division and factionalism? How to assuage the fears of MPs who fear the welcome 
enthusiasm of the revitalised grassroots will lead, if undirected, to localised 
civil wars and purges? How might he show determination to take all sections of 
the party with him, especially – given his shadow cabinet selections – its 
women? How to project a party strengthened and energised by the left into a 
progressive force that can appeal to voters outside those parameters, and can – 
at some imaginable point – win an election?

No one expects the completed project, but many will now reasonably ask to see 
the blueprint. With the argument about who has power now settled, he has a 
responsibility to show the broadLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> church, and then the broader 
electorate, how effectively he will use it.

“Am I looking at the next prime minister of Britain?” Andrew Marr asked him 
last month. “I hope you are,” he said, but he never really looked as though he 
believed it. He never does. Interviewers routinely ask the question because 
they and others need to discover if dominance within the party is in fact the 
height of his ambition. In the next 100 days, we may all know.
 