
In 1957, roads in Europe carried a fraction of the traffic they do today. 
Motorways didn’t exist outside of Germany, most roads were single carriageways 
and the majority of cars offered a broadly similar sedate performance. All of 
which are reasons wing mirrors didn’t come with the SEAT 600 when it was 
launched. Today, we’ve come to accept mirrors as an essential part of a car’s 
equipment, but it’s surprising how recently that became the case. In the 1970s, 
some entry-level models came with a single door mirror on the driver’s side – 
if you wanted a twin on the other side it was an optional extra.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fa-look-back-at-the-history-of-the-wing-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4154ebe166fd97e5f2e2e8ce42163dad96530fd6%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20look%20back%20at%20the%20history%20of%20the%20wing%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fa-look-back-at-the-history-of-the-wing-mirror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20look%20back%20at%20the%20history%20of%20the%20wing%20mirror&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fa-look-back-at-the-history-of-the-wing-mirror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4154ebe166fd97e5f2e2e8ce42163dad96530fd6%2F0_0_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 On the SEAT 600, a driver’s door mirror was an optional extra. Photograph: 
Drew Gibson for the Guardian 
Later in the SEAT 600’s life, a driver’s door mirror was offered as an extra, 
but many owners fitted aftermarket mirrors. They clipped on to the windscreen 
surround and were simply a piece of mirrored glass fitted to a chrome-plated 
surround. To adjust it, you simply opened the window and twiddled it with your 
hand.

These days, all cars, aside from the most basic models, have mirrors that can 
be adjusted electrically by a button. But if we look at the door mirrors fitted 
to the new SEAT Ateca we will find within the painted plastic casings more 
technology than was contained in the whole of the SEAT 600.

First, the electric motors. One for adjusting the angle of the glass, another 
for folding in the mirror casings for extra clearance when parking or 
negotiating a narrow gap.

Scraping off ice and frost on a mirror in winter is a chore consigned to the 
past, as these mirrors contain a heating element that melts the ice or frost 
before you’ve left your driveway.

The Ateca’s mirrors also play a crucial part in the car’s blind-spot warning 
system. Radars in the car’s flanks detect the presence of objects in the 
vehicle’s blind spot and transmit this information to the mirrors, where the 
driver will see a red triangle flash up if they are indicating to overtake, but 
it’s not safe to do so. If there isn’t anything close to the Ateca’s flank, an 
orange triangle is shown.


There’s one last feature that we’ve not mentioned: an LED light that shines 
from under the mirror casing and illuminates the ground beside the car to aid 
getting in or out at night. One extra feature: it projects the word Ateca on to 
the road. From optional extra to driving essential, the wing mirror’s 
transition is complete.

 