
Any centre of any city on any Friday or Saturday night has the same vibe. It’s 
as if there has been a fire at the prick factory and everyone has escaped. I 
always try to stay away. If I have a standup gig in central London, I leave 
immediately after the show and get back to my safe bed as soon as I possibly 
can. Alcohol brings out the worst in some people – and no one has ever 
drunkenly told me something I really needed to hear.

This happened on a recent Saturday. I had rushed out of a gig and got the tube 
to Kennington, south London, where I was waiting for my bus. I’d forgotten my 
headphones so I was hyper-aware of all the drunk people walking the streets, 
getting on the tube, going into the city centre to seek shelter in nightclubs 
where the music, fortunately, is so loud that no one can hear them speak, which 
means they never have to develop personalities.

I cannot say it clearly enough: this happens on a daily basis to hundreds of 
thousands of fat people everywhere

I saw four young men approach. I was not surprised when they spoke – I 
expected it. “Oi, you fat cunt!” one of them said. “Oink oink,” said another. 
The rest is a blur because I focused on whatever was on my phone. It hurt, of 
course. As it would have hurt anyone.

Not having any idea what to do, I put it on Facebook, sharing it with my 
friends and followers. I just needed to do with that experience what I usually 
do when I do standup – take ownership of it and express myself. It felt a bit 
better.

I woke up the next day to see my post had been shared thousands of times. It 
was even in newspapers and on blogs. “Danish ComedianSofie Hagen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/sofie-hagen> Says: They Shouted Abuse At Me” 
and “Men Shout At Danish Comedian – What Happens Next Will Shock You” and other 
such clickbaity headlines. People had posted such comments as, “I am really 
sorry that happened to you,” and “Those guys were massive pricks.”

It stopped hurting. The hurt immediately disappeared. And all I was left with 
was anger.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwBsloOkBFjk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwBsloOkBFjk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DwBsloOkBFjk&media=>
4 Minute Comedy - Sofie Hagen on BBC Radio 1 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wBsloOkBFjk> 
This is not a once-in-a-lifetime thing. This happens on a daily basis to 
hundreds of thousands of fat people everywhere. This is happening now, perhaps 
at this very moment, to a 14-year-old girl who has yet to realise that her 
body’s worth is not dependent on what the media tells her it is. It is 
happening to children. It will happen again. Maybe tonight when I am walking 
home from a gig.

This will happen online – some people will even be inclined to write it in 
response to this very article. People will tell me to stop promoting obesity 
and to just lose weight. People will tweet at me without having read the 
article and pretend that they are worried about my health. Some will even tell 
me I am making it up. Some fat people will say they have never experienced 
anything like that.

This will happen on TV, in movies and on the radio. As I am writing this, my 
fat friend told me that last week she was hit on the head with a kebab – and 
yes, that is a really funny sentence – I am but human, and “kebab” is a funny 
word and that is a funny image. It is, however, unforgivable.

Sofie Hagen: Danish comics would ask, ‘Do you need me to have sex with you?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/01/sofie-hagen-danish-standup-comedy-edinburgh-newcomer-award-interview>
It has always happened and it will continue to happen. But now it’s different. 
I no longer feel good when people pity or comfort me afterwards. I do not need 
people’s kind words. I need their fury. I need them to be angry with me. I need 
them to act.

I need everyone to realise the repercussions of making “fat” mean lazy, 
stupid, unattractive and unhealthy. Fat is not necessarily unhealthy, and 
skinny is not necessarily healthy. I need people to stop saying “You are not 
fat, you are beautiful,” as though they are mutually exclusive. I need people 
to feel angry – not at these four idiots at Kennington station – but at the 
society that created them.

I need people to demand change. Tweet companies who use fatphobia to promote 
their products, email TV shows portraying fat women as sexless, evil or 
motherly and goofy. Call out your friends, family and teachers.

If you won’t then OK. But keep your pity to yourself. I am a healthy, 
beautiful, intelligent, active and creative fat woman. I’m doing what I love 
for a living. I have friends and family who love me. I am good. I am no longer 
sad. I am just angry, and I wish you were too.

• Sofie Hagen is on tour <http://www.sofiehagen.com/> and will be performing 
Shimmer Shammer at theSoho Theatre in London, 5-17 December 
<http://www.sohotheatre.com/whats-on/sofie-hagen-shimmer-shatter>
 