
It was a Sunday night in early December. I was working in the neonatal 
intensive care unit, attending to the tiniest, most fragile of humans during my 
paediatric internship. A group of us were interning at the time, and we were 
closer than mere colleagues or friends. We were family. We slept when the rest 
of the world was awake, we worked while they slept, we spoke a different 
language. Aged 25, after spending the past two decades in school, sheltered 
from reality, we were expected to make life-and-death decisions that would 
affect children and their families for the rest of their lives.

On Monday morning, before the winter sun had risen, I was waiting for the next 
shift’s worker to arrive, when one of my friends called. Had I seen Jeff, she 
asked, panic driving her words so fast that I had to ask her to slow down.

Jeff was to have taken over my shift. And he was late – but that was Jeff, 
always late and you never minded, because he’d work twice as hard to help you 
get home on time to get some much-needed sleep after a 30-hour shift. No, I 
answered. “He’s not here yet.”

My writing was the only place where I felt safe, where I had a chance to 
regain control

“The radio,” she continued. “They’re saying a man was killed last night. 
Murdered. A paediatric intern. In Jeff’s neighbourhood. And he’s not answering 
his phone. And he’s not at work and he should be by now.” A cold fist of dread 
hit me, followed immediately by denial. It can’t be Jeff, I told her – they’d 
got it wrong. It can’t be one of us. I went back to my fragile babies in the 
unit, clinging to life, but somewhere in my heart, I knew I’d lied.

The police gathered together the 11 of us interns – who’d been 12 only hours 
earlier – later that morning and told us that Jeff had left his house in the 
middle of the night to help a friend jump-start his car. When he’d returned 
home, it was to discover an intruder at the house. Their struggle began at the 
front door and travelled through three storeys of the sprawling Victorian 
house. Jeff had been beaten, strangled, stabbed, and finally his body was 
thrown into the upstairs bathtub.

That was Monday. By Thursday we were back on duty, struggling to work through 
our grief while we continued to save lives – hollow victories after losing Jeff.

I turned to my writing, struggling to make sense of the chaos. In high school 
I wrote a young adult fantasy novel and had written two more science fiction 
novels by med school graduation. I shoved them all into a drawer. Writing was 
my private addiction, helping me process what had happened in my life. After 
Jeff died, fantasy and science fiction no longer held any appeal in my new, 
stark, black world.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fa-moment-that-changed-me-colleague-murdered-write-bestsellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a40e8339ca1ce6c9479a260378d4da554780fa5%2F0_648_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20the%20day%20my%20colleague%20was%20murdered%20%7C%20CJ%20Lyons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fa-moment-that-changed-me-colleague-murdered-write-bestsellers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20the%20day%20my%20colleague%20was%20murdered%20%7C%20CJ%20Lyons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F12%2Fa-moment-that-changed-me-colleague-murdered-write-bestsellers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a40e8339ca1ce6c9479a260378d4da554780fa5%2F0_648_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘If there is one thing I have learned from Jeff’s death, it is that life goes 
on.’ Photograph: Michael Benabib 
I thirsted for justice, to know I still had some power over my own future. My 
writing was the only place where I felt safe, where I had a chance to regain 
control. I abandoned the science fiction novel I was working on and turned to 
crime fiction. My first thriller, Borrowed Time, eventually became a 
bestseller, and since then I’ve had 28 more novels published.

My books are not as much about the car chases and explosions as they are about 
the emotional abyss created by sudden violence. About the grey areas between 
the black and white of good and evil. About what happens when chaos collides 
with life.

A moment that changed me: having the courage to leave an abusive relationship 
| Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/i-had-the-courage-to-leave-an-abusive-relationship>
After 17 years practising medicine, I left to write full time. I’ve have had 
the satisfaction of knowing that my stories have touched more lives around the 
world than I ever could as a physician.

Readers have written to me, thanking me for helping them to get through a 
night pain-free from cancer or empowering them to leave abusive relationships 
or simply for the entertainment they’ve received from my fictional characters. 
Proving to me time and again that stories are one of the most powerful weapons 
we have to take control of the chaos and bring light into this world.

If there is one thing I have learned from Jeff’s death, it is that life goes 
on. For me, that’s through my books. He may be gone, but he’ll never be 
forgotten.
 