
Barely six months into the job, Scottish transport minister Humza Yousaf is 
under fire 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14912080.Kezia_Dugdale_tackles_First_Minister_on_ScotRail_performance/>
 from opposition politicians and the public alike for the poor performance of 
Scotland’s creaking rail network.

With winter setting in, punctuality has plummeted 
<https://www.scotrail.co.uk/performance-and-reliability> and improvements to 
the main Edinburgh-Glasgow express line, already scaled back at the request of 
SNP ministers, arebehind schedule 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14599186.Edinburgh___Glasgow_electric_trains_and_other_route_improvements_delayed/>
.

 The express trains that roll past the Scottish parliament’s windows are, 
ironically, not Yousaf’s responsibility. Take an East Coast train from Waverley 
station 130 miles south to Newcastle and it will take 80 minutes. Take one of 
Scotrail’s own domestic intercity trains the same distance north to Aberdeen 
and you can add an hour to the journey. Edinburgh to Inverness, one of Europe’s 
fastest-growing cities, takes almost three and a half hours by train.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fmodern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ba0def54749f5f7ca577ca96fba5aba1e99013%2F798_214_2329_2329%2F2329.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20modern%20rail%20network%20in%20Scotland%20is%20long%20overdue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fmodern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20modern%20rail%20network%20in%20Scotland%20is%20long%20overdue&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fmodern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54ba0def54749f5f7ca577ca96fba5aba1e99013%2F798_214_2329_2329%2F2329.jpg>
 Scottish transport minister Humza Yousaf. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the 
Guardian 
 In its decade in government the SNP has overseen several rail projects begun 
by its Labour predecessor, but is yet to table any of its own. The Scottish 
government has pledged tospend £3bn 
<http://www.transport.gov.scot/project/a9-dualling-perth-inverness> on the main 
A9 from Perth to Inverness, but has no plans to improve the parallel rail 
infrastructure.

 When current operator Abellio took over the Scotrail network 
<https://www.scotrail.co.uk/about-scotrail> last year, it promised a number of 
small-scale improvements, including refurbished intercity trains from England, 
free Wi-Fi and refurbished stations. Conspicuous by its absence was any 
commitment to large-scale investment in the rail network beyond these 
relatively small fixes.

 In the meantime, industry consortium the Rail Delivery Group 
 
<http://www.railtechnologymagazine.com/Interviews/investing-in-the-future-of-scottish-rail>
expectsgrowth of more than 100% 
<http://www.railtechnologymagazine.com/Interviews/investing-in-the-future-of-scottish-rail>
 in the three biggest Scottish cities – Edinburgh, Glasgow and Aberdeen – over 
the next 20 years.

 In days gone by the Granite City had its own high-speed rail line: as part of 
the race to the north between competing railway companies, the Caledonian 
railway company built a direct line from Perth to Montrose through the Angus 
town of Forfar, slashing journey times. The modern route along the coast from 
Edinburgh contains numerous 20 mile-an-hour speed limits, stretches of single 
track and Victorian bridges.

Scottish investment in rail funded with record borrowing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/15/scottish-investment-in-rail-funded-with-record-borrowing>
Richard Stiff, chief executive of Angus council, says investment in the East 
Coast mainline in England needs to be mirrored north of Edinburgh. “The line is 
a major business and social artery for the whole of the east coast – no less in 
Angus than anywhere else,” he says. Angus is part of a consortium of 
authorities pushing for improvements. InScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> that would mean money coming from 
Holyrood rather than Westminster.

 “We are looking for improved journey times, greater capacity and, at our 
smaller stations, more stopping trains,” says Stiff. “There are two particular 
infrastructure investments in the county that could make a big contribution to 
capacity and speed challenges on the line as a whole – a single track section 
at Usan south of Montrose and the old South Esk viaduct at Montrose itself. In 
the council’s view these improvements are needed sooner rather than later.”

 Beyond wanting to keep voters happy, another incentive for the Scottish 
government to make big leaps in rail travel are its elusive carbon targets. 
Later this year, a bill will go through parliament in Edinburgh binding 
Scotland to the tighter emissions levels agreed in Paris. In 2015, the 
committee on climate change, which keeps an eye on government performance, 
warned thatScotland was approaching 
<https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/reducing-emissions-in-scotland-2015-progress-report/>
 a cliff <> if it did not make structural reforms to its energy use, including 
slashing transport emissions.

 Claudia Beamish, Scottish Labour’s spokeswoman on climate change, believes 
cuts need to be deep and fast. “Transport is the second biggest greenhouse gas 
emitter and levels have only reduced by a pitiful 1.4% since 1990,” she says. 
“To make any progress the sustainable options must be more attractive, and 
there must be progressive steps towards electrification, integration with buses 
and cycling, and moving freight onto rail.”

Small towns, big plans: how better transport can boost the local economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/12/small-towns-better-transport-boost-local-economy>
 Three of the projects that could bring about serious shifts to sustainable 
transport are in Fife, in the heart of Scotland but lacking long-term 
investment. Reconnecting well-heeled St Andrews and the hard-up industrial 
towns of Leven and Methil could mean a half-hourly commuter service direct to 
Edinburgh, with express trains re-routed via a new higher speed line to Perth 
and on to Scotland’s northern cities.

The main obstacle is government funding, according to local Green MSP Mark 
Ruskell. “The danger is we end up with a political beauty contest pitching one 
community’s needs against another due to the limited ambition of government to 
invest in rail compared to road,” he says. “I know of one group in Newburgh 
near Perth that resorted to applying to the National Lottery for funds. That’s 
no way to get a strategic low-carbon transport network.”

If the ambitious Yousaf wants to make his mark on Scotland, giving the country 
a modern rail network would not be a bad way to start.

Dominic Hinde is a journalist and interdisciplinary environmental studies 
academic.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 