
I was a deeply unhappy child. Hatred of school, my parents’ disastrously bad 
marriage and an upbringing in the kind of church that was big on rules and low 
on compassion, added up to me being extremely angry and withdrawn, pretty much 
until I was able to leave home.

A girl like that looks for a place to hole up and wait until childhood is 
over. Some kids find escape through computers. Some find escape with their 
friends – but because I refused to go school, I didn’t have any.

A moment that changed me: being sent away to my loveless boarding school | 
Kate Morris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/moment-changed-me-sent-away-loveless-boarding-school>
For a time my mother worked during the early evenings at Index, a catalogue 
shop inside a shopping centre. I didn’t like being in the house alone, so often 
I would walk to work with her, and sit on the benches outside the shop during 
her shift. Sometimes I got bored or cold and walked around the town centre, 
looking in windows. Other times, I went to the library.

For these hours, during the evenings when my mother was working, and more 
often when I was supposed to be at school, I would find a chair next to the 
huge, iron, clanking radiators and read. Because my family weren’t bookish and 
I wasn’t at school, I had no idea what I was supposed to choose. I couldn’t 
tell the worthy books from the trash and I didn’t know which you were supposed 
to start with: fiction or non-fiction.

I never remember a librarian speaking to me, either to advise me what to read 
or to ask me why I wasn’t at school. Nobody offered me a library ticket so I 
could take the books home.Harris Library 
<http://spotonlancashire.co.uk/venues/the-harris-library-preston/> librarians 
of the mid-1990s – if you are reading this, I’m so, so grateful for that: for 
being, just for those few stolen hours, left entirely and completely alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-school-library%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F748d4dc0186657013fd1bfcb9414f389758db331%2F0_1542_3744_1972%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20stealing%20the%20book%20that%20saved%20my%20life%20%7C%20Jenn%20Ashworth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-school-library%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20stealing%20the%20book%20that%20saved%20my%20life%20%7C%20Jenn%20Ashworth&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-school-library%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F748d4dc0186657013fd1bfcb9414f389758db331%2F0_1542_3744_1972%2F3744.jpg>
 ‘I’d found my own place to wait out childhood, which didn’t last forever.’ 
Jenn Ashworth outside her former school. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for 
the Guardian 
One day, aged 12, I arrived in the morning, tear-stained and exhausted after 
another hour-long argument about going to school. I couldn’t explain why I 
wouldn’t go: I’d be an adultbefore it would make sense to me 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/13/jenn-ashworth-refusing-to-go-to-school>
. That day, I ran away to the library, and found a new shelf: “teenage 
fiction”, they called it. I’d leapt from Enid Blyton to Agatha Christie and 
chewed through most of Ruth Rendell and Stephen King without knowing there was 
something in the middle.

A moment that changed me: being abused on the street about my weight | Sofie 
Hagen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/verbally-abused-weight-street-fat-people>
The first book I picked up had an intriguing title: Fly Pie and the Seventeen 
Million Pound Baby (it’s since been republished asThe Baby and Fly Pie 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/361823/>). I found my 
seat by the radiator and started to read. Except I forgot I was sad and scared 
and lonely, because I wasn’t in that library any more, I had stepped, instead, 
into that dark dystopian world the author Melvin Burgess had created for Sham 
and Fly – “rubbish kids, losers and orphans” – abandoned by their mother in a 
sprawling, impossible city. Desperate and alone in a dangerous world of adults, 
the pair fall in with a Fagin figure who sets them to work picking through a 
rubbish tip. There, they take a priceless baby from a dying man. The book is 
strange and frightening and violent: it felt like the most real thing I had 
ever read. Why should Sham and Fly’s bleak world comfort me, in mine?

I looked up from the last page and it was lunchtime. I wasn’t hungry. I turned 
back to the first page and started again and I’ve never done that before or 
since, but I wanted to find out how Burgess had done it: how he’d stopped and 
stretched time, how he’d make a crack in the world just wide enough for someone 
like me to escape through it. It’s a time for cliches: my heart was in my 
throat.

By the end of the second reading, the school day was over. I headed home, and 
something had changed. I’d always written diaries, stories, poems. Always hoped 
that writing could be the one thing I was good at. Now I was determined to 
figure out how to make a place, with words, for someone else to be. And until 
that happened, I’d found my own place to wait out childhood, which didn’t last 
forever. Dear Harris librarians of the mid-1990s, I stole that paperback and I 
am not sorry. It saved my life.
 