
Arriving at the fundraiser late, I ordered a pint and then manoeuvred myself 
through the sea of ceilidh dancers that separated me from familiar faces. I was 
spat out the other side of a do-si-do without so much as spilling a drop when I 
literally bumped into her.

Related: Allow married Catholic priests to halt decline in Ireland, says 
clergyman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/allow-married-catholic-priests-to-halt-decline-in-ireland-says-clergyman>

A friend introduced us, but it wasn’t necessary. We had met before in Cologne 
as 19-year-olds when we were enthusiastic young Catholics on a pilgrimage to 
see the newly appointedPope Benedict XVI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/pope-benedict-god-resign-mystical-experience>
. During the 10 years that had passed, she had trained as a nurse and got 
married. I had become a Catholic priest.

When I was ordained I made a promise to the bishop to be celibate for the rest 
of my life. It was easy to do at the time. I had trained for six years in an 
all-male college away from home – and as a heterosexual man, very little 
temptation came my way. I was so confident about being celibate that I happily 
discussed it onTV 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/4thoughttv/episode-guide/series-1> and 
radio. The prospect of never having children was daunting, but I was happy to 
make that sacrifice to become a priest.

That evening at the fundraiser we rekindled our friendship to the soundtrack 
of a tin whistle. I put my foot in it at one point by asking her how her 
husband was and she informed me she had recently got divorced. She was 
confident, funny and easy to talk to – the same qualities that had attracted me 
to her a decade ago in Germany.

We became friends over the following months and I began to fall in love, which 
needless to say isn’t allowed if you are a priest. Well, it is – but you 
shouldn’t do anything about it, apart from suppress it and go to confession, of 
course. You definitely shouldn’t take them to the cinema and sit on the back 
row (oops).

Then, in a scene resembling an episode of Ballykissangel but without anyone 
dying <http://www.tv.com/shows/ballykissangel/the-reckoning-164929/>, she also 
fell in love with me. It was at this point that I had to make the most 
important decision of my life. I wanted to be a priest – I believed it was my 
calling and I knew that I was good at it – but I also wanted to be with her. My 
parents were very supportive; however, the decision would cost me my home, my 
job and a lot of friends. And yet in 2015, at the age of 29, I took off my dog 
collar for the final time and walked away from the Catholic priesthood.
 Dan Murtah in the pulpit during his time as a Catholic priest Photograph: Dan 
Murtah 
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> had ignored my 
request for guidance: the letter I got back from a Vatican secretary told me to 
speak to my bishop. So I did. And after many meetings, I finally told him I was 
choosing love over the church. He was adamant that it wouldn’t last and I would 
come crawling back within a year.

I was under a lot of pressure from the church to abandon her. I was told I was 
“destined for great things” if I stayed – because Jesus did say success is 
everything (he didn’t actually). I was told that ordinary life was boring – 
that’s right, you ordinary lay people (yawn). I was also told that I could not 
break my vow of celibacy – but it turns out that it was as easy as making it. 
Breaking the vow didn’t upset me or make me fearful, and ultimately it made me 
happy. Of course it did: being with a partner is a natural part of being human.

I am currently barred from marrying my fiancee in a Catholic church; they 
still see me as a priest, so I would need consent from the pope. He’s recently 
been puttingwomen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/pope-francis-women-never-roman-catholic-priests-church>
 andpriests with homosexual tendencies in their place 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/the-pope-just-approved-a-very-troubling-document-on-gays-and-priesthood_us_58488029e4b0d0aa037f0ff8>
, so God knows what he’d think of me having sex. Just in case I change my mind, 
I’m told he won’t grant permission until after I’m 40 (that’s in a decade). So 
I can’t marry. Actually I can – in a registry office, on a beach, even in an 
Anglican church, thank you Henry VIII. Although we have yet to make a decision.

It’s been just over a year since I left and I am thankful for the experience 
of being a priest. I am currently using the knowledge I gained to teach 
religious affairs and I am managing to find humour in my former life in the 
standup comedy I do. I really thought that from time to time I would regret my 
decision, but I never have. Since I left, I have had the freedom to question my 
old beliefs, take a step back from church and focus on discovering the world 
for myself.

Other priests in similar situations can have very different experiences. I 
know men who have left the priesthood for love and have felt lost ever since – 
wanting to be priests again but being told that they can’t be. I know men who 
have pushed away the person they love because they are scared to leave the 
priesthood – and who can blame them when they were trained at a young age, then 
given a home, living expenses and prestige? I also know men caught between both 
worlds, unable to leave the priesthood and unable to leave their lover. This 
inevitably leads to secret affairs and even secret children in situations akin 
to Bishop Brennan’s inFather Ted 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=skib_O_dcUg&feature=youtu.be>, but a lot less 
funny.

Related: A moment that changed me: quitting the Jehovah’s Witnesses | Anonymous
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/moment-changed-me-quitting-jehovahs-witnesses>

It was reported last week that due to the low number of priests in Brazil, 
Pope Franciswill ask priests who left for marriage to return 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2017/01/03/leonardo-boff-pope-francis-may-soon-allow-brazil-to-have-married-priests/>
. If this is true, it will be reminiscent of Simon Cowell bringingDermot 
O’Leary back to The X Factor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/29/dermot-oleary-returns-to-x-factor-run-dermot-run-while-you-still-can->
 because audience figures had fallen. Dermot might have returned, but these men 
should stay away for their dignity. Some will see the return of married priests 
as a victory over harsh Catholic rules – maybe in time it will be – but for men 
who will be asked to return now, it is an affront to their marriages. The pope 
will want these men to give up their lives again; not because the church 
suddenly recognises the value of their relationships, but because it is 
desperately low on priests.

The decision I made to leave the priesthood was the hardest decision I’ve ever 
had to make. However, it means that I have the life I have now – and I am 
spending it with the person I love.
 