
The hotel function room was packed tight with tables, drunken voices raised to 
cut through the hubbub. It was a TV awards do, guests all dressed up and the 
booze flowing like a river bursting its banks. As I manoeuvred through the 
crowd, my eyes met his. The older writer I’d been seeing – and obsessing about 
– for the past few months.

I’d convinced myself that the reason he was so unreliable, so hard to track 
down, was because he lived at the other end of the country. Now I had a freeze 
frame of the real reason he was so reluctant to commit: his hand intertwined 
with a woman’s, the girlfriend he’d sworn he’d broken up with months before. 
The fact he’d told me he was still looking to move out of the house they shared 
together, and was “staying in the spare room”, should have been a clue, but I 
hadn’t wanted to heed it. Now denial was no longer an option. I turned on my 
heel and fled into the night.

Why I tried the Hoffman Process of psychoanalysis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/mar/15/why-tried-hoffman-process-psychoanalysis>
That was the moment I knew something fundamental had to change. That the men I 
was attracted to – charming, older and inevitably unavailable – were living 
ghosts of the first man who’d fitted that description. The father I’d never 
lived with, but had spent my childhood idolising, and pining for during his 
frequent absences from my life. He’d died a few short years earlier, and my 
complicated grief about it was casting a long shadow over my whole life.

My father had so much promise as a young man – he was witty, academically 
gifted and handsome, and I can absolutely understand why my mum had fallen for 
him when they met at university. But he struggled to deliver on that early 
potential. They had me young, and I think the responsibility was too great. He 
left when I was still a baby, and proceeded to drift through life, never 
finding a meaningful career or remarrying. He drank too much, and was always 
broke.

As a result, his life was precarious – there were times when he was even 
homeless – but I would still long for the school holidays when I could visit 
him. These times were intense. He’d confide in me about his adult problems, 
read to me from novels and let me stay up until midnight watching films with 
him. I loved feeling like a grown up, too young to realise how confused and 
damaging our relationship was.

I was 28 that night I fled the party, and something in me knew that if I 
didn’t change the way I was living, I’d spend the rest of my adult life in a 
prison of my own making. It was theHoffman process 
<https://www.hoffmaninstitute.org/> that handed me the keys to get out – a 
week-long intensive group retreat where you identify thechildhood patterns that 
are still running your life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/may/18/features.magazine17>. 
Hoffman has been widely praised by celebrities –Sienna Miller is its most 
recent vocal fan 
<http://www.inquisitr.com/3463460/sienna-miller-spends-thousands-to-get-rid-of-the-noise-in-her-head-with-week-long-therapy-detox/>
 – but it’s more than a fad. It’s tough and profound, and offers a real chance 
to make your life better. Having heard about it from an older friend, I maxed 
out all my credit cards, lied to work about a last-minute holiday, and set off 
for a big house deep in the Sussex countryside.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmoment-changed-me-group-therapy-hoffman-process-falling-versions-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce480accacabf36494f9f9a6f8bbebdfd04f789%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20group%20therapy%20stopped%20me%20falling%20for%20versions%20of%20my%20dad%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Moran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmoment-changed-me-group-therapy-hoffman-process-falling-versions-father%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20group%20therapy%20stopped%20me%20falling%20for%20versions%20of%20my%20dad%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Moran&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fmoment-changed-me-group-therapy-hoffman-process-falling-versions-father%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ce480accacabf36494f9f9a6f8bbebdfd04f789%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘The Hoffman process has been widely praised by celebrities – Sienna Miller is 
a recent fan – but it’s more than a fad.’ Photograph: Andrew Kelly/Reuters 
Before the process begins, you write reams of notes about your early life and 
your current issues. My teacher, motherly and tough all at once, identified my 
core issue the moment I met her. “You’re a daddy’s girl,” she said. “There’s 
always at least one on every process.” Soon I was sitting in a circle, peering 
suspiciously at the rest of my group and wondering what had brought each of 
them here. With no phone or email, they were going to be all I had for the rest 
of the week. As they started to speak, my inner critic reared up in judgment of 
the corpulent banker whose marriage was on the rocks, the stern German woman 
who seemed to have had a sense-of-humour bypass. Why hadn’t I splurged my 
hard-earned cash on a holiday when I still had the chance?

What I came to learn was that working in a group can be incredibly healing. 
I’d had plenty of therapy before, but now I was peeling back my defences with 
20 people who were feeling equally vulnerable. When I showed them who I really 
was, they didn’t run away screaming. Perhaps I didn’t need to be perfect to be 
lovable after all? I had a busy, high-profile career, and the grief that dogged 
me often felt like something to hide or be ashamed of. It was such a relief to 
know I wasn’t the only one feeling like I lived a double life.

Over the course of that week I came to understand why I’d put my father on 
such a pedestal as a little girl, even though he’d been at best unreliable, and 
at worst downright dangerous. I couldn’t afford to question his behaviour, 
because I was too frightened that if I made demands on him, he’d disappear from 
my life again. Instead I’d rationalise it, and take the blame on myself. He 
would leave me alone at night, petrified, and I would wish I was grown up 
enough not to bother him with my petty terror. When he burned the house down 
when I was 10, forcing us to shin down a drainpipe to escape, I experienced a 
strange kind of triumph about the fact that I’d been the one to wake us up and 
save his life. Our roles had always been reversed, with my narcissistic father 
the child and me a miniature adult: unable to cope, but valiantly trying.

All of this had taught me that relationships with men involved winning their 
love; that their affection should be something to fight for. So it was the men 
who offered the biggest challenge who stole my heart. The reverse was true too 
– I could be harsh and callous with the kind of “boring” men who called when 
they said they would and made it clear they wanted to be with me.

The Hoffman process is shrouded in some secrecy, as it’s very experiential. You
revisit the pain of early life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/mar/15/why-tried-hoffman-process-psychoanalysis>
 in a way that’s safe but also visceral. I’d read enough self-help books to 
fill a library, but when you’re on the process, there’s no hiding behind your 
intellectual understanding of what’s made you the way you are. You rage and 
cry, and regress to some very early experiences.

Over the course of that week I was able to really feel the anger that it was 
too dangerous for me to express as a child, for fear of triggering another of 
my father’s long, agonising disappearances. As an adult I still tried to be no 
bother with the older, unavailable men who invariably stole my heart. I knew 
instinctively they had little to give me, and tiptoed around them, a meek, 
bland version of myself. It meant part of me was still that child, frozen in 
time; Hoffman gave me the chance to grow up.

A moment that changed me: meeting my father for the first time | Nick Van Mead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/25/moment-changed-me-meeting-my-father>
Now I could parent that child, move through the anger, and find compassion for 
my damaged, broken dad from an adult place. He too was a product of his 
upbringing, and I could end a cycle that had probably stretched back through 
generations.

In one visualisation exercise, imagining how my own life would turn out if I 
carried on acting from those early hurts, I felt a proper change. I knew in 
that moment that I was absolutely committed to living a different life from the 
short, painful one he had experienced.

Hoffman is a long time ago now, but I still feel grateful for the shift it 
gave me. I don’t believe our early life ever leaves us, but I certainly think 
we can relate to it in a very different way once we have awareness of its 
patterns. I can even see positive sides to the start I had in life. I treasure 
stability and kindness now. I also know that most of us have secret hurts that 
we’re trying to conceal, which hopefully makes me more empathetic.

And all that therapy gave me a heroine for my novels – a psychotherapist with 
a screwy past who ends up advising the police on their most emotionally complex 
cases. Definitely a bigger win than a week in Tenerife.

• Too Close For Comfort 
<http://www.simonandschuster.com.au/books/Too-Close-For-Comfort/Eleanor-Moran/9781471141720>
, by Eleanor Moran, is published on 22 September by Simon & Schuster
 