
The British public tends, as a rule, to dislike toffs. It’s why foxhunting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hunting> , being symbolic of a deeply 
entrenched class antagonism, occasionally escalates to a national crisis. And 
it’s why tales of David Cameron’s alleged antics during his Oxford days have 
not gone down at all well with a stony-faced public.

A moment that changed me: waking up with a bad hangover – and two men | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/14/waking-up-hungover-men-sex>
“Pig-gate” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/22/david-cameron-advisers-piggate-spin-doctor>
, ​last September, was only the most recent of these stories. But despite my 
sympathy for both pigs and foxes I feel myself inescapably, evenumbilically 
connected to the “Dave” stories that have continued to drip from his time spent 
around Oxford’s dreaming spires.

In the runup to the 2010 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/apr/30/the-liberal-moment-has-come>
, a less sensational story of Dave’s glory days emerged, first via Channel 4 
and then from the Daily Mail. This was the story of Dave’s so-calledRasta friend
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1218964/David-Cameron-cool-says-Rasta-cafe-owner-befriended-Tory-leader-Oxford.html>
, Hugh “Andy” Anderson, in whose Oxford bar Dave and his Bullingdon chums spent 
quality time during the 1980s.

Accounts of this unlikely pairing, which demonstrated how “cool” Cameron was, 
and how he could hold his own in any conversation about the endlessly complex 
polyrhythms of jazz and reggae music, were no doubt intended to paint 
Call-Me-Dave in a friendlier, more inclusive light. Maybe it even helped him 
win the election. Who knows?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fmoment-changed-me-david-cameron-dad-daily-mai-rasta-friend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e30220f17f90e195c0473df2f1e0f3eb9048086%2F19_0_643_964%2F643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20David%20Cameron%20got%20me%20and%20my%20dad%20together%20%7C%20Victoria%20Anderson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fmoment-changed-me-david-cameron-dad-daily-mai-rasta-friend%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20David%20Cameron%20got%20me%20and%20my%20dad%20together%20%7C%20Victoria%20Anderson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F28%2Fmoment-changed-me-david-cameron-dad-daily-mai-rasta-friend%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e30220f17f90e195c0473df2f1e0f3eb9048086%2F19_0_643_964%2F643.jpg>
 The Mail Online story about Hugh ‘Andy’ Anderson, the ‘Rasta’ who befriended a 
young David Cameron in Oxford. Photograph: Mail Online 
For me, though, there was a more personal impact. Because Hugh “Andy” Anderson 
is my dad.

Until this Daily Mail article, I had never even seen a picture of my hitherto 
abstract father. I knew his name; my mother had told me that much. But until I 
was in my mid-teens, I didn’t even know he was Jamaican, let alone that he had 
friends in such high places.

In those days, there was still some shame attached to racially mixed 
relationships. My (Welsh) mother was vague on the topic, citing my father’s 
origins as “South American” and refusing to be drawn further. But it was she 
who duly confirmed, looking somewhat paler than usual, that David Cameron’s 
chum in the newspaper was, as a matter of fact, my father.

You will imagine this came as a shock; but things could have been worse. 
Imagine finding out that, say, George Osborne was your father. For me, that 
really would be horrific. And, in the end it was fine. It was good; it was 
great; it was positive. Thanks tothe Daily Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailymail> and, by logical extension, our 
prime minister, I was finally able to meet my male progenitor. And there aren’t 
many people who can make that particular claim.

David Cameron ​has been outlining his plans to enrol Muslim women on 
compulsory English language learning programmes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/muslim-women-to-be-taught-english-in-20m-plan-to-beat-backward-attitudes>
 or face deportation. There is also renewed talk of the soon-to-be implemented 
bill that will set a pay threshold for non-EU migrants, where anyone earning 
under £35,000 could be forcibly repatriated.

Of course, none of this has any direct bearing on my dad, who makes a point of 
reading the Daily Mail even when he isn’t in it. Like so many immigrants, he 
had no money when he came to this country; he came from a remote rural 
community inJamaica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> that to this 
day has little access to any of the opportunities or amenities that we take for 
granted, such as running water, transport links, healthcare or even free 
education. The community is depleted further by the continual drain of young 
people leaving to seek a better life.

A moment that changed me – listening to David Bowie’s Hunky Dory | Peter 
Ormerod
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
But despite this gradual disintegration, there remains a magma-grade core of 
strength and a religious certitude that would shake the archbishop of 
Canterbury right down to his socks. The name of that community? Peckham, 
Jamaica. And I do believe Del Boy would approve. After all, he’s another 
self-made man.

Nowadays my father and I retain a more regular relationship with each other 
than he does withDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> – although should DC ever 
feel like dropping in again, he’d be made ever so welcome. Thirty years on, 
wealthy ex-public school students still gravitate to my father’s bar. I could 
suggest that, for some, it’s just an exotic form of “slumming it” – but that 
would only make me sound cynical.

By the way, Dave – and the Daily Mail – should know that my father is not, in 
fact, a Rasta. He smokes Cuban cigars, not ganja, and he is a licensed 
bar-owner; Rastafarians do not consume alcohol – or pork, come to that. Just 
saying.
 