
“But you don’t look 35!” my friend shrieked. I considered what this meant – I 
wasn’t the wizened old crone that she, aged 24, had expected: my wrinkles 
weren’t deep enough, my dowager’s hump not humpy enough. I’m a few months shy 
of this birthday, and I am mentally prepared. Over the past year, though, my 
life has changed. It’s been changing for a while, but recently something really 
cracked.

Why are millennials so anxious? | Rose Bretécher, Ronnie Joice and Rhiannon 
Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/millennials-anxiety-generation-y-housing-careers>
A short spell of depression <https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression> 
sat on my shoulders like that creature inFive Children and It 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/aug/18/the-unquenchable-brilliance-of-e-nesbit>
 – and while it was up there, it blew an existential crisis in my ear. Edging 
towards ticking the 35-40 box while getting my boring old grownup insurance 
quote sorted, I realised I had nothing to show for it. I didn’t own anything. I 
didn’t have a tangible record of achievement to prove that I’ve lived or have 
learned any skills. As a self-employed person, I wasn’t even working towards a 
promotion.

That said, I have achieved many things, but not in the same way that, say, our 
neighbour, a doctor, has. I’ve DJed around the world at parties – once on a 
boat with a nakedGrace Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/jan/13/grace-jones-10-of-the-best>
 grinding next to me while singing Slave to the Rhythm. I’ve interviewed most 
of my idols – fromDebbie Harry <https://www.theguardian.com/music/debbie-harry> 
to Dame Edna. I asked Beyoncé what she sings in the showerwhen we shot her last 
year 
<http://www.thebeatjuice.com/chats/2016/01/01/14280/yasss-heres-our-beyonce-interview-in-full/>
 for the music magazine I own and publish independently, which, yes, is a 
tangible thing, but still somehow that empty, rattly feeling snuck in.

It feels like a rite of passage as a “millennial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
” to moan about the pace of life and how our achievements are measured. You 
can’t move for conversations about how people want to work with their hands or 
start making things – myInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram> feed is clogged with 
pottery-class ashtrays. But I did feel a yearning to do something. To channel 
this need for essence in materials. I just didn’t know how.

And then one night, sheltering a takeaway curry from the rain under my coat, I 
found the chair. Sitting on the kerb, it was totally bare save for the odd 
scrap of fabric attached by rusty upholstery nails to the frame. But it was a 
nice chair, a late Edwardian dining chair. We made eye contact. “Come on, take 
me home,” it whispered. When I got home, I ate my curry and went back to get 
it. I left it in the basement until eventually, I plucked up enough courage to 
work out what to do. ManyYouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/youtube> tutorials on how to use a 
webbing stretcher and a complex foam-shaping situation with an electric carving 
knife later, it was finished. Admittedly not perfect, but the first time I sat 
down in it, something was ignited in me, and it wasn’t the non-flame-retardant 
foam cushion I’d used.

Later, when my depression waltzed back through the door, my partner decided 
that I needed to do something that wasn’t whatever I was doing, and signed me 
up for a woodworking course to make a coffee table. Cycling through the dusky, 
honeysuckle-filled haze of Hackney Marshes and spending three hours nibbling 
away at amortise and tenon joint 
<http://www.ukworkshop.co.uk/how-tos/joints/mortise-tenon-joint.html> with a 
group of people who didn’t know my name was pure emancipation from my own mind.

I learned to have confidence, and to take care, and to feel pride in what I 
was doing, even if it wouldn’t be seen

After making the coffee table, I needed more. I enrolled in a 14-week 
part-time course atthe Cass art school 
<http://www.londonmet.ac.uk/faculties/the-cass/courses/short-courses/> to make 
a chair. Every Saturday, from 11am to 5pm, I would glide around the woodmill in 
pure ecstasy. I made new friends. I spent four entire weeks trying to make a 
single tenon fit snugly into its corresponding mortise. I learned from my 
mistakes. I learned to have confidence in what I was doing, and to take care, 
and to feel pride in what I was doing, even if it wouldn’t be seen – those 
hidden joints are sometimes the most structurally important.

I had order and a physical, predetermined outcome – the exact opposite of my 
freewheelin’ freelance life. I had an eccentric teacher who would whistle 
choruses from musical theatre, and who would encourage us to have a drink at 
lunchtime. Despite that, somewhat surprisingly, I didn’t lose any fingers. The 
warm waxy smells of art-school corridors reminded me of my own time atCamberwell
 <http://www.arts.ac.uk/camberwell/>. I was so happy. Even now, when I can’t 
sleep at night, I remember all the things I would do in a day there – taking 
raw, splintery timber, putting it through the straight edger, cutting it to 
length, surface planing it to make a face edge and three smooth edges. 
Measuring, chiselling and planing. Minutes ticking past with my mind zoomed in 
on a tiny detail, not thinking about Facebook or comparing myself to my peers 
on Instagram. I fall asleep smiling.

My dad rang me on my birthday but I didn’t answer – I was using a small block 
plane to create a 7mm taper on the arm of my chair. When I spoke to him I could 
hear the pride in his voice. “Good; job first, phone second,” he cackled. My 
dad is MrDIY <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/diy>. The man has three 
sheds, he pretty much built our house. Give him a bag of coathangers and some 
screws, and I swear he would present you with a motorbike. Both my parents are 
the crafty, fixing and restoring types, whose treasure troves take the form of 
skips and junk shops. Asking their advice, telling them what I’d found and what 
I’d been making has brought me infinitely closer to them. It’s like 
acknowledging my own DNA, learning my mother’s tips on different wood oils.

Dad’s never really bothered with presents, really, but this year he told me to 
keep an eye out for two boxes. When they arrived, I cried. A huge tool box, 
with, among other things, his own plane and a set of chisels (in a leather 
chisel roll that he’d made), a set of clamps and two different kinds of beeswax 
(from my dear old dead Nana’s own beehive). There was a wee folding workbench 
and even a square pencil. Everything was individually wrapped up in tissue with 
string around it. The whole thing smelled of his workshop and home, the 
ultimate comfort. He even popped down from Edinburgh for an impromptu trip to 
inspect my chair handiwork with his buttocks, and brought me some leather 
samples and advice on how to pleat the hide round the corners of a cushion – 
something I haven’t gotten round to yet – but frankly I’m savouring the 
prospect of a day spent united with my staple gun.

I can’t remember what I’d imagined myself doing when I was nearly 35 when I 
was in my 20s. I don’t know if I ever really thought about it, because I 
couldn’t imagine a life that wasn’t going out all night and having a fabulous 
time and somehow, between the hangovers, making a living. Now when I sit in the 
chair I made, or the sofa I reupholstered, and think about what I’d like to do 
when I grow up, I imagine a house full of things I’ve made. And somewhere in it 
will sit a late Edwardian dining chair with a scrappy upholstery job and some 
wonky webbing.
 