
Avoid making significant life changes during the long grieving process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/31/men-culture-grieving-robert-peston-male-insensitivity>
. That’s the advice I kept hearing when my mum died last year. It’s advice I 
chose to ignore, which was either very wise or very stupid; I haven’t decided 
yet.My mum had been ill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/28/what-they-dont-tell-you-about-dementia>
 for four years, so her death wasn’t entirely unexpected, but my reaction to it 
was. I’d been prepared to grieve but I didn’t expect that I’d also feel an 
overwhelming urge to escape. I didn’t care where I went, as long as it was far 
away from the sadness of the last few years.

A moment that changed me: waking up with a bad hangover – and two men | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/14/waking-up-hungover-men-sex>
As well as this, and on a far more trivial, less life-shattering note, the 
simple fact is I was bored. I had become all too aware of life’s brevity, I’d 
had enough of my home town and its memories, and my living arrangements were 
far from ideal. About a year before, the commercial premises below the 
overpriced, undersized flat I rented with my boyfriend had been converted into 
a busy coffee shop, which was thoroughly cleaned and restocked at midnight for 
about an hour every night. The combination of grief, extortionate rent, 
nocturnal hoovering and the incessant humming of the industrial fridge 
immediately below our bedroom eventually became too much, so we started 
scouring the internet for escape routes.

The initial plan was to move to some picturesque place in the countryside, 
wean ourselves off the caffeine fumes and enjoy some fresh air and a slower 
pace of life for a bit. Sadly the romance of this idea soon wore off once we 
took the even higher rents, crap winter weather and lack of jobs into 
consideration, so we decided to investigate warmer, cheaper options. I became 
overly invested in the lives of the couples onA Place in the Sun 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/apr/26/property-abroad-spain-prices-falls>
 and fired off application forms for jobs in Ibiza, Corsica, Malta and any 
other pleasant-sounding Mediterranean island I could think of during the advert 
breaks.

I’ve never been one to over-plan, or even slightly plan to be honest, so it 
was only when I was called for interview for a job inCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/cyprus> that I looked up where it actually 
was on a map. I knew it was somewhere near Greece, roughly, but it turned out 
to be a lot closer to Syria and Iraq than I’d expected. Apparently geography, 
like general life planning, is an area I need to work on. However, my potential 
employer was covering the expenses and the hotel looked nice, so I slapped on 
the Factor 50 and hopped on easyJet’s first flight out.

An early highlight of the trip was being serenaded by an energetic, ancient 
man who was either the hotel’s original resident singer or just a very 
enthusiastic guest, performing a Taylor Swift/Katy Perry mash-up on a lute, 
complete with authentic dance moves, while I enjoyed my complimentary Greek 
buffet-for-one and sampled the rosé wine selection. This irresistible hint of 
local nightlife, plus being 2,000 miles away from the coffee shop, was enough 
to convince me that I’d found a place we’d be happy to call home. I was 
delighted when I got a call a few days later to offer me the job.

A moment that changed me – listening to David Bowie’s Hunky Dory | Peter 
Ormerod
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/moment-that-changed-me-david-bowie-hunky-dory>
A couple of months after that, armed with sunglasses, flip-flops and only 
minor fears that we were making a huge mistake, my boyfriend and I made the 
move. One of the first phrases we were introduced to was “siga, siga”, which 
means “slowly, slowly” – very apt for the Cypriot lifestyle. Our goal of 
enjoying a less hectic pace of life is definitely working out. We’ve been here 
a few months now, and apart from a dramatic encounter with a tarantula in the 
bath and a fairly tense standoff with some of the local feral cats it’s all 
going pretty smoothly.

The events of last year, and the noise from that industrial fridge, feel very 
far away, which is just what I was hoping for. In terms of fully dealing with 
my mum’s death I know I’m probably just putting it off, but for now life is 
good. As far as future plans go, there aren’t any yet. As I said, life planning 
is an area I need to work on. But siga, siga – there’s no rush.
 