
In March 2007 I was told that I would lose my sight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/blindness>. It was like a rug being pulled 
from under me. I was 35 and thought I had my whole life ahead of me. I’d had no 
idea that anything was wrong. I’mdiabetic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/diabetes>, and have regular eye checks, 
but my vision was fine up to that point, perfect in fact – I was a competitive 
field archer. But after that appointment everything moved so fast.

The doctors explained that high blood sugar levels were damaging the retina at 
the back of my eyes, a condition known asdiabetic proliferative retinopathy 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Diabetic-retinopathy/Pages/Introduction.aspx>. 
They told me that they would try to save my vision, but that some, or possibly 
all, of my sight would eventually go.

‘I was so focused on trying to save my vision that I didn’t take a moment to 
consider my mental wellbeing

There was a horrible sense of foreboding. I was sent for operation after 
operation, but with no idea what state my vision would be in at the end of it. 
Would I have to live the rest of my life in darkness? What would this mean for 
my new wife, Joanne, who had recently left her family in Edinburgh to move in 
with me?


In total I had five years of operations and laser surgery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2013/oct/12/should-i-have-laser-eye-surgery>
. Joanne was by my side like a rock – reading books to me as I recovered from 
yet another operation. But as my eyesight deteriorated I felt I was losing 
control of my life. I couldn’t do anything on my own any more and relied on 
Joanne for help with little things that used to be so easy – like making a cup 
of tea.

As I went from one appointment to the next, I tried to ignore the feelings of 
hopelessness, but I gradually lost all my confidence and felt isolated from 
everyone around me. I was so wrapped up in my own situation that my 
relationship with Joanne began to suffer. I didn’t realise that she felt alone 
too. Our conversations were taken over by talk of medical procedures and 
practicalities. We both desperately tried to understand this new life, but it 
nearly broke us.

Looking back, I wish someone had asked me how I was coping much sooner. Or how 
my family was coping. I was never asked how I was feeling about my life or my 
future. I was asked about levels of pain, and I was so focused on trying to 
save my vision that I didn’t take a moment to consider my mental wellbeing. 
I’ve heard thatevery hour someone in the UK loses their sight 
<http://www.guidedogs.org.uk/aboutus/careers/#.VrI3MGThByo>, but the emotional 
consequences that come with it are just sidelined, unless you know how to ask 
for help.

A moment that changed me – when my siblings and I became orphans | Frances 
Acquaah
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/17/moment-changed-me-mothers-death>
I was lucky that they managed to save some of my sight and now I have some 
central vision left – it’s a bit like looking through a slot. But once the 
operations and medical treatment were over, I had nothing left to focus on. I 
struggled to get about and tried using a white cane. But I was concentrating so 
hard on what was around me all the time that I was constantly exhausted. One 
day I bumped into someone and he really laid into me. He was apologetic when he 
saw my cane but it was a final knock to my self-esteem, and I realised how 
vulnerable I had become.

The Monday after, something inside me snapped and I broke down at work. It was 
as though the gradual panic inside me had become so intense that my brain just 
shut off. It was fight or flight and all I wanted to do was run away. The 
breakdown forced me to go to my GP and ask for the help that I’d needed all 
along. I was diagnosed with clinicaldepression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression> and stress, and signed off 
work. I was referred for cognitive behavioural therapy, which helped me process 
my thoughts in a way that is more positive. We also realised that Joanne had 
neglected her mental health as well, and she also received support for anxiety 
and stress.

I’m so glad we found that help, as things slowly started to seem more hopeful 
and manageable. It was then that a friend asked if I’d thought about aguide dog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jan/19/guide-dog-puppy-trainer-real-life-account>
. I had no idea of the huge impact that my guide dog, Stokes, would have on our 
lives. He’s literally given me my freedom back. He’s also brought Joanne and I 
closer together – it’s like he was the missing link and brings so much joy to 
our lives.

It doesn’t sound like a big deal, but now if we run out of milk at home I can 
just go. I can walk out the door, down the street and get it myself. Stokes is 
there to make sure I’m safe and not about to walk into anything. I used to have 
to concentrate so hard on what was immediately in front of me, but now my mind 
can wander like everyone else’s. He’s given me the chance to be me again.
 