
It’s 8pm, and I have been standing outside a church building for hours, too 
afraid to go in. I am giving God another chance. Having grown up in aChristian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/christianity> family, I rediscovered my own 
faith recently, after being fairly indifferent to it all as a child, but 
standing there – feeling a mix of shame and sadness – something is stopping me 
going inside. If there really is a supreme being, where is he now?

Happy birthday, Shelter – sadly you are needed more than ever | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/25/shelter-fifty-years-charity-homelessness-government>
People file out of the evening service, laughing with friends and discussing 
dinner plans. They walk past me as if I am invisible. Then a woman stops and 
asks if I am all right. “I have nowhere to live.” The words tumble out and are 
almost inaudible as I try to hold back tears. “Why don’t you come inside? We 
have a notice board where people offer spare rooms,” she replies. “No, you 
don’t understand,” I say. “I have nothing. I’ve fallen out with my family, I’ve 
run out of friends, I’m failing in school and I have no money. I don’t know 
what to do.”

She saw the fear in my eyes, and her countenance filled with compassion, as 
she offered me a bed for the night. She was convinced that a few phone calls 
would help sort everything out. She didn’t ask much about my life up to this 
point, but simply showed unquestioning kindness instead.

At 18, from a “good” middle-class family, and well-educated, I might not have 
looked like an “obvious” person to be sleeping rough, but my life had turned 
down a dark path. I had run away from home and was making some poor life 
choices – blaming all my mistakes on my mum and dad. I left in search of 
independence and had fallen into self-destruct mode, suffering fromdepression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/depression>, obsessive compulsive disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/obsessive-compulsive-disorder> and 
self-harming.

At first I stayed with a close friend, but then her family moved away. Another 
family from church took me in but they couldn’t care for me along with their 
own children. I was less focused on myA-levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels> than their own daughter, 
despite the fact my exams were looming. Maybe they thought I was a bad 
influence and that their best intentions were failing. They kept suggesting 
that I should return home, when neither I nor my parents felt ready for this.

So I sofa-surfed until my friends ran out of patience. I was street homeless 
for a week. I went up and down a London underground line, slept on night buses 
or in train stations, and survived on reduced foods from the 24-hour 
supermarket. This was an exhausting and embarrassing experience.

This woman outside the church came into my life when I was on the brink of 
collapse, panicking about what to do from one day to the next. I was in 
survival mode, and all I could think about was myself. I was taking advantage 
of people’s generosity without showing much gratitude or consideration. This 
woman not only gave me a bed for the night, but she also talked some sense into 
me. “What’s your long-term plan? You can’t go on like this for ever,” she said. 
“No wonder you’ve run out of friends if you treat them this way. You’re taking 
advantage of their kindness… or are you just expecting people to continue to 
pay your way for you?” Her words and tough love broke a cycle of negative 
thinking.

After hearing this analysis of my situation I realised that I needed to sort 
my life out. This advice was nothing new; friends and family had already tried 
to get through to me, but hearing it from someone who didn’t know me hit 
harder. I spent the next night at theMarylebone Project 
<http://www.churcharmy.org.uk/Groups/245011/Church_Army/ms/Marylebone_Project/About_Us/About_Us.aspx>
, run by the Church Army. I had a hot shower, a hot meal and a room to myself. 
The staff made enquiries and found me a bed in aCentrepoint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2013/dec/27/centrepoint-young-hidden-homeless-london-video>
 hostel for 16- to 25-year-olds. I shared a dormitory and bathroom with three 
other girls. From there, I was given a room in a flat with another girl, 
sharing the kitchen and bathroom. After four months there, I entered a 
six-month Christian residential programme for vulnerable women. Everywhere I 
went, I was treated exceptionally well – I didn’t feel like a burden, but a 
valuable human being. The staff helped me to get my life back on track. I got 
my first job working in a department store. I was becoming a responsible adult, 
paying bills and learning to deal with the consequences of my actions.

The secret life of a homeless outreach worker: we put up with abuse that no 
other profession would | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/15/secret-life-homeless-outreach-worker-abuse>
The biggest challenge was not being taken seriously. I was British, 
well-educated, and middle-class – I didn’t fit the typical image of a homeless 
person. I felt like being homeless was my fault, because I didn’t have “real 
problems”, such as addiction. When people think of a homeless person they 
probably imagine a bearded older man, but I know now thathomelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/homelessness> can happen to anyone.

Looking back, it sometimes feels as though this is not my own story, because 
it seems too far removed from my life now. Family relationships and friendships 
have been restored. Being open, honest and vulnerable, we have spent lot of 
time talking and learning to trust each other again. I love the work that I do 
now, both paid and voluntary. I’ve just moved into a new apartment, which is a 
stone’s throw away from where I used to sleep rough. I walk past the same 
places every day, which can be quite surreal.

I’m part of another church now, which is very involved in the local community 
and I’ve recently become part ofCitizens UK <http://www.citizensuk.org/>, a 
non-partisan organisation campaigning for things such as the living wage. The 
government needs to step up its game, to ensure that more affordable housing 
becomes a reality and that people are paid enough to actually live. More 
volunteers are needed for street teams who help the homeless sleeping rough.

If there were more people out there like the woman who helped me, then perhaps 
we might see a reduction in rough sleeping. True success stories can only be 
achieved and sustained when people can access the services they need for long 
enough to rebuild their lives. Whenever I buythe Big Issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-big-issue>, or serve on a team for 
Crisis at Christmas, it keeps me connected to something that I could easily try 
to distance myself from. Homelessness could happen to any of us, so do remember 
that a single act of kindness could change someone’s life.
 