
My university seminar had just finished, and I was standing in line at the 
refectory, grumbling about a man who had suggested any woman who disagreed with 
him must bea lesbian <https://www.theguardian.com/society/sexuality>. “Well, I 
am a lesbian so I don’t know what he’d say to me,” said Denise Marshall. It was 
the first time we’d met. I was enchanted.

Feminist campaigner Denise Marshall on being diagnosed with cancer: ‘There’s 
so much left to do’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/08/feminist-campaigner-denise-marshall-cancer-eaves>
This was early 1992 and I’d been pretending to be “straight” for quite some 
time. I didn’t ever use the word lesbian. If my sexuality had been spoken about 
at all – which it definitely wasn’t – I would have used the word gay.

To meet a woman so out and so absolutely gorgeous … well … I was hooked. I 
didn’t know, of course, just how far my life would go with the funny, 
red-haired woman in a duffel coat, but we were friends immediately, laughing at 
both being from Tottenham, just up the road from the Middlesex University 
campus in Enfield, when all around us were people from proper “up north”: Tracy 
from Manchester, Wendy from Bradford, John and his twin from somewhere “not 
London”.

We were funny and flash in our north London cockiness. We thought so, at least.

Denise was profoundly political, a feminist and socialist to her core and 
deeply delighted by her life as an out-and-proud lesbian activist. Every 
Thursday afternoon, while the rest of us sat around smoking, Denise would go 
off to work with a group of Kurdish women who needed housing. I didn’t even 
know what Kurdish was at the time.

For the next three years, Denise held court after lectures and many people 
listened. Me most of all. She hadn’t been around heterosexuals for many years, 
she said. She had been a development worker for Stonewall, helping to set up 
housing projects for vulnerable young lesbians and gay men. University was full 
of straight people. She was fascinated by them and it made her fascinating. She 
also knew from our first meeting that I wasn’t being true to myself. She didn’t 
say so directly. But because she presented being a lesbian as a beautiful 
privilege, she made me realise I could live differently.

Denise organised a group of us to go to the May Day rally in 1992, and soon we 
were all reading her two favourite books:The Ragged-Trousered Philanthropists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/may/02/ragged-trousered-philanthropists-left-wing-bestsellers>
 by Robert Tressell and Sour Sweet byTimothy Mo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/oct/07/fiction.mayajaggi>. She taught 
me about feminism, class oppression, the importance of caring for our 
communities, of working to right wrongs. Pretty soon I was out of the closet, 
and with Denise’s encouragement I went to Gay Pride, had some fine fun flings 
with fabulous women, and my life took off. Denise was an education in herself 
and I spent every moment I could with her.

My secret life faded and I found liberation in living honestly. Our friendship 
deepened, I moved in as Denise’s lodger, and then one day, it all changed. We 
became lovers.

This was 1995, and Denise had become the manager of a women’s refuge. I had 
graduated as an English teacher and the internet had just arrived. Like the 
rest of the world, we had no idea what that dial-up tone would mean and where 
it would take us. We had no idea what becoming lovers would come to mean 
either, but our love was wild and wonderful, and neither of us had ever been 
happier. It was a golden time of feminism, lesbianism, freedom and hope. We 
adored each other.

Ten years later, not long after I became a headteacher, I collapsed one day, 
insanely tired following an Ofsted inspection. An emergency brain scan led to a 
diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. I had to retire from my job, and was told I 
would soon need a wheelchair. It felt like my life was over. But it wasn’t. I 
still had Denise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmoment-changed-me-love-courage-come-out-lesbian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27ecfc60f5ce1420114da5e1ee9b49f2d9d36071%2F0_72_4180_2507%2F4180.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20meeting%20my%20late%20love%20Denise%2C%20who%20gave%20me%20the%20courage%20to%20come%20out%20%7C%20Lisa%20Alabaksh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmoment-changed-me-love-courage-come-out-lesbian%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20meeting%20my%20late%20love%20Denise%2C%20who%20gave%20me%20the%20courage%20to%20come%20out%20%7C%20Lisa%20Alabaksh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fmoment-changed-me-love-courage-come-out-lesbian%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27ecfc60f5ce1420114da5e1ee9b49f2d9d36071%2F0_72_4180_2507%2F4180.jpg>
 ‘Denise’s final Facebook post asked friends to look after me, and they did.’ 
Denise Marshall and friend. Photograph: Lisa Alabaksh 
She became CEO of Eaves <http://www.eavesforwomen.org.uk/>, a feminist charity 
specialising in support, advocacy and research into all aspects of violence 
against women. Eaves changed policy and perceptions around trafficking through 
itsPoppy project 
<http://www.eavesforwomen.org.uk/about-eaves/our-projects/the-poppy-project/>, 
and the work was respected worldwide. Funding was cut with the advent of the 
coalition government in 2010, and Denise was heartbroken. But she was a force 
of nature, and kept the Eaves projects going, as well as writingtwo 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/B00BG2XW9W> novels 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/1495313506>, travelling the world for adventure, 
playing poker and using social media with a political passion.

In August 2015, our life together ended 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/denise-marshall>. Denise died of 
stomach cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/08/feminist-campaigner-denise-marshall-cancer-eaves>
, andEaves closed two months later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/nov/03/the-demise-of-womens-charity-eaves-should-worry-us-all>
 – a double devastation. Through sickness, diagnosis, treatment, pretty much up 
to the end of her life, Facebook had been Denise’s link to the outside world, 
and in those early minutes, hours, days and weeks of grief it became mine too. 
Posting on Facebook was my way of not drowning, because online, there were 
friends. Real friends; people I’d actually met and who knew Denise. I would 
write, sometimes in the dark, desperate hours of insomnia, and someone would be 
there. Facebook saved my life. Denise’s final post asked friends to look after 
me, and they did.

By the time of my first birthday without Denise, I had posted some 60,000 
words. She was loved by so many and she was missed so much, personally and 
professionally. People told me it helped to read my posts, and that message 
helped me. One day, two friends brought a manuscript around, made up of the 
posts I’d written, and from there this became an actual book and my life 
changed again.

Now I am a published writer who has a life that includes people I really don’t 
know but who now know me. Sort of.The book is an out-and-proud story of lesbian 
love <https://www.amazon.co.uk/dp/1911266160>, feminist fire and a universal 
recognition that everyone can be stronger for longer with a bit of kindness and 
compassion. It is about surviving the swim across the oceans of grief and 
finding hope in the heartache. It is about love.

Denise Marshall obituary
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/02/denise-marshall> 
The moment I met Denise Marshall, I found my life’s passion – working to end 
violence against women and girls – and I took the first step on the path to 
living openly and happily as a lesbian, as who I am. Because of Facebook, I 
have been able to survive the greatest loss of my life. Along the way, I’ve 
tried to live according to a mood and a mindset I call Hahalala – health and 
happiness and love and laughter all. This outlook and expression came to me 
after my own recovery from sickness. Although Denise would often roll her eyes 
at my cheeriness, she too was an optimist and she loved and believed in the 
concept.

In the last days of her life, I asked how she had done it all, how she was 
still managing to raise a smile, how we were all going to survive without her. 
She smiled the smile that enchanted me the first time I met her, in that 
refectory queue, 23 years earlier. “It’s a case of having to, my darling,” she 
said.
 