
At certain times in my life my parents remind me that I wasn’t meant to be 
here. I know that sounds like I was some kind of mistake, but what they really 
mean is that some people had written me off at certain stages in my life, and 
there were many cliched discussions about the wrong choices I was making. 
Everything I’ve accomplished is a reminder of how far I’ve come.

I was born to West Indian parents, and it was instilled into me that I would 
have to work twice as hard to get half as much. That education wasn’t a joke – 
it was the only way to make it. But there I was in secondary school, taking the 
mick, thinking it was better to be recognised by a group of girls older than me 
than by my peers – and most definitely than by my teachers.

I had ignored all the if-you-don’t-pull- your-socks-up threats from my 
teachers, presuming they weren’t really serious warnings. And I never really 
wanted to change. I liked being cool for all the wrong reasons – like that time 
I slicked my baby hairs down in the shape of the letter C.

I got numerous detentions for bad behaviour, not doing my homework and 
rudeness – the usual things you would expect from a child with a serious 
attitude problem: a child who probably thought the world owed them something, 
instead of the other way round.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-being-made-head-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb34a046d6f7753e2b2f8aec001273ebe7f07965%2F179_188_1936_2046%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20being%20made%20head%20girl%20%7C%20Lemara%20Lindsay-Prince&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-being-made-head-girl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20being%20made%20head%20girl%20%7C%20Lemara%20Lindsay-Prince&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F11%2Fmoment-changed-me-being-made-head-girl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb34a046d6f7753e2b2f8aec001273ebe7f07965%2F179_188_1936_2046%2F1936.jpg>
 ‘Any position, let alone head girl, wasn’t a consideration for me.’ 
It all came to a head one day after school in a fight. News that one of my 
friends had broken another girl’s arm was all anyone was talking about, and I 
had been seen there. As I was marched to my head of year’s office the next day, 
it was like a moment from a bad teen movie. I watched as my teacher raised her 
hand to call my dad at work, and I pulled the signed detention slip from inside 
my blazer pocket. It was the one time in all my school years that I was 
thankful to be in detention after school.

It was then I realised it could all be lost. My mum had fought hard to get me 
into all my schools – this one especially. We lived in a now-demolished estate 
in south-west London that had a bad reputation. My parents were, and still are, 
the kind that work “all the hours God sends” to “make ends meet” and to “give 
you the life they never had”. My small part to play in this family was just to 
show up to school, learn, and come home.

Nothing was so hard about that when I look at it now, but I’ll admit I 
struggled for a few years before that moment. I owned up to my behaviour but it 
look a long time for my teachers’ dissatisfaction with me to fade. I was 
trapped in this image of myself that I had created.

I always remember how frustrated I felt at not being listened to by teachers, 
as they still presumed that I was a troublemaker and was not to be taken 
seriously. I remember putting my hand up to answer questions and getting 
ignored – it was assumed I wouldn’t know anything of use. There was surprise 
when I actually started doing my homework. I really didn’t want to be a 
stereotype, and I feared it was too late to turn it around.

When I tell this story, people always ask me what changed. The obvious answer 
was that I grew up. But mainly it was down to my parents’ reaction. Seeing them 
disappointed in me hurt the most. Meeting after meeting about my behaviour, 
awkward parents’ evenings where we rested hope on a vague comment about 
“potential”: I didn’t want any more of those moments for them, let alone for me.

My parents liked that the secondary school I went to built on tradition. There 
was a pride in the uniform, and our school name was associated with discipline 
and excellence. One of our most serious traditions was the position of head 
girl. In the last year of sixth form all the teachers took a vote on who to 
elect. It was always a big deal. It meant a lot to achieve that, and it held 
all the markers of what a role model should be.

Any position, let alone head girl, wasn’t a consideration for me. I knew it 
was out of my league. But then two of my teachers approached me about running 
for it. I remember it now like an ambush – I was backed into a corner on the 
stairs. They said that I should apply, that they would support my application, 
that it would be a good thing.

They had clearly given it much thought. It sounded convincing, but I knew it 
wasn’t likely, considering my past. I remember giving my application letter to 
my head of year; she asked whether I was applying for house captain and not 
head girl.

What happens to head girls?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/24/what-happens-to-head-girls>
Traditions have long processes. My letter stating my intent was only a small 
part of it – there were interviews, in-house voting, more interviews and then 
the announcement. One teacher made me consider that a few others were finding 
it hard to ignore my past – a reminder of who I used to be. These teachers were 
worried about the signal the appointment would send to pupils in other years.

The final candidates were all called into the headmistress’s room, when the 
decision was finally made. I’ve re-enacted that moment for my mum since, to 
show her how my legs buckled under me when my name was called. I couldn’t 
believe it. Nobody could believe it. I was to be joint-head girl, which was 
fine with me. Joint was better than nothing. Joint was great, for a kid who had 
nearly been kicked out of school.

This moment was for me and for my parents. It was a personal accomplishment 
that meant more than just acceptance. It was a long road of events and hard 
changes to get to that point, but it will always stand out for me because it 
was the first time I understood that I was no longer defined by my past.
 