
It is only a 20-minute walk, but crossing no-man’s-land at the Erez border 
control changes everything. EnteringGaza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> feels like gaining access to a state 
penitentiary; there are guards, automatic weapons, dogs, gates and the infamous 
wall, designed to keep the1.85 million Gazans 
<http://pcbs.gov.ps/Downloads/book2176.pdf> in, and everything else out.

The 2014 conflict left Gaza’s healthcare shattered. When will justice be done? 
| Helena Kennedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/29/2014-conflict-gaza-healthcare-hospitals-war-crime-israel-hamas>
Israel is an advanced country, with fantastic infrastructure and a healthcare 
system to rival any of those in the western world. Just a few miles down the 
road though, you see a different story. As anNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> doctor, working in a busy tertiary 
centre in Liverpool, I am used to working long hours, coping with staffing 
shortages, and the constant pressure. Despite this I am proud that we provide 
quality healthcare for our patients at any time of the day or night, seven days 
a week. That’s why I wanted to help those not so lucky to have such a 
healthcare system.

My journey to Gaza began with a charity, the Liverpool International 
Transplant Initiative <http://www.liverpooliti.com/> (LITI). LITI was 
responsible for the first kidney transplants in Gaza, and has performed 25 
successful transplants there now. As we made our way from the border to the 
al-Shifa hospital, the largest in Gaza, I couldn’t help but notice the 
buildings lying half-demolished and derelict along the way. The2014 war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2014/dec/31/conflict-gaza-claimed-2000-lives>
 had a colossal impact on the infrastructure of Gaza, and many people are still 
trying to recover. Al-Shifa hospital itself is little more than a large 
apartment block with no resemblance to the hospitals we know so well in the UK.

Our aim on this mission was to carry out four kidney transplants, all live 
donors, from relatives of the patients. Living with kidney failure in the UK is 
a struggle, even with advanced support, three to four weekly dialysis sessions, 
regular follow-ups, dietitian input, specialist nurses, anaemia management and 
hospital transport. InGaza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/gaza> it is 
almost impossible. Suffering from kidney failure here means almost certain 
premature death. Dialysis centres are few and far between, and cater for 
numbers that are unheard of in the UK. This means that patients may only be 
able to dialyse once or twice per week, which puts an enormous strain on the 
body and leaves them with a substandard quality of life.

Our first patient was a 27-year-old woman, due to receive a kidney from her 
brother. She had been admitted to hospital three days previously with 
pneumonia, and even while talking to us at rest was extremely breathless. It 
became painfully obvious that this young lady was not fit for a transplant on 
this mission, her body was still fighting off the pneumonia, and to put her 
through a huge surgery and immunosuppression would not be right. In Liverpool 
this patient would receive antibiotics, her anaemia corrected and in six weeks’ 
time would be in the best shape possible to have her transplant. Unfortunately 
this is not the case in Gaza, and I suspect this woman may not be alive by the 
time we next fly out.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmoment-changed-me-kidney-transplants-gaza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c968905aa059096dbf23e7545c83dfaf163a8f%2F0_99_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20carrying%20out%20kidney%20transplants%20in%20Gaza%20%20%7C%20Salim%20Hammad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmoment-changed-me-kidney-transplants-gaza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20carrying%20out%20kidney%20transplants%20in%20Gaza%20%20%7C%20Salim%20Hammad&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fmoment-changed-me-kidney-transplants-gaza%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F99c968905aa059096dbf23e7545c83dfaf163a8f%2F0_99_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 ‘As we made our way from the border to the al-Shifa hospital, I couldn’t help 
but notice the buildings lying half-demolished and derelict along the way.’ 
Photograph: Salim Hammad 
Daily life in Gaza is interrupted by regular power cuts, some of which last 
for hours. The hospitals supposedly have back-up generators that take over the 
power, but in reality this is not always the case. During one of our 
transplants, the operating theatre was plunged into darkness, and a familiar 
sigh from the Gazan doctors went round the room. I stood as still and silently 
as possible, not used to the pitch black mid-operation, and waited for the 
generators to kick in.

The dialysis unit in the Al-Shifa hospital is a far cry from the highly 
polished, well slicked UK centres. There are four rooms, each with 12 old 
dialysis machines. The one nurse for each room runs back and forth between the 
patients, trying to keep the dialysis sessions running. One of the nurses 
explains how they have to cut the gauze into four, so that they have enough for 
all the patients. Back home, this would be unheard of. Ahmed, a 13-year-old 
patient, tells me how he has to get a taxi to the dialysis centre three times a 
week from a neighbouring town, costing his family £18 each time. In a region 
where unemployment rates are as high as 50%, this is not sustainable for his 
family.

The world has broken its promises about rebuilding Gaza – and the children 
will suffer | Chris Gunness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/21/chris-gunness-gaza-aid-broken-promises-children-suffer>
The most astonishing quality of the Gazan people is their ability to remain 
positive and enthusiastic despite everything they have been through: if you are 
six years old in Gaza, you are a veteran of three wars. We were taken to the 
town of Shuja’iyya, east of the centre, an area that was razed to the ground 
during the 2014 war. It is amazing how far the town has progressed, and how 
quickly signs of life have returned to the area. Children show their incredible 
spirit, playing in the rubble of their houses, swinging from trees and causing 
as much mischief as possible, while the young men work on the regeneration of 
the buildings.

On the morning we were due to leave, I learned of the imposition of the junior 
doctors’ contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/11/jeremy-hunt-to-impose-contract-on-junior-doctors>
 back in England. A week in Gaza had reaffirmed to me that the NHS was an 
extraordinary organisation, providing world-class care, free at the point of 
use for everyone. The citizens of the strip, often so desperate for the most 
simple of medical interventions, would give anything and everything for such an 
establishment. Our healthcare system is constantly under scrutiny, our staff 
work tirelessly and our patients are looked after to the best of our abilities 
at all times. We must all make it our priority to protect the NHS - its very 
existence means that we are more fortunate than we will ever know.
 