
On 1 April, 11 years ago, I looked into my spare room to check that it really 
was empty. Yes, it was. My partner of 12 years had finally gone, and taken all 
his belongings with him: the floor-to-ceiling shelves and everything on them; 
the squillion books; papers; monster collection of photos and other bits and 
scraps – twigs, stones, “arrangements” and assorted waste material. Not a trace 
of him was left. The vacuum cleaner stood all by itself in the middle of the 
room. I was single again, at 62.

A moment that changed me: opening a letter I wrote myself in 1994 | John Wilson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/moment-that-changed-me-opening-letter-childhood-friends-interviewing>
This was a situation I had feared for decades, for most of my life: being a 
single woman. Perhaps that’s why this separation had been such a long time 
coming. We’d been mouldering along for years, not really liking each other 
much, the household simmering with tension or flare-ups of loathing, squabbles, 
sulking and resentments.

Over the years he, my mother and my daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/27/michele-hanson-my-daughter-treasure>
 had grown to dislike each other intensely. My mother was in despair. “Grant me 
one last wish as a dying woman,” she begged one of my closest friends. “Don’t 
let her marry him!”

Friends weren’t keen on him either. “Get rid of him,” they advised. One 
refused to visit, she was so sick of me moaning and doing nothing about it. 

I had endless excuses, I was too busy; how could I pack up all his belongings 
and throw them into the front garden as instructed? There was too much stuff, 
crammed into his room, the whole basement and the attic. Or perhaps if we had a 
short holiday, or he got a long-term job, or my friends and family gave him a 
bit more of a chance, things might improve.

But secretly it was terror holding me back. I was scared stiff of being on my 
own, of being one of those pathetic creatures – a spinster, unlovable, who 
cannot sustain a relationship, who turns to dogs because no one else would have 
her. There was nothing rational about this fear. I knew it was rubbish, but 
still it was lurking, and had a paralysing grip on me until things reached a 
peak that even I could not tolerate He had to go.

It still took a few months of nagging, but eventually that room was empty, and 
instead of feeling scared, I felt great. Free, free at last, like a rat let out 
of its trap. I could do what I liked, when I liked. No tensions, no wondering 
whether this or that person would or wouldn’t get on with him, no lectures, no 
unenthusiastic mother and daughter, no crotchety friends, browned off with 
listening to my hours of repetitive bitterness-speak, no sullen presence 
casting a pall over daily life. 

At teachers’ training college, when I was about 20, the principal had given 
all of the new students an introductory talk. “A pair is a stultifying unit,” 
he warned us. “Do not form a pair. Form a gang.” We thought him an idiot at the 
time, but now I see it, and I have my gang: daughter, friends,dogs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/08/depressed-dogs-bad-weather-owning-pet-expensive-responsible>
. And most wonderful of all has been the discovery that it was very pleasant 
indeed to be alone. Solitude was not a desolate state. It was heaven, I found, 
and not scary at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-single-at-62-spinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb806e15f3d59ee7dcc4a24118febf16cbae8fe92%2F0_377_3906_2343%2F3906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20becoming%20single%20at%2062%20%7C%20Michele%20Hanson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-single-at-62-spinster%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20becoming%20single%20at%2062%20%7C%20Michele%20Hanson&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-single-at-62-spinster%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb806e15f3d59ee7dcc4a24118febf16cbae8fe92%2F0_377_3906_2343%2F3906.jpg>
 Michele, right, and her friend Carol McNichol at an art gallery. Photograph: 
Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
I don’t want another partner, or relationship, physical or otherwise. I do not 
feel like an isolated capon. I’m fine like this. The only snag is that I bet 
most people won’t believe me. I can imagine those Trump-like voices from the 
wings saying: “She’s saying that because she just can’t get anyone. Who’d want 
to give her one, at her age, and with a face like that?” and suchlike. And the 
more I insist, the more I’ll probably be accused of protesting too much. 

But I promise that I have found new happiness in being able to choose my own 
curtains, duvet cover, colour paint for the walls, kitchen surfaces or any bit 
of household decor without hours of consultation with him, hours of arguing, 
dithering, compromising. I could choose my own favourite plants for the garden, 
background music, wattage of light-bulbs, which parties, films, visits to go 
on, or whether the dog could sleep on the bed. I’d forgotten how lovely it is 
to make my own mind up about anything and everything. To not being sneered at 
for watching EastEnders. I wake up, and there is a cheery dog bouncing around 
rather than a silent, sulking hulk. Any friend can visit at any time, in a 
mellow atmosphere, with no tension, no rows. A life full of conversations 
dawned, rather than dronings and lecturettes. No more friends having to sit 
listening and nodding and trying to be polite.

A moment that changed me: meeting my late love Denise, who gave me the courage 
to come out | Lisa Alabaksh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/moment-changed-me-love-courage-come-out-lesbian>
I weedily used to think that there were certain household tasks that only a 
man could do: unblock the sink, mend this that or the other, prune the roses, 
put a washer on the tap, or even do the washing up. I would wait and wait for 
him to do it. Tonight, tomorrow, next week? If I asked, I was nagging; if I 
didn’t ask, it never got done. A lose-lose situation. Now I no longer have to 
live in this state of tension, waiting, hoping, wondering and fuming. Such a 
waste of time and energy, over such small things.

Now I can just call a friend, a member of my gang – usually Carol yes, a woman 
– who can build walls, clear out drains, prune trees, and she would come round 
and just get on with it. And now, under her tuition, I can also do most of 
these tasks myself, even mix cement and build walls. It might look like 
selfishness, having everything my own way, but I see it as a new independence. 
I can trust my own taste. I am not as incompetent as I thought.

Of course, it hasn’t been all plain sailing. It took me some time to get over 
this relationship. The rage lingered on. For months – years, really, if I’m 
honest. I would pointlessly mull and fume over those wretched years, and mainly 
I was enraged at myself: for my collusion, for letting it go on for so long, 
for being so wet, at the waste of energy, the guilt for making my mother and 
daughter endure such unpleasantness.

That’s gone now, because there is no point to any fury and regret. As a mutual 
friend advised me when I was still fuming, “Hate is corrosive.” Correct. And I 
feel that I’ve managed to stop the corrosion. My mind seems to have had a big 
clear-out, like that lovely, empty room. And there is something tremendously 
energising about a clear-out.

It certainly perked my mother up. She died a happier woman, free of her 
biggest worry. Then I finished a history degree, moved house, and wrote a book: 
“all by myself”. Which is what I used to say, my mother told me, when I was 
about three, and she was interfering. Because I could manage quite well on my 
own. And I still can, thank you very much.
 