
A new and disturbing factor emerged during this presidential election, and one 
that may change elections forever: democracies are now at the mercy of hacking 
and surveillance technology – and those who control it.

WikiLeaks and a network of anonymous hackers have become a major influence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/19/wikileaks-ecuador-julian-assange-internet-access>
, turning the rituals of democracy into sleaze-fests for the tabloids and the 
sensationalist press. And foreign governments have a hand, too – allegedly 
Russia, in the case of the US election.

Technology has advanced rapidly from election to election, becoming more 
powerful and ubiquitous. Skilled hackers have the ability to access and release 
private conversations, communications and information, whether from two hours 
ago or 20 years ago.

Clinton campaign dubs WikiLeaks 'Russian propaganda' after latest hack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
And now in the US, that technology has played the role of kingmaker: 
WikiLeaks’ firepower was directed only at one of the presidential candidates, 
and the topic of missing emails was controversially revived by the FBI nine 
days before the election. Hillary Clintonblamed that intervention 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/us/politics/hillary-clinton-james-comey.html>
 as one reason she lost the election. Both set a troubling precedent, but this 
emerging “leakocracy” is not just a threat to the US.

Following two separate cyber-attacks targeting major political parties in 
Germany, both with links to Russia,Chancellor Angela Merkel warned 
<http://www.dw.com/en/merkel-warns-of-russian-cyber-attacks-in-german-elections/a-36314197>
 last week that Russia may try to influence the upcoming German federal 
elections in September 2017 through a campaign of hacking and disinformation. 
Germany is already facing “a daily task” of responding to Russian 
cyber-attacks, Merkel says. Security experts suggest Russia may think it would 
be better able to deal with a more leftwing government than the current grand 
coalition led by Merkel, a center-right conservative.


The trail of evidence in many recent hacks points to Russia, says Martin 
Schallbruch, deputy directorof the Digital Society Institute in Berlin 
<http://www.dw.com/en/signs-point-to-russia-in-cyberattacks-on-germany/a-19566439>
. “It’s significant that attacks like this increasingly try to capture large 
volumes of data, as was the case with the DNC, in order to do something with 
them in the future,” Schallbruch said. “We’re a year away from German national 
elections. And an attacker who stocks up on information today is better capable 
of action in nine months, be it leaking that information or blackmailing 
someone. It’s conceivable. We’ve seen it in the US, so why not in Germany?”

Cyber-warfare also hit France’s TV5 Monde television channel in April 2015, 
forcing it off the air and placing jihadist propaganda messages on the 
station’s website and social media accounts.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fwikileaks-elections-hackers-surveillance-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff38af41527855284980819397a111f5d8c6a1a%2F0_137_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20era%3A%20our%20elections%20now%20will%20be%20decided%20by%20hackers%20and%20leaked%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fwikileaks-elections-hackers-surveillance-technology%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20era%3A%20our%20elections%20now%20will%20be%20decided%20by%20hackers%20and%20leaked%20data&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fwikileaks-elections-hackers-surveillance-technology%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffff38af41527855284980819397a111f5d8c6a1a%2F0_137_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 Angela Merkel warned that Russia may try to influence the upcoming German 
federal elections through a campaign of hacking and disinformation. Photograph: 
John Macdougall/AFP/Getty Images 
In the Philippines, just a month before the presidential election in May 2016, 
the government sufferedprobably its worst ever data breach 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/technology-36013713>, while a few months earlier the 
Philippine Commission on Elections saw its website defaced and its entire 
database posted online. Ryan Flores, a senior manager at IT security firm Trend 
Micro, said the government’s cybersecurity vulnerabilities could lead to the 
election being “sabotaged”.

In the UK, the leaked Panama Papers revealed that the then UK prime minister 
David Cameron had personally profited from a tax-dodging stash of £30,000 in an 
offshore investment fund set up by his father. As de facto leader of the Remain 
campaign in the “Brexit” vote to leave the European Union, Cameron lost public 
credibility over the incident and damaged the campaign to stay in the EU.

By the time the US election rolled around, Americans were confused and reeling 
after a vicious campaign, and both Donald Trump and Clinton had unprecedented 
negative ratings from voters.

WikiLeaks emails: what they revealed about the Clinton campaign's mechanics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
Even the possibility of being embarrassed by a leak will discourage some 
people from running for office. How many good potential candidates are so 
squeaky clean that she or he can survive having snatches of conversations or 
emails ripped out of context and splashed across the headlines? Or having the 
email archives of a candidate’s closest advisers (such as Clinton’s election 
campaign chairman, John Podesta) raked through for scandal material?

Technology has certainly affected elections before, most famously with the 
sensation caused by the John Kennedy-Richard Nixon television debates. Those 
who watched the debates on TV thought Kennedy won, and those who heard it on 
the radio thought Nixon won.

But the recent US presidential election is the first time technology has 
played such a central role in digging into private lives, hacking into private 
communications, unearthing what was previously unearthable – and then providing 
the means to broadcast that all over the world. Adding to the mystery and 
tragedy is the apparent likelihood that foreign governments increasingly have 
the capabilities to do this to each other, trying to sway the outcome of 
elections and help the voters of another nation pick a leader they find more 
palatable.

Allowing Julian Assange or Vladimir Putin to become the kingmakers for 
important elections all over the world seems like a shortcut toward a 
democratic death spiral. We need to consider the vastly disproportionate 
influence of technology, because the critical processes and institutions of 
democracy may be more fragile than we thought.

 * Steven Hill <http://www.steven-hill.com/> is a political writer and the 
author of Raw Deal: How the ‘Uber Economy’ and Runaway Capitalism Are Screwing 
American Workers and 10 Steps to Repair American Democracy. You can follow him 
onTwitter <https://twitter.com/stevenhill1776?lang=en>  