
High-energy particle beams have multiple uses. In general, a controlled beam 
of high-energy particles can be used to smash things up – for example tumours 
or protons – or study them at high resolution, revealing the structure of 
molecules and materials, or indeed new fundamental physics such as the Higgs 
boson.

The challenges involved in producing a useful beam are various, and depend on 
the type of particle and what you want to use the beam for. One common 
limitation is the size and cost of the machine, and another is the steepness of 
the accelerating voltage gradient.

The physics of proton therapy | Jon Butterworth | Life & Physics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2014/aug/31/ashya-king-physics-of-proton-therapy>
The accelerating voltage in a standard battery is 12 Volts. Mains power could 
get you 240 V. But many applications require millions or even billions of times 
this. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC), at the current frontier of high-energy 
physics, accelerates particles to 13TeV 
<https://lifeandphysics.wordpress.com/about/smashing-physics/3283-2/>, more 
than a million million times the energy that can be reached using the batteries 
hopefully included in your Christmas presents.

The voltage gradient is a measure of how much voltage can be applied over a 
certain distance. For many accelerators¹ this is what determines the size. Can 
you get from zero to a billion in a few centimetres, metres, or kilometres?

Over the last few years, several experiments have shown that very high 
gradients can be produced in plasmas. A plasma is a gaseous mixture of 
positively and negatively charged particles, usually produced at high 
temperatures. Old neon lamps contain plasma.

In normal circumstances, the positively and negatively charged particles in a 
plasma are evenly distributed. But firing a laser, or a beam of particles, into 
a plasma, disrupts this, producing regions in the plasma of strong net positive 
charge, and others of strong negative charge. The gradients produced between 
these regions, in the wake of the beam, can be fantastically strong, and can be 
used to accelerate particles.

Why is the LHC tunnel so big? | Jon Butterworth | Life & Physics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2012/jun/08/why-is-lhc-big>
Such acceleration has already been demonstrated using lasers and electron 
beams injected into plasma, and these offer the possibility of accelerators for 
medical and other applications that are much smaller and cheaper than any 
currently available. The goal of the Advanced Wakefield Experiment (AWAKE 
<http://awake.web.cern.ch/awake/Default.htm>) at CERN² is to demonstrate plasma 
wakefield acceleration using a proton beam.

Proton beams are available at higher energies than lasers or electrons, and 
the most energetic are at CERN. AWAKE is using protons from the Super Proton 
Synchrotron (SPS), the final booster stage in the CERN accelerator complex 
before the LHC (see diagram).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Flife-and-physics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fa-new-cern-experiment-targets-even-higher-energies-eventually%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918e3dddebf3d371bac797d5efe435fec330bc9d%2F0_0_1698_1244%2F1698.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20new%20CERN%20experiment%20targets%20even%20higher%20energies%20(eventually)&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Flife-and-physics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fa-new-cern-experiment-targets-even-higher-energies-eventually%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20new%20CERN%20experiment%20targets%20even%20higher%20energies%20%28eventually%29&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Flife-and-physics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fa-new-cern-experiment-targets-even-higher-energies-eventually%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F918e3dddebf3d371bac797d5efe435fec330bc9d%2F0_0_1698_1244%2F1698.jpg>
 The CERN accelerator complex, showing the beamline for the AWAKE experiment 
(red). Photograph: CERN 
The eventual aim of AWAKE is to demonstrate the feasibility of using such a 
high-energy proton beam in a plasma to accelerate an electron beam to higher 
energies than ever before.

It is possible you have heard of AWAKE because when beams first entered the 
experiment in June last year, there were some wild headlines in news outlets 
(such as the Express and The Sun), along the lines of CERN opening ‘portals’. 
The spurious excitement seems to have been caused by somepictures of a 
thunderstorm 
<http://www.snopes.com/clouds-over-geneva-show-cern-opening-a-portal-to-a-new-dimension/>
. Thunderstorms arereally, really rare 
<https://dbffkv15yp72v.cloudfront.net/production/reports/year/000/032/402/df583f40/probability_of_precipitation_at_some_point_in_the_day_percent_pct.png>
 around the mountains of central Europe, and a particle physics experiment 
passing a milestone on schedule is even more unusual, so you can see how the 
journalists involved could have got confused.

Anyway, that was an important step forward, and at the end of LHC running in 
2016, another major step was taken. The experiment for the first time measured 
the fact that the shape of the proton beam was being modulated, or shaped, by 
the plasma. This is a sign that indeed the desired very high gradient electric 
fields are being produced in the plasma – the first time this has been seen for 
a proton beam.

There is some more information, and a nice 360-degree view of the experiment, 
inthis CERN news article <http://awake.web.cern.ch/awake/Default.htm>. There is 
a long way to go, but 2016 was a good year for protons at CERN, and not just in 
the LHC.


 * This article was amended on 9 January 2017 to remove a reference to certain 
newspapers as fake news outlets.

¹Though not, in fact, for the LHC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2012/jun/08/why-is-lhc-big>
.

² Which is in Geneva, not Yorkshire <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wakefield>.

Declaration of interest, UCL is a member of AWAKE 
<https://www.hep.ucl.ac.uk/awake/>, though I personally am not.

Weather link above from WeatherSpark 
<https://weatherspark.com/averages/32402/Geneva-Switzerland>.

J <https://twitter.com/jonmbutterworth>on Butterworth 
<https://twitter.com/jonmbutterworth>’s book Smashing Physics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/02/smashing-physics-jon-butterworth-review-cern-higgs-boson-particle>
is available as “Most Wanted Particle” in Canada & the US.
 