
On Wednesday, the US supreme court heard oral arguments 
<http://www.supremecourt.gov/oral_arguments/argument_transcripts/14-1418_1bn2.pdf>
 in Zubik v Burwell. The case challenges the Affordable Care Act requirement 
that employers include contraceptive coverage in taxpayer-subsidized health 
plans, with potentially negative ramifications for women nationwide should the 
court rule against the government.

The arguments suggest, however, that the issue will remain unresolved by a 
shorthanded court likely to split 4-4, which may well be the best-case scenario 
under the circumstances.

In the wake of the supreme court’s controversial 2014 holding in Burwell v 
Hobby Lobby <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Burwell_v._Hobby_Lobby_Stores,_Inc.> 
that in some cases the requirements violated the religious rights of employers, 
the federal government offered a way for employers with a religious objection 
to providing contraceptive coverage to exempt themselves without denying the 
rights of their employees. Employers could simply send the government a form 
announcing their objection, and the government would provide the plan that 
covered contraception without the involvement of the employer.

For some religiously affiliated employers, however, this still wasn’t enough. 
They challenged the new plan, arguing that they remained complicit in actions 
that were contrary to their religious values.Most, but not all, 
<http://www.scotusblog.com/2016/03/argument-preview-historic-fight-over-religion-and-birth-control/>
 lower courts that heard the issue have sided with the government. The supreme 
court took on this case to clarify the legal status of the new regulation.

The legal arguments against the contraceptive mandate are based on the 
Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993. It forbids federal regulations that 
impose a “substantial burden” on religious freedom unless it can be shown that 
the regulation is the least restrictive means of advancing a compelling 
government interest. (Based oncurrent law 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Employment_Division_v._Smith>, the contraceptive 
mandate plainly does not violate the first amendment’s guarantee of the free 
exercise of religion.)

Even in the original Hobby Lobby case, the claim that the regulations imposed 
a “substantial burden” on employers wasa major stretch. 
<http://prospect.org/article/5-men-supreme-court-impose-substantial-burden-women-illogical-decision>
 The regulations did not require any employer to purchase or use contraceptives 
or to advocate for their use. And in addition, exempting employers would 
constitute a genuine burden on employees who would be denied their legal rights 
based on religious objections they do not necessarily share. The court did not 
take these third-party harms appropriately into account.

Still, five supreme court justices ultimately agreed that the original 
regulations constituted a “substantial burden” on objecting employers. This 
argument, however, is even tougher to make this time around given the 
government’s new accommodation.

The liberal justices made it clear that they agreed that the new regulations 
are not a “substantial burden” under Hobby Lobby.

But Justice Anthony Kennedy, the only Republican-appointed justice who seemed 
to have any chance of providing a fifth vote for the government, seemed 
unconvinced that the regulations were adequate. “It seems to me that that’s a 
substantial burden,” Kennedy informed the solicitor general, Donald Verrilli, 
at one point. Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Samuel Alito, for their 
part, left no doubt that they would vote against the government. In contrast to 
theirrelatively subdued performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/02/womens-freedoms-laws-supreme-court-presidential-election-result>
 at oral arguments in the recent case about Texas abortion regulations, the 
conservative justices attacked the government’s positionaggressively 
<http://thinkprogress.org/justice/2016/03/23/3762765/the-supreme-court-flirts-with-chaos-at-todays-birth-control-argument/>
 on Wednesday.

Because of the recent death of Justice Antonin Scalia, if all four 
Republican-appointed judges side against the government, the result would be a 
4-4 split. All lower-court opinions would remain in place, which means most 
affected women would retain their access to contraceptives even if their 
employers object. However, women in the states covered by the eighth circuit – 
Arkansas, Iowa, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska and North and South Dakota – 
could lose access if their employers object, because that court found the 
regulation invalid.

Given that Senate Republicans are almost certain not to confirm Merrick 
Garland – or any other nominee – many areas of federal law are likely to end up 
equally unsettled, which is a serious potential problem. In this case, however, 
a full supreme court almost certainly would have ruled against the government. 
A deadlock isn’t ideal, but since the regulation will remain in effect in most 
of the country, it’s not a terrible outcome for the time being.
 