
A year ago, more than 300,000 people took to the streets in New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/21/-sp-climate-change-protest-melbourne-london-new-york-protest>
 to demand action from their leaders on climate change.


Nearly the same number took part in similar events in 161 countries across the 
globe. For 24 hours, the sun did not set on the largest climate protest in 
history.

These grassroots activists are part of a powerful global movement for change 
that has continued to grow as crucialUN climate talks in Paris in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/everything-you-need-to-know-about-the-paris-climate-summit-and-un-talks>
 have drawn nearer, bolstered by interventions from other important global 
voices –Pope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/18/popes-climate-change-encyclical-calls-on-rich-nations-to-pay-social-debt>
,Graça Machel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/sep/23/un-climate-change-summit-partial-results-speeches-obama>
,Desmond Tutu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/10/desmond-tutus-climate-petition-tops-300000-signatures>
 andMary Robinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/cyclone-pam-solutions-to-the-human-cost-of-climate-change>
, to name a few. The pope last week repeated his message of climate justice and 
change to world leaders at the UN.
Sign up box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/kiitg2/email-signup/email-embed.html> 
Crucially, that change is now beginning to take hold, with clean energy on the 
march and the low-carbon economy becoming a reality on the ground, rather than 
just a PowerPoint aspiration.

It is against this backdrop that the Guardian is launching the next stage of 
itsclimate change campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/everything-you-wanted-to-ask-about-the-guardians-climate-change-campaign>
 as our team of environment correspondents around the world champion a rare 
commodity in the climate change debate – hope.

There is hope in the many voices who are now calling for action from their 
leaders.

There is hope in the rapidly falling cost of renewable energy that is starting 
to transform our dirty energy system.

There is hope in the pledge by G7 countries to phase out coal power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/08/g7-leaders-agree-phase-out-fossil-fuel-use-end-of-century>
.

There is hope in the communities and innovators around the world who are 
getting on with the job rather than waiting for the politicians.

In short, the world is beginning to get to grips with the biggest problem it 
faces, but has arrived at a crossroads. Powerful forces are still at work 
against a meaningful agreement in Paris. So those who believe that climate 
change needs urgent solutions cannot let up the pressure.

More of that later. First a recap.

Six months ago, the Guardian took a stand on climate change with an editorial 
push and campaign. The intention was to highlight the uncomfortable fact that a 
large proportion of the oil, coal and gas reserves that states and companies 
already hold have to stay untapped in order to avoid dangerous climate change.

It is estimated that the world can afford to burn between one-fifth and 
one-third of proven reserves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/keep-it-in-the-ground-blog/2015/mar/25/what-numbers-tell-about-how-much-fossil-fuel-reserves-cant-burn>
 before there is a reasonable chance of tipping the planet over the 2C danger 
threshold of warming. Uncomfortable is putting it mildly. As our reporting has 
sought to demonstrate, the implications of this analysis are huge for our 
economies, the stability of our financial system and the way we live our 
everyday lives.

The project has also sought new and better ways to cover the biggest and most 
important issue of the age – one that affects so much else that the Guardian’s 
journalists around the world report on every day. Extreme weather, food and 
water shortages, conflict, migration, energy bills, technology and many other 
issues are influenced by the steady march of climate change.
Guardian Environment (@guardianeco) 
A story of hope: we launch phase II of Keep it in the Ground, our climate 
change campaignhttp://t.co/V56iefvBh4 <http://t.co/V56iefvBh4> 
#keepitintheground <https://twitter.com/hashtag/keepitintheground?src=hash>
 <https://twitter.com/guardianeco/status/650943024684498945> October 5, 2015 
<https://twitter.com/guardianeco/status/650943024684498945> 
Aside from making a big investment in investigative journalism and reportage 
from locations as diverse as theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/16/drilling-oil-gas-arctic-alaska>
,China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/05/carbon-bomb-the-coal-boom-choking-china>
,Brazil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/25/brazils-gamble-on-deep-water-oil-guanabara-bay>
,Australia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/may/15/carbon-bomb-australia-the-new-coal-frontier>
 andSouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/26/dust-tb-hiv-ugly-face-mining-south-africa>
, the Guardian alsolaunched a campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/mar/16/keep-it-in-the-ground-guardian-climate-change-campaign>
 in partnership with the NGO350.org <http://350.org/> to persuade the world’s 
two largest health charities – theBill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/what-is-the-bill-and-melinda-gates-foundation>
 and theWellcome Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/what-is-the-wellcome-trust>
 – to move their investments out of fossil fuel-producing companies. The 
Guardian’s own commercial board took thedecision to divest its £800m fund from 
coal, oil and gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/01/guardian-media-group-to-divest-its-800m-fund-from-fossil-fuels>
.

There was always a broader context, however – the Paris climate talks. In 
December, governments will attempt to thrash out a deal that many hope will 
chart a course to transforming the world’s dirty energy system and so keep at 
bay the worst consequences of climate change. Keep it in the ground phase one 
began to turn up the heat on politicians in advance of those talks by 
highlighting the stratospheric growth of the fossil fuel divestment movement.

In 43 countries, more than 400 organisations with a collective worth of $2.6tn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/22/leonardo-dicaprio-joins-26tn-fossil-fuel-divestment-movement>
 – including Stanford University, the Church of England, the Norwegian 
sovereign wealth fund and the Australian city with thelargest coal port 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/28/worlds-biggest-coal-port-joins-fossil-fuel-divestment-push>
 on the planet – have made commitments to move their investments out of fossil 
fuels. This is civil society putting serious money where its mouth is – 
something those involved in the talks have noticed.

With just over two months to go until the talks it is right that we shift the 
focus of the campaign. We will continue to highlight the message that the 
majority of fossil fuels must be kept under the ground and to make the 
divestment case to the Wellcome Trust and Gates Foundation. But it is time for 
a new direction.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437392821822%2FKP_360735_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20the%20sun%20cool%20down%20Earth%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20the%20sun%20cool%20down%20Earth%3F%20-%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fjul%2F22%2Fsun-cool-down-earth-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F7%2F20%2F1437392821822%2FKP_360735_crop_640x360.jpg>
 60-second climate fix: can the sun cool down the Earth? 
Naturally, the journalistic focus now moves to the talks themselves. Which 
countries are the heroes and which the villains? Will the deal be fair to the 
poorest nations? Most importantly, can the agreement save the world? Despite a 
relentless diplomatic push by the French hosts to make the talks a success, an 
ambitious agreement is far from certain.

Notwithstanding the importance of the UN process, focusing solely on Paris 
would be to tell only part of the story. One of the most significant features 
of the Keep it in the ground campaign so far has been the response from 
Guardian readers. More than 226,000 of you have signed up as supporters from 
more than 170 countries – and you have been central to what we and 350.org have 
done. You bombarded us with ideas for stories to cover. Hundreds of you wrote 
well-informed and oftenmoving letters to the Wellcome Trust board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/apr/24/wellcome-trust-letters-fossil-fuel-divestment>
 requesting divestment. Many of you took part in avideo appeal direct to Bill 
Gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/30/dear-bill-gates-will-you-lead-the-fight-against-climate-change>
. And numerous others in his home town of Seattle have joined the cause with
their own campaign <http://www.gatesdivest.org/>. Nearly 1,000 health 
professionals – including the editors of the British Medical Journal and the 
Lancet –signed a letter urging health organisations to “do no harm” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/14/wellcome-trust-urged-to-divest-fossil-fuels-health-professionals>
 and divest their assets on grounds of medical ethics. Thank you for your 
support so far.

The new cold war: drilling for oil and gas in the Arctic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/jun/16/drilling-oil-gas-arctic-alaska>
So when deciding where Keep it in the ground should go next it made sense for 
us to ask this global movement where they wanted us to shift the focus. 
Naturally, there was a range of ideas but one clear message kept coming through 
time and again. It can be summed up in one word – hope.

Supporters told us they wanted to hear more about the positive climate stories 
– the new technologies that are capturing the sun’s energy even more 
efficiently; the rapid drops in the price of renewable energy; the currently 
off-grid communities in Africa that are developing clean power; the smart 
technology helping homeowners to use less energy.

Another message that came through was a desire to hear about the other side of 
the divestment coin. If you take your money out of the problem, where should 
you put it to be part of the solution? We’ve heard about “divest”, now what 
about “invest”?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407039666312e939ef5915796a33d347d431523f%2F509_305_4808_2885%2F4808.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20story%20of%20hope%3A%20the%20Guardian%20launches%20phase%20II%20of%20its%20climate%20change%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20story%20of%20hope%3A%20the%20Guardian%20launches%20phase%20II%20of%20its%20climate%20change%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F407039666312e939ef5915796a33d347d431523f%2F509_305_4808_2885%2F4808.jpg>
 Children touch a solar panel at their school. Photograph: Alamy 
Above all, you told us that even though the Gates Foundation and Wellcome 
Trust have not yet chosen to move their investments, the Guardian must not give 
up on the climate issue. With global warming so high on the world agenda, it 
would be wrong to abandon the momentum that Keep it in the ground has created.

So a major strand of our climate coverage up to Paris and beyond will be about 
climate change as a story of hope. That doesn’t mean wilfully ignoring the 
gravity of the situation we face. Far from it. The Guardian will continue to 
report on the science of climate change, visit the places around the globe that 
will experience the worst impacts and uncover bad corporate behaviour and 
misinformation where it happens. But we will also make a point of bringing 
positive stories to the fore. In particular, the next phase of Keep it in the 
ground will champion the amazing growth of solar power and its potential to 
transform the global energy supply. Since the disappointing outcome at the 
Copenhagen climate summit in 2009, the cost of solar panels has dropped by 
about 70% and continues to fall, meaning that solar is now as cheap or cheaper 
than fossil fuels in some countries.

In Queensland, Australia, last year, wholesale energy prices went negative 
during the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jul/07/solar-has-won-even-if-coal-were-free-to-burn-power-stations-couldnt-compete>
 for the first time because of the expansion of solar installations to more 
than 350,000 rooftops across the state. There was so much power on the grid its 
price crashed.
Solar growth around the world 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/cost_reductions/giv-31114yVlL4w6hppko/>
In the US, solar is the fastest-growing source of power 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/peter-d-rosenstein/solar-power-today-and-its_b_8134790.html>
 with residential rooftop installations up 70% year on year. And politicians 
there have woken up. Last month, President Obama announced measures to 
encourage more take-up by home owners. He was speaking in a Las Vegas casino 
that has 20 acres of solar panels on its roof.Hillary Clinton has made solar a 
big part of her pitch for the presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/27/hillary-clinton-pledges-half-a-billion-solar-panels-for-us-if-she-wins-office>
 with a pledge for half a billion panels across the country.

Republicans too – even those who don’t regard climate change as a problem – 
are seeing the potential of solar to give households energy independence and 
security. “Rooftop solar makes it harder for terrorists to render a devastating 
blow to our power grid 
<http://www.newyorker.com/tech/elements/green-tea-party-solar>,” says Debbie 
Dooley, who was one of 22 organisers of the first nationwide Tea Party protest 
in 2009.

Around the world, far-sighted countries are helping investors to put serious 
money into solar. A few months ago, a deal was signed in conflict-riven Burundi 
for asolar field that will provide 15% 
<http://gigawattglobal.com/projects/burundi/> of that country’s 
energy-generating capacity.Tanzania has a plan 
<http://www.pv-magazine.com/news/details/beitrag/tanzania-announces-one-million-solar-homes-initiative_100018261/#axzz3lnsjODSz>
 to give a million homes access to solar energy by the end of 2017.Bangladesh 
aims 
<http://in.reuters.com/article/2015/01/25/bangladesh-solar-idINKBN0KY0O220150125>
 to expand solar power to every home by 2021.Morocco plans 
<http://mgafrica.com/article/2015-08-03-these-5-african-nations-are-vying-to-be-the-continentsfirst-green-superpower>
 to build five big new solar plants by 2020 at a cost of $9bn (£6bn) and become 
a major energy exporter to Europe.
Solar around the world 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/09/installations_worldwide/giv-31114hnUw0VIVz232/>
Technology improvements can and will help drive this transition by making 
clean energy cheaper, but we are no longer waiting for some mythical 
breakthrough invention to solve climate change. Many of the tools already exist.

With so much momentum behind clean energy around the world, it is all the more 
jarring that the British government isgoing in the opposite direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/24/the-9-green-policies-killed-off-by-tory-government>
. With the opposition distracted, the Conservatives have moved to 
systematically remove support for renewable energy. The government isconsulting 
on subsidy changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/27/slashing-household-solar-subsides-kill-off-industry-government-feed-in-tariff>
 that will make it essentially uneconomic for people to install solar panels on 
their roofs. The Australian government too has acted as a brake on solar energy 
when we need an accelerator.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0d353db5a2df979ac0265a5b0b91382820b5ef%2F0_109_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20story%20of%20hope%3A%20the%20Guardian%20launches%20phase%20II%20of%20its%20climate%20change%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20story%20of%20hope%3A%20the%20Guardian%20launches%20phase%20II%20of%20its%20climate%20change%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fa-story-of-hope-the-guardian-launches-phase-two-of-its-climate-change-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1f0d353db5a2df979ac0265a5b0b91382820b5ef%2F0_109_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A 10MW solar power station in Delingha, in China’s Qinghai province, is the 
first phase of a solar-thermal plant with a total capacity of 50MW. Photograph: 
Zhang Hongxiang/Corbis 
In the coming weeks and months, the Guardian will increase its reporting all 
of these developments and more. We will look in detail at the potential for 
solar power and the obstacles it faces. And campaign supporters will continue 
to play a crucial role. The Guardian will ask readers what you want to see 
covered and we’ll bring you closer to the experts who can help answer your 
questions. We will be at the Global Climate March in Paris on 29 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/29/peoples-climate-march-the-revolution-starts-here>
 and will give information on what individuals around the world can do to get 
behind the climate movement.

So whether you are already a supporter of Keep it in the ground or whether you 
are seeing the Guardian’s campaign for the first time, please sign up to find 
out more. By doing so, you will receive regular updates on our coverage and the 
progress of the campaign, as well as an opportunity to participate and 
influence the direction we take.

This is the most exciting and hopeful time for anyone interested in solving 
the biggest problem that humanity faces. As Pope Francis put it in his
encyclical on the environment in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/18/popes-climate-change-encyclical-calls-on-rich-nations-to-pay-social-debt>
: “All is not lost. Human beings, while capable of the worst, are also capable 
of rising above themselves, choosing again what is good, and making a new start 
… to embark on new paths to authentic freedom.”

That new start is already rising from the dirty energy system we inherited 
from the 19th and 20th centuries but for now it is just that – a start. It is 
only with unrelenting pressure from below that world leaders will continue with 
enough purpose on the right path.

The time is now. Join us.
Sign up box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/kiitg2/email-signup/email-embed.html> 
•You can also receive latest updates on the campaign by selecting “Follow 
series” in the Guardian app

•Everything you wanted to ask about the Guardian’s climate change campaign  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/mar/16/everything-you-wanted-to-ask-about-the-guardians-climate-change-campaign>

•Got a question about Keep it in the Ground that we haven’t covered? Email the 
team on keep.it@theguardian.com
 