
One in three UK consumers admit to binning turkey and sprouts for their 
Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner before it 
even reaches the table because of their lack of culinary knowhow, a new report 
has revealed.

Official figures 
<http://www.wrap.org.uk/content/uk-handy-waste-facts-and-figures-retail-sector> 
show that UK households throw away 7m tonnes of food every year, but the new 
research from supermarket chain Sainsbury’s shows householders are more likely 
to bin food over the festive season because they don’t know how to prepare and 
cook it.

Two in every five people worry about preparing their Christmas meal because 
they fear burning or undercooking it – rising to three in five of those aged 16 
to 24, and a similar number (57%) among 25- to 34-year-olds, the research found.


Quarter of millennials have absolutely no interest in cookery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/06/millennials-no-interest-in-cookery>
Of all the festive fare and trimmings, turkey is the item Britons struggle 
with the most, with one in 10 having binned an entire bird as the result of a 
cooking mishap, the research found. Brussels sprouts and roast potatoes were 
also likely to be binned because they were not cooked properly. Meanwhile, 
undercooking is the nation’s biggest worry according to nearly 60% of people 
surveyed, although a third also fret about burning food.

The research among 2,000 adults was carried out by Sainsbury’s as part of its 
“waste less, save more” scheme – a £10m, five-year programme to help tackle 
food waste. Following a nationwide search at the end of 2015, the town of 
Swadlincote in south Derbyshire waschosen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/sainsburys-swadlincote-derbyshire-town-1m-food-waste>
 for a £1m investment from Sainsbury’s, trialling new initiatives designed to 
cut food waste and working closely with householders to monitor and reduce the 
amount they throw away.

During the 12-month pilot it is hoped that households in the 35,000-resident 
town will reduce their levels of food waste by 50% – each saving £350 a year. 
Once trials conclude, Sainsbury’s will roll out successful programmes to help 
tackle the issue nationwide. Figures from the government’s waste advisory body,
Wrap, <http://www.wrap.org.uk/food-waste-reduction> which is monitoring the 
project, show that in the UK an estimated 2m turkeys, 5m Christmas puddings and 
74m mince pies are thrown away every Christmas.

“Food plays a huge part in making the perfect Christmas, but for many of us, 
due to a lack of kitchen confidence, it’s not just the turkey that’ll end up 
being completely stuffed” said Paul Crewe, head of sustainability, engineering, 
energy and environment at Saisnbury’s. “Over a third of us will face a festive 
food fiasco and, whether you’ve spoiled the sprouts or toasted turkey, it’ll be 
both food and money in the bin.”


The Swadlincote scheme will be the first of its kind in the UK. The programme 
teaches families – many on benefits and low incomes – new cookery skills as 
well as practical help in cutting food waste. The “council tenant engagement 
scheme” will run until April and a total of 104 residents have so far been 
recruited.

In addition to cutting waste and saving money, the scheme aims to improve 
understanding of nutritional awareness, healthy eating and confidence to cook 
from scratch.

“By working with local communities to improve cookery skills, we’re hoping 
we’ve found a healthy and tasty way to slash food waste,” Crew said. “As with 
all elements of ‘waste less, save more’ we’ll be completely transparent about 
the results, meaning this trial could pave the way for other local councils to 
initiate similar projects.”

Other initiatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/tech-innovations-that-could-reduce-food-waste>
 being trialled in Swadlincote include the distribution of fridge thermometers 
to help produce keep for longer, a schools programme,food-sharing apps such as 
Olio <http://olioex.com/> and the installation of smart fridges with cameras.

In Swadlincote, Sainsbury’s is working closely with the environmental charity 
Hubbub <https://www.hubbub.org.uk/>, which is telling shoppers to exercise 
restraint in theannual stampede 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/18/christmas-food-shoppers-braced-battle-frenzied-friday>
 to the shops for fresh food.
 