
The iron law of the market is that you do not stifle demand by trying to 
stifle supply. It applies to drugs. It applies to alcohol. It applies to sex. 
It applies toivory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/21/uk-to-crack-down-on-illegal-ivory-sales>
. For a generation, an international bureaucracy of UN officials and NGOs has 
been trying to stamp out ivory supply in Africa, much as it has been trying to 
stamp out cocaine supply in Latin America. All this does is increase price.

Conservationists and MPs call for a total UK ban on ivory sales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/conservationists-and-mps-call-for-a-total-uk-ban-on-ivory-sales>
For animals and for many people in countries across Africa, this has been 
disastrous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
. Small armies have been recruited, millions squandered and poachers hunted 
down. Local people have had to watch their gold dust – rhino horn is now more 
valuable per ounce than gold – burned in front of them, to make westerners feel 
good. A wholly ludicrous ban is imposed on ivory antiques. Yet poaching is said 
to be at an all-time high, driven by such publicity stunts as last April’s
Kenyan bonfire of £70m of seized ivory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/apr/30/ivory-pyres-in-kenya-in-pictures>
, supposedly to “raise awareness”.

Such destruction of value merely encourages dealers in east Asia to stockpile, 
thus increasing the incentive to poach. If we actually want to render the 
rhinoceros and the elephant extinct – which given their popularity in safari 
parks and zoos is unlikely – policy is bang on course.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fprince-william-african-elephants-could-be-gone-in-10-years-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20William%3A%20African%20elephants%20could%20be%20gone%20in%2010%20years%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fprince-william-african-elephants-could-be-gone-in-10-years-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20William%3A%20African%20elephants%20could%20be%20gone%20in%2010%20years%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fprince-william-african-elephants-could-be-gone-in-10-years-video&media=>
Prince William: African elephants could be gone in 10 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/sep/22/prince-william-african-elephants-could-be-gone-in-10-years-video>
It would be nice for all of us if nobody believed rare animal products were 
good for their health. Demand in Japan is declining, but the market in China 
and Vietnam remains massive. Attempts are being made to farm the relevant 
species domestically. Rhinos, bears and two-thirds of all extant tigers are 
being farmed in China, but this cannot keep up with demand for ivory.

Big-game hunting licences are for sale in parts of Africa, but people who live 
in those areas are denied the much bigger return from the ivory. As a result, 
hunting licences in southern Africa, where elephants are still plentiful, are 
used for covert ivory supplies. Meanwhile farmers are told they must not kill 
elephants, but nor are they recompensed for the damage done by the animals to 
their crops. What would Wiltshire farmers say if told to allow mammoths to roam 
their fields because people inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> 
were worried they might become extinct?

Why the EU is right to oppose a global ivory ban | Colman O’Criodain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/09/the-eu-is-right-to-oppose-a-global-ivory-ban>
Shifting to a legal market in ivory would be painful – as with drugs it would 
appear to reward criminals. But allowing people in Africa to benefit from 
protecting endangered species is the only way to secure the future of those 
species. The concept of “the wild” is ever shrinking. If we try to deny poor 
countries the right to husband the produce of their land – as we do cows and 
sheep – rather than encourage them to sensible and profitable conservation, we 
impose costs on them, and encourage them to migrate to our countries, where we 
have long since got rid of elephants.

The best way to preserve these glorious animals is not to give their 
custodians a vested interest in poaching. The fact that ivory policy is being 
driven by theBritish royal family 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/prince-william-african-elephants-could-be-gone-from-the-wild-by-the-time-charlotte-turns-25>
 and well-heeled American lobbyists does not make it right. It is wrong, and 
grows more disastrous with every passing year.
 