
“I say to you, the people of Europe, don’t forget who you are. You are the 
heirs to a struggle for freedom.” With those words, in aspeech given in Hanover 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/the-guardian-view-on-obamas-hanover-speech-a-welcome-endorsement-of-european-unity-and-values>
 at the end of his European tour,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> did what no European leader 
has ventured to do in a long time, which is to give an “address to the people 
of Europe”. That choice of the singular form, “people of Europe” and not 
“peoples”, was the most striking part of Obama’s message.

It ran counter to Europe’s growing populism; the self-glorification of 
national egos, the distrust towards outsiders, and the reflex ofputting up walls
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/22/migrants-hungary-border-fence-wall-serbia>
 orclosing down borders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/17/hungary-closes-border-to-refugees-as-turkey-questions-eu-deal-to-stem-crisis>
. The president was deliberate and specific. “The people of Europe, hundreds of 
millions of citizens – east, west, north, south – are more secure and more 
prosperous because we stood together for the ideals we share,” he said.

To refer so pointedly to Europeans as one single people seems 
counterintuitive. Not only that, it might even backfire. Brexiters and other 
anti-EU activists will pounce on it as vindication of all their warnings about 
an EU ready to deprive nations of their separate identities and to place them 
under one towering authority. So what was Obama thinking as he spoke in a way 
that was surely designed to provoke reflection, and how might Europeans dwell 
on his words?

For many, especially among young generations, the peace imperative has worn 
thin

This was a speech meant to boost a much-diminished sense of European 
self-confidence. Obama listed accomplishments that most European leaders find 
hard to recall these days: how postwar Europe “rose above old divisions and put 
[itself] on the path to union”, how the heroism of the Poles ofSolidarity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/may/31/poland-communism-twentieth-anniversary>
 and other central Europeans helped bring down the iron curtain. Resilience to 
terrorism was even brought into the mix, with references to how European 
capitals “refused to give in to fear” when bombs went off. You should be proud, 
he said: “People starved on this continent. Families were separated on this 
continent. And now people desperately want to come here precisely because of 
what you’ve created. You can’t take that for granted.”

But none of this quite defined that supposedly unique entity, the “people of 
Europe” – and that’s no surprise because the European project itself has long 
struggled with the notion. EU texts don’t even go so far as speaking of a 
single “people of Europe”. Article 1 of the EU treaty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Treaties_of_the_European_Union> mentions an 
“ever closer union among the peoples of Europe” – note the plural, “peoples”.

For the past 60 years, the main goals set for European cooperation have been 
peace, prosperity and power. For many, especially among young generations, the 
peace motif, decisive in the post-1945 period, has worn thin – even as war
returned to the continent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/11/ukraine-russia-crimea-sanctions-us-eu-guide-explainer>
 in 2014 (in Ukraine). Globalisation has fed resentment against inequalities 
and elites. And the EU is struggling to convince citizens that it can find 
pragmatic solutions to concrete problems, as shown by its difficulties in the 
refugee crisis.

The Guardian view on Obama’s Hanover speech: a welcome endorsement of European 
unity and values | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/26/the-guardian-view-on-obamas-hanover-speech-a-welcome-endorsement-of-european-unity-and-values>
Obama’s speech tried to point to something we Europeans now tend to discard as 
an overly idealistic vision. Yet there have been numerous – if tentative – 
attempts to forge that common sense of European belonging, and this is a good 
occasion to recall them. In his book,Passage to Europe 
<http://passage-to-europe.eu/editions>, the Dutch political analyst Luuk van 
Middelaar usefully runs through many of those episodes. For example, does 
anyone remember that when the Maastricht treaty came into force in 1993, 
hundreds of millions became “citizens of the union”? Initially, the European 
project rested on a vague recollection of the medieval Carolingian past: the 
six founding nations had after all been part of Charlemagne’s empire.

That changed after 1973, when the UK, Ireland and Denmark joined. The need to 
find other references led to a “declaration on European identity”. European 
unity, it said, was about overcoming ancient enmities, about “diversity of 
cultures” within “common values and principles” and an “increasing convergence 
of attitudes to life”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-highlight-europes-greatest-strength%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa72bbf984f85896e213400cc0b4c75d6f881aa92%2F0_19_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20truth%20we%20hate%20to%20admit%20%E2%80%93%20we%20are%20one%20people%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-highlight-europes-greatest-strength%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20truth%20we%20hate%20to%20admit%20%E2%80%93%20we%20are%20one%20people%20in%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmay%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-highlight-europes-greatest-strength%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa72bbf984f85896e213400cc0b4c75d6f881aa92%2F0_19_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 President Obama delivering a speech in Hanover. Photograph: Kevin 
Lamarque/Reuters 
After the iron curtain fell, the European project became more of a 
geopolitical one. There was no rush, among European leaders at the time, to let 
into their midst 10 poor, weakened peoples. Yet there was no other choice but 
to welcome them in – an indispensable step towards European reunification. 
After the 2004 enlargement, for the first time, Europe’s geographic dimensions 
started fitting more comfortably with its name.

Today, identity politics are back with a vengeance, as the British referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> debate shows, and as other 
developments have illustrated, from Hungary to the Netherlands, where the far 
right is on the ascendency. The EU may have retained its own flag (officially 
called a “logo” when it was adopted in 1986) and it has an anthem (Ode to Joy, 
from Beethoven’s Ninth symphony – with the words “all men will be brothers”) 
but the idea that a single European culture can be the bearer of a single 
political order is overwhelmingly resisted. This is not a new phenomenon, but 
now seems more pronounced.

The truth is, European governments have never fundamentally wanted their 
citizens to think of themselves as genuinely European citizens. EU institutions 
are by no means flawless, but they have also been a handy punch bag for 
national politicians wanting to deflect criticism from their own failings.

Why is the Brexit camp so obsessed with immigration? Because that’s all they 
have | Peter Mandelson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/03/brexit-camp-immigration-economic-vote-leave>
So, how can we define ourselves collectively? When Europeans travel to 
America, Asia or Africa, many intuitively do feel European. Tourists recognise 
this. But when returning back home, to Paris or London or Warsaw, that feeling 
somehow evaporates and we quickly plunge back into nationally framed debates 
and differences.

So it can take an outsider, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, to remind us of how the 
quest for freedom and democracy sits at the heart of European endeavours. That 
Greeks have been critical of the eurozone’s governance is one thing, but that 
didn’t mean they preferred to leave the euro, nor the EU. Greece’s just as 
Spain’s and Portugal’s memberships have been instrumental in harnessing 
parliamentary democracy: it’s the core reason these countries, which had all 
known dictatorship, knocked on the European door in the first place.

As Van Middelaar points out, European identity is a thin membrane, difficult 
to capture in words. It stands somewhere between plurality on the inside and a 
claim to universalism towards the outside world. It’s because Europeans find 
themselves collectively confronted with a changing global landscape, and chaos 
threatening to spill over from the outside, that it can only make sense to try 
to stick together.

Turning a continent into a union has always been a difficult task, fraught 
with tensions and setbacks, and today’s crises don’t make it easier. Perhaps 
Obama’s speech said as much about the degree of concern in Washington over 
Europe’s state of affairs as it did about what should holdEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> together.

The EU is a unique construct, neither a federation nor a purely 
intergovernmental organisation. Speaking of the “American people” is a given, 
but no one would seriously think of speaking of the “people of Asean” or “the 
people of Mercosur”. The EU might now be a loveless union, but if an American 
president thinks the “people of Europe” do exist, why can’t we see the 
advantage of that?
 