
Imagine the difference it would make to the UK’s landscape if everyone in the 
country planted just one tree. This would be the equivalent of boosting the 
total number of trees in the UK by more than a fifth.


 This is the exciting aim of the Woodland Trust’s tree-planting campaign: to 
add 64 million new native trees – one for every person in the UK – to the 
nation’s gardens, shared land, farms and woods by 2025. “The UK has one of the 
lowest woodland covers in Europe,” says the Woodland Trust’s director of 
woodland creation, John Tucker. “And what we do have is a limited number of 
species.”

Without replacement, the familiar trees of our parks, hedgerows and woodlands 
will become history. As government efforts for reforestation are falling well 
short of the mark, it is up to conservation charities like the Woodland Trust 
to preserve our green heritage. “If we don’t take action now,” says Tucker, 
“you have to wonder what your neighbourhood is going to look like in 10 years.”


Ash, one of the UK’s most popular trees, is susceptible to the fungal disease 
known as ash dieback, with 126 million trees in UK woodlands at risk. Replacing 
like with like is just not sustainable. “We are trying to encourage people to 
plant other species,” says Tucker, “such as small-leaved lime, wild cherry, 
aspen and field maple”.

As for where the proposed new trees will be planted, Tucker explains, ”My job 
is to talk to farmers, landowners and partners, to inspire them and help them 
understand why woodland is appropriate to their needs and the environment, to 
help them get more trees into the landscape.” Difficulties in increasing 
woodland cover is rarely due to the unwillingness of landowners – more often, 
it’s down to simple logistics, deadlines and paperwork, which the Woodland 
Trust can help with.


Start in your garden 
On a smaller scale, anyone can get involved in the effort to restore the UK’s 
historic tree cover. Order anautumn discovery pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/autumnpack/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
 for ideas about great ways to start planting and things to do this autumn. Or, 
if you’re ready to plant trees with people from your school or community, apply 
for aWoodland Trust tree pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/plant-trees/in-your-community/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
, which also comes with advice on where and how to plant.

Guardian readers can find out more about the 64 million tree campaign, and the 
benefits of a healthy woodland by ordering the autumn discovery pack. This 
explains how to get involved, from planting seeds or nuts collected on an 
autumn walk, to buying a tree fromwoodlandtrustshop.com 
<http://www.woodlandtrustshop.com/category/62-native-trees.aspx/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
 to give as a gift or plant yourself. The pack is also full of ideas for 
woodland walks, plus how to spot the signs of the changing seasons on trees and 
a handy guide to woodland fungi.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fa-tree-planting-campaign-is-taking-root%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88bd3d6c7e3a5fc7a2a0daf0dc8b5705ca5b2458%2F0_24_730_438%2F730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20tree-planting%20campaign%20is%20taking%20root&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fa-tree-planting-campaign-is-taking-root%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20tree-planting%20campaign%20is%20taking%20root&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fa-tree-planting-campaign-is-taking-root%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88bd3d6c7e3a5fc7a2a0daf0dc8b5705ca5b2458%2F0_24_730_438%2F730.jpg>
 Get involved by going on a woodland walk. Photograph: Image Source/Rogan 
Macdonald/Cultura/Image Source 
If you join the Woodland Trust as a member you can go one step further and 
receive a rowan sapling to plant, nurture and watch grow. “The rowan tree is of 
small to medium height when fully grown,” says Tucker. “The rowan has lovely 
flowers in the spring, bright red fruits in the autumn and lovely autumn colour 
in its leaves – a great choice for gardens of all sizes.”

 By planting a tree of your own, you will have a personal stake in the 
campaign to rebuild and maintain our green land, making the UK a healthier, 
happier place for people to live and work. The tree you plant is your gift to 
your family and generations to follow.


 <>
 