
Zac Goldsmith stands down in Richmond Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-quits-as-mp-over-doomed-heathrow-expansion-decision>
 to protest against the Heathrow decision, just as hesaid he would 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-to-resign-as-tory-mp-after-heathrow-go-ahead>
. A man of honour keeping his promise? That’s not how he may emerge on 
byelection polling day.

Yet again, this spoiled nonentity is cosseted by his party: though he stands 
as an “independent”, the Conservatives will try to save his bacon by setting no 
candidate against him, to avoid splitting their vote. That makes it harder for 
theLiberal Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> to 
snatch back this seat – but by no means unlikely, after their strong showing in 
Witney.

There have rarely been so many good reasons for expelling an MP – and Richmond 
Park might just do it. Start with his character. In his ill-judged London 
mayoral campaign against Sadiq Khan, Goldsmith hired toxic spin-masterLynton 
Crosby <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lynton-crosby> to help him descend 
to thelowest anti-Muslim racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/zac-goldsmith-attacked-by-senior-tory-over-tactics-in-london-mayor-election>
. His lacklustre performance was only memorable forhis repeated smears  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/12/zac-goldsmith-accuses-rival-sadiq-khan-of-giving-cover-to-extremists>
alleging Khan had “given platforms, oxygen and even cover – over and over and 
over again – to those who seek to do our police and capital harm”. He invented 
nonexistent “links” to fanatics, claiming Khan “repeatedly legitimised those 
with extremist views”, as hewrote in the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3567537/On-Thursday-really-going-hand-world-s-greatest-city-Labour-party-thinks-terrorists-friends-passionate-plea-ZAC-GOLDSMITH-four-days-Mayoral-election.html>
.

The Richmond Park byelection is a golden opportunity to fight Brexit | Hugo 
Dixon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/richmond-park-byelection-brexit-zac-goldsmith-pro-european>
His absurd claim that Khan would be Jeremy Corbyn’s “man in London” as a 
leftist puppet of his party’s leader was the normal politics: after all, Corbyn 
isLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader, later claiming 
Khan’s victory as his own success.

What was shockingly abnormal was Goldsmith’s attempt to split London’s voters 
along hyper-sensitive racial and religious lines. Hiscampaign literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/mar/16/london-mayor-race-negatives-hindu-jewels-leaflets-misfired>
, sent to Indians, Tamils and Sikhs, suggested that Khan, a Muslim of Pakistani 
descent, would not “stand up” for them as mayor. Farcically offensive to all 
communities, he even suggested Khan would raise taxes on their family 
jewellery, assuming gold is what motivates non-Muslims. Goldsmith repeatedly 
used the word “radical” about Khan, with clear connotations of “radicalised”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government's%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Zac%20Goldsmith%20resigns%20after%20government%27s%20go-ahead%20to%20Heathrow%20third%20runway%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Fzac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video&media=>
Zac Goldsmith resigns after government’s go-ahead to Heathrow third runway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/25/zac-goldsmith-resigns-after-governments-go-ahead-to-heathrow-third-runway-video>
But he lost. London rejected him and in electing its first Muslim mayor showed 
it had no truck with such filth. Now Richmond Park must do the same as a lesson 
to any politician tempted to lever themselves up through racism.

That is the prime reason why Labour MP Lisa Nandy has called for her party not 
to put up a candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/labour-frontbenchers-urge-party-not-to-contest-richmond-park-byelection>
, giving the Lib Dems a clear run to unite all those against Goldsmith. Clive 
Lewis, from the Corbyn wing of Labour, and Jonathan Reynolds, from the 
non-Corbyn wing, join her in calling on Labour to stand back.

They are right. This byelection will not be about Heathrow: all candidates 
will be equally opposed. It will be about Goldsmith’s bad character – but it 
will also be about the great crisis facing the country. Goldsmith, following in 
thefootsteps of his father 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jul/05/zac-goldsmith-views-heathrow-europe-problem-david-cameron>
, who started the rabid anti-EU referendum campaign, is for a hard Brexit, 
wrenching us away as brutally and damagingly as possible.

As the risks become real, with the pound plunging, food and petrol prices set 
to rise next year and damaging consequences for industry and finance beginning 
to emerge, polls suggest opinion is already shifting. Thegood growth figures 
announced today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-defies-brexit-slowdown-fears>
 are only for services, while manufacturing, industry, agriculture and 
construction all shrank again. Controlling immigration matters to most people, 
but not at any economic price. If the price turns out to be too high, staying 
in the single market will matter more.

Richmond Park voted remain by 70% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/anticipation-abounds-as-the-lib-dems-begin-battle-for-richmond-park>
, so there is no better place to make that case and surely no better candidate 
to beat than hard Brexiteer Goldsmith.

Will Labour stand back? Not a chance. There are good reasons why Labour 
detests the Lib Dems for what they did in the coalition. Old rivalries locally 
die hard: Lib Dems often fight dirty on the ground.

Labour frontbenchers urge party not to contest Richmond Park byelection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/labour-frontbenchers-urge-party-not-to-contest-richmond-park-byelection>
But for a host of bad old tribal reasons, the Nandy, Lewis, Reynolds idea 
isn’t supported even by Labour MPs who say they back electoral reform and the 
great cultural shift proportional representation implies.

Ask why not and they say, “It’d look like a back-room stitch-up”, “We must 
give voters a chance to vote Labour”, “We’d look weak if we didn’t stand”, 
“This would set a bad precedent for other seats”, “Our local councillors in the 
area wouldn’t agree”, “The NEC won’t have it” and so on. The result will be yet 
another humiliating hammering for Labour in a seat it could never win, but hey, 
never mind.

Imagine instead Corbyn saying something like this: “There are times when 
politicians should put country above party, and this is one of them. First we 
must show the door to the cynical racism of people like Goldsmith. Second, we 
must protect Britain from the ideological fanatics who want to destroy our 
economy by taking us out of the single market, whatever damage that does. 
Third, we have a rotten electoral system, with an unjust first-past-the-post 
system that forces tactical voting on us.

“Let this byelection be an expression too of the need to change a system that 
denies people the right to form and vote for parties of their choice. We don’t 
forgive the Liberal Democrats for their collusion in cuts that impoverished the 
most vulnerable and devastated public services. But there are times when it is 
right for a party to stand back and raise our sights to Britain’s future. We 
call on the voters of Richmond Park to make their mark, expel a dishonourable 
man from politics and vote against all extreme Brexiteers who risk irreparable 
damage to the country.”

Don’t hold your breath. Corbyn doesn’t believe in electoral reform and nor 
does he cleave to the single market. Though no doubt he reviles Goldsmith’s 
racism, he doesn’t detest it quite enough to lend a hand to oust him. Gentler, 
kinder politics doesn’t mean alliances, not even progressive ones.
 