
Making people welcome and the feeling of being welcome are important. In fact, 
it might even be one of the reasons that the human race is so successful. 
“Historically, we’re pack animals,” says Tam Johnston, neuro-linguistic 
programming practitioner and founder of Fresh Insight Coaching. “We have an 
instinct to be accepted, understood and connected as a pack. This is why making 
connections is key to survival – we’re innately programmed to be a part of a 
group.”

Feeling welcomed certainly seems to help with both your physical and emotional 
health. A number of studies have found that being connected with others makes 
you happier – and, hence, healthier. Of course, keeping in touch with family 
and friends, developing interests and hobbies outside your home and even just 
picking up the phone can have a real benefit to both your physical and mental 
health. A study from the University of Illinois, for example, looked at happy 
students who showed the fewest signs of depression. They all had one thing in 
common – they all enjoyed spending quality time with friends and family.


Colour psychology – how different shades and tones affect your mood
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/colour-psychology-how-different-shades-and-tones-affect-your-mood>
You don’t even have to connect with people you know intimately to get a 
benefit from your interaction. A 2014 study by Cambridge and Columbia 
universities looked at the power of both “strong ties” such as family, and 
“weak ties”, such as the guy who lives three doors down from you. It found that 
among participants, interactions with strong ties still provided a big boost to 
happiness, but interactions with weak ties helped to increase a sense that they 
belonged in their communities, helping them to feel better overall.

Yet in today’s tech-driven world, where so much communication is via a screen, 
are we losing the power to make these connections? Social media may be 
replacing those spaces where we once met face-to-face. But one study of how 
social media affected the daily lives of college students found that 39% of 
respondents felt closer to their friends because of social media and 26% felt 
that social media had given them more friends.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fa-warm-welcome-in-a-digital-age-the-need-for-real-connections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4dd314dfdd57e22fd9335643754edd5997df483%2F0_1_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20warm%20welcome%20in%20a%20digital%20age%20%E2%80%93%20the%20need%20for%20real%20connections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fa-warm-welcome-in-a-digital-age-the-need-for-real-connections%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20warm%20welcome%20in%20a%20digital%20age%20%E2%80%93%20the%20need%20for%20real%20connections&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fa-warm-welcome-in-a-digital-age-the-need-for-real-connections%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4dd314dfdd57e22fd9335643754edd5997df483%2F0_1_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 Social media gives us the chance to connect with wider audiences. Photograph: 
Leren Lu/Getty Images 
Social media has also given us the chance to connect with much wider 
audiences, as well. These days, we can share a joke on Twitter, or a picture on 
Instagram, that welcomes people into our lives we’d never normally meet, from 
all walks of life and all over the globe.


On-screen communication has changed the way we write, as well. Emoji is now 
the UK’s fastest-growing language, according to linguistics expert Prof Vyv 
Evans, who says the pictorial communication system is “modern hieroglyphics”. 
According to a study carried out by a mobile phone company, 80% of us now use 
emojis to “talk” to each other regularly. We need to get better at it, though – 
Evans also points out that we’ve got to learn when it’s appropriate to use one 
(talking to your friend) and when it’s not (in a job application).


But face-to-face contact isn’t history yet. It’s still vital for relationships 
in business: in a report from the Harvard Business Review, 95% of respondents 
said that face-to-face meetings are key to building strong, long-term 
relationships, while just 20% said they could get the same outcome from virtual 
meetings.

And the more we connect using screens, the more we seem to long for real-life, 
face-to-face experiences, whether it’s going to a festival with 20,000 people, 
or just meeting up for a meal with friends. “We are inherently a social 
species,” says Elle Boag, senior lecturer in social psychology at Birmingham 
City University. “We need other people to survive.”
 