
Donald Trump lost the popular vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/nov/11/clinton-won-more-votes-trump-won-the-election-and-its-not-the-first-time>
: the second Republican candidate to do so yet still take the presidency in 16 
years. He will be the most unpopular presidential candidate to take office 
since records began. He has a track record of opposing democratic norms,
inciting violence against protesters 
<http://mashable.com/2016/03/12/trump-rally-incite-violence/#Sd9.voCoriq9> and 
threatening toimprison his main opponent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/debate-donald-trump-threatens-to-jail-hillary-clinton>
. His intolerance of political and media dissent is well documented; he now has 
the means to do something about it. His ghostwriterhas called him a “sociopath” 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/07/25/donald-trumps-ghostwriter-tells-all>
 whose presidency risks “the end of civilisation”. He is appointing extremists 
to the White House: in a call for vigilance to the American people, Republican 
strategist John Weaverdeclared that 
<https://twitter.com/JWGOP/status/797918770136117248> “the racist, fascist 
extreme right is represented footsteps from the Oval Office”. His campaign 
exploited and incited hatred against Muslims, Mexican immigrants and women. 
Racists chose to celebrate his victory bylaunching hate crimes 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/morning-mix/wp/2016/11/14/making-sense-of-the-post-election-spike-in-harassment-and-intimidation-how-much-how-long/?tid=a_inl>
 against American minorities. AsJohn Oliver puts it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/john-oliver-trump-wins-election-last-week-tonight>
, Trump being president “is not normal”, and his rule should never be 
normalised. His opponents should refuse to accept the legitimacy of this 
president and – like Republicans have done before – refuse to co-operate and 
begin a nonviolent war of political attrition.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjohn-oliver-on-donald-trump-a-klan-backed-misogynist-internet-troll-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Oliver%20on%20Donald%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20Klan-backed%20misogynist%20internet%20troll%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjohn-oliver-on-donald-trump-a-klan-backed-misogynist-internet-troll-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Oliver%20on%20Donald%20Trump%3A%20%E2%80%98A%20Klan-backed%20misogynist%20internet%20troll%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fjohn-oliver-on-donald-trump-a-klan-backed-misogynist-internet-troll-video&media=>
John Oliver on Donald Trump: ‘A Klan-backed misogynist internet troll’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/15/john-oliver-on-donald-trump-a-klan-backed-misogynist-internet-troll-video>
Hang on a minute: who am I as a Briton to interfere in the internal affairs of 
a foreign country? The problem is the entire world is now subject to the writ 
of the leader of the last superpower. We are all, to a degree, under his 
dominion. The American people have a struggle on their hands, not just to 
preserve their democracy and republic, but to fight for the rest of us, too. 
There is a long tradition of marching in solidarity with people in foreign 
countries standing against their own rulers.

There will be those among Trump’s opponents who capitulate and normalise his 
rule. They will take Barack Obama’s line, urging Americans to embrace Trump as 
their president, to give him a chance, even to urge his success. They must be 
resisted. When Trump wrongly believed that Obama had lost the popular vote in 
2012, hecalled for mass protest 
<http://occupydemocrats.com/2016/11/11/trump-bashing-protesters-look-said-obama-won/>
, so he has as much moral high ground on this as any other issue. There are 
encouraging signs that even political figures who can hardly be described as 
radicals are doing exactly that. Harry Reid, the Democratic Senate minority 
leader,declared that 
<http://www.reid.senate.gov/press_releases/2016-11-11-reid-statement-on-the-election-of-donald-trump#.WCrhyeGLSHo>
 Trump’s election “has emboldened the forces of hate and bigotry in America”, 
denouncing Trump as “a sexual predator who lost the popular vote” and for 
“grave sins he committed against millions of Americans”. Andrew Sullivan – a 
conservative, no less –demands “nonviolent civil disobedience” 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/andrew-sullivan-president-trump-and-the-end-of-the-republic.html>
.

Bernie Sanders, meanwhile, is becoming the de facto leader of the American 
opposition,warning that 
<https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/796785451713593344> he would be Trump’s 
“worst nightmare” if he turned his supporters’ anger on minorities.Protesters 
have taken to the streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/12/anti-trump-protests-new-york-portland-shooting>
 in cities across the United States, chanting “Not my president” and defending 
the rights of women and other favoured Trump targets.

Don't let Donald Trump become the new normal | Steven W Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/dont-let-donald-trump-become-the-new-normal>
Trumpism is, by nature, an authoritarian movement that regards democratic 
norms as dispensable if they fail to serve political ends. The aspiration – 
whether realisable or not – is clear: authoritarian societies such as Putin’s 
Russia, Erdoğan’s Turkey and Orbán’s Hungary that maintain certain democratic 
trappings as a convenient front. As Sullivan and otherspredict 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/andrew-sullivan-trump-america-and-the-abyss.html>
, a clampdown on democratic rights and freedoms will only need a pretext. 
Perhaps an investigation into his financial dealings and conflicts of interest. 
Perhaps, after another unarmed black man is shot dead by the American police, 
violence towards protesters could trigger an escalation. Perhaps a terrorist 
attack, either at home or abroad.

If the American people simply accept the legitimacy of this president, and 
they normalise this would-be tyrant, it will only embolden him. Demoralised and 
frightened though millions of Americans are, their new ruler is weaker than he 
appears. When this billionaire plutocrat charlatan – who poses as a man of the 
people as he enriches himself at their expense – implements a $5.5tn cut that 
shamelessly shovels money into the pockets of affluent and wealthy Americans, 
he should be resisted. Democrats should filibuster and obstruct, using the same 
tactics Republicans have deployed against Democrats. Protesters should mobilise 
in every town and city. Civil disobedience should be employed where necessary. 
Don’t just do it for yourself, America. The fate of the rest of the world will 
be determined by your choices.
 