
This is my last column of the year, and I want to reflect on one of the more 
depressing sentiments I’ve heard friends express since election day: that they 
can’t wait for the next four years to be over.


But quadrennial presidential cycles are a terrible frame to mark the timing of 
our lives. Hoping for time to pass swiftly makes our lives seem small and 
unworthy. We can’t let four-year chunks of time determine our emotions and 
gloss over the gift of our very own lives, as if presidential politics are more 
important. So please remember: you are important, every day, much more so than 
any of the grifters headed to the White House.

I was similarly dismayed throughout the 2016 campaign to hear friends say that 
they couldn’t wait for the election to be over. What did they miss while hoping 
for life to be over more quickly?


Being black and gay in the US has taught me that embracing and celebrating my 
full humanity is neither contingent upon presidential administrations nor on a 
particular sense of safety. I’ve buried too many loved ones – and learned how 
important it is tobe with them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/26/do-not-tell-cancer-patients-cures-they-could-be-doing>
 in that process despite not being able to “do anything” – that I don’t want my 
days to pass quickly, even the difficult ones.

And I don’t want to wait for four years to feel good about living again, any 
more than I want any of you to miss being present for all the hugs, tears and 
orgasms, the first kisses and last words, the shade or the laughter that make 
up the days of our lives.

What you think is important. What and who you read is important. Poetry is 
important. Science is important. Don’t let anyone tell you that thoughts, 
daydreaming and critical theorizing aren’t important in days like these. The 
scientificwitch-hunts 
<http://www.salon.com/2016/12/13/energy-department-slaps-down-donald-trumps-witch-hunt-of-climate-change-staffers/>
 around climate change are as dangerous for our environmental survival now as 
the attacks onqueer art 
<http://thefileroom.org/documents/dyn/DisplayCase.cfm/id/209> were to our 
cultural survival when Aids first hit.

As we face a highly uneducated, anti-education 
<http://www.nydailynews.com/news/national/king-huge-education-level-drop-off-trump-cabinet-picks-article-1.2911859>
 presidential cabinet, we need our critical minds and creative spirits going 
more than ever. We need this to fight but also just because it’s fun to think 
about the moon, iambic pentameter or the sea.


Human interactions you have that can’t be sold, or economically exchanged, or 
monetized by an app are important.

Leisure, music and dancing are as important as ever. It’s been said  
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PoXTYJW1--k>that Prince and David Bowie left 
us maps for moving forward. Surely getting our groove on,shakin’ that ass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances>
 and reaching up to thestarman <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tRcPA7Fzebw> 
waiting in the sky to meet us are steps on that journey.


Your neighbors are important - the people with whom you live in closest 
proximity, the people you pray or play with, the ones you may be called upon to 
defend from Trump or Brexit in asanctuary city 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/trump-brexit-cities-sanctuary-chicago-mayor>
.

Your health is important. Your sexual and reproductive health are important. 
Your mental health is important. That you laugh, and smile and give comfort to 
your lover(s), and experience kisses and hugs and massages and dancing and joy: 
these, too, are political acts of paramount importance. Access to abortion and a
repeal of sodomy laws <https://www.oyez.org/cases/2002/02-102>, no matter how 
embattled they may become, are about more than legality, after all; they are 
about your right to pursue the pleasure of your and other bodies joyfully and 
without shame.

I am not saying that the wellbeing of the things that are important to you are 
not interconnected with presidential politics. Nor am I advocating that we 
ignore who is coming to power in just a few weeks. We need to be ready for the 
fight of our lives, and self-care alone is not an effective remedy for what is 
headed our way. A full-on resistance to an accelerated crisis of autocracy and 
xenophobia is necessary. Many of us will be in harm’s way.

But along the way we must not forget: you are important. Despite the hell it 
wrought, 2016 was still the most extraordinary year of my life – not due to a 
quaint idea of happiness, but because of experiencing growth, of being present 
to pain, of learning the joy of community with other queer people of color, of 
remembering my sister. My life is not going to be dictated simply by 
celebrities or politicians (or a president-elect who embodies the worst traits 
of both). Nor should yours, even as he comes at us.

Here’s to 2017, friends. Even as we fight and resist, may you remember how 
important you are.
 