
This website is funded by support provided, in part, by the Bill and Melinda 
Gates Foundation <http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/home.aspx>. Content is 
editorially independent and its purpose is to focus on global development, with 
particular reference to the millennium development goals and their transition 
into the sustainable development goals from 2015.

All our journalism follows GNM's published editorial code. The Guardian is 
committed to open journalism, recognising that the best understanding of the 
world is achieved when we collaborate, share knowledge, encourage debate, 
welcome challenge and harness the expertise of specialists and their 
communities.

The Guardian's award-winning <http://oneworldmedia.org.uk/awards/winners> 
global development site was launched in 2010 to provide special focus on the
millennium development goals <http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/index.shtml> — 
the eight targets set in 2000 by the United Nations Millennium Declaration with 
the aim of improving the lives of the world's poorest people by 2015.

The site, which hosts comment from a range of voices around the globe, 
alongside news, features, debate, data and student resources, is made possible 
by part-funding from theBill and Melinda Gates Foundation 
<http://www.gatesfoundation.org/Pages/home.aspx>. The site is editorially 
independent of any sponsorship.

The only restriction to the Guardian's coverage on this site is where the Bill 
& Melinda Gates Foundation is prohibited under US law from directly funding or 
earmarking funds to: (a) influence the outcome of any domestic or foreign 
election for public office; or (b) support lobbying or other attempts to 
influence legislation (local, state, federal, or foreign). This means any 
communications to the public in which a view is expressed about a specific 
legislative proposal, and the recipients of the communications are urged 
through a 'call to action' to contact government officials, must provide a 
reasoned, objective consideration of facts and issues in a full and fair manner 
that enables third parties to develop their own positions on any legislation 
that may be discussed.

Unless otherwise stated, all statements and materials posted on the website, 
including any statements regarding specific legislation, reflect the views of 
the individual contributors and not those of the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation nor the Guardian.
 