
Converting struggling schools into sponsored academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> may improve GCSE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses> results initially but appears to 
have no long-term effect on attainment, according to research.

The study, by the London School of Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/londonschoolofeconomics> (LSE) in 
partnership with theEducation Policy Institute <http://epi.org.uk/> (EPI), 
found GCSE grades rose in the years before and after conversion. After that, 
however, GCSE performance dropped back and continued to fall over over the next 
three years until improvement was “back to zero” by the fourth year of being an 
academy.

The research, published on Wednesday, challenges the view that the 
government’s academies programme is a panacea for school improvement. Earlier 
this year the then education secretaryNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> had to abandon government 
ambitions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
 to force all schools to become academies – or have plans to do so – by 2022, 
in the face of fierce opposition from Tory rebels.

Local authority schools outperform academies, research suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/25/local-authority-schools-outperform-academies-research-suggests>
Nevertheless the number of schools being issued with academy orders is likely 
to rise with increased government powers to intervene in not just inadequate 
schools but those described as“coasting” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hundreds-of-coasting-schools-to-be-transformed>
.


The LSE/EPI study focused on 205 secondary academies approved for academy 
sponsorship after the 2010 election and opened by December 2014. These were 
then compared to a control group of 49 sponsored academies that opened after 
this period.

The report first identifies a jump in results – equivalent to 1.2 GCSE grades 
in one subject – in the year before converting to academy status. In the year 
of conversion, results rise again equivalent to 1.7 grades in one subject. But 
after that results start to drop off.

Researchers suggest the spike in results before the school has even converted 
may be down to targeted focus on key stage 4 pupils about to sit their GCSEs by 
school leaders trying to avoid becoming an academy, or possibly trying to 
appeal to a successful academy chain. Another explanation might be that after 
years of poor performance, schools under pressure fromOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> take action to raise standards, 
perhaps appointing a new headteacher or adopting new teaching policies.

“In conclusion, while we find an initial (and significant) improvement in the 
year prior to and after becoming a sponsored academy, we cannot attribute that 
trend to anything that may have been implemented by the academy sponsor,” the 
study says. “It may however be a result of the incentives generated by the 
academisation policy, which the government may well argue is a success in 
itself. Or, it could be that these schools were improving in any case (perhaps 
as a result of competition pressures or other interventions), and the fact that 
they became academies is not relevant. Neither can we say, yet, that the 
improvements are sustained over a period of longer than three years.”

The report says it is is difficult to discern how much of the drop in 
attainment post-conversion is due to a real decline in improvement and how much 
is a result of the control group improving its own results in the year before 
it becomes an academy. “Essentially, we find that the control group starts to 
behave differently as it prepares for academy conversion,” it says.

Earlier this year, analysis by the Local Government Association 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/> found 86% of local authority schools were rated good 
or outstanding by Ofsted, compared with 82% of academies and 79% of free 
schools.
 