
This is the age of the disgruntled – in domestic politics and foreign affairs 
alike. Anti-establishment sentiment within countries is somehow echoed by the 
way the rule book of international relations is being torn up. These dynamics 
feed on each other. They are at play in America (therise of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/02/donald-trump-battle-for-the-soul-republican-party>
), Europe (growing populism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jun/16/guardian-view-on-populism-in-european-politics-shaken-and-stirred>
) and Asia (nationalism and an arms race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/whats-behind-beijings-drive-control-south-china-sea-hainan>
). Finding a way to address them will be crucial if democracies are to have any 
hope of resisting instability.

This Dutch referendum spells trouble for Europe | Joris Luyendijk
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/08/dutch-referendum-europe-ukraine-eu>
I recently attended the Lennart Meri conference in Estonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/apr/07/barack-obama-usa-russia-nato>
 – a transatlantic gathering where much of the talk focused on how the“dream of 
a Europe whole and free” might be fading <http://lmc.icds.ee/>, and how that is 
affecting security and stability. And this week in London, at a meeting on 
global governance, and what needs to be done to improve it, a key focus of 
British and other European participants was: how do we restore the legitimacy 
of international institutions?

In democracies it is only natural that public opinion influences actions taken 
by governments on the international stage. But the way that pressure is exerted 
has changed. The Dutch government would never have sought a reviewof an 
association agreement between the EU and Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/08/dutch-referendum-europe-ukraine-eu>
 if a referendum in the Netherlands – with a turnout of only 32%, triggered by 
a petition that had just over 300,000 signatures – hadn’t signalled a rejection 
of that treaty.

Angela Merkel would never have pushed for a relaunching of EU membership talks 
with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/may/16/turkey-renew-talks-european-union-membership>
 (something she had been blocking for almost 10 years) if the German far right 
hadn’t started doing better in opinion polls. In my country, France, although 
Marine Le Pen’s Front National failed last year to win control of any region in 
local elections, her admiration for Vladimir Putin has made it more difficult 
for the socialist government to stick to itspolicy of renewing EU sanctions 
against Russia 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/06/world/europe/francois-hollande-says-destabilizing-sanctions-on-russia-must-stop-now.html>
 later this year. In Austria, where the far-right seems within reach of the 
presidency (ahead of voting on Sunday), populist pressures have already led to 
borders being shut to refugees. And in the US Donald Trump’s success is already 
beginning to frame the foreign policy debate .

Just as the traditional domestic politics of many nations is being upended by 
groups who claim that elites have lost all legitimacy, global politics is being 
shaken up by the way institutions created after 1945 have lost much of their 
credibility. The UN has failed dismally to put an end to the war in Syria; and 
the EU is widely criticised for its inability to address a variety of crises – 
its very functioning as an institution is questioned as never before. 
Meanwhile, Russia and China are disrupting international rules that were once 
deemed rock solid: force has been used tochange borders unilaterally (Crimea) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/17/crimea-success-ukraine-putin-russia-borders>
, and territorial claims are made through the creepingmilitarisation of islands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
 (in the South China Sea).

The parallel between disgruntlement on the inside and disruptive behaviour on 
the outside may well define our era

Both in Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and Asia 
alliances are being put to the test, with many asking if they will hold. The 
result of much of this is that global governance appears weakened, if not 
powerless. Passions and frustrations, often with strong nationalistic 
undertones, have become a major driving force of events, both domestically and 
internationally. Increasingly we see the rule of force – even rule of the mob – 
prevailing over the rule of law and over diplomatic mechanisms designed to 
defuse tensions.

To a large extent that’s because the very legitimacy of institutions, and the 
way we have known them, has eroded. Many citizens feel their voices are not 
being heard. The influence of the internet means representative democracy is 
losing ground to grassroots mobilisation – spontaneous or orchestrated – that 
often exists outside a recognised framework. And on a global stage tensions 
between powers fester because the forums meant to settle them aren’t working. 
Accepted rules and limits are increasingly set aside. Broadly speaking, what we 
are seeing is a growing cacophony in which it is unclear who, or what, will 
ultimately act as an arbiter.

The parallel between disgruntlement on the inside and disruptive behaviour on 
the outside may well define our era. It’s as if a race is under way between the 
growing aspirations of citizens (not least driven by a massive, instant spread 
of information and disinformation) and the struggling capacity of governments 
and international institutions to address them.

So what can be done? Reforming the UN system entirely is much talked about, 
though all but impossible right now. Reinventing the way democracies function 
is just as difficult. So perhaps small steps might be taken. At the Tallinn 
conference some speakers suggested EU officials could embark on “town hall 
meetings” across the continent, to reach out to citizens who resent what they 
see as a dehumanised Brussels bureaucracy.

What’s behind Beijing’s drive to control the South China Sea? | Howard W French
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/whats-behind-beijings-drive-control-south-china-sea-hainan>
And in the London discussion, several participants spoke of the need to create 
a “multi stakeholder” model for international institutions in which not just 
states but NGOs and citizens would have a say in open and transparent 
deliberations. Depending on the issue at hand, ad hoc groups of stakeholders 
could be convened. One idea was dubbed “the skateboard model” after the sport’s 
eschewing of judging panels in favour of competitors marking each other’s 
performances in open discussions – apparently everyone comes out more satisfied.

It’s easy to see the flaws (for example, how do you make sure the results 
aren’t manipulated?). But the key point is that if passions are to be managed 
in an orderly way, both within societies and globally, new mechanisms are 
needed to restore the legitimacy of decision-making. That this issue is 
increasingly being discussed is a good thing – because the risk of sticking to 
the status quo is that populists, everywhere, will continue to thrive.
 