
One of the biggest insurance companies in Britain is to use social media to 
analyse the personalities of car owners and set the price of their insurance.

The unprecedented move highlights the start of a new era for how companies use 
online personal data and will start a debate about privacy.

Admiral Insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/insurance> will analyse 
the Facebook accounts of first-time car owners to look for personality traits 
that are linked to safe driving. For example, individuals who are identified as 
conscientious and well-organised will score well.

Facebook forces Admiral to pull plan to price car insurance based on posts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/02/facebook-admiral-car-insurance-privacy-data>
The insurer will examine posts and likes by the Facebook user, although not 
photos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/18/facebook-hoax-private-photos-public-tomorrow>
, looking for habits that research shows are linked to these traits. These 
include writing in short concrete sentences, using lists, and arranging to meet 
friends at a set time and place, rather than just “tonight”.

In contrast, evidence that the Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> user might be overconfident – 
such as the use of exclamation marks and the frequent use of “always” or 
“never” rather than “maybe” – will count against them.

The initiative is called firstcarquote and was officially meant to launch this 
week but that was delayed at the last minute on Tuesday night. It is aimed at 
first-time drivers or owners – although anyone with a licence can apply. The 
scheme is voluntary, and will only offer discounts rather than price increases, 
which could be worth up to £350 a year. However,Admiral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/admiralgroup> has not ruled out expanding 
firstcarquote.

The rapid growth of social media and personal technology has given insurance 
companies and employers swaths of data they can access to analyse customers or 
employees. As well as Admiral’s car insurance scheme, insurers are looking at 
how they can use the rise ofsmartwatches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/audio/2016/mar/17/the-future-of-wearable-tech-tech-weekly-podcast>
 andfitness trackers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/03/fitness-trackers-call-time-watches>
 to monitor people’s health. For example,Vitality 
<https://www.vitality.co.uk/rewards/partners/activity-tracking/> is currently 
selling the Apple Watch 
<https://www.vitality.co.uk/rewards/partners/active-rewards/apple-watch/> to 
health and life insurance customers, with the final price dependent on how much 
exercise customers do while owning the watch.

Admiral says that firstcarquote offers a way for young drivers to identify 
themselves as safe rather than having to wait years while they build up a track 
record and a no claims bonus.

Alarmed by Admiral's data grab? Wait until insurers can see the contents of 
your fridge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/admiral-facebook-data-insurers-internet-of-things>
Dan Mines, who led the firstcarquote project at Admiral, denied that it was 
invasive of personal data.

“It is incredibly transparent. If you don’t want to use it in a quote then you 
don’t have to,” he said. “We are doing our best to build a product that allows 
young people to identify themselves as safe drivers.”

Mines said Admiral could eventually develop the scheme further, meaning it 
could include other social media sites and increase the price of insurance for 
some drivers.

“This is very much a test product for us. This is innovative, it is the first 
time anyone has done this,” he said. “It is a test, this is early days. The 
data will only ever provide a discount. We will work through that and learn 
more.

“I think the future is unknown. We don’t know if people are prepared to share 
their data. If we find people aren’t sharing their data, then we won’t ever get 
to consider that [expanding firstcarquote].”

The scheme is based around algorithms that have been developed by Admiral. The 
technology uses social data to make a personality assessment and then, judging 
against real claims data, analyse the risk of insuring the driver.

Yossi Borenstein, the principal data scientist on firstcarquote, said its 
algorithm looked for correlations between social media data and actual claims 
data. The technology will evolve as firstcarquote attracts customers and 
gathers more evidence about the correlations, meaning the importance of items 
identified on social media could change.

Borenstein said: “Just like conscientiousness there are other traits which can 
be indicative of safe driving. Our algorithm for calculating what ‘safe’ looks 
like is constantly learning, as we match social data to actual claims data.

“Our analysis is not based on any one specific model, but rather on thousands 
of different combinations of likes, words and phrases and is constantly 
changing with new evidence that we obtain from the data. As such our 
calculations reflect how drivers generally behave on social media, and how 
predictive that is, as opposed to fixed assumptions about what a safe driver 
may look like.”

Borenstein insisted that Admiral would not have access to information about 
what its customers look at on Facebook or what their friends do. The company 
would only have access to the information gathered during the quote process and 
would have no ongoing access.

“If this is successful, it could be revolutionary,” he said. “It could be 
truly transformational.”

An Admiral spokesman said: “The launch of our firstcarquote trial has had to 
be delayed. We’ve been working closely with Facebook in Europe to get the 
service ready, and are now addressing a few outstanding issues. We hope that 
very soon we will be able to offer first-time drivers better deals on their car 
insurance.”
 