
More African elephants are being killed for ivory than are being born, despite 
poaching levels falling for the fourth year in a row in 2015.

The new data, released on UN world wildlife day <http://www.wildlifeday.org/> 
on Thursday, shows about 60% of elephant deaths are at the hands of poachers, 
meaning the overall population is most likely to be falling.

“African elephant populations continue to face an immediate threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/03/world-wildlife-day-animals-are-being-slaughtered-one-by-one-not-saved-two-by-two>
 to their survival, especially in central and west Africa where high levels of 
poaching are still evident,” said John Scanlon, secretary-general of the
Convention on the Trade in Endangered Species <https://www.cites.org/> (Cites), 
whichcollects the data <https://cites.org/eng/prog/mike/index.php>. At least 
20,000 elephants were killed 
<http://www.bornfree.org.uk/index.php?id=34&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=1979&cHash=ff6dc8a80ad85ea74af7213540ad6b8d>
 for ivory in 2015.

But Scanlon said there were some encouraging signs, including in parts of 
easternAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, such as in Kenya, 
where the poaching trend has declined.

World wildlife day: Animals are being slaughtered one by one, not saved two by 
two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/03/world-wildlife-day-animals-are-being-slaughtered-one-by-one-not-saved-two-by-two>
“This is showing us all what is possible through a sustained and collective 
effort with strong political support,” he said. “The momentum generated over 
the past few years is translating into deeper and stronger efforts to fight 
these crimes on the front line, where it is needed most – from the rangers in 
the field, to police and customs at ports and across illicit markets.”

Elephant poaching peaked in 2011, when it accounted for about 75% of all 
deaths. Poaching has gradually reduced since then but remains well above 
sustainable levels. Scanlon said even greater efforts were needed to fully 
reverse the trend.

The new report revealed that a “troubling” upward trend in elephant poaching 
was observed in the Kruger national park in South Africa for the first time in 
2015. The proportion of elephants killed by poaching jumped from 17% in 2014 to 
41% last year. “While [this] is still below the sustainability threshold, the 
substantial increase in what had been one of the most secure sites for 
elephants in Africa is a cause for concern,” said the report.

In January, poachers shot down a helicopter in Tanzania and killed its British 
pilot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/31/tanzania-elephant-poacher-killers-british-pilot-roger-gower>
 during an operation to track down elephant killers while, in October last year,
14 elephants were poisoned by cyanide in Zimbabwe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/06/poachers-poison-14-elephants-zimbabwe-national-parks>
.

As well as action to toughen law enforcement and increase the penalties for 
wildlife crime, publicity campaigns have attempted to deter people from buying 
illegal wildlife products. In October, just before China’s president visited 
the UK,Prince William told Chinese citizens to stop buying illegally traded 
wildlife products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/19/prince-william-urges-chinese-to-stop-buying-ivory-and-rhino-horn>
. Other campaigns have featured sports stars including Andy Murray, Rahul 
Dravid, Francois Pienaar and Yao Ming.

Interpol estimates the illegal wildlife trade is worth $10-20bn a year, the 
fourth most lucrative black market after drugs, people and arms smuggling and 
it is often linked to organised crime. The UN says it not only harms endangered 
wildlife but also fuels conflicts, feeds corruption and undermines poverty 
eradication efforts.
 