
The number of African elephants dropped by about 111,000 in the past decade as 
a result of poaching, a report released at the Johannesburg conference on the 
wildlife trade has found.

 News of the worst drop in elephant numbers in 25 years came amid disagreement 
on the second day of theglobal meeting over the best way to improve the plight 
of the animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/wildlife-trade-summit-is-a-do-or-die-moment-for-endangered-animals>
, which are targeted for their tusks.

Poaching drives huge 30% decline in Africa's savannah elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
Based on 275 estimates from across the continent, the report by the IUCN 
conservation group put Africa’s total elephant population at around 415,000, a 
decline of around 111,000 over the past decade.

It is the first time in 25 years that the IUCN’s African Elephant Status 
report has reported a continental decline in numbers, with the group 
attributing the losses in large part to a sharp rise in poaching.

“The surge in poaching for ivory that began approximately a decade ago – the 
worst thatAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> has experienced 
since the 1970s and 1980s – has been the main driver of the decline,” said IUCN.

IUCN chief Inger Andersen said the numbers showed “the truly alarming plight 
of the majestic elephant”.

“It is shocking but not surprising that poaching has taken such a dramatic 
toll on this iconic species,” she said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365e256d805832776de9751cc40fae6b385cb7b4%2F0_0_4686_2812%2F4686.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=African%20elephant%20numbers%20plummet%20during%20'worst%20decline%20in%2025%20years%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=African%20elephant%20numbers%20plummet%20during%20%27worst%20decline%20in%2025%20years%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F365e256d805832776de9751cc40fae6b385cb7b4%2F0_0_4686_2812%2F4686.jpg>
 Activists march to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species 
of Wild Fauna and Flora, (CITES) in Sandton, Johannesburg. Photograph: Denis 
Farrell/AP 
The finding comes amid arguments among African nations over the best way to 
protect elephants.

Namibia and Zimbabwewant to be allowed to sell their ivory stockpiles accrued 
from natural deaths to fund community elephant conservation initiatives.

Zimbabwe’s environment minister Oppah Muchinguri rejected the “imperialistic 
policies” of countries that oppose the plan, branding them a “clear 
infringement on the sovereign rights of nations”.

Both Namibia and Zimbabwe boast healthy elephant populations and their desire 
to sell the stockpiles is supported bySouth Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/southafrica>.

Wildlife trade summit is a 'do or die' moment for endangered animals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/wildlife-trade-summit-is-a-do-or-die-moment-for-endangered-animals>
“We need to be considerate as we make these decisions,” Muchinguri said.

A booming illegal wildlife trade has put huge pressure on an existing treaty 
signed by more than 180 countries – the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species (Cities).

“Cities should be there to facilitate us to succeed in our conservation 
programmes rather than these imperialistic policies,” Muchinguri said, adding 
she was speaking on behalf of the southern African region that is home to 
three-quarters of the savannah jumbo population.

Thousands of conservationists and government officials are in Johannesburg for 
the 12-day Cities gathering, seeking to hammer out new international trade 
regulations to protect a vast array of different species, with several 
proposals on whether to tighten or ease controls on the ivory trade on the 
agenda.

“We have been keeping this ivory for nine years and we’re hoping this 
moratorium will be lifted so that we are able to sell this ivory or to produce 
jewellery, artefacts for the benefit of our people,” Muchinguri said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3444a77429fefd8eece555bbb5e5a2c8e195c3a5%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=African%20elephant%20numbers%20plummet%20during%20'worst%20decline%20in%2025%20years%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=African%20elephant%20numbers%20plummet%20during%20%27worst%20decline%20in%2025%20years%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fafrican-elephant-numbers-plummet-during-worst-decline-in-25-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3444a77429fefd8eece555bbb5e5a2c8e195c3a5%2F0_8_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A Zimbabwe National Parks official holds an elephant task during a tour of the 
country’s ivory stockpile at the Zimbabwe National Parks Headquarters in 
Harare. Photograph: Tsvangirayi Mukwazhi/AP 
“We have our sovereign right and we know best what to do, how to utilise our 
natural resources... we should not be punished, we should be rewarded (for good 
conservation practices),” she added.

Sue Lieberman, vice president of the Wildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Conservation Society, said 
the IUCN report was “yet another set of data clearly indicating that 
governments must take all necessary actions to address the crisis, including 
closing their domestic elephant ivory markets”.

“It is now up to the Cities parties to carry that momentum forward (and) 
support the majority of African elephant range countries who are calling for 
closure of domestic markets,” she said.

“Closing domestic markets will close off opportunities to launder illegal 
ivory.”

Stephen Mwansa, permanent secretary in Zambia’s tourism ministry, however, 
earlier castigated the proposal to ban domestic trade in ivory.

“How do you come and start regulating the domestic market? That will be 
extra-territorial,” said Mwansa.

“That’s arrogance of the highest order. It’s tantamount to neo-colonialism and 
that we can’t accept it,” he told reporters on Saturday.

In 1989 Cities banned international trade in ivory by listing all African 
elephant populations in its appendix 1.

In 1997 and 2000, however, elephant populations in Botswana, Namibia, South 
Africa andZimbabwe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zimbabwe> were downgraded 
to a less endangered species status – to allow two sales of ivory stockpiles to 
Japan and China in 1999 and 2008.
 