
Nothing feels more mentally restorative than contemplating a KANYE 2020 
presidential run – or at least, it didn’t till the prospect of ROCK 2020 opened 
up.

Admittedly, it is likely that the 
wrestling-legend-turned-world’s-best-paid-movie-star would mount a White House 
bid using his extra-ring name, Dwayne Johnson. But he is at least jokingly 
toying with the idea, in a way that can only add to the gaiety of the nations. 
In the past, the Rock has described the notion of being president as “very 
alluring”.

“I used to say it jokingly,” he told People this week 
<http://people.com/celebrity/dwayne-the-rock-johnson-run-for-president-sexiest-man-alive/>
. “But every time I was asked, it was with a real genuine interest. And it was 
very earnest. And so I started to really think. Could I make a difference? 
Could I surround myself with really brilliant people to help me make decisions? 
Do I care about this country? And when the answers continued to come up yes, 
then I thought, there’s a good chance. Yeah, one day. Then we’ll do another 
interview like this.”

Literally counting the days. “As time goes on,” he told Good Morning America 
earlier this year 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Entertainment/dwayne-rock-johnson-potential-future-presidential-run/story?id=40524512>
, “[I will] take the temperature of the American people. If it is a very real, 
overwhelming, positive, strong ‘We want you to run for president’, and I felt 
that I can step up to the place and become a tremendous leader for our country, 
and make a real difference and make change, I would do it.”

Do it and #crushit. As a dedicated follower of his social media output, Lost 
in Showbiz now dreams of a US president who speaks only in uplifting workout 
hashtags, as opposed to justalleging the New York Times has made an animal sex 
tape or whatever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-twitter-new-york-times>. 
#jacked #bringit #humbleabs #loveyoubackchamp #cheatday #destroyyourworkout ... 
in light of infinitely more disturbing developments, these are presidential 
instructions I yearn to work with. Only this week, the Rock was named People’s 
Sexiest Man Alive, forcing a slight skew on the format. “Still up at 4am 
trainin’ hard,” he announced, “&takin’ care of my babies… sexily ;)”

Well, of course he is – what else would he be doing when that 4am call comes? 
Godspeed, ROCK 2020. Godspeed.
 