
Brexit is the black hole of British politics, a place of dark matter, strange 
attractors and bent time. It has nowsent Sir Ivan Rogers spinning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/04/ivan-rogers-brexit-eu-ambassador-ids-couldnt-be-trusted-by-ministers-claims-duncan-smith-politics-live>
, screaming into its void. People stop in the street and ask, “What can it all 
mean?”

Ambassador to EU quits and warns staff over 'muddled thinking'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
Rogers’ deftly publicised resignation as British ambassador to the EU was 
hardly shattering. Ostensibly, a disaffected official brings forward his 
retirement so that someone new can lead his country into the Brexit battle 
ahead. As he returns to Blighty, he pensadvice to his colleagues for the 
imminent conflict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
: they should remember the regiment’s glory, speak truth to power, not hide bad 
news – the usual guff.

But this was no ordinary email. It was more fragmentary evidence in the 
enveloping gloom that is Brexit. First there was November’s “have cake and eat 
it” strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/greg-clark-minister-dismisses-having-cake-and-eating-it-brexit-notes>
 memo spotted in Downing Street. Then there was theDeloitte leak, that “there 
is no plan” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/whitehall-struggling-to-cope-with-scale-of-work-arising-from-brexit-vote>
. Then a palace rumour held that when the Queen asked after Brexit, she was 
mysteriously told, “It means Brexit, Ma’am. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/23/queen-theresa-may-brexit-britain-eu>
” Now we have Rogers’ dark references to “ill-founded arguments and muddled 
thinking”. The riddle is wrapped in an enigma.

That the Foreign Office hates Brexit is not news. It is to Europe what the 
Ministry of Defence is to the army, and the Department for International 
Development to management consultancy. It is the reason for existing. I once 
asked the department’s old boss,Michael Palliser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/jun/20/sir-michael-palliser>, if he 
had considered resigning over the Falklands. No, he said, he had had to do his 
duty by the government of the day. The only issue that would cause him to 
resign, he said ominously, was Britain leaving Europe.

Likewise, Rogers’ heart was clearly not in Brexit. He was no longer “one of 
us”. For all the fine words about civil service independence, at times like 
this senior officials cannot be robots. They have to share in group morale, to 
believe in what they are doing. If not, they should go. (These are issues that 
Rogers’ successor,Sir Tim Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/sir-tim-barrow-appointed-as-britains-eu-ambassador>
, will have to grapple with.)

What Rogers confirms is something different. It is that the Brexit war machine 
set up by May six months ago is not yet fit for purpose. Appointingthree 
Brexiters as relevant ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/beware-brexit-three-blind-mice-nick-herbert>
 might have seemed politically clever, but between them they had limited 
experience of Whitehall and European negotiation. Sidelining the Foreign Office 
and men such as Rogers might avoid friction, but it can only jeopardise 
process. Parliament was surely right, before Christmas, to ask the government 
whether it really had the foggiest idea where it was going.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-britain-friends-europe-diplomats-eu-ambassador-resignation-brexit-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f3f1d9b36796164545ba30c11fb6090d3b59f%2F0_478_3352_2012%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20Ivan%20Rogers%2C%20Britain%20will%20still%20need%20friends%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20and%20diplomats%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-britain-friends-europe-diplomats-eu-ambassador-resignation-brexit-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20Ivan%20Rogers%2C%20Britain%20will%20still%20need%20friends%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20and%20diplomats%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fivan-rogers-britain-friends-europe-diplomats-eu-ambassador-resignation-brexit-theresa-may%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe67f3f1d9b36796164545ba30c11fb6090d3b59f%2F0_478_3352_2012%2F3352.jpg>
 ‘Every recent utterance from Liam Fox, Boris Johnson and David Davis – Theresa 
May’s Brexit ministers – hints at compromise.’ Photograph: Gareth Fuller/PA 
Britain is to leave the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, 
and will trigger its two-year period of departure in March. There will be a 
withdrawal. That much we know. The only real argument is about what form that 
withdrawal should take: what form would most benefit the country and its 
citizens.

That argument is largely technical, not a proxy for rerunning the previous 
battle over Brexit. The champions of “hard” Brexit want simply to tear up the 
past and face the world as it comes. Bring on the great disruption, they cry, 
the ad hoc deals for bankers, students, farmers and temporary workers. See what 
happens.

Hard Brexit talks the talk, but I cannot see it walking the walk. Scrape its 
surface and it seems pure machismo, especially in the matter of immigration. 
Trade in goods might be handled. But Brexit threatens to strip hospitals and 
care homes of their EU staff, close down entire hotels and food outlets, leave 
fruit unpicked in orchards, and build up gargantuan passport queues. Britain 
would become, in some respects, a Ruritania of border guards, tariff clerks and 
temporary work permits.

At the very least, hard Brexit needs to explain, and fast, how exactly its 
Britain would look. That is why soft Brexit is the only game in town. As Rogers 
says: “Free trade is not something that just happens.”

There has to be some negotiation with the present EU. Yet the approach of the 
continent’s leaders has been to treat Brexit as politically toxic. Many are 
threatened by separatists on all sides, most of them cheering Brexit on.

To these leaders this is not a commercial issue. They do not care that almost 
half the British population and the entire British establishment were against 
Brexit. They do not care if hard Brexit might damage exports of Volkswagen cars 
or Camembert cheeses. They have no interest in Britain dancing off into the 
Brexit sunset.

There will always be a handful of wise Europeans who see mutual benefit in 
doing a deal with Britain. But wisdom is not fashionable in Europe just now. 
The EU is not the benign confederacy envisaged by its founders. It is a 
coalition of interests, lobbies and frightened politicians. It negotiates on 
lines not of greatest economic advantage but of least political resistance. Any 
organisation that can treat Greece, Italy and Spain with callous contempt, and 
Syrian refugees with cruelty, is unlikely to lean over backwards for a Brexit 
Britain.

Britain is for ever part of Europe. It will always have enemies there, and 
need friends. That is what diplomats are for

I am sure this is why every recent utterance from the Brexit ministers – Boris 
Johnson, David Davis and Liam Fox – hints at compromise. We hear of immigration 
concessions, transition arrangements, customs unions and “bespoke Norwegian”. 
These are men feeling their way towards whatever table d’hôte menu might work 
best. Of course there are downsides: an EU law obeyed here, a payment into 
common funds there, a third-party tariff somewhere else. Brexit was never going 
to be cost-free.

There is so much that might be salvaged from the Brexit debacle. It is clear 
to any sensible person that the EU in its present form has run out of steam. 
Reform should – and one day surely will – realign two, or even three, Europes. 
One is the existing eurozone, perhaps divided into two currency zones; the 
other a northern European free-trade area in some trading partnership with the 
first. This is themodel that was cogently set out 
<http://bruegel.org/2016/08/europe-after-brexit-a-proposal-for-a-continental-partnership/>
 last year by the Brussels thinktank Bruegel.

Either way, there is no point in Britain pretending it has nothing more to do 
with such a future. It is for ever “part” of Europe. It will always have 
enemies there, and therefore will need friends. That is what diplomats are for.

At present, the Rogers affair merely leaves a bad taste in the mouth. That is 
the trouble with the new Downing Street regime. Too little sense of purpose, 
and too much bad breath.
 