
The discovery of my mother’s big lie happened by accident. I had been mulling 
over ideas for a birthday present for her. Something personal; something that 
showed that I knew her like no one else.

For most of our lives, we had had a tempestuous relationship. She was my 
hypercritical mother; I was her disaster of a daughter. One point of contention 
was my appearance: I had not been the compliant, adorable beauty she had 
wanted. Appearance was everything to Mum. When she wasn’t shaming herself about 
her weight – a persistent struggle – or renovating old homes 
into magazine-quality centrespreads, she tried to renovate me. She once sat me 
down and violently brushed my hair to get it to “behave”, and when it refused 
to yield to her, she whacked my head with the brush and cried, “Why did God 
give me such an ugly child?”

I had no answer for her, but for the rest of her life I endeavoured to 
please her, if not by my appearance then by my deeds. So as her birthday loomed 
I searched for that unique gift, one that had absolution-conferring properties. 

Inspiration struck. In the 1920s, my mother and her family had emigrated from 
Hungary to escape the political volatility. Her father, the mayor and miller of 
Somosköújfalu, ventured alone to Canada. Under Canada’s immigration policy of 
the day, he spent five years on a farm in Manitoba as a labourer, after which 
he was able to return to Hungary, collect his wife and young children and bring 
them to a new life in a town in Ontario. My grand idea was to locate the 
immigration papers from that voyage and present them to my mother as a gift.

Thanks to the internet it was not a difficult search. Pier 21 in Halifax, Nova 
Scotia <https://www.pier21.ca/home/>, once the entry point for millions of 
Canadian-bound European émigrés, is now Canada’s Museum of 
Immigration-cum-archival collection. I found what I was looking for, printed 
the relevant pages, and placed an order for pristine copies. 

Hunched over the rough printouts, I ran an eager finger down the columns of 
names and passenger details of the SS Montroyal, which sailed from Antwerp on 
24 September 1927, and arrived in Quebec City on 2 October. My imagination 
swirled with the sights and sounds those newly arrived families encountered, 
and the bewildering questions asked of them in a foreign language. Smells? Mum 
had regaled me about choppy Atlantic crossings that had given her a lifelong 
physical revulsion to seafood. 

Down the list was my mother’s name, Valéria. My finger slid across the page of 
scant details. Under occupation, she was listed as “scholar”. How quaint. There 
was her brother, Béla, my uncle, also listed as scholar. At some point, Mum had 
returned to Hungary with her mother and brother and had sailed back to Canada, 
via Liverpool, aboard the Montclare, arriving inHalifax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/21/insiders-guide-halifax-canada-perks-city-relaxed-small-town>
 in February 1932. Ah yes, I recalled being told that Grandma had gone back to 
her homeland to give birth to her third child.

It was a fascinating snapshot, but something did not ring true. I glanced at 
the clock: I wanted to get in a swim before the local pool closed. I left the 
printout in the kitchen and hurried up the street. Ten minutes later, I lowered 
myself into the warm water and started into my lengths. Halfway through the 
second length, practically in mid stroke, those earlier doubts concerning the 
immigration details swam up to me. Then clarity bubbled to the surface: how 
could Mum have arrived in 1927 as a student when she told me she was born in 
1928? 

I towelled off and rushed home to the documents. Her date of birth was listed 
variously as “about 1923” and “about 1922”. I grabbed some paper and did the 
maths. My mouth dropped. Mum was always cagey about her age but at some point 
had grudgingly declared 1928 as her birth year. Why wouldn’t I believe her? It 
was on her passport and driving licence. When she and I travelled to Italy on 
holiday she was 78. Nearly two years after that, when she turned 80, I had 
treated her to a luxurious weekend at her favourite hotel. But with this new 
information, Mum was not 78 in Italy: she had been about 88. The “80th 
birthday” was closer to 90 than 80. 

A week later, I went to visit her. We had some wine and our conversation came 
round to her upcoming birthday. 

“What to do for my 81st?” she mused coyly looking at her hands. 

“Ah, 81,” I replied. “Are we talking your real age or your pretend age?” Her 
face snapped up to meet mine. Her lips were set in a defiant smile, but her 
eyes showed fear; her face had flushed and it wasn’t the wine. “What on earth 
do you mean?” she said innocently.

“I think we know what I mean,” I said in that voice women use to convey girly 
confidence. Then I laid it out: the web search, the passenger lists, the 
immigration records. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmum-lied-about-age-hungarian-family-immigration-records%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F296e565d86fe58139812750c72be98f28d9d3371%2F0_877_1751_1050%2F1751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=After%20her%20death%20I%20discovered%20Mum%20was%20a%20decade%20older%20than%20she%20claimed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmum-lied-about-age-hungarian-family-immigration-records%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=After%20her%20death%20I%20discovered%20Mum%20was%20a%20decade%20older%20than%20she%20claimed&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fmum-lied-about-age-hungarian-family-immigration-records%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F296e565d86fe58139812750c72be98f28d9d3371%2F0_877_1751_1050%2F1751.jpg>
 Jane Christmas’s mother, Valéria, in 2004. Photograph: Jim Wileman for the 
Guardian 
She was livid. She sounded like Lord Voldemort when she said: “Never tell 
anyone. Never.”

“Of course I won’t,” I said blithely as if the whole thing was a trifle, which 
it most certainly was not. She had lied not only to me but also to her entire 
family. My late father had been, it transpired, oblivious to her ruse. 

“Why did you do it?” I asked.

“I was older than your father, and in those days it was scandalous for a wife 
to be older than her husband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2010/may/12/marrying-younger-man-woman-mortality>
.” 

The admission instantly ruled out birth years 1928 and 1923. So was it 1922? 

“You cheated yourself out of 10 years’ worth of old-age pension,” I said.

She rolled her brown eyes; her look said she was about to state the bleeding 
obvious. “It is more important to be considered young than to have money.” 

“But you look fantastic for your age,” I gushed. “People would be amazed how 
youthful you look at almost 90.”

Flattery did not sway her. I poured her more wine.

“How did you fudge the records?”

“Easy. In those days everything was typewritten. It didn’t take much to turn a 
‘3’ into an ‘8’ with a pen. Besides, people were not the sticklers they are 
today. It was enough that the information gathered was generally correct.”

She continued to regard me warily even after she swore me to secrecy. The next 
day she had the monument company engrave her date of birth – 1928 – into the 
headstone she would eventually share with my father. 

I could not entirely keep her confidence. She might have cheated herself out 
of a pension, but her deception rendered moot my maternal medical history. 
Ditto for how that information affected the genetic health of her 
grandchildren. But for the most part I kept her secret, keeping stumm when her 
friends quizzed me about her age at her funeral. Even they had suspicions. 

And then another surprise. While cleaning out her files after her death I came 
across a letter, a reply, she had received from one of those psychics whose 
solicitations find their way through the mail slots of the elderly. The 
psychic’s letter began: “Based on the information you provided …” Mum had 
provided her birth year as 1919. 

I suppose she got the last laugh: Her true age will forever be a mystery. 

• Incontinent on the Continent  
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/incontinent-on-the-continent.html>by Jane 
Christmas <http://www.janechristmas.ca/bio.html> is published by Lion Books, 
£8.99. 
 