
Alan Rickman: the most loyal, playful and generous of friends | Katharine Viner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-the-most-loyal-playful-and-generous-of-friends>
The world became fully aware of the sly, languid and villainous charms of Alan 
Rickman, who has died aged 69 of cancer, as the self-parodying Sheriff of 
Nottingham pitted againstKevin Costner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/kevin-costner> in Robin Hood: Prince of 
Thieves <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/42778/robin-hood> (1991). 
However, the actor had already established himself as a star name at the Royal 
Shakespeare Company in the mid-1980s and as the hilarious German terrorist, 
Hans Gruber, in the action thrillerDie Hard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/80851/die-hard> (1988) with Bruce Willis
 <https://www.theguardian.com/film/brucewillis>.

Rickman appeared as the cello-playing, dearly departed ghost in Anthony 
Minghella <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/mar/18/filmnews.theatrenews>’s 
sensual, taut and wonderfully mutedTruly, Madly, Deeply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/82784/truly-madly-deeply> (1990), with 
Juliet Stevenson <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/juliet-stevenson> as his 
grieving partner. At the RSC, he had been sensational as the predatory, 
dissolute Vicomte de Valmont inLes Liaisons Dangereuses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/nov/11/les-liaisons-dangereuses-alan-rickman-lindsay-duncan-rsc-1986>
,Christopher Hampton <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/christopherhampton>’s 
brilliant adaptation of Choderlos de Laclos’s 18th-century epistolary novel 
that started small in the RSC’s Other Place in Stratford-upon-Avon and trailed 
clouds of glory to the West End and Broadway in 1987; Rickman was a pivotal 
figure in a company that included, at that time, and in that production,Lindsay 
Duncan <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/lindsay-duncan>, Stevenson and Fiona 
Shaw <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/fiona-shaw>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sheriff%20of%20Nottingham%20to%20Severus%20Snape%3A%20Alan%20Rickman's%20most%20memorable%20roles%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sheriff%20of%20Nottingham%20to%20Severus%20Snape%3A%20Alan%20Rickman%27s%20most%20memorable%20roles%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Fsheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video&media=>
Alan Rickman’s most memorable roles: From the Sheriff of Nottingham to Severus 
Snape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/jan/14/sheriff-of-nottingham-to-severus-snape-alan-rickmans-most-memorable-roles-video>
Having first trained and worked as a graphic designer, Rickman was a late 
starter as an actor, attending Rada between 1972 and 1974, and winning the 
Bancroft gold medal, before working in rep and the RSC in small roles at the 
end of the 70s. He began making waves as Anthony Trollope’s devious chaplain 
Obadiah Slope in BBC television’s The Barchester Chronicles in 1982.

Then he was, for a new generation entirely, the sinister potions master 
Severus Snape in the eightHarry Potter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/harrypotter> movies, for a decade from 2001. 
Snape had secrets, and this inner life infused one of the outstanding 
performances in the series as he stalked the corridors and back passages at 
Hogwarts like the ghost in Hamlet, smelling a rat at every turn, his noble face 
contorted with mysterious loathing and curious motivation.

However, it would be wrong to typecast Rickman as a villain. He was an 
outstanding Hamlet at the Riverside Studios and on tour in 1992, a mature 
student whose rampant morbidity masked an intense, albeit perverse, zest for 
life. And in Antony and Cleopatra at the National Theatre in 1998, he was 
fabulous oppositeHelen Mirren <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/helen-mirren>
’s voluptuous serpent of old Nile – shambolic, charismatic, a spineless poet of 
a warrior. It was his misfortune to have both these great classic performances 
displayed in productions that met with considerable critical hostility and 
public indifference.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdBl0opvUp0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdBl0opvUp0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DBdBl0opvUp0&media=>
 Trailer for Truly, Madly, Deeply, 1990, starring Alan Rickman and Juliet 
Stevenson. 
Tall, commanding, extremely funny when required, he was never above sending 
himself up either on stage or in the movies. He had talent to burn, a glorious 
voice that sometimes blurred in slack-jawed articulation, if only because 
everything he did seemed to come so easily to him. He was a central figure in 
the life of the little Bush theatre on the London fringe, at the Royal Court in 
theMax Stafford-Clark <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/max-stafford-clark> 
era of the 80s, as well as atTrevor Nunn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/trevor-nunn> and Terry Hands’s RSC, and he 
was a continual source of inspiration, and practical support, to his 
colleagues. He proved also to be a fine stage director, and directed two films. 
In the second of them, A Little Chaos (2014), a handsome 17th-century costume 
drama of love among the landscape artists at the newly constructed palace of 
Versailles, Rickman himself presided in his bewigged pomp as Louis XIV, the Sun 
King.

When Alan Rickman was a star at the bar | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/15/when-alan-rickman-was-a-star-at-the-bar>
The son of a factory worker, Bernard (who died when Alan was eight), and his 
wife, Margaret (nee Bartlett), he was of Irish and Welsh descent, raised on a 
council estate in Acton, west London, with three siblings (he was the second 
child), and educated at Derwentwater primary school in Acton, a Montessori 
school, and Latymer Upper. He studied graphic design at Chelsea School of Art – 
where he first met, aged 18, his future life partner, Rima Horton – and the 
Royal College of Art. With three friends, he ran a graphic design studio for 
three years in Notting Hill before going to Rada at the age of 26.

Rickman made his first impact with the Birmingham Rep, the first regional 
company to visit the new National Theatre’s home on the South Bank, when he 
played the upright Wittipol, disguised as a Spanish lady, in Ben Jonson’s The 
Devil Is an Ass in 1976, and also at the Edinburgh festival. Small parts in the 
RSC season of 1977-78 were followed, in 1980, by leading roles as a distraught 
sponsor of a pop concert inStephen Poliakoff 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/stephen-poliakoff>’s The Summer Party at 
the Crucible in Sheffield, with Brian Cox and Hayley Mills, and in Dusty 
Hughes’s anatomy of the Trotskyite left in Commitments, at the Bush. Rickman 
was a lifelong Labour party activist, while Rima, an economist, with whom he 
lived from 1977, was a Labour councillor in Kensington and Chelsea for 20 years 
from 1986.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRSUGp9Yz1sk&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRSUGp9Yz1sk>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRSUGp9Yz1sk&media=>
 Alan Rickman as the Sheriff of Nottingham in Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves, 
1991. 
In the early 80s, he was an ideal, doggedly English Trigorin in Thomas 
Kilroy’s otherwise Irish version of Chekhov’s The Seagull at the Royal Court; a 
coruscating Grand Inquisitor in Richard Crane’s adaptation of Dostoevsky’s The 
Brothers Karamazov at the Edinburgh festival; and a cheerfully stoned 
pragmatist on a Californian dope farm inSnoo Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2013/jul/05/snoo-wilson>’s The Grass Widow, 
also at the Royal Court, laying bare the capitalism of the drugs world as a 
sort of displaced Howard Marks, alongside Ron Cook andTracey Ullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/tracey-ullman>.

Everything about his acting came into sharp focus in the 1985-86 RSC season, 
when Les Liaisons Dangereuses was in repertory with three other plays. In As 
You Like It, he was the perfect “Seven ages of man” Jaques with Stevenson as 
Rosalind and Shaw as Celia; in Troilus and Cressida, Achilles never sulked so 
mightily in his tent; and in Ariane Mnouchkine’s superb version of Klaus Mann’s 
Mephisto, translated by Timberlake Wertenbaker, he nailed the dilemma of a 
creative artist in the censorious climate of the Third Reich: “What can I do? 
I’m only an actor.” He took the next big job.

He was both rooted in his own theatre world and internationally curious. 
Guided by the producerThelma Holt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/aug/22/thelma-holt-theatre-producer-interview>
, he played a reclusive, abandoned actor in a derelict cinema in Kunio 
Shimizu’s Tango at the End of Winter, a beautiful poetic drama of memory and 
illusion directed by the Japanese maestro Yukio Ninagawa, at the Edinburgh 
festival in 1991; and buckled down to Hamlet with Robert Sturua, the great 
director of the Rustaveli theatre in Georgia who had made waves in western 
Europe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3710dce00818497a48f4da164b14738c6861e016%2F0_0_1711_2342%2F1711.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3710dce00818497a48f4da164b14738c6861e016%2F0_0_1711_2342%2F1711.jpg>
 Alan Rickman and Lindsay Duncan in the RSC production of Les Liaisons 
Dangereuses, 1987. Photograph: Douglas H Jeffery 
In the earlier part of his career, Rickman had supervised several shows with 
the comedianRuby Wax <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ruby-wax>, whom he 
had met at the RSC, and had recommended a play bySharman Macdonald 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2005/mar/17/theatre> to the Bush; he 
expanded his directing work with Wax into a new play he commissioned from 
Macdonald, The Winter Guest (1995, West Yorkshire Playhouse and the Almeida in 
London), a tone poem in a Scottish seaside town, with no plot, for the superb 
quartet of Phyllida Law, Sheila Reid, Sian Thomas and Sandra Voe; he also 
directed a film version (1997) with an overlapping cast.

But film had begun to take precedence, Robin Hood leading to big roles and 
billing inTim Robbins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/tim-robbins>’s satirical
Bob Roberts <https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/101408/bob-roberts> (1992), 
about a rightwing folk singer running for the US Senate; as Colonel Brandon in
Ang Lee <https://www.theguardian.com/film/anglee>’s fine version of Jane 
Austen’s Sense and Sensibility (1996), with a screenplay byEmma Thompson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson>; and as Eamon de Valera in 
Neil Jordan’sMichael Collins <https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-collins> 
(1996), starringLiam Neeson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/liam-neeson> as 
the IRA founder.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0e4fba8962dbbc535201a74d07dd1057f3fa608%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0e4fba8962dbbc535201a74d07dd1057f3fa608%2F0_0_4096_2457%2F4096.jpg>
 Alan Rickman opposite Helen Mirren in Antony and Cleopatra at the National 
Theatre, 1998. Photograph: John Stillwell/PA Archive/PA Photos 
Even with the Harry Potter franchise under way, Rickman managed a triumphant 
return in 2001 to the West End and Broadway in Noël Coward’sPrivate Lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2001/oct/06/theatre.artsfeatures1>, 
displaying what the New York Times called a virtuosity of disdain as the 
squinting, wounded egomaniac Elyot Chase opposite Lindsay Duncan’s blonde ice 
queen of an Amanda Prynne; this was the best pairing in the roles sinceRobert 
Stephens 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-sir-robert-stephens-1581909.html>
 and Maggie Smith 30 years earlier. His last stage roles, both critically 
acclaimed, were as Ibsen’sJohn Gabriel Borkman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/oct/15/john-gabriel-borkman-review> 
at the Abbey in Dublin (with Duncan and Fiona Shaw) in 2010 and as a celebrity 
teacher in a writing workshop in Theresa Rebeck’sSeminar 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/11/21/theater/reviews/seminar-by-theresa-rebeck-with-alan-rickman-review.html?pagewanted=all&_r=1>
 on Broadway in 2011.

In between, he directed My Name Is Rachel Corrie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/apr/14/theatre.politicaltheatre> at the 
Royal Court, the West End, the Edinburgh festival and on Broadway in 2005-06. 
He compiled the show with Katharine Viner, now editor-in-chief of the Guardian, 
from the writings and emails of the American activist Corrie, who was killed by 
a bulldozer operated by the Israeli army in Gaza in 2003 while protesting 
against its occupation. This sense of political justice and civic 
responsibility informed his life as a citizen, too.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab6c1fbdeebed3c493f7bbc09fc3792193fec0d%2F194_266_2997_1799%2F2997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alan%20Rickman%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2016%2Fjan%2F14%2Falan-rickman-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ab6c1fbdeebed3c493f7bbc09fc3792193fec0d%2F194_266_2997_1799%2F2997.jpg>
 Alan Rickman and Kate Winslet in Sense and Sensibility, 1995. Photograph: 
Allstar/Columbia Pictures 
Alan Rickman, giant of British screen and stage, dies at 69
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/14/alan-rickman-giant-of-british-film-and-theatre-dies-at-69>
Rickman will be remembered latterly as Thompson’s husband in Richard Curtis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/richard-curtis>’s Love Actually 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/love-actually> (2003), the voice of Marvin 
the paranoid android inThe Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/105556/hitchhiker.s.guide.to.the.galaxy>
 (2005), as Judge Turpin in Tim Burton’s wacky movie version of Stephen 
Sondheim’sSweeney Todd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/movie/122346/sweeney.todd> (2007) and as 
(another voice) Absalom the Caterpillar in Burton’sAlice in Wonderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/mar/04/alice-in-wonderland-review> 
(2010).

But he was a committed vice-chairman of Rada, a patron of the charity Saving 
Faces <http://www.savingfaces.co.uk>, dedicated to helping those with facial 
disfigurements and cancer, and honorary president of the International 
Performers Aid Trust, which works to alleviate poverty in some of the world’s 
toughest areas.

He married Rima in 2012. She survives him, as do his siblings, David, Michael 
and Sheila.

• Alan Sidney Patrick Rickman, actor, born 21 February 1946; died 14 January 
2016
 