
Anybody who has been overcharged by an insurance company, denied a claim or 
given the runaround by an insurer’s customer disservice should shudder at the 
idea of insurers learning how to deploy the internet as a way of monitoring 
customers and using their online data to determine how much they should pay.

The latest, inevitable news is that Admiral, one of the UK’s biggest insurers, 
is touse customers’ Facebook data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/admiral-to-price-car-insurance-based-on-facebook-posts>
 to help calculate how much car insurance they should pay.

Insurers are always looking for new ways 
<http://www.propertycasualty360.com/2015/02/03/4-technologies-that-are-revolutionizing-the-insura?page=4&page_all=1&slreturn=1475010598>
 to strengthen their position and sell their services. And while social media 
might seem to indicate personality traits associated with safe driving, a new 
seam of far more personal and invasive monitoring is opening up in the Internet 
of Things (IoT) – thousands of internet-connected devices that monitor our 
lives at home, work and in transit.

Each device is a window into part of your life, and insurers want to be the 
ones pressing their face against the glass

Consulting firm AT Kearney says the IoT will “disrupt traditional insurance 
models, while opening new frontiers for growth” – a common enough mantra for 
businesses exploiting new technologies. The problem comes when this disruption 
means new methods for squeezing more out of its customers andshirking 
obligations 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/60-minutes-life-insurance-investigation-lesley-stahl/>
 to pay us. Take, for instance, the unfair (even illegal) practice of “price 
optimisation 
<http://www.ibamag.com/news/auto-insurers-overcharging-loyal-customers-insurance-commissioner-says-21473.aspx>
”, which means analysing non-risk-related data, such as shopping habits, to 
target people with personalised prices that reflect how much they will pay, not 
their risky behaviours.

Many analysts <http://insuranceblog.accenture.com/tag/internet-of-things> 
predict 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2014/05/23/the_internet_of_things_helps_insurance_firms_reward_punish/>
 that insurance could be the major business model underpinning the IoT, similar 
to howadvertising bankrolls 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/08/advertising-is-the-internets-original-sin/376041/>
 many web platforms. Corporations clearly smell the money; Dell computers’ 
consulting arm opened an “insurance accelerator 
<http://www.dell.com/learn/us/en/id/press-releases/2015-11-17-dell-services-launch-of-internet-of-things>
” in 2015, andMicrosoft 
<https://news.microsoft.com/2014/06/17/microsoft-and-american-family-insurance-launch-startup-accelerator-focused-on-home-automation/>
 has also partnered with American Family Insurance to start a similar incubator 
program.

'Smart' devices 'too dumb' to fend off cyber-attacks, say experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/22/smart-devices-too-dumb-to-fend-off-cyber-attacks-say-experts>
Insurers are already designing and deploying internet-connected devices. 
Progressive Insurance’s “Snapshot <https://www.progressive.com/auto/snapshot/>” 
plugs into your car to track how and when you drive, while other insurers are 
partnering with IoT firmNest <https://nest.com/insurance-partners/> – which 
makes smart thermostats and smoke alarms – and fitness trackerFitbit 
<http://www.computerworld.com/article/2911594/insurance-company-now-offers-discounts-if-you-let-it-track-your-fitbit.html>
 to offer discounts for allowing data reports about your behaviour.

If insurance does become the financial underbelly of the Internet of Things, 
what does that mean for how these technologies are developed, how they affect 
our lives and how they spread throughout society?

The tradeoff of control for convenience – dataveillance for discounts – may 
seem innocuous now. But when insurers exert influence over the IoT, they will 
have access to powerful monitoring abilities. By design, smart devices record 
and report information about our behaviours, lifestyles and preferences. Each 
device is like a window into a different part of your life, and insurers want 
to be the ones pressing their face against the glass.

Nothing will escape their notice. Every sugary drink or fatty food you indulge 
in will affect your premium. Every hour you go without replacing the batteries 
in that chirpingNest Protect <https://nest.com/insurance-partners/> alarm means 
added points to your risk score. “Hard braking”, or driving at odd hours. 
Insurers will already send you a tracking device for free so that they can tap 
all the valuable data you produce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fadmiral-facebook-data-insurers-internet-of-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb372d9d492f1d5f921bf8cf5c71c171e70b7c4cb%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alarmed%20by%20Admiral's%20data%20grab%3F%20Wait%20until%20insurers%20can%20see%20the%20contents%20of%20your%20fridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fadmiral-facebook-data-insurers-internet-of-things%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alarmed%20by%20Admiral%27s%20data%20grab%3F%20Wait%20until%20insurers%20can%20see%20the%20contents%20of%20your%20fridge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F02%2Fadmiral-facebook-data-insurers-internet-of-things%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb372d9d492f1d5f921bf8cf5c71c171e70b7c4cb%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
 With devices such as smart thermostats and lighting, the IoT offers real 
potential for improving our lives. But that all depends on who the technology 
is built for. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Second, the IoT can help insurers manipulate our behaviour, through policy 
conditions and incentives. Discounts can quickly become penalties once 
expectations about data disclosure shift from novel to normal. As surveillance 
by insurers “becomes more accepted”,argues 
<http://scholarlycommons.law.northwestern.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1157&context=nulr>
 law professor Scott Peppet, “it will give rise to its own stigma: when 
disclosure becomes low-cost and routine, those who hold out are suspect”. 
Impeding the flow of data – and grasping for privacy – “may carry with it the 
presumption that one is hiding information”.

So unless you can afford the financial and social cost of suspicion, you are 
left with no real choice but to comply with insurers’ demands for data.

Internet of things: the greatest mass surveillance infrastructure ever?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/15/internet-of-things-mass-surveillance>
The IoT will also open up new avenues for monetising customers. Insurers claim 
that the IoT will allow them to charge more accurate prices, thus ensuring that 
people pay what they should. Their hypothetical examples are always about a 
client getting unexpected discounts, and that will be true for some people.

Yet there is little reason to believe that the industry overall won’t use risk 
monitoring and personalised prices to increase their own revenues. If data 
analytics are used to smuggle in unfair discrimination and price optimisation, 
we have even less ability to understand and contest these practices.

By providing us with new and better ways of doing things, the IoT offers real 
potential for improving our lives. But that all depends on who the technology 
is built for. We would be remiss if we allow a new generation of 
internet-connected devices to be designed to benefit insurance companies. When 
industrieseagerly embrace innovation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/silicon-valley-health-finance>
, it isn’t because they will be the ones disrupted.
 