
Alberta has a profound effect on your lower jaw: after a while it aches from 
the number of times it’s forced to drop! Whether you’re gazing at the 
awe-inspiring Rocky Mountains with their age-old ice banks feeding turquoise 
green glacier lakes such as Lake Louise, or the immense coniferous forests 
leading to vast prairies, Alberta is an epic wilderness that has provided the 
setting for countless western films. The Revenant, Brokeback Mountain and 
Unforgiven were all shot in the province.

You can also live the dream: Alberta is, even now, the home of many real-life 
cowboys who still rear beef cattle on ranches in places such as Pincher Creek. 
We stayed in one such place, Sierra West Cabins and Ranch, as guests of the 
lovely Randy and Ginny Donahue. I took to riding like I did to cooking, apart 
from a few rookie mistakes of course – such as putting the wrong foot in the 
stirrup, which would have had me facing backwards on the horse. Details, 
details!

Staying on a ranch, riding horses, corralling cattle and cooking by the 
campfire had a profound slowing effect on me. I felt rooted to the land and 
connected to the horses almost immediately. The funny thing was, it took almost 
no effort. It was as though I was remembering playing cowboys from my childhood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b0b89ac548f50db1fbbfc3b9ffef44de6deac0%2F0_192_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31b0b89ac548f50db1fbbfc3b9ffef44de6deac0%2F0_192_4320_2592%2F4320.jpg>
 ‘Real-life’ cowboys still drive cattle in Alberta 
In Banff, after a campfire breakfast, we experienced an unexpected traffic 
jam. I was appalled. I thought I’d left these abominations back in London; how 
could they be happening here in this wilderness nirvana? Then I noticed a few 
people in the slow-moving traffic taking pictures, and heard the word “bear”! I 
immediately started scanning the view from our people carrier, full of 
excitement and expectation, as if I’d heard an old friend was in town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b16ed710e6bbb47f6a14410306a74e9f8ab15de%2F1094_0_2863_3580%2F2863.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b16ed710e6bbb47f6a14410306a74e9f8ab15de%2F1094_0_2863_3580%2F2863.jpg>
 One of Alberta’s native black bears. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
As I prepared to bound into the forest to reconnect with my long-lost pal, I 
had to be reminded that it was a black bear and not a labrador that had been 
sighted, and it was safer and more respectful to take pictures from inside the 
car. I got a good look at the bear from about 40 feet away, from the road, for 
10 seconds as he went about his own daily commute. I’d said only two or three 
days before that my ultimate sight would be a bear in the wild, and here I was 
now, having my dreams realised. He briefly turned round, but didn’t recognise 
me; I was momentarily heartbroken. Out here, even the traffic jams are awesome.

Alberta delivers on your dreams. It doesn’t promise you and then let you down 
like so many other destinations. This is what Alberta is: rugged, 100% genuine 
wilderness. While we were in the province we spotted a wolf, elk, chipmunks, 
gofers, raccoon, deer, mountain sheep and enough eagles to shake a stick at. I 
mean we saw golden eagles, bald eagles, various types of hawk and osprey. After 
a while the video crew I was travelling with became less and less impressed. It 
took a golden eagle swooping over the car to arouse the remotest interest in 
them. Heathens.

Of course Alberta isn’t all unadulterated wilderness. It has two large 
metropolitan areas in Edmonton and Calgary. We headed to the latter for the 
grand finale of our six-week trip: the world-famous Calgary Stampede. A 10-day 
rodeo festival held every July, billed as “The Greatest Outdoor Show on Earth”, 
it’s like nothing I’ve ever seen before – a sort of stetsoned Olympics mixed 
with the cowboy X Factor. A million visitors descend on the city during this 
period and the whole place is cowboy central. Locals don western wear and the 
rodeo itself showcases everything from chuck wagon racing to traditional First 
Nations cooking. It’s one of those “only in this city” experiences.

Experience the wonder of Alberta – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-cool-canada/gallery/2016/oct/28/experience-the-wonder-of-alberta-in-pictures>
A memorable six weeks

My time in Canada has had a profound impact on me. I was at peace when I was 
there, and now I have “move to Canada fever”. I can’t tell you the number of 
times my wife and I talk about moving there. Something happens in the news and 
we’re like: “Oh that wouldn’t happen in Canada, would it darling?” It’s 
embarrassing! I hear myself saying it, making everything black and white and 
simpler, a haven where everyone gets on and eats lobster rolls for lunch every 
day while gazing at the mountains. It’s like an addiction, but with no negative 
side effects.

It’s nice to imagine a simple place with a simpler life, more rooted in nature 
and the land. Of course, Canada proves this is no mere idyll – people really 
can and do live that way. From the temperate rainforest on Vancouver Island, to 
the vast open range of Alberta, to the vineyards of Niagara-on-the-Lake, 
Canada’s landscapes just have to be seen. And yet, even so, these aren’t the 
memories that persist.

What really makes me daydream of relocating is the people. I think everyone 
there knows that it’s a special place. Somehow the incredible, breath-taking 
landscape and abundant natural blessings seem to have rubbed off on its 
inhabitants. Canadians are some of the most welcoming, generous, relaxed people 
I’ve ever met. I certainly felt safe, but that’s not the thing. It’s more that, 
despite being a stranger, I never felt ill at ease or out of place.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed8542d26fb998ebda7de6fda351bca5aa00bbe%2F0_0_2646_3063%2F2646.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alberta%20dreaming%3A%20why%20John%20Quilter%20wants%20to%20move%20to%20Canada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-cool-canada%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fjohn-quilter-alberta-delivers-on-your-dreams%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbed8542d26fb998ebda7de6fda351bca5aa00bbe%2F0_0_2646_3063%2F2646.jpg>
 John’s route around Canada. Illustration: MUTI - Folio Art 
Canada seems in many ways a multicultural blueprint for other countries; there 
is a welcoming spirit towards visitors and a positive embracing of minorities.

This is startlingly and refreshingly demonstrated in the minority communities 
of cosmopolitan cities such as Toronto and Vancouver. Time and time again I 
experienced rich, ethnic cultural centres humming and sparkling with the 
day-to-day life of food shopping, eating out or grabbing a coffee. You can 
measure the health of a community by its food culture; by its butchers, 
fishmongers and eateries. They are the thermometers of a city’s wellbeing, and 
Canada’s “check-up” showed they’ve been eating their broccoli. I ate some of 
the best ethnic food I’ve ever had in Canada’s cities.

As a chef, I found the food scene inspiring. Throughout Canada you find an 
incredibly strong field-to-plate movement. I was astonished and delighted by 
the quality of the markets and shops, with so many beautiful, fresh 
ingredients. In Montréal the shopkeeper economy was the backbone of the local 
community, giving a unique personality to the city. The fish market in 
Vancouver was humming with the vibrant sockeye salmon. In Ottawa, Vancouver 
Island and Ontario, I feasted direct from the land on beautiful farms. There 
are so many incredible fields to visit in this country with grapes for wine and 
fruit for the restaurant tables – the list goes on.

And if you’re interested in when I’m going back, well … I recently got 
married, and guess where our honeymoon is?

For more information and inspiration, see explore-canada.co.uk 
<https://uk-keepexploring.canada.travel/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=native_advertising&utm_campaign=uk_2016_p&utm_content=pd_advertising_jq+over+the+rockies+into+alberta>
 