
Aldi is to give more than 3,000 staff a pay rise in an effort to leapfrog 
fellow German discounterLidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> to 
become the highest-paying supermarket in the UK.

Employees at the fast-growing supermarket chain will earn £8.53 per hour and 
£9.75 if they live in London, starting from 1 February.

While Aldi’s hourly rate in the capital will be the same as the new minimum 
announced in November by Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/lidl-to-give-lowest-paid-staff-pay-rise-to-845-an-hour>
, staff outside London will earn 7p an hour more.

Both supermarket chains have now matched or bettered the the voluntary minimum 
pay suggested by theLiving Wage Foundation 
<http://www.livingwage.org.uk/what-living-wage>.

Aldi <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> said the increase means it is 
now the highest paying company in the supermarket sector, adding that 3,356 
staff stood to benefit.

It pointed out that it also paid staff for breaks, which it claimed Lidl did 
not.

Aldi’s UK chief executive, Matthew Barnes, said: “We recognise the valuable 
contribution that our thousands of store employees make every day. Their 
dedication and commitment is a key reason whyAldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> is the UK’s fastest-growing 
supermarket.

“We employ the best people in retail and invest in their training to enable 
them to carry out a range of different roles in store.

“We remain committed to being the best supermarket employer in Britain. This 
means that we will continue to provide employees with rates of pay and benefits 
that are the highest in the supermarket sector.”

Aldi is in the midst of a recruitment drive, hiring about 4,000 new staff in 
its bid to take the number of UK stores from 700 to 1,000 by 2022. Its 700th UK 
store will open next month.

In November, Lidl <https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> said it would 
hand a 2.4% pay rise to its lowest-paid staff to put them on theindependently 
verified living wage <http://www.livingwage.org.uk/what-living-wage>.

The discounter said 5,500 employees – a quarter of its UK workforce – would 
benefit from the pay rise, which puts them on a minimum of £8.45 an hour, or 
£9.75 an hour in London.

The workers in England, Scotland and Wales will get the pay rise from 1 March.
 