 Breakers pound the beaches of Banffshire as a white campaign bus transports 
Alex Salmond along the coastal road to Macduff. By all accounts, it has been a 
turbulent few days for the normally buoyant leader of the Scottish National 
Party.
Portrayed as jaded and defensive, he has been battered by the press with the 
ferocity of a force nine. Some even suggest he is not up to the pressure of 
Scotland's first general election. 'Balls,' he replies. 'Absolute balls. So 
what? Let them write what they like.' Then he seeks inspiration from Burns. 
'The mair they talk, the better I'm kent [known]... OK, not one of the 
classics, but a good line.'

With independence no longer a pipe dream, the man who has re-branded Scottish 
nationalism as a social democratic force to the left of Labour is touring his 
adopted heartland in north-east Scotland. Banff and Buchan, the farming and 
fishing Westminster seat which Mr Salmond won from the Tories in 1987, is a 
world apart from industrial west-centralScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, where the SNP's new leftism has a 
certain resonance. Here, traditional values mean thrift, hard work, and 
enterprise. 'People should not be held back for wanting to get on in life,' 
volunteers the local SNP candidate accompanying Mr Salmond.

John Cox, fish processor turned hotelier, should know. He was a member of the 
Conservative Party until last year. He appears more tartan Blairite than new 
leftist. 'We've moved on from what socialism was 10 years ago,' he says. 'We 
have to create the right environment for Scotland to prosper.'

The message echoes around a constituency carefully cultivated by Mr Salmond. 
This is middle-Scotland. Social democracy will have to wait for another day.

At the bowling club, an elderly woman confides that they are all still Tories 
at heart. Another pensioner says: 'I vote for Alex because there are no longer 
any decent Tories around.'

Edging into Macduff, Mr Salmond has reassuring words for those alarmed by the 
prospect of Scotland breaking with Britain. May 6, he says, is no independence 
election, although some SNP zealots believe the party will have a mandate to 
negotiate separation if it gains a majority in the 129-member parliament. Mr 
Salmond does not. 'People vote... for all sorts of different reasons,' he 
insists. 'You cannot decide independence in a general election.'

The plan - in the unlikely event that the SNP can form an administration - is 
to hold an independence referendum sometime in the new parliament. Mr Salmond 
would like it later rather than sooner, in the hope of wooing the Lib-Dems into 
a coalition.

So the campaign ploy is play down independence and instead embrace a social 
agenda by promising Â£690m to improve schools, hospitals and houses. The cash 
will come from forgoing Gordon Brown's 1p-in-the-pound tax cut a 'tax bribe 
versus better public services', Mr Salmond bravely tells voters a few days 
beforehand while touring Wishaw, almost 200 miles south in post-industrial 
Lanarkshire, conveniently nearer his main home at Linlithgow. Significantly, he 
adds: 'The Penny for Scotland [the SNP slogan] is the central feature of this 
campaign.'

Exactly how the SNP decided to unstitch the Brown budget is far from clear. Mr 
Salmond insists the move is hugely popular. Not everyone in Wishaw thinks so. 
'We're taxed too much already,' says Brenda Watson, a housewife, after shaking 
hands with Mr Salmond. 'We held our breath when he did it,' confesses Alan 
Patterson, a former businessman who is helping with the local SNP campaign. But 
it speaks volumes about the Salmond style. Margo MacDonald, once the public 
face of the SNP and now a candidate for the parliament, recently compared Mr 
Salmond to Tony Blair.

That is slightly unfair. Mr Salmond was repositioning the SNP long before Mr 
Blair became Labour leader. A Labour supporter before joining the student SNP 
at university, he no longer publicly proclaims his socialism quite so much and 
certainly not in Banff. A private man, he can appear warm and generous on the 
street; yet critics insist he is cold, calculating, arrogant. But he presents 
the only credible face of the SNP. He is the party.

'We need a Scottish parliament that will get people back to work,' a man in a 
wheelchair tells him on a visit to Glasgow's vast Easterhouse housing estate. 
Mr Salmond nods approvingly; perhaps he can afford to raise expectations of the 
SNP's reformist agenda because he knows they are probably destined to become 
the opposition in the parliament. Six miles down the road, he tours the 
Scottish TUC conference. Pat Docherty, a TGWU delegate, briefly jokes with Mr 
Salmond. But he later confides: 'Doesn't impress me. The SNP have been playing 
whichever card suits them - rightwing here, leftwing there - for years.'

Jimmy Reid, leader of that shipyard work-in and now a columnist, is more 
reassuring. 'Among the party leaders he's the most true to labour principles,' 
says Mr Reid. 'Yes, I would vote for him, because he represents my core values.'

With two weeks to polling, Mr Salmond and the SNP are approaching the crunch. 
Voters now know that independence is no longer an abstract concept if they vote 
nationalist. It is a possibility.

Education: Linlithgow academy; St Andrews, MA Hons.

Career: Economist, Scottish department of agriculture and fisheries, 1978-80; 
energy economist, Royal Bank of Scotland, 1980-87.

High point: Elected to parliament 1987; became leader of SNP 1990, roundly 
defeating his neighbouring MP, Margeret Ewing.

Low point: Suspended at 1982 SNP conference for helping form a left faction; 
re-admitted after six months when he signed a loyalty oath.

Personal life: Married Moira McGlashan, 1981; met when both working in the 
agriculture department. No children.

Hobbies: Racing tipster, like Robin Cook. 
 