
I don’t even like cupcakes that much – and I despise the practice, which is 
sadly becoming more widespread, of playing out the left’s internal squabbles on 
the pages of newspapers. But the picture painted by leaked emails from 
Momentum’s steering committee last week, in which Iurged my colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/momentum-treasurer-tried-to-stop-founders-new-constitution-plan-steering-committee-jon-lansman-labour-email>
 to “eat cupcakes and think about butterflies” in a frustrated plea to them to 
step back from the brink of a split, is worthy of elaboration. The coup 
currently under way in Momentum tells us something bigger about the need for 
the left to rethink its strategy.

Momentum’s leadership has imposed a constitution on the organisation, 
abolishing the democratic structures that have beendeveloping over the past year
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/momentum-iwar-of-words-labour-affiliation>
 and cancelling its founding conference, where members were due to debate its 
future. The stated goal of the new constitution is to ensure that Momentum does 
not replicate the Labour party, clearing the way for it toaffiliate as a 
socialist society 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/pro-corbyn-group-momentum-launches-9600311>
. Ironically, under the new rules Momentum will be governed by a national 
coordinating group with representatives from members, local government, MPs and 
other stakeholders – a kind of shadow Labour party NEC, very similar to the
strategy board 
<http://www.progressonline.org.uk/campaigns/progress-strategy-board/> of the 
Blairite faction Progress.

My hopes for Momentum have been dashed by the toxic debate at the top
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/11/my-hopes-for-momentum-have-been-dashed>
In one version of reality, Jon Lansman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/momentum-hope-saved-saboteurs-sectarian-labour>
 and his allies are saving Momentum from a delegate-based version of democracy 
in which far-left factions could seek to “capture” the organisation. This is a 
narrative that has been repeated by ahostile press 
<https://order-order.com/2016/12/06/251060/> with a sparse working knowledge of 
the left’s internal politics and an agenda that is well-served by exaggerating 
the role of Trotskyists in Labour and Momentum. But the largest Trotskyist 
organisationactive in Momentum <http://www.workersliberty.org/> has only about 
100 members. The force that Momentum’s leadership is attacking is a much 
broader layer of its grassroots activists who, like me, are shocked at its 
unwillingness to compromise.

This is happening because there is now a fundamental difference of opinion 
about what Momentum should be for. The new constitution – which was adopted by 
an email vote of a small committee in the space of an hour – is that of a 
disciplined, top-down organisation whose primary purpose is to mobilise its 
members inside the Labour party in support of Jeremy Corbyn. Although the new 
constitution was adopted on the premise of giving all members a say, members 
seeking, for instance, to propose campaigns or make internal rule changes, will 
have to collect thousands of signatures to call a referendum. They will then 
have to achieve avote so large 
<https://d3n8a8pro7vhmx.cloudfront.net/momentum/pages/940/attachments/original/1484081634/Campaign_Priorities.pdf?1484081634>
 in that referendum as to make the task effectively impossible.

Supporting the Labour leadership is vital, but on its own it is inadequate. At 
the moment, some of the greatest minds of the British left are consumed by 
high-level chess games with the press and the parliamentary Labour party over 
Corbyn’s leadership. They are losing – because the left cannot win with clever 
footwork alone. Without a radical movement in society, Labour’s leadership will 
find itself pushed into performing the same kind of damaging compromise on 
principle – onfreedom of movement of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/trying-to-pin-down-labours-position-on-free-movement>
, on economic policy – that is failing social democratic parties all over the 
western world.

In order for the Corbyn project to stand a chance at the ballot box, we need 
to shift the ground from under the Westminster bubble by fighting cuts with 
direct action, and convincing ordinary people of an alternative narrative about 
immigration and inequality. As the Tories lay waste to communities and 
services, Britain needs a movement of rebellion built on broad foundations, 
plugging Labour into social movements and giving social movements a voice in
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>. For that to work, we need 
empowered activists with a mind of their own – not just foot soldiers who cheer 
at the right time and vote the right way. Grassroots movements cannot flourish 
without internal democracy and political independence.

Trotskyist factions seeking to take over Momentum, member claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/trotskyist-factions-seeking-to-take-over-momentum-member-claims>
I cut my teeth during the student and anti-austerity movements of 2010 and 
2011, explosive bottom-up revolts against neoliberalism that paved the way for 
the rise of Corbyn. If those movements taught me anything, it was that none of 
the established pillars of the left – not the organised far left, not the 
Labour left, not the trade union leaderships, not the NGOs and slick online 
campaign hubs – really had a serious strategy to beat the government. 
Corbynism’s claim to represent “a new kind of politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/11/jeremy-corbyn-aims-to-throw-out-theatrical-abuse-in-parliament>
” is not just a slogan – it is also a statement of humility, an admission that 
we are looking for answers in a volatile new world.

The only force that can provide the inspiration, ideas and hard graft to carry 
Corbyn’s Labour into Downing Street is the grassroots of the Labour movement 
and a new wave of activists from communities and workplaces struggling for 
social justice.Momentum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> is a 
vital building block for that new mass politics – but only if remains united, 
and if it can combine its role in supporting Corbyn with a bottom-up democratic 
culture. For that to happen, its leaders must learn how to compromise.
 