
Thunk! The billhook bites deep and splits the hazel slantwise. With a heave 
and a twist on the trunk, the young tree shakes its embryonic catkins against 
the sky and swishes down to lie lengthwise with the others. Then begins the 
business of trimming the prone sapling and weaving it in so it becomes both 
hedge and living fence.

Hedge laying is an ancient craft. Small tree trunks are sliced with a shallow, 
diagonal cut and then bent sideways. A thin bridge of wood remains to connect 
the laid tree to the live root. The horizontal trees, called pleaches or 
plashes, are interlaced and held in place with posts and crooks – pieces of 
forked stick driven into the ground. New side shoots grow outwards and upwards, 
regenerating the hedge from a thick, stock-proof, base.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce9b742ea290b9661e9743c2518b6b05167994cd%2F0_0_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20the%20twists%2C%20trims%20and%20turns%20of%20a%20good%20hedge%20lay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20the%20twists%2C%20trims%20and%20turns%20of%20a%20good%20hedge%20lay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce9b742ea290b9661e9743c2518b6b05167994cd%2F0_0_1772_1063%2F1772.jpg>
 Section of the laid hedge. Photograph: Sara Hudston 
There are three of us volunteers working alongside Rob Bowditch, a 
professional woodsman, and Nick Gray from DorsetWildlife 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trust. The hedge we are 
laying hasn’t been tackled for more than 40 years, just smashed intermittently 
with a tractor-mounted flail.

It’s a straggly mix of hazel, blackthorn, ash, spindle and sycamore, all grown 
into stunted trees tangled with ivy. We have to chop out the dead wood, fell 
the thickest trunks and then work with the thinner, wrist-sized pieces. Every 
limb is a puzzle requiring several decisions – whether to remove or keep, and, 
if keep, how to split and where to interlace.

It’s slow, hard, work requiring considerable skill. As a beginner, I can’t 
match Nick and Rob’s precise violence. Rob wields a roaring chainsaw, sawdust 
snowflakes fountaining backwards from the blade. Nick chunks wedges of hazel 
with his billhook, using its weight to add extra directional force.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bd0787912de2ae5a58531c8565eb3853d219e3%2F0_0_1181_787%2F1181.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All%20the%20twists%2C%20trims%20and%20turns%20of%20a%20good%20hedge%20lay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All%20the%20twists%2C%20trims%20and%20turns%20of%20a%20good%20hedge%20lay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fall-the-twists-trims-and-turns-of-a-good-hedge-lay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64bd0787912de2ae5a58531c8565eb3853d219e3%2F0_0_1181_787%2F1181.jpg>
 Thin bridges of wood allow trunks to stay connected to their roots. 
Photograph: Sara Hudston 
I am less sure of my aim and it takes several, lighter, swipes to achieve what 
he does in one deft blow. The wood frays under my attempts and has to be sawn 
smooth; rich and buttery as pale cheese in its green rind.

The outcome looks both neat and brutal: a pile of pinned skeletons. But next 
spring it will grow back bushy and dense, providing ideal shelter and food for 
dormice, insects and birds.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 