
Trump worries China

The Chinese government has warned Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> it is “seriously concerned” 
after the president-elect brought into question the historic “One-China” 
policy, agreed by Richard Nixon and Mao Zedong in 1972, during an interview 
with Fox News. Trump questioned the necessity of the policy, under which the US 
does not recognize Taiwan as a sovereign state, and argued that it might be 
used as a bargaining chip in a trade deal with China. “I don’t know why we have 
to be bound by a ‘One China’ policy unless we make a deal with China having to 
do with other things, including trade,” said Trump. Geng Shuang, a spokesman 
for China’s foreign ministry, told reporters that bilateral ties and “the sound 
and steady growth of China-US relations” would be “out of the question” were 
Trump to turn away from the “One China” policy. He referred to the issue as the 
“political bedrock” of the ties between the two countries.

China ‘seriously concerned’ after Trump questions Taiwan policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>

Trump clashes with CIA over Russia

The CIA’s conclusion that Russia interfered with the 2016 presidential 
election is “ridiculous”, Trump told Fox News on Sunday. The president-elect 
said the CIA’s assessment was “just another excuse” for his stunning defeat of 
Hillary Clinton last month. The Washington Postreported 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-orders-review-of-russian-hacking-during-presidential-campaign/2016/12/09/31d6b300-be2a-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.89b0976a841b>
 on Friday that the CIA had concluded that the Russian government had attempted 
to influence the election by hacking the Democratic National Committee and 
passing emails to WikiLeaks. The New York Timesreported 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/09/us/obama-russia-election-hack.html> that the 
Russians had also hacked into the Republican National Committee’s computer 
systems, but that they did not release the information they gained from the 
GOP. Trump claimed that it was impossible to trace the source of the DNC hack: 
“Once they hack, if you don’t catch them in the act you’re not going to catch 
them. They have no idea if it’s Russia or China or somebody. It could be 
somebody sitting in a bed some place.” Trump also criticized the US 
intelligence community (“These are the same people that said Saddam Hussein had 
weapons of mass destruction”) and said he was going to skip most of the daily 
intelligence briefings because they were so repetitive, instead leaving them to 
vice-president elect Mike Pence. Legislators overseeing the CIA and other 
intelligence agencieshave told the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
 they will be vigilant about reprisals from the incoming president.

Donald Trump says CIA charge Russia influenced election is ‘ridiculous’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-reports-russia-influenced-us-election-ridiculous-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%3A%20reports%20that%20Russia%20influenced%20US%20election%20are%20%E2%80%98ridiculous%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-reports-russia-influenced-us-election-ridiculous-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%3A%20reports%20that%20Russia%20influenced%20US%20election%20are%20%E2%80%98ridiculous%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-reports-russia-influenced-us-election-ridiculous-video&media=>
Trump: reports that Russia influenced US election are ‘ridiculous’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/11/trump-reports-russia-influenced-us-election-ridiculous-video>
Trump’s team of climate change deniers

Trump is assembling an all-star cast of climate change deniers for his 
transition team – often placing them at the heads of key agencies responsible 
for monitoring or dealing with global warming. The heads of transition teams 
for Nasa, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Department of the Interior 
and the Department of Energy, as well as his nominees to lead the EPA and the 
Department of the Interior, are all skeptical of the science of human-caused 
climate change. For instance, Myron Ebell, head of the EPA transition team, has 
said that the scientific consensus on climate change is “phoney”, while another 
member of the team, David Kruetzer of the conservative Heritage Foundation, has 
erroneously claimed there has been “global cooling” in recent years.

Trump’s transition: skeptics guide every agency dealing with climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>

Facebook’s year in review

This has been a rollercoaster year for Facebook and its founder Mark 
Zuckerberg. The Silicon Valley giant raked in record profits thanks to 
increased advertising revenue but faced criticisms in a range of areas. 
Hollowing out legacy media’s revenues while using its content, “digital 
colonialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/11/marc-andreessens-colonialism-tweet-silicon-valley-facebook-india>
” and issues of censorship have plagued the company in 2016. However, 
Facebook’s impact on the US election may have been been most stinging, with 
Barack Obama among many claiming thatit undermined the political process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/17/barack-obama-fake-news-facebook-social-media>
. Despite originally denying responsibility, Zuckerberg later wrote an apology 
and outlined attempts to tackle the problem. García Martínez, who used to work 
in Facebook’s advertising sales department, told the Guardian that Facebook is 
well aware of its impact and uses it as a key selling point to advertisers. “We 
used to joke that we could sell the whole election to the highest bidder.”

2016: the year Facebook became the bad guy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>

Latinos patrolling the border

Trump campaigned on a promise to build a wall across the US-Mexico border, 
that he said would keep out Mexicans, who he referred to as “rapists” and 
criminals. But he will rely on thousands of federal employees of Mexican 
heritage to enforce any crackdown. Rory Carroll meets one of them.

Life as a Mexican American on the Border Patrol: ‘The system is not broken’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/mexican-american-border-patrol-agent-vincente-paco>

Teen Vogue takes on Trump

Hannah Jane Parkinson notes that Teen Vogue has emerged as one of the 
strongest progressive voices against Trump.An op-ed 
<http://www.teenvogue.com/story/donald-trump-is-gaslighting-america> by Lauren 
Duca that went viral over the weekend is a continuation of a series of pieces 
by Teen Vogue on the incoming administration. Parkinson credits Elaine 
Welteroth, Conde Nast’s youngest editor, for the success of the magazine.

Who will take on Donald Trump? Teen Vogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/12/who-take-on-donald-trump-teen-vogue>

Guns in stadiums? 

Republican representatives in the state of Washington have proposed a bill 
that would let sports fans bring guns into stadiums. The bill would prevent 
stadium operators from stopping people with a concealed carry license to 
bringing their firearms into stadiums. The NFL opposes the bill, which will 
face strong opposition due to the state’s strong Democratic base.

Fans could bring guns into stadiums under proposed bill in Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/11/seattle-seahawks-stadium-guns-proposed-bill-firearms>

In case you missed it …

A restaurateur in Toronto opened his doors to a group of Syrian refugee women 
to cook for the community. The opportunity has helped them find purpose in the 
strange city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Newcomer%20Kitchen%3A%20how%20Syrian%20refugees%20took%20over%20a%20Toronto%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Newcomer%20Kitchen%3A%20how%20Syrian%20refugees%20took%20over%20a%20Toronto%20restaurant%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fnewcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video&media=>
Newcomer Kitchen: how Syrian refugees took over a Toronto restaurant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/12/newcomer-kitchen-syrian-refugees-toronto-restaurant-video> 