
Shortly before Christmas, Wilbur Smith, the writer of airport novels, gave an 
interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/dec/14/wilbur-smith-a-writers-memorable-quotes-you-may-want-to-forget>
 to a Sunday newspaper in which he spoke of his four wives in the following 
tender terms: “Two of them died on me, the first one hates me, and this one 
loves me, so I’ve covered the whole spectrum.” He no longer saw his children, 
he added: “They’ve got my sperm, that’s all … it’s sadder for them than it is 
for me, because they’re not getting any more money.” Perhaps the most 
charitable response was to observe that at least Smith was being consistent 
here: the real people in his life seemed as two-dimensional, judging from these 
descriptions, as the typical Smith hero, who is a rugged outdoorsman with a 
passion for hunting, hard liquor, and no-strings sex. (Oh, and for avoiding the
gaboon adder 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/02589009408729555#.VoQemWThByo>, 
the deadly African snake Smith calls upon, with amusing frequency, when a 
character needs to die.) But my sneering’s a bit hypocritical, really. I only 
know about Smith’s cardboard-cutout characters because 2015 was the year I read 
two of his brick-sized novels, along with several similar vast works by 
Frederick Forsyth and Ken Follett: the kind of books, as one friend put it both 
succinctly and snobbily, that you find in self-catering holiday cottages. A 
further confession: mainly, I enjoyed them.

In publishing at large, it was a year of very long works: of Franzen and 
Knausgård and Marlon James, if you have some kind of problem with gaboon adders 
and prefer literary fiction instead.A survey in December 
<http://mentalfloss.com/article/72840/bestselling-books-are-getting-longer-study-finds>
 confirmed that novels in general are getting bigger: the average number of 
pages in a bestseller, it found, had grown by 25% since 1999. This is 
unexpected. Digital culture was always supposed to fragment our attention 
spans, eroding our powers of concentration with addictive interruptions and 
bite-sized stimuli – and it often does. But it’s also the case that e-readers 
make very long books much more practical: the 400-plus pages of Smith’sEye of 
the Tiger <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/eye-of-the-tiger.html> (in which, 
by the way, a killer shark is destroyed by being induced to swallow a stick of 
gelignite hidden inside the body of a Moray eel) added no weight to my Kindle.

Wilbur Smith: ‘Poor Cecil the lion was going downhill fast – that dentist 
probably did his pride a favour’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/03/wilbur-smith-cecil-the-lion-going-downhill-fast-dentist-did-pride-a-favour>
I also have technology to thank for my favourite very long discovery of the 
year – not a novel but a podcast, entitledHardcore History 
<http://www.dancarlin.com/hardcore-history-series/>, presented by an American 
former radio host named Dan Carlin. Episodes frequently run for almost four 
hours. In one sequence of shows, Carlin tells the story of the first world war, 
from a momentous shooting in Sarajevo all the way to Armistice Day. To listen 
to the whole thing at once would take just under a full day, from midnight to 
midnight. And here’s what happens during all those hours: Carlin talks. That’s 
it.

There is something almost inexpressibly appealing about this, in an era when 
almost all other content – articles, podcasts, videos, TV shows – arrives doing 
jazz hands, anxiously soliciting the reader’s or listener’s or viewer’s 
attention by means of outrageous headlines or self-conscious gimmicks, in a 
determined effort to make things seem more interesting than, on inspection, 
they turn out to be. Listening to Carlin talking about the first world war is 
compelling because the first world war is compelling, and because Carlin is an 
accomplished storyteller. The same is true of another 2015 discovery,You Must 
Remember This <http://www.vidiocy.com/you-must-remember-this/>, a podcast on 
Hollywood history expertly narrated by the film critic Karina Longworth. 
Relaxing in the safe hands of these talented talkers, I became aware of how 
much of the rest of my media-consumption time, these days, is spent braced 
against attention-grabbing gambits. I’ve developed the habit of clicking 
warily, knowing from bitter experience how often the promise made in the 
headline isn’t kept by the article, video or programme to which it leads. 
Another glorious exception to the rule is theNew York Review of Books 
<http://www.nybooks.com/>: its acres of dense text make no desperate efforts to 
lure me in, and, precisely as a consequence of this, I’m lured.

The big question: are books getting longer?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/10/are-books-getting-longer-survey-marlon-james-hanya-yanagihara>
But back to the opposite end of the highbrow/lowbrow scale: airport thrillers. 
The objection could be raised, I suppose, that they’re really just clickbait in 
book form; you read on because you need to find out if the hero, hanging by his 
fingernails to the edge of the canyon, will pull himself to safety and a slug 
of whisky – or will the gaboon adder triumph again? (The critic Miles Donald, 
reviewing another of Smith’s novels, put it perfectly: “I wanted to know what 
happened next even when I didn’t care.”) Yet even here, in works of pure 
escapism, the sheer length of the books give rise to a unity of concentration 
on the part of the reader that feels increasingly rare. Perhaps one ironic 
result of the culture of distraction and interruption will be to send us, like 
stranded hikers spotting the mountain rescue team, scrambling back to focus.

No more President Pataki
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Flonger-novels-podcasts-appealing-gaboon-adder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34517dceb830fc46c020818851ab4974a1c2c26c%2F0_53_2892_1736%2F2892.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=All-day%20podcasts%20and%20brick-sized%20books.%20Or%2C%20why%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20long%20form%20fought%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Flonger-novels-podcasts-appealing-gaboon-adder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=All-day%20podcasts%20and%20brick-sized%20books.%20Or%2C%20why%202015%20was%20the%20year%20the%20long%20form%20fought%20back&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjan%2F02%2Flonger-novels-podcasts-appealing-gaboon-adder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34517dceb830fc46c020818851ab4974a1c2c26c%2F0_53_2892_1736%2F2892.jpg>
 Who’s George Pataki, again? Photograph: John Locher/AP 
The new #NoFilter Jeb Bush: a desperate ploy to build a personality from 
scratch | Lucia Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/28/jeb-bush-nofilter-campaign-authenticity>
This week, George Pataki abandoned his campaign 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2015/12/29/george-pataki-leaves-presidential-race/?_r=0>
 for the US presidency, prompting two importantquestions: “Wait, was George 
Pataki running for president?” and, relatedly, “Who’s George Pataki, again?” 
These are inauspicious times for moderate Republicans, and the former governor 
of New York state frequently found himself polling 0% of potential primary 
voters: on graphs representing the race, his support was indistinguishable from 
the X axis. The real mystery, as ever, is not why he quit, but what keeps 
no-hope candidates going as long as they do. A shot at the vice-presidency is 
part of the answer. It can also be a route to a media career and book sales; a 
way to promote a cause; or, for younger candidates, a path to subsequent 
success. For the 70-year-old Pataki, though, it was hard not to see something 
more personal at play. Having several times flirted with running, it seemed he 
couldn’t face the rest of his life without the knowledge that, however 
comically long the odds, he’d finally tried.

Increasingly, I find this psychological lens the only bearable one through 
which to watch the race for the Republican presidential nomination. Donald 
Trump the nominee has been already been a disaster for US political debate. But 
Trump the man, driven by – well, driven by what? – remains compelling. His 
private demons are everywhere on display, as when he described Hillary 
Clinton’s bathroom break in the last Democratic debate as “disgusting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/dec/22/trump-mocks-clinton-for-taking-toilet-break-during-democratic-debate-video>
”, or speculated on her ability to “satisfy her husband 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/livewire/donald-trump-hillary-cant-satisfy-america>
”. He is, one can only assume, a deeply unhappy man, unfulfilled by wealth or 
celebrity, who hopes political triumph might finally fill the inner chasm. Then 
there’s Ben Carson, apparently both a hugely talented former neurosurgeon and, 
in several other ways, an idiot; that these might coexist in one person is 
fascinating. Rick Santorum’s rictus grin at every debate communicates undiluted 
terror. Whose voice is it, in his head, telling him he must put himself through 
such agony? Clearly, running for president is a form of therapy by other means 
for these people, and probably not a very effective one. The rest of us, 
collectively, are the therapists. We have nine more months of this. It’s a pity 
we can’t charge a fee.
 