
The Catholic church should accept married men for ordination in an effort to 
prevent the extinction of priests inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, a prominent clergyman has urged, 
amid warnings about rising rates of depression, isolation and suicide among the 
ageing priesthood.

Father Brendan Hoban, a co-founder of the Association of Catholic Priests 
(ACP), said urgent action was needed to counter the “vocations crisis”. As well 
as ordaining married men, those who had left the priesthood – sometimes to get 
married – should be invited back, and women should be ordained as deacons, he 
told the Guardian.


Married priests would be a “massive change”, he conceded. But he added: “At 
the end of the day, without the priests there is no mass, and without the mass 
there is no church. So we see in Ireland a huge eucharistic famine in a few 
years’ time.”


The number of parish priests in Ireland fell by almost 17% in the 10 years to 
2014, from 3,141 to 2,627, according to the church’s most recent statistics. 
About a quarter of the 2014 figure were thought to be retired already, and “the 
vast majority of those remaining in the priesthood are in their 60s and 70s – 
or even 80s,” said Hoban.


Compulsory celibacy is wrong and damaging for all clergy – straight or gay | 
Diarmaid MacCulloch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2012/jan/20/compulsory-celibacy-clergy-straight-gay>
A survey by the ACP in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/12/catholics-ireland-priests-allowed-married>
 found that almost nine in 10 Irish Catholics wanted priests to be allowed to 
marry. “The situation is imploding because priests as a body are getting older 
and older and there are very few priests coming after us. So people see this 
huge dilemma,” said Hoban.

Pope Francis – who is to visit Ireland in 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/pope-francis-to-visit-ireland-in-2018>
 – wasreportedly keen 
<https://cruxnow.com/analysis/2016/08/12/next-synod-likely-focus-ordaining-married-men/>
 to examine the possibility of married priests at his next synod of bishops. 
However, the Vatican announced in October that its theme would be young people 
and vocation after theissue of celibacy was voted down 
<http://www.ncregister.com/blog/edward-pentin/next-synod-will-be-on-youth-faith-and-vocational-discernment>
 by the body that decides the synod’s agenda.


In an address given in November to the ACP annual general meeting, Hoban 
warned that the priesthood in Ireland was a “lost tribe; we’ve come to the end 
of a long line”.


When he was ordained in the 1970s, he told the meeting, “parish priests took 
for granted that they were admired, respected and supported by their 
parishioners. Their words were infallible; their decisions confident and 
unquestioned … Now, we’re often pitied, patronised, reviled, insulted, 
disrespected, ignored and resented.”


At best, he added, “we’re now little more than a ceremonial presence on the 
sidelines of life”.


He said priests who “can’t wait to get off the stage” by retiring were 
manipulated into staying on beyond the age of 75 because of a lack of younger 
clergymen.


“We’re expected to work longer and harder … The effect of our increased and 
ever-increasing workload is that as we morph into sacrament-dispensing 
machines, we find pastoral work less and less satisfying.”


He went on: “With the implosion of our church, the unease and inconvenience 
and isolation of our lives, with the regrets and ambivalences that disturb our 
waking hours and with our singular lifestyles, we’re prone to depression in one 
or other of its malevolent manifestations.”


Ireland gets ready for first papal visit since 1979
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/28/ireland-gets-ready-for-first-papal-visit-since-1979>
He told the conference suicide had increased among priests in Ireland, but 
speaking to the Guardian he acknowledged that there was no firm data available.

“A lot of this is hidden. But certainly in the past number of years, there 
have been five suicides. We’ve no doubt at all that it is increasing and it 
hides a whole subculture of depression, isolation and loneliness that priests 
are now experiencing in parishes and that we ignore at our peril,” he said.


His said his speech had triggered a huge reaction from priests and the public, 
but a “very muted” response from bishops, whom he accused of at best ignoring 
the problem and at worst bullying clergymen into working longer and harder.


Since the ACP was established six years ago, it had sought “realistic and 
respectful engagement with [bishops] to discuss issues that we believe are 
really fundamental to the future of the Catholic church”. The ACP has about 
1,100 members – more than one in three priests in Ireland.

He said meetings with bishops had been friendly. But he added: “They don’t 
seem to want to talk to us very much any more. We’re very disappointed that 
they haven’t taken on board what we’re saying. They’re effectively in denial 
about the problems facing the Catholic church in Ireland.”


Celibacy rule may have contributed to child sex abuse, says Catholic church
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/12/celibacy-rule-may-have-contributed-to-child-sex-abuse-says-catholic-church>
Hoban acknowledged that the church had lost respect in society “because of 
what’s happened particularly in respect of the child sexual abuse scandals and 
the way they were handled – denials, lack of transparency and openness”.


Individual priests and some bishops continued to have good relationships with 
their parishioners but “institutional authority and respect has gone. It’s been 
a huge revolution, a huge drop in the status of the church.”


The ACP was not a trade union nor a thorn in the side of the church, Hoban 
said. “We’re loyal to the church, and loyal to Rome and loyal to our beliefs, 
but we also feel a huge responsibility to say what we think needs to be said at 
this critical juncture.”


In response to a request for comment, the Irish Catholics Bishops’ Conference 
forwarded a letter sent by Raymond Browne, the bishop of Kerry, to Hoban in 
October, which said: “The current challenging situation for the future life and 
mission of the church in this country requires that all of us work together.”


It added: “Overall, the bishops are committed to working with priests at every 
level in ensuring that we are all wholeheartedly proclaiming the gospel and 
serving the people of God.”

 