
These days it is en vogue in Washington DC to be itching for conflict with 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>. Politicians and pundits 
alike are outdoing each other for how they can describe the supposed threat 
Putin now poses to the west. To his credit, Barack Obama seems to be the only 
politician not playing into the cold war 2.0 hysteria.

In little noticed comments last week, Hillary Clinton suggested that the US 
should start preparing <https://twitter.com/mtracey/status/771418337096134656> 
“military” responses to cyber-attacks allegedly perpetrated by Russia on the 
DNC and voter registration files. And her campaign has also spent the last few 
weeks ratcheting up the fear-mongering that the Trump campaign is secretly a 
Russian plant of some sort.

Increasing military tensions with Russia is now a bipartisan issue. 
Republicans not named Donald Trumpspent much of the primary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/14/republican-presidential-candidates-would-jump-straight-into-war-with-russia-trump-carson>
 earlier this year calling for a no-fly zone – a certain path to war – in Syria 
and were perfectly willing to shoot down Russian planes over the region, 
despite the real possibility of starting world war three.

The rush to blame Russia for the DNC email hack is premature | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/russia-blame-dnc-email-hack-premature>
Meanwhile, House Democrats recently called on the FBI to “investigate” unknown 
links between the Trump campaign and Russia, seemingly unaware of the 
historical analogies (and the irony) of calling for a government investigation 
into their political enemies. Trump is a menace and a buffoon in countless 
ways, but the idea that he is secretly doing secretly Putin’s bidding is beyond 
absurd.

The media, in turn, largely seems to be eager to portray Putin 
<https://twitter.com/ggreenwald/status/757255490866933760> as a 11th 
dimensional chess grandmaster, who is behind every major world event. 
(Conspiracy theories are almost universally mocked in the US, unless they 
involve Putin and Russia – then they are encouraged.)

Even some inside the Obama administration, like defense secretary Ash Carter, 
seem open toratcheting up the tension with Russia 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/ash-carter-russia-sowing-seeds-global-instability/>
, which, by the way, the sprawling defense industry is also openly rooting for. 
The Interceptreported weapons manufacturers 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/08/19/nato-weapons-industry/> have been telling 
investors that the “new” Russian threat is great for business. (Increased cyber 
tensions, needless to say,lead to better bottom lines 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/fireeye-blames-a-friendlier-china-for-earnings-shortfall-but-others-disagree-1446762327>
 for all the cybersecurity companies that have popped up in recent years as 
well.)

Obama has been generally right about Russia for years. In a 60 Minutes 
interview last year 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/president-obama-60-minutes-syria-isis-2016-presidential-race/>
, correspondent Steve Kroft kept trying to get Obama to admit that Putin was 
asserting his dominance over the US, but as Obama calmly (and correctly) 
explained, what Russia is doing in Syria and Ukraine is not borne out of 
strength, but out of desperation. The idea of using our military purely to 
“show strength” against Russia in some sort of macho capacity may only make 
things worse.

If Russia is trying to hack America, it is not to help Donald Trump win | 
David Klion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/russia-hack-america-not-help-donald-trump-win-election>
One of Obama’s best moments during the 2012 debate was mocking Mitt Romney 
<http://observer.com/2016/09/why-obama-is-to-blame-for-russias-spywar-on-america/#.V8hjRIAToNc.twitter>
 for calling Russia the US’s “number one geopolitical foe,” quipping “the 80s 
called and wants their foreign policy back.” Yet this has now been turned into 
an attack on Obama by the very same people who seem to be almost wishing that 
Russia returns to its cold war status as Enemy No1.

The Obama administration seems intent on trying to negotiate a deal with 
Russia in Syria. Putting aside the flawed rationale for bombing Syria at all, 
this seems like the entirely logical move – yet it barely gets mentioned by the 
various parties who are currently fanning the Russia-is-the-enemy flames.

By the way, Reuters reported last week how Obama’s comments on Russia in Syria 
have been borne out by reality: Russia has realizedthat their airstrikes in 
Syria <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-russia-idUSKCN1141VN> 
aren’t having the effect they thought they would (beyond killing a lot of 
civilians).

All this is not to say that the allegations against Russia aren’t disturbing. 
And no one is saying the US should be best friends with Russia or that they 
shouldn’t be publicly criticized. If they are trying to disrupt the US election 
for whatever reason, it’s a significant story and cause for alarm for anyone 
concerned about the sanctity of our elections. But as Obama calmly stated the 
other day: “We are moving into a new area where a number of countries have 
significant capacities. And frankly we have more capacity than any other 
country, both offensively and defensively.” We know that the NSA, after all, is
authorized <https://twitter.com/Snowden/status/757618414554939393> to hack 
political parties in other countries as well.

Yet agitating for yet another foreign policy crisis and ratcheting up the 
pressure on the administration to “do something” – even if no one knows what 
that is – is only going to make things worse. The goal should be de-escalating 
the chances of a larger war, not finding ways to encourage it.
 