
Head straight for the belly of the sleeping beast. The place is deserted, 
which is a once-in-a year situation. Start at the Tower of London since so much 
else does, includingthe Wall 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/london-wall/> and therefore 
known history itself. You may have been this way before but been pushed for 
time and for space, preoccupied by whatever and generally kept at bay from the 
surroundings by their mighty cordon of noise.

But at a time when much of industry – and transactions – are happening at the 
hearth and in the kitchen, this place is taking a breather and you can almost 
feel it exhaling with the pleasant surprise of quiet and clarity. This is not 
just the baseline of a city but of the City. As a name, this is a little like a 
historically eminent football side calling itself the Team, and getting 
everyone else to refer to it that way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d0971d6dc23fcb6b6a5e7d478136b30f2aabba%2F0_728_4714_2828%2F4714.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb5d0971d6dc23fcb6b6a5e7d478136b30f2aabba%2F0_728_4714_2828%2F4714.jpg>
 The southern end of the London Wall with the Tower of London beyond. 
Photograph: Alamy 
A few paces towards the DLR station stands one of the highest remaining 
sections of the Roman wall. In such a realm of skyscrapers, its 10 metres is 
nothing, just a squat linear scrap of rubble fit to be cleared. Look a little 
closer, as you have time to do now, and you see that the stonework changes 
dramatically about four metres from the ground. It goes medieval, the rows now 
more linear and ordered.

This is an evocative monument for sure, site of the nation’s last execution by 
beheading (Lord Lovat, 1747, treason), but it is also emblematic of what 
happens throughout this walk: accretion all the way, in the highways and the 
hidden courts, the churchyards and the meeting points; ages clambering on their 
forbears; and masonry bearing out the line in Alan Bennett’s The History Boys 
about history being one bloody thing after another.

Already such a stroll on such a day is stealing the clothes of the country 
ramble in two ways. First by unfolding amid such truly monumental tranquillity; 
second by banishing distractions so that you can see some of the strata on 
which the present scene resides. If you want to stay with the line of the Wall, 
you can do so by way of Aldgate to the north, then west viaSt Botolph’s Church 
<http://www.stbotolphs.org.uk/> and the road called London Wall towards 
Cripplegate. But the idea is to go through the City’s heart while it’s not 
looking.

Left down Creechurch Lane, then right into Bury Street, and the full bulbous 
majesty of the modern City rears up at you

You’re barely under the line out of Fenchurch Street and you’re skirting 
America Square with its mighty conference centre at Number One – where else? If 
the precinct sounds new in comparison with such neighbours as the Minories 
(named after the nuns of a 13th-century order) and Crutched Friars (from 
Fratres Sanctae Crucis), this too is deceptive, as the square was built in 
about 1760 and dedicated to the American colonies.

Down Jewry Street (William the Conqueror encouraged Jewish immigration); over 
Aldgate, into Duke’s Place and past the Sir John Cass’s Foundation Primary 
School, named afterthe 17th-century merchant and philanthropist 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Cass>. Cut left down the narrow Creechurch 
Lane, then right into Bury Street, and the full bulbous majesty of the modern 
City rears up and fills almost every inch of the sky ahead. There stands 30 St 
Mary Axe, better known asthe Gherkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/10/the-gherkin-sold-joseph-safra-brazil-720-million-pounds>
, one of the many controversial bulksto have redrawn the skyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2004/oct/18/architecture.regeneration>
 in the past 20 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cff20d615ae172da01a171be383390471e7889%2F0_486_5280_3170%2F5280.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59cff20d615ae172da01a171be383390471e7889%2F0_486_5280_3170%2F5280.jpg>
 Exterior of Sir John Cass’s Foundation Primary School. Photograph: Alamy 
Sheer and shiny it may be, but this too has arisen from a point of historic 
conflict, for it stands on the ground once occupied by the Baltic Exchange and 
the Chamber of Shipping, blown up by the IRA 24 years ago. Seen from the corner 
of St Mary Axe and Leadenhall Street, with the venerable form of the St Andrew 
Undershaft church dwarfed in the foreground, the view encapsulates as 
graphically as any in the Square Mile the enforced proximity of violently 
different times and worlds: the old sanctities of faith and the towering 
proximity of wealth.

To be a pedestrian in this most peculiar corner of the kingdom is to be 
acutely aware of two completely distinct scales

Today these juxtapositions can take on the air of an old monarchy and a 
looming presidency. This particular church, whose strange name came from the 
shaft of a nearby maypole, survived not only the blitz but also theGreat Fire 
of London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/02/great-fire-of-london-website-350th-anniversary-museum-of-london>
.

The last time I walked through the City on a Christmas Day was before the 
arrival of the huge and controversial shapes of Heron Tower in Bishopsgate, 20 
Fenchurch Street (the Walkie Talkie) or 122 Leadenhall Street (the 
Cheesegrater). Conservationists may fear that all is lost, yet to be a 
pedestrian in this most peculiar corner of the kingdom is to be acutely aware 
of two completely distinct scales: the little old one of alleys with endless 
right angles, coffee shops and gentlemen’s outfitters; and the vast new one 
sculpting wild shapes in the heavens. Sometimes they seem so far apart that 
they are not even in competition.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590b2e9f381c93ff4d81edc7af07ea0a00905fa9%2F0_325_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F590b2e9f381c93ff4d81edc7af07ea0a00905fa9%2F0_325_4960_2976%2F4960.jpg>
 The Lloyds Building and the Gherkin skyscrapers are joined by construction in 
the City. Photograph: Alamy 
Head straight down Threadneedle Street, still a fine narrow valley walled by 
some of the City’s most venerable presences: theMerchant Taylors’ Hall 
<http://www.mtaylorsevents.co.uk/>, Berenberg, the world’s oldest merchant 
bank; the Bank of England itself, sitting on thousands of gold bars in its 
subterranean vaults. Catch the Bank, the hub of a six-spoked junction, in this 
rare stasis, then head straight on down Queen Victoria Street to Mansion House, 
right into Cannon Street and past St Paul’s Cathedral, 40 years in the building 
and, hard to believe, the highest in London until 1967.

Ludgate Hill, then over Farringdon Street, once a kind of boundary road 
between the old domains of wealth and the word. The Fourth Estate, as Edmund 
Burke dubbed the press in 1787, is now long gone from Fleet Street, leaving the 
thoroughfarevoid of journalists 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/fleet-street-last-reporters-leave-newspapers-home-ends-a7173921.html>
. A few doors down, to your right, is one of the best remnants of the street’s 
heyday, the old Daily Express building, at the age of just 84 a relative 
upstart among listed buildings, but preserved as one of the best examples of 
art deco architecture in London.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545f0210bb65e387da22244a348b41b9f8315ba9%2F0_209_5669_3402%2F5669.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Alone%20in%20the%20City%3A%20a%20Christmas%20Day%20walk%20around%20London&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fchristmas-day-walk-the-city-of-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F545f0210bb65e387da22244a348b41b9f8315ba9%2F0_209_5669_3402%2F5669.jpg>
 Southwark Cathedral. Photograph: Alamy 
Savour the broadening emptiness of the Strand, then swing left after Somerset 
House on to Waterloo bridge and over to the South Bank in order to head back to 
the starting point by way of Denys Lasdun’s National Theatre building, 
Shakespeare’s Globe, Southwark Cathedral and Tower bridge. That way you get to 
go parallel to the stretch through the City and catch the broad perspective of 
its restless, momentarily frozen skyline. It’s a route that country walk 
planners term circular. William Wordsworth may have been standing further up 
the river, on Westminster bridge, when he trained his nature poet’s eye on the 
townscape and declared that “all that mighty heart is lying still”, but the 
point stands, and never more so than today.
 