
Just days after Google proudly announced it had banned the morally dubious  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/11/google-ban-payday-loan-ad>payday 
loan sector from its advertising platforms, its parent company has been 
revealed to be a repeat investor in a payday loan lender.

GV, the venture-capital investment arm of Google’s parent company, Alphabet, 
has backed online lender LendUp since before its launch in 2012 and has 
provided capital for every equity round LendUp has done since, theWall Street 
Journal first reported 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/google-invests-in-payday-lender-but-could-have-to-ban-its-ads-1463650204>
.

LendUp bills itself as a “payday loan alternative”, the company promotes 
itself using phrases including “up to $250 for 30 days”, “good credit not 
required”, and “instant decision” in the manner of many other loan companies 
that make high-rate loans to people trying to make ends meet between paychecks. 
The rates LendUp charges amount to a 400% APR.

The company operates digitally, rather than out of a storefront, and has been 
the subject of enthusiastic profiles throughout the tech media, though some of 
its tactics have raised eyebrows, including itsuse of social media to determine 
creditworthiness 
<http://business.time.com/2012/11/16/can-a-payday-lending-start-up-use-facebook-to-create-a-modern-community-bank/>
.

Last week Google added payday lenders to its “dangerous products 
<https://support.google.com/adwordspolicy/answer/6014299?hl=en>” category, 
alongside guns, tobacco and explosives in a major blow to the $46bn industry.

The lenders – who generally give out small loans with extremely high interest 
rates –have been accused ofentrapping people in circles of debt 
<http://www.npr.org/2015/03/26/395421117/payday-loans-and-endless-cycles-of-debt-targeted-by-federal-watchdog>
. Google’s ban, which will go into effect on 13 July, also will apply to ads 
for loans where repayment is due within 60 days of the date of issue and loans 
with anannual percentage rate 
<http://www.consumerfinance.gov/askcfpb/44/what-is-a-credit-card-interest-rate-what-does-apr-mean.html>
 (APR) of 36% or higher.

Announcing the ban in a blogpost 
<http://googlepublicpolicy.blogspot.com/2016/05/an-update-to-our-adwords-policy-on.html>
 David Graf, Google’s director of global product policy, wrote: “This change is 
designed to protect our users from deceptive or harmful financial products ...

“According to Wade Henderson, president and CEO of The Leadership Conference 
on Civil and Human Rights, ‘This new policy addresses many of the longstanding 
concerns shared by the entire civil rights community about predatory payday 
lending. These companies have long used slick advertising and aggressive 
marketing to trap consumers into outrageously high interest loans – often those 
least able to afford it.’”


The Journal reported that LendUp’s executives had been disturbed by Google’s 
choice to ban payday lenders from its advertising services. “We do worry about 
how this will play out and think it paints with too broad a brush,” Sasha 
Orloff, LendUp’s chief executive, told the publication.

 