
This question has gained extra piquancy this week, with two investigations – 
one,Dispatches 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/the-battle-for-the-labour-party-channel-4-dispatches>
, undercover and rather underhand –into Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/momentum-media-bias-channel4-dispatches>
, the grassroots organisation that sprang up in support ofJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>. The question put, 
insistently, is: are Corbyn’s supporters real socialists or hard-left 
entryists? If we accept that some of them are real socialists, are they having 
their arms twisted by Trotskyists?

I know from the ferocity of the debate that it will be taken for insincerity 
when I say this, but nevertheless, I mean it: I find it difficult to identify 
the concrete principles that separate the acceptable socialist from the 
unacceptable outrider. Often the criteria are quite loose and temporally free 
range: you are no longer a socialist if you’ve shared a platform with a 
revolutionary, or been involved with Stop the War (the jury is still out as to 
whether going on a Stop the War march counts), or ever espoused anything other 
than parliamentary democracy, even if it was the 90s and you were drunk.

Proxy issues – usually Trident and Palestine – are used as tests of the 
boundary between socialism and radicalism, even though neither issue could be 
rationally situated on the left or right, one being fundamentally a 
techno-military question of what modern warfare will look like, the other a 
foreign policy matter in which the supposedly “lefter” side has plenty of 
support among conservatives. There is nothing unsocialist – indeed, nothing 
more socialist – than to have been involved in theminers’ strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/miners-strike-1984-85>, yet if it put you 
in contact with theAlliance for Worker’s Liberty 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Alliance_for_Workers%27_Liberty>, which it 
probably did, that made you a communist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4988c7e3e6abac7850d89ce939ba9b16ce8b814f%2F0_111_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4988c7e3e6abac7850d89ce939ba9b16ce8b814f%2F0_111_3333_2000%2F3333.jpg>
 ‘In the early part of this decade, Ed Miliband called himself a socialist.’ 
Photograph: Oli Scarff/AFP/Getty Images 
There is a school of thought that says, just as George Osborne would never 
call himself a free-market fundamentalist, rather, a man of good sense, so a 
socialist shouldn’t wrestle too much with self-definition. Yet I have the 
feeling, in the absence of clarity, of a taboo closing in, so that one day soon 
we will wake up unable to remember whether socialism is an acceptable position 
at all, or whether it opens you up for some abstruse historical reason to the 
accusation of “palling around with terrorists”.

It is helpful to return to the pre-Corbyn consensus, by which I mean, any time 
up to last September; how could you describe yourself, before you made Andrew 
Neil even redder, or Evan Davis’s eyebrows shoot up, or in some other way put 
yourself beyond the pale of common sense?

You were a socialist if you believed in nationalising industries and/or 
utilities, if you believed in raising wages through collective pay bargaining 
rather than post-hoc redistribution, if you cleaved to a fair day’s pay for a 
fair day’s work – a living wage. Free healthcare at the point of use is 
properly understood as a socialist principle, and is described as such by 
American commentators, but has never counted because British opinion is united 
in support of it: a tacit understanding of our politics is that once something 
has majority support, it ceases to be socialistic – it’s an OK position so long 
as it remains niche, and it is easier to turn a blind eye to the socialism 
inherent in a popular position than it is to admit that socialism is often 
popular.

Likewise, a belief in equality has now reached the status of platitude, with 
politicians from every party espousing it, whereas in fact, it remains 
socialist rather than capitalist: only a creed that considers equality an 
actionable goal, rather than a utopian idea you scramble towards by giving 
extra nursery hours to insufficiently aspirational toddlers, can realistically 
claim to believe in it.

In the early part of this decade, Ed Miliband called himself a socialist 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/labour/10325076/Ed-Miliband-Im-bringing-socialism-back-to-Britain.html>
, without much catcalling.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be858ab7ea50cf377e3db7b99a73d2d51c3a1b8%2F0_129_3000_2311%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5be858ab7ea50cf377e3db7b99a73d2d51c3a1b8%2F0_129_3000_2311%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘If you wanted to sound like a West Wing leftie you would call yourself a 
liberal egalitarian.’ Photograph: NBCUPhotobank/Rex Features 
Those who wanted to signal their discontinuity with the Blair years, while not 
sounding too radical, would call themselves democratic socialists – that is, 
they believed in socialism but were happy to trust a sensible, non-socialist 
majority to democratically overrule them.

If you wanted to sound like a West Wing leftie – like a British leftie, only 
better looking, wearing cashmere, more likely to win, and even losing, less 
likely to be a crank – you would call yourself a liberal egalitarian.

There were questions to which Miliband-style socialism had no answers: it was 
not against private property, indeed, socialism has never been rigid on this 
point. So if you saw the growth of a landlord class and the return to a rentier 
society as the inevitable result of housing being priced as an asset (exchange 
value) rather than a necessity (use value), that would put you in Marxist 
territory, whereupon you would have to park a perfectly demonstrable economic 
theory while you quickly apologised for gulags.

It is fascinating, to me at least, to see a younger generation on the left 
reclaim “communism” – now in the shape of fully-automated luxury communism, 
which fuses the aims of egalitarianism with the inevitability of a robotised 
future. Lefties over 40 will never call themselves communists because the 
inevitable conversation about whether or not Stalin was evil is just too 
tedious. It is a glimpse of what it feels like to be seen, if a Muslim, as an 
apologist for Isis, but only a glimpse.

How did my communist family get it so wrong? Because politics was their 
religion | Martin Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/22/communist-family-politics-religion>
To get to the fundamental distinctions between socialism and communism, 
without going via Stalin, Mao and Kim Jong-un, it is useful to return to the 
source of both terms – Paris in the 1830s – when secret political societies 
sprang up to finish what the revolution had left undone. These groups were 
mainly discursive, though occasionally spilled out into street protest, 
dismissed at the time – this will be familiar – as mainly middle-class 
intellectuals. It’s a bizarre and, even more bizarrely, effective rightwing 
accusation: “Your movement is stupid because its proponents are too clever.”

It was often hard to disentangle one belief from the other since the words 
waxed and waned in popularity, were often used interchangeably, and both 
believed in revolution. However, very broadly, the socialists wanted central 
direction of industry but weren’t opposed to markets, while communists wanted 
to see an end of markets and money, with all endeavour freely chosen and paid 
for by coupon. Socialists weren’t against private property, though they were in 
favour of the common ownership of goods, and obviously there’s space in there 
to quibble about what can and can’t be legitimately held in common.

Communists believed in universal free education, and so did some socialists. 
There were societies fusing socialism and communism that preached class war, on 
the basis that the aristocracy was a cancer on the body politic and as 
dangerous to man as was the tiger to other animals; and thought, furthermore, 
the aristocracy of money was as bad as the aristocracy of blood.

However, by a process of self-sorting and vigorous infighting, the communists 
ended up the more trenchant on this killing-enemies point, while socialism by 
the mid-1800s was shot through with a much softer vision, in which science and 
the best of humanity would unite to create paradise on Earth through peaceful 
means. The ComteanPositivist Religion of Humanity 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwiP1eulnp7PAhUFKMAKHUgIDsEQFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FReligion_of_Humanity&usg=AFQjCNEnbSxwEGFC-DMZcZyk88I_4mftfw&sig2=8znHLCbiDJ5X7huLZoNONg>
, resting on the twin blessings of brotherly love and the natural goodness of 
mankind, was probably what finally did it for the socialists’ allegiance with 
the communists, who found them saccharine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ec0718786a741ccd5f2fa1d8fc2bf407dc3c1b%2F0_278_1661_1352%2F1661.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20socialist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fam-i-socialist-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24ec0718786a741ccd5f2fa1d8fc2bf407dc3c1b%2F0_278_1661_1352%2F1661.jpg>
 ‘Karl Marx would roll in his grave.’ Photograph: Popperfoto 
To put that in perspective, even by 1846, the first two items on the agenda of 
theCommunist Correspondence Committee 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1847/communist-league/1846let1.htm>
 were: “1. An examination must be made of the Communist party. 2. This can be 
achieved by criticising the incompetent and separating them from the sources of 
money.” If you know you’re a socialist because it takes a lot of evenings, you 
know you’re communist when you hate the other people at your meeting worse than 
the devil (this is no longer the case with fully automated luxury communists, 
FYI).

Just as a new technological context has allowed a generation to re-imagine 
communism, so the tectonic movements in democracy, energy, climate, land, 
finance, money and work throw up questions to which the socialism of the 1830s, 
1930s or 1980s could not possibly have the answers. How do you reconnect a 
socialist party to a grassroots movement in the absence of mass trade union 
membership? How do you bring energy back into common ownership? Is there any 
point in nationalising fossil fuels, or is the right to a common stake in a 
viable future more important? (In that case, only renewables are socialist). 
How do you arrest the concentration of land into the hands of the few, when 
it’s moving so fast? Is profit un-socialist by definition, or is it the 
legitimate result of a good decision, so long as the investment is accessible 
and pro-social? Indeed, is finance inherently capitalistic or can it be 
democratised and thereby socialised? (Mark Davis at the Bauman Institute 
releasesa report on this on Thursday 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/financial-innovation-today-towards-economic-resilience-tickets-27525888674>
).

Of course 'socialism' was most-searched term of 2015: its ideas fit our times 
| Kshama Sawant
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/19/socialism-definition-most-searched-word-of-2015>
Come to that, now we understand money as a social resource – a marker of trust 
between people and institutions, with no innate value – should we socialise its 
creation? How do you build solidarity that doesn’t rely on work or a workplace? 
Probably the only solid socialist answer to any of these questions is that it’s 
within the wit of science and the innate goodness of the species to figure them 
all out. There are certainly no fixed lines, here, no spaces where a classic 
socialist could not possibly be flexible to the demands of the future, where a 
would-be socialist finds him or herself confronted with an idée fixe. Marx 
would roll in his grave.

You could question the value in using old principles to solve new problems: I 
would counter that those principles – common ownership, equality, fellowship, 
innovation, a belief that everyone’s welfare is everyone else’s business and 
that a better future for the next generation is thesine qua non 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sine_qua_non> – are universal and need no 
updating, for all that they don’t point in one obvious direction.

Finally, you could argue about the wisdom of returning to an old term when it 
risks derailing the quest for new answers. Yet the stigma around it is lifting. 
In the 90s and noughties, it was a shorthand for a person who didn’t understand 
modernity and couldn’t find political energy with a canary and a pit helmet. 
The fact that it’s being reclaimed, with pride, is probably the beginning of a 
very short answer: if you can ask, “Am I a socialist?” and not mind getting a 
“Yes”, then you probably are one, or at the very least, know some.
 