
We all fear it, being a hipster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2014/jun/22/end-of-the-hipster-flat-caps-and-beards>
. A malignant diagnosis. Type the words into Google with that punch-sink 
feeling in your stomach, with your heart racing, sweat beading, with tattoos of 
anchors spreading up your forearms like a pox: “Am … I … a … hipster?” Once you 
are, there is no going back. Once hipsterdom embraces you or you embrace it, 
that’s you done: not one weekend of your life will ever not be spent “just 
popping in” to vintage stores, and you will never be able to resistpulled pork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/wordofmouth/2013/jan/31/how-to-cook-perfect-pulled-pork>
 on a pub menu again. Buy a USB record player and accept your fate. Buy a 
single cactus and display it in an artisan cactus holder. Mine is an enamel mug 
repurposed to hold a fistful of cactus soil and a single succulent. I paid £8 
for this enamel mug. I paid £3 for the succulent itself. And for what? For what?

The hipster is dead. Long live the hipster
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/oct/03/hipster-social-phenomenon-commercial-success>
Are you a hipster? That is not for you to decide. Being a hipster is sort of 
like a nickname: it is chosen for you, thrust and ordained upon you, eclipses 
your true identity slowly, death by a thousand cuts. One does not go overnight 
to “Gaz” from “Gary”. One does not simply wake up with a handlebar moustache 
and a job as London’s most furious bike courier.

I suppose at this point it’s important to classify what a hipster actually is, 
because it’s a nuanced and multi-level thing, and essentially there are certain 
symptoms it is safe to ignore and certain ones it is not, and because there are 
no qualified doctors in this particular area it’s hard to know what is and 
isn’t hipstery. Thus:

1. You have a lot of plaid shirts and you have bought an indie CD in the last 
two years

You are not a hipster this time. You did not win. You have three plaid shirts 
and anArcade Fire <https://www.theguardian.com/music/arcadefire> album: so does 
everyone. So does everyone on earth. You are not a hipster. You are just a 
normal person. It’s fine.

2. You seem to find yourself spending two to three hours every Saturday and 
Sunday just wandering through Urban Outfitters, idly touching the T-shirts, 
reading the thick, padded books about “how to smoke the ultimate rack of ribs, 
bro” or “Journalling For Beginners”; you think really hard about buying a mug 
that says “UNT” on it and has a coloured-in handle; you think about buying a 
reclaimed wax jacket; you spend £12 on a three-pack of dotted socks; you wonder 
where the time went – time is a black hole here in Urban Outfitters; a girl 
with a septum piercing is asking you to leave, please, you have been stood 
listening to the same Elliott Smith album for three hours on the shop-soiled 
headphones. “Please leave, sir or madam, we need to lock up the shop.”

You’re not a hipster but you’re veering there. You’re asleep at the wheel and 
your car is ploughing over the bumps in the road, and if you do not start and 
get back on the motorway then you are going to crash leg-breakingly into 
hipsterhood, and no emergency service can help you.

3. You just went to Beyond Retro and bought a pair of tweed trousers that 
don’t quite fit you but they’re a one-off so you’re going to have to just make 
do, aren’t you, because this pattern of trouser just isn’t going to come up 
again, and also they have four holes in them but you could always patch them 
up, and they have a smell, a bizarre scent, something between mustiness and 
that dusty smell of death, like a house that was lived in by an expired nan 
some years before – this is what the trousers smell like, and also the trousers 
costs £36, somehow.

Yes, you are a hipster. The hipness might not have consumed your entire body 
yet, but this is the infection point from when it all starts. That’s how 
hipsterness gets you: an abscess that leaks into your blood. Look at me: I move 
pretty much in hipster circles – I live somewhere between north and east 
London, I am pretty sure I know whata flat white 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/jan/05/what-is-a-flat-white-starbucks>
 is, I ride a bicycle, I mean I literally work forVice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/vice-media> magazine – and spend a lot of my 
weekends at vintage shops looking at the people who buzz around there, 
wondering how they happened. How do you work your way up to wearing a fine fox 
fur, tweed trousers, a fitted blouse, tiger-print bandana, the word “MIXOLOGY” 
painted on your face in oil paint, and a culturally appropriative vintage 
bindi? You can’t just buy that all at once and go, “Huh, this is me now. This 
is what I wear. These are my outfits.” You need to work your way up to that. 
And look at you: standing in line, your soiled trousers folded neatly beneath 
your arm, watching as the boy behind the counter somehow manages to vape 
through a cigarette holder, thinking about where to get brunch: you’re on a 
slippery slope, my friend. A slippery slope towards hipstery.

4. You’re in a band called Hearts of The Lost and Damned or Sir Chris Hoylent 
Green; your only album is on cassette tape; you have a side hustle with your 
friend who insists their name is DOMIQUÉ where you sit in a park with a 
typewriter making up haikus for passersby and charging them £6 per poem; you 
are “thinking really hard about moving to New York, actually”; you rent a 
single room in a warehouse; you only watch Girls ironically – you only do 
anything ironically; your parents have stopped calling you after that weekend 
you went home and tried to explain to your dad what your job was; you have a 
longstanding issue with a particular megacorporation; you thinkGlastonbury 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/glastonbury> has sold out; you have a 
favourite emoji, you think having a favourite emoji is lame, your favourite 
emoji is not a frequently used emoji – it’s like one of a fax machine or 
something; one of your friends has a tattoo gun; you and your ex had to divide 
the good Dalston nightclubs in the split and they got Alibi so essentially 
that’s you fucked now; you spent a whole Sunday afternoon decanting all of your 
dried goods into various kilner jars but you forgot to actually label them so 
now you keep having disasters where you confuse chia seeds and peppercorns; you 
once paid £250 for a lamp …

Yes, you are a hipster. You are possibly the hippest person alive.

Six things hipsters have ruined
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/aug/02/six-things-hipsters-have-ruined>
Thing is, we fear being labelled a “hipster” in the same way we fear being 
labelled “basic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/23/basic-insult-kate-moss-lil-wayne-sylvia-plath>
” – opposite ends of the same spectrum, with humans in the middle, naturally 
erring one way or another. Being scared of being a hipster is an essential fear 
that enough people like the things you like that it suddenly renders you 
un-unique and your liking of the things insincere, because everyone likes them, 
making you the same as everyone. That all the little whirring quirks and 
oddities that make you you are actually just broadly daubed brushstrokes with 
the hipster pen. Do you really like that trucker hat? Or are you just a 
hipster? What about small batch cupcakes? Do you even actually like them? It’s 
hard to even know any more. Your preferences and motivations are lost to the 
dreaded h-word. Your identity grows obscured by a trendy beard.

It’s easy to boil hipsters down to those same few tropes – ironic T-shirts, 
lens-less glasses, craft beer, adult colouring books, etc – but essentially it 
all comes down to a far more basic feature: Morrissey-level sincerity in 
everything you do.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ee9c2d7f5a89ed3e1b0ac96b423dd944336f0e%2F0_10_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20hipster%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Joel%20Golby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20hipster%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Joel%20Golby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7ee9c2d7f5a89ed3e1b0ac96b423dd944336f0e%2F0_10_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 ‘Queue up outside the cereal cafe and take some deep breaths’ Photograph: 
LNP/Rex/Shutterstock 
Nobody wants to be accused of being Morrissey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/morrissey>, do they? And so nobody wants to 
be accused of being a hipster. But if you are – if you recognise yourself or 
facets of what you might be on the list above – shh, shh, stop worrying. Go to 
the nearest burger place that does American beer and deep fried pickles, and 
calm yourself with a side of mac and cheese. Queue up outsidethe cereal cafe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/15/cereal-killer-cafe-gentrification-media-hipster-brothers>
 and take some deep breaths. It’s not the end of the world. It just means you 
care slightly more about the American Apparel basics range than anyone else.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb55166045c06dd93f5e79f68390b7f0f6cd15ef%2F0_164_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20hipster%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Joel%20Golby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20hipster%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Joel%20Golby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fam-i-a-hipster-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb55166045c06dd93f5e79f68390b7f0f6cd15ef%2F0_164_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A participant in Berlin’s hipster Olympics. Photograph: Adam Berry/Getty Images 