
Paranoia 
<http://mind.org.uk/information-support/types-of-mental-health-problems/paranoia/#.V6CYgTYrJyo>
 is the erroneous idea that people are targeting you for harm. We don’t talk 
about it nearly enough, but every day each of us must decide whether or not to 
trust other people. There’s no way around these decisions: they’re an 
inevitable part of life. Real threats do exist, so not to consider risks would 
be naive. The difficulty is that we seldom know what another person is actually 
thinking, least of all when we are the topic. It is easy to misread the 
intentions of others. But when we are overly suspicious, too mistrustful, then 
we are advancing along the paranoia spectrum.

It is increasingly being accepted that paranoid thoughts are much more 
widespread than previously thought

There are daily reminders that the modern world is dangerous: news bulletins, 
CCTV cameras, and public security announcements are just several of many 
constant reminders to be wary. But paranoia has always been with us. Francis 
Bacon, the Renaissance philosopher, captured the danger of tilting our 
worldview to the mistrustful: “Suspicions amongst thoughts are like bats 
amongst birds – they ever fly by twilight. Certainly they are to be repressed, 
or, at the least, well guarded. For they cloud the mind, they lose friends, and 
they check with business, whereby business cannot go on currently and 
constantly. They dispose kings to tyranny, husbands to jealousy, wise men to 
irresolution and melancholy.”

Excessive mistrust ends in the psychologically painful position of isolation; 
Graham Greene, in The Ministry of Fear, describes how, “it is impossible to go 
through life without trust: that is to be imprisoned in the worst cell of all, 
oneself.”

You’re not the only one
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0844af0932c92b2090c19348e0b824127d90f4c%2F0_29_5142_3084%2F5142.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0844af0932c92b2090c19348e0b824127d90f4c%2F0_29_5142_3084%2F5142.jpg>
 ‘Many people have a few paranoid thoughts, and a few people have many paranoid 
thoughts.’ Photograph: Martin Lof/Getty Images/amana images RM 
No one who is troubled by unfounded suspicions need feel ashamed or 
embarrassed: most of us, at some point in our lives, will experience them. (You 
can readvivid accounts here <http://www.paranoidthoughts.com/accounts.php>).

A major UK mental health survey 
<http://natcen.ac.uk/our-research/research/adult-psychiatric-morbidity-survey/> 
in 2007found <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20735884> that almost one in 
five respondents felt that people were against them. Some 8% of those 
questioned reported feeling as though people were deliberately trying to harm 
them or their interests. And 2% suspected that a group of people was plotting 
to cause them serious harm or injury. Self-report surveys cannot distinguish 
between mistrustful misinterpretations and actual experiences of hostility (or 
the substantial hazy ground between).

I battled my anxiety by making people laugh. Funnily enough, it works | Naomi 
Petersen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/02/battled-anxiety-making-people-laugh-comedy-edinburgh-naomi-peterson>
So virtual reality was used to present members of the public with exactly the 
same computer simulations of social situations. The computer characters were 
programmed to behave neutrally, but, nonetheless, one in three people perceived 
hostility from the avatars. Those reporting paranoia about the avatars were 
also reporting such fears in daily life. The evidence is clear: many people 
have a few paranoid thoughts, and a few people have many paranoid thoughts.

Paranoia carries a confusing array of meanings. Hippocrates (born about the 
year 460BC) is credited with coining the word. He used the term – combining the 
Greek words for “beside” (para) and “mind” (nous) to create a word meaning “out 
of one’s mind” – to describe the delirious ramblings during a fever. In 
everyday conversation, paranoia is sometimes used to refer to any fear, 
including about a partner’s potential infidelity. Excessivejealousy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2013/nov/01/jealousy-genes> is a form 
of mistrust but in psychiatry it is not labelled as paranoia. What is typically 
missing is the key element that the partner is deliberately trying to cause 
harm.

Why people get paranoid
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10259fdfa4bc45aafd471954b831f86383f63400%2F0_275_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10259fdfa4bc45aafd471954b831f86383f63400%2F0_275_4287_2572%2F4287.jpg>
 ‘Poor sleep exacerbates anxious and fearful emotions.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Recent studies in the field have meant a transformation in the understanding 
of paranoia. It is clear thatmultiple, interacting causes are at work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/01/paranoia-hallucinations-grandiose-delusions-schizophrenia-environment-genes>
. Nature and nurture are equally important. Little is known about the 
individual genes linked to paranoia, but environmental risks have been 
identified. For example, paranoia is more likely to occur if others have 
actually been bad to you, andcannabis use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/jul/16/cannabis-paranoia-psychoactive-thc-mood>
 can be one contributory factor for vulnerable individuals.

The psychological state of the individual in which paranoia thrives is 
well-established. Paranoia feeds on the feelings of vulnerability created by 
low self-esteem. A tendency to worry brings fearful but implausible ideas to 
mind. Poor sleep exacerbates anxious and fearful emotions, and a range of 
subtle perceptual disturbances are easily misinterpreted as signs of danger 
from the outside world. Reasoning biases such as jumping to conclusions, 
failing to consider alternative explanations, and focusing only on events that 
seem to confirm the paranoid thought, lock fears into place. The use of 
defensive countermeasures – such as avoiding feared situations – means that we 
don’t get to learn that things are actually OK.

Reducing paranoid thoughts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6167502c0f48066dbb2a47e6eddef546e1b8da0%2F0_157_2150_1290%2F2150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa6167502c0f48066dbb2a47e6eddef546e1b8da0%2F0_157_2150_1290%2F2150.jpg>
 ‘Re-evaluate the initial fears, perhaps with feedback from trusted friends.’ 
Photograph: David Hanover/Tony Stone 
At the heart of paranoia is the mistaken idea of a current threat. To overcome 
it, we need to relearn that we are safe, that things are all right. For some 
people, it is enough to re-evaluate the initial fears, perhaps with feedback 
from trusted friends. The strongest learning comes from direct experience: 
going into the feared (but safe) situations to find out that nothing untoward 
occurs. Once we know that paranoia is a poor guide, it becomes easier to 
dismiss.

A sense of trust is more likely to take hold if the key psychological factors 
have been tackled; paranoid thoughts are, for example, much less likely when we 
are feeling self-confident, spending less time engaged in worrying, sleeping 
well, and are immersed in meaningful activity. Sometimes it is necessary to 
find ways to prevent past bad experience clouding the view of the present.

When paranoia is particularly severe – when we believe the fears strongly, are 
significantly distressed, and they impact on our lives – then professional help 
can be needed.Cognitive behavioural therapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/mar/08/cognitive-behavioural-therapy>
 (CBT) specifically tailored for paranoia can be helpful, while antipsychotic 
medication is typically prescribed for severe paranoia in the context of 
psychiatric diagnoses such as schizophrenia.

The questions to ask yourself
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc6312d04e4e10c7030d1d0bc155f8ce028c8ae9%2F0_227_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20just%20paranoid%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Daniel%20Freeman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fgoogle-autocomplete-paranoid-help%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc6312d04e4e10c7030d1d0bc155f8ce028c8ae9%2F0_227_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘We are beginning to not only Google paranoia but to talk about it.’ 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
If you’re struggling to decide whether your suspicious thoughts are justified, 
you should ask yourself these 10 questions:

1. Would other people think my suspicions are realistic?

2. What would my best friend say?

3. Have I talked to others about my worries?

4. Is it possible that I have been oversensitive and exaggerated the threat?

5. Is there any indisputable evidence for my suspicions?

6. Are my worries based on ambiguous events?

7. Are my worries based on my feelings rather than indisputable evidence?

8. Is it very likely that I would be singled out above anyone else?

9. Is there any evidence that runs contrary to my suspicions?

10. Do my suspicions persist despite reassurance from others that they are 
unfounded?

The probability that your fears are unrealistic increases the more you feel 
that: no one else fully shares your suspicions; there is no indisputable 
evidence to support your worries; there is evidence against your suspicions; it 
is unlikely that you would be singled out; your fears persist despite 
reassurance from others; and your fears are based on feelings and ambiguous 
events.

It is increasingly being accepted that paranoid thoughts are much more 
widespread than previously thought. The stigma attached to them has begun to 
lessen. Encouragingly, we are beginning to not only Google paranoia but to talk 
about it. This openness is likely to help us to take a calm, measured, and 
judicious approach to balancing appropriately our levels of trust and mistrust.
 