
There’s a short answer and a long answer to this. The short: if you’re of a 
certain age (generally 40-58, average 51 in the UK) and you’ve not had a period 
for 12 months or more, then you’ve reachedmenopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/i-am-menopausal-but-having-great-sex-with-my-ex-husband-mariella-frostrup>
, which is technically a retrospective diagnosis of your last menstrual period.

‘I’m menopausal, having great sex with my ex-husband – and confused’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/18/i-am-menopausal-but-having-great-sex-with-my-ex-husband-mariella-frostrup>
The longer? Well, “menopausal” can also encompass the build-up (or 
perimenopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/jul/09/healthandwellbeing.health>
), which can last up to four years, and the aftermath (generally another four 
years or so – though in extreme cases a decade or more). It’s not always easy 
to define where to draw the line of entry into the menopausal state. There are 
lists – long lists – of symptoms to look out for, but not every woman will 
experience every one, and they can come and go, just to add to any confusion. 
But take your pick fromhot flushes, night sweats, thinning hair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/11/jeanette-winterson-can-you-stop-the-menopause>
 (in places where you actually want hair) and sprouting hairs (in places where 
you generally don’t), mood swings, moustaches, weight gain, fatigue, loss of 
libido, memory loss, aches and pains …

The perimenopause might almost be a dress rehearsal, a chance to experience 
the joys (I use the term loosely) while coming to terms with everything that 
menopause means in terms of womanhood, fertility and ageing. Like many, I had 
somewhat glibly dismissed it simply as “the bit before”, underplaying something 
that can truly take over your life for years on end. Nonetheless, I confess 
that I had given it little thought, and my in-depth scientific research (or, at 
least, a poll of friends on WhatsApp) suggested I was not alone. 

And yet now the perimenopause is upon me, it appears that I might have been a 
little hasty in writing it off as something and nothing. Especially the nothing 
bit. True, there’s not been a doctor’s visit in years that hasn’t involved a 
less than subtle scrutiny, and an “ah yes, perimenopausal” verdict, though what 
relevance this might have to a request for a typhoid vaccine is hard to say. 
But it still took me completely by surprise.

Maybe because, in my head, I’m still 35 (tops). Maybe because the menopause is 
so much the end of an era – so farewell, then fertility, take my youthful 
dreams and see if I care – that it’s simpler to remain firmly in denial. Or 
perhaps it’s because up to this point there had been no physical signs to 
herald this, the surest sign of middle age.

I hadn’t heard about the magnet that you clip into your pants to keep the 
boiling sweats of hot flushes at bay

So I found it all too easy to keep my head buried in the sand and skip along 
as if I had the hormones of a 20-year-old. Until the night, on holiday, that I 
woke up glowing like theReady Brek <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6c3n-mh5bck>
 kid, despite the fact that the air conditioning kept our room slightly cooler 
than the average fridge. Two nights of melting from the inside out, and then a 
break long enough to lull me into a false sense of security before it started 
all over again.

For many women, dealing with flushes is one of the major challenges of 
menopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/15/what-science-doesnt-know-about-the-menopause-what-its-for-how-to-treat-it>
. I knew about fans, of course, and black cohosh and the various other 
suggested remedies for combating the all-encompassing heat. I hadn’t heard 
about the magnet that you clip into your pants to keep the boiling sweats at 
bay. I imagined some teeny, tiny thing rather than what looks startlingly an 
enormous sparkly fridge magnet that you keep fastened in the front of your 
underwear by a (marginally) smaller sparkly fridge magnet. Long tops can be 
useful to hide them.

It’s still early days, so the jury is out on how effective it actually is. But 
a word of warning for anyone who is tempted to follow suit: don’t stand too 
close to a kitchen cabinet with a metal handle. (I was welded there for a 
moment). Or a giant stapler in the office (a friend). Another acquaintance 
walked around with a teaspoon stuck to her belly all day. “I’m assuming, since 
nobody mentioned it, they all thought it was a fashion choice.” Perhaps another 
reason to stick to the long tops. Oh, and it’s probably wise to steer clear of 
induction hobs while you’re at it.

Health: Perimenopause
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2002/jul/09/healthandwellbeing.health>
Another thing to be wary of is a premature conclusion that your periods have 
actually stopped. Indeed, they might have gone awol for months on end, but then 
Aunt Flo can come a-calling without so much as a flowery notelet to warn you of 
her impending visit. And she’s back with a vengeance. As one friend mourned: 
“That was the end of my favourite trousers.”

Perimenopause is generally a gradual process that takes you into a fully 
menopausal state. But don’t underestimate its potency or effects. No one is 
pretending it’s going to be a barrel of laughs – but it’s not necessarily just 
doom and gloom.

In the words of someone who’s very recently been there: “It takes a bit of 
getting used to and you do get forgetful and angry and wider, but it’s not so 
bad in the winter months as the hot flushes keep you warm. Once you are through 
it (and try not to kill anyone) and start HRT you will feel like you again, but 
a better you.”
 