
If you’re asking this question, you’re probably also wondering if 
perfectionism can ever be a good thing.

Perfectionists are those who strive for flawlessness, for a perfect creation, 
outcome or performance. They set excessively high standards. They’re harshly 
critical in their evaluations both of themselves and of others, and they’re 
highly concerned about the way others evaluate them and their work. They find 
compromise challenging – either something is done to their own high and 
exacting prescription or it’s regarded as a total failure. They find it 
difficult to delegate, even if that means neglecting their health, 
relationships and wellbeing in pursuit of a “perfect” outcome. They also find 
it difficult to forget about a past mistake or a situation in which they feel 
they failed – and as a result, they’re often plagued by feelings of guilt and 
regret.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4fa1ad25473de162a8b4a06708a0182e3f53ea%2F0_401_2430_1457%2F2430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4fa1ad25473de162a8b4a06708a0182e3f53ea%2F0_401_2430_1457%2F2430.jpg>
 Pablo Picasso. Photograph: AFP 
Perfectionism has long been considered an important personality trait. It’s 
one of over 4,000 personality-descriptive adjectives that Gordon Allport 
collected in 1936. It’s included as one of the 16 personality factors that 
Raymond Cattell <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/16PF_Questionnaire> later 
distilled from Allport’s list in 1949. TheEnneagram 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Enneagram_of_Personality>, a description of nine 
basic personality types created by Oscar Ichazo in the 1960s, lists 
perfectionism as one descriptor for Type One Personality, the “Reformer”. You 
can even find perfectionism within the most widely accepted formulation of 
personality traits we use today, known as the “Big 5 
<https://www.verywell.com/the-big-five-personality-dimensions-2795422>”. This 
list – developed during the 1980s and 1990s by Robert McCrae, Paul Costa and a 
number of others – describes personality using five broad traits, extraversion, 
agreeableness, conscientiousness, neuroticism and openness to experience. 
Perfectionism lies at one end of the conscientiousness continuum.

Perfectionism has been subdivided 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/dont-delay/200804/what-flavor-perfectionist-are-you-it-matters>
 into three types by Paul Hewitt and Gordon Flett. These are: the socially 
prescribed perfectionist, the other-oriented perfectionist, and the 
self-oriented perfectionist. The main characteristic of socially prescribed 
perfectionists is that they believe others will like them only if they come 
across as perfect. Other-oriented perfectionists demand the highest from other 
people, whereas self-oriented perfectionists demand only the very best of 
themselves. These subdivisions will become important when we consider whether 
it can ever be a good thing to be a perfectionist.

Am I going to die? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Phil Daoust
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/am-i-going-to-die-autocomplete-question>
A number of well-tested perfectionism scales have been devised – for example, 
theFrost multidimensional perfectionism scale 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/236260156_Frost_Multidimensional_Perfectionism_Scale>
, themultidimensional perfectionism scale 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/science/humanbody/mind/surveys/perfectionism/>, and the 
almost perfect scale-revised 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/232453592_The_Revised_Almost_Perfect_Scale>
. However, if you simply want to get a rough idea of whether you’re a 
perfectionist and if so, whether you’re a mild or a more extreme example, there 
are any number of quizzes you can find online to help you.

Once you’ve determined whether you really are a perfectionist, you may wish to 
consider whether this is a good thing. If you’re a socially prescribed or 
other-oriented perfectionist – that is, if your standards are either dictated 
by others or you impose them on others – then I can tell you straight away that 
it’s not. Research, particularly studies conducted by Hewitt and Flett, have 
shown that socially prescribed perfectionism is associated with higher rates of 
depression, and other-oriented perfectionism is linked to difficulty sustaining 
relationships.

When, however, we turn to self-oriented perfectionism, things become less 
clear-cut. Some studies have found an association between this sort of 
perfectionism and various mental health problems – depression, anxiety and 
eating disorders in particular. However, ina study carried out by Prem Fry 
<http://hpq.sagepub.com/content/14/4/513.abstract> and colleagues in which they 
assessed levels of perfectionism in 450 older adults (over 65 years of age) and 
followed them for six and a half years, there were conflicting results. 
Individuals who scored high on perfectionism had on average a 51% greater risk 
of dying than those who scored low – unless, that is, the individual was 
suffering from a chronic disorder such as diabetes. For these individuals, high 
scores on perfectionism were associated with a longer lifespan. The researchers 
suggest that if people have a disease that requires careful monitoring and 
regular medication, perfectionism may help because they are more likely to 
comply with treatment and as a result, remain healthier for longer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4519f043d761a2ef68485020db9f1a2639b92800%2F0_59_3692_2216%2F3692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4519f043d761a2ef68485020db9f1a2639b92800%2F0_59_3692_2216%2F3692.jpg>
 Mahatma Gandhi. Photograph: Hulton Getty 
When you consider whether or not it’s a good thing to be a perfectionist, you 
also have to take into account your priorities. If happiness and strong 
positive relationships are important to you, then perfectionism is probably not 
going to help you lead what for you is a meaningful life.

If on the other hand, you believe you have a special talent or outstanding 
ability and you’re determined to fulfil your potential, then it will probably 
help – although you may often feel lonely and unhappy as a result. In his 
fascinating bookCreating Minds 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/294036.Creating_Minds>, Howard Gardner 
examined the personalities of seven creative geniuses – Freud, Picasso, 
Einstein, Stravinsky, TS Eliot, Martha Graham and Mahatma Gandhi. He found them 
all to be intensely dedicated to their particular area of expertise. All made 
incredible demands on themselves, working long hours until they produced what 
they regarded as an acceptable result. They were often described as loners, so 
absorbed in their work that they frequently neglected other aspects of their 
lives, particularly their relationships.

Creative genius, it seems, comes at a high price.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ee90077a0ae7341a49b6bdfb937f37c508cb9c6%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6ee90077a0ae7341a49b6bdfb937f37c508cb9c6%2F0_0_1920_1152%2F1920.jpg>
 Sigmund Freud Photograph: Imagno/Getty Images 
Let’s say, then, that you now know you’re a perfectionist. You’ve weighed up 
the costs and benefits, and you’ve decided that you wish to rid yourself of 
this characteristic. How do you go about it?


Start by changing your focus, and think “process” not “outcome”. In other 
words, remember to focus on what you’re doing right now whenever you can, 
instead of what you might eventually achieve.

You would also be wise to start practising mindfulness, meditation, yoga or 
t’ai chi. These disciplines will help you focus on the present, without passing 
judgment or evaluating what you notice now in terms of the past or the future. 
Regular practice will help you let go of guilt and regret as well – after all, 
there’s no point in feeling bad about things you can no longer change. Instead 
of allowing guilt or regret to make you feel helpless or unworthy, think how 
past mistakes can help you behave and think more adaptively from now on.

Next, practise thinking more flexibly. Whenever you catch yourself thinking in 
black/white, either/or terms, stop. Reach for a pen and paper. Write down at 
least three additional ways to describe the person or outcome you’re thinking 
about, or three more ways to achieve the goal you’ve just set for yourself. 
Start using words like “alternatives”, “possibilities”, “sometimes”, 
“occasionally” and “compromise”.

Whenever you hear yourself saying you “should” do something, take note. 
“Should” implies obligation. It means you’re trying to please someone other 
than yourself, or trying to live up to (usually rigid) pre-determined 
standards. Listen out instead for phrases like “I’d love to”, or find ways to 
turn the “shoulds” into something more enjoyable. When you’re doing what you 
love, you’ll feel happier and more engaged in the present moment. You’ll also 
feel more fulfilled in the long run.

Finally, try to become aware of the words you use when you evaluate yourself 
and others. Whenever possible, exchange negative words for more positive terms, 
or at least choose something softer. The words we use make a powerful 
difference to the way we feel, both about our accomplishments and about our 
self-worth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00ccf01e71fa735fa4cae494be3293fa1acecc1c%2F0_745_2984_1790%2F2984.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20perfectionist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Linda%20Blair&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Fam-i-a-perfectionist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00ccf01e71fa735fa4cae494be3293fa1acecc1c%2F0_745_2984_1790%2F2984.jpg>
 TS Eliot. Photograph: Express/Getty Images  