
“Toxic” is a potent word. It sounds like something dangerous dripping in a 
lab. By definition, to be toxic is to have the ability to cause harm, and it’s 
a term we often ascribe to human behaviour. We all have the ability to cause 
harm to each other; tangible and abstract, visible and invisible. But what 
makes a person toxic? A flesh-and-bones poison?

We could say that it’s acts of abuse, bigotry, bitching, spitefulness, 
selfishness, lying,gaslighting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/the-archers-domestic-abuse-gaslighting-sanity-abusive-relationship>
 or an absence of empathy: all types of behaviour that cause pain. More 
generally, a person’s apparent poisoning of “everything they touch” – their 
romantic relationships, friendships, work relationships – in a way they don’t 
seem to understand.

The Archers domestic abuse is classic ‘gaslighting’ – very real, little 
understood | Jay Watts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/05/the-archers-domestic-abuse-gaslighting-sanity-abusive-relationship>
To consider someone to be toxic seems to imply there is some fundamental 
glitch in their emotional matrix, that in place of their heart is a lump of
polonium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/06/alexander-litvinenko-and-the-most-radioactive-towel-in-history>
. A common kneejerk reaction might be to think that, if someone feels the need 
to ask if they’re toxic, they probably are. But let’s not be so quick to judge.

We’re consumed with the concept of human toxicity in today’s society: toxic 
relationships, toxic friendships, toxic masculinity, toxic bosses, toxic 
colleagues, toxic energy. But despite the proliferation of the word and the 
number of “tests” on the internet to tell you whether you are – or someone you 
know is – toxic, it’s worth considering the following.

First: any “Answer these 10 questions to find out if you’re a toxic person 
<http://www.talentedladiesclub.com/all-help/10-giveaway-signs-toxic-person-handle/>
!” quiz may claim to enlighten you – but “toxic” is neither a personality type 
or a diagnosis.

And second: in order to understand and evaluate our own behaviour, it’s 
important to consider how we interpret the behaviour of others. So, if I am 
wondering whether I am a toxic person, I need to ask myself: “What does 
toxicity look like to me?”

Making any interpretation of behaviour means, by virtue of being a human being 
with a wildly complex brain, automatically bringing ourselves into the 
equation. Our belief systems about what are and aren’t good ways to act are 
indiscernible, shape-shifting helixes informed by genetics and life experience. 
If a friend has done something that has upset me, that upset is as much about 
me as it is them. That isn’t to say my emotion is not real or valid, or that 
the person in question should take my hurt any less seriously. Rather, it is 
acknowledging that at the very heart of any matters psychological, we are 
dealing with perceptions. Two sets of values colliding.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c250f722431bad300c7abe35b3b6e33973b155f%2F0_132_3384_2031%2F3384.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c250f722431bad300c7abe35b3b6e33973b155f%2F0_132_3384_2031%2F3384.jpg>
 ‘Childhood experiences of distress and fear as a result of neglect or abuse 
are very common in people with personality disorders.’ Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP
Often, when hurt, we can assume people perceive things the way we do. Looking 
at the US election is a good example. People of a certain mindset – considering 
inhumane any person or system that favours the undermining of minorities to 
upgrade life for the majority – hope that others feel the same. Sometimes that 
hope gives way to assumption. So many assumed Donald Trump’s flagrant spectrum 
of discrimination would be a barrier to him ever becoming president. Ismocking 
disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-appears-to-mock-disabled-reporter-video>
 at campaign rallies a toxic thing to do? Do not the allegations made by 
several women thatTrump sexually assaulted them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-tenth-woman-accuser>
 give the man even the vaguest whiff of toxicity? What about being racist? The 
answers will depend on who you ask and what their own belief system tells them 
is right and just.More than 59 million voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/globalization-trump-inequality-thomas-piketty>
 in the US didn’t seem to think so.

In our day-to-day lives, how we attach meaning to others’ or our own behaviour 
can be explained byattribution theory 
<http://www.simplypsychology.org/attribution-theory.html>. Broadly speaking, 
this aspect of social psychology suggests that the attributions we make about 
people’s behaviour can be classified as either internal or external.

If I make an internal attribution, I believe that a person’s behaviour is down 
to their traits, intentions or abilities, without considering context. For 
example, if a driver cuts me up on my bike, I might think: “Ugh, selfish dick. 
What a terrible driver.” I might not consider why they cut me up. I’ve 
automatically gone to “selfish dick” zone, very quickly attributing someone’s 
behaviour in one space, at one time, to who they are fundamentally as a person.

An external attribution means I understand a person’s behaviour to be a 
product of context, so, this driver may have had to swerve due to my own 
position on the road, or may not have had enough room to manoeuvre because of 
the position of other cars.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3c337417deca1856123fdea1ff0cffc4b9e00a%2F34_826_3924_2354%2F3924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b3c337417deca1856123fdea1ff0cffc4b9e00a%2F34_826_3924_2354%2F3924.jpg>
 ‘If a driver cuts me up on my bike, I might automatically go to ‘selfish dick’ 
zone.’ Photograph: Wanda McCrae/Alamy 
In psychoanalysis it is believed that, in order to deal with conflict, the ego 
has a range of defence mechanisms. These operate on an unconscious level and 
help us feel better about ourselves. One of those mechanisms is projection, 
which is when a person attributes their own thoughts and feelings on to others. 
For instance, you might have an anger management problem, but your superego 
tells you that kind of anger isn’t a good trait to have, and you “solve” the 
problem by believing that everyone around you is angry. As my dad used to say 
to me: “If you think everyone is an arsehole, it’s you that’s the arsehole.”

By asking Google whether I am toxic, I am likely to be trying to make sense of 
a pattern of difficult interactions. Maybe I feel that everyone is angry or 
upset with me all the time. Maybe I have noticed that I argue with people a lot 
or can’t hold down a relationship with a partner. Maybe I’ve been told that I’m 
toxic. However, there is no rulebook for emotional behaviour. We can only judge 
our actions based on the impact they have on others.

Our mental health affects how we think, perceive, feel or relate to others, 
and there are conditions that can have a significant impact on our ability to 
do that. Personality disorders are often characterised by a person’s odd, 
destructive behaviour that can be distressing and upsetting to those around 
them. It’s thought thatone in 20 people in the UK 
<http://www.rcpsych.ac.uk/healthadvice/problemsdisorders/personalitydisorder.aspx>
 has a personality disorder and there are several types, usually grouped into 
clusters.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89c36bacf9c2c2370bc57a4ebc1588d0b6a7484b%2F0_109_5687_3413%2F5687.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20toxic%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Eleanor%20Morgan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fam-i-a-toxic-person-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F89c36bacf9c2c2370bc57a4ebc1588d0b6a7484b%2F0_109_5687_3413%2F5687.jpg>
 ‘A common kneejerk reaction might be to think that, if someone feels the need 
to ask if they’re toxic, they probably are. But let’s not be so quick to 
judge.’ Photograph: Design Pics Inc/Rex 
Someone with borderline personality disorder may be emotionally unstable and 
have very intense, short-lived relationships. A person with antisocial 
personality disorder may bully others they see as vulnerable and show no 
remorse for their actions. Unfortunately, these conditions are not well 
understood, and are often misdiagnosed. In such cases, a person’s behaviour is 
liable to be misconstrued. Furthermore, childhood experiences of distress and 
fear as a result of neglect or abuse are very common in people with personality 
disorders. Most models of psychology will agree that negative behaviours are 
coming from a place of pain.

There is much to consider when we try to pick apart “bad” human behaviour – 
including our own. When looking inwards, perhaps a better question to ask would 
be: “Am I aware?” Am I aware of how I make people feel? Am I aware of how I act?

With awareness comes options. If my human connections are problematic, it 
would be an act of both self-kindness and selflessness to talk to someone to 
try to identify the patterns. In doing so, I may be able to work out ways that 
I can mend connections, or indeed start to make them.
 