
The beginning of being a good person is the knowledge that you may not be, or 
that you have acted as a bad one would. After that it gets complicated.

The most obvious complication, perhaps, is that there is no agreement on what 
constitutes a good person. In fact there’s no agreement on whether we should 
even agree who a good person is. In some extreme forms of theoretical 
individualism, the only judge of whether you are good is you yourself: cheating 
on your taxes, being Donald Trump, writing comments on news sites – whatever’s 
right for you. In practice, however, no one ever really believes this. Even the 
sociopath cares for the opinion of others. It’s just that the tribute he wants 
from them is awe and devotion rather than love and respect.

But before we even get to the question of what would make a good person, there 
is a basic difficulty with our inquiry: if we ask ourselves, the answer we get 
will probably be tainted with lies. Even when we know we have done wrong, our 
minds set at work to scrub the knowledge out. A rather elegant studyrecently 
published in PNAS <http://www.pnas.org/content/113/22/6166.full> showed that we 
have difficulties even forming memories of the times we have behaved 
unethically, and if they ever are formed, they disintegrate faster than other 
ones. And this is a truth that was known long before lab science, by anyone who 
studies human nature, from St Augustine to Jane Austen.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-president-heaven-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20jokes%20that%20good%20presidency%20may%20be%20his%20only%20ticket%20to%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-president-heaven-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20jokes%20that%20good%20presidency%20may%20be%20his%20only%20ticket%20to%20heaven%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-president-heaven-video&media=>
Trump jokes that good presidency may be his only ticket to heaven 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/11/donald-trump-president-heaven-video>
This isn’t an insurmountable obstacle, but any project of self-knowledge has 
to take into account what a hard and largely unrewarding prospect it is. The 
alternatives, however, are worse. And it is always possible that at the end of 
our explorations we discover that we were not, after all, wholly intolerable 
and disgusting but just possibly good enough.

What would it mean to be good enough? Good enough at what?

Am I going to hell? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Andrew Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/13/am-i-going-to-hell-pain-suffering-justice>
Very roughly speaking there are three big ideas about how we could measure 
goodness: it could be a matter of following the right rules; it could be a 
matter of cultivating the right virtues; it might be something that was judged 
by success: did I leave the world a better place? All of these have been held 
to be self-evident in some cultures, and ludicrous in others. In practice, any 
judgment will have elements of all three, but one of them will be treated as 
predominant.

Our own culture now mostly takes consequentialism for granted. In that scheme, 
being a good person means that you had a good effect on the world. So you can 
answer the question by totting up all the good you did, balancing it against 
the bad things you have such a hard time remembering, and seeing how the 
register comes out. This is problematic for two reasons. The first is the 
element of luck. People with power seem more morally significant, and capable 
of being better, under these rules because they can change the world more. 
Conversely, the wholly powerless – babies, very old people, or severely 
disabled people – would seem morally insignificant because they can’t do 
anything. There’s also the problem of how you measure the good done in the 
world. Socrates thought that it was part of virtue to harm your enemies and 
other bad people. Jesus disagreed. Which scale do you want to measure yourself 
against?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fam-i-good-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e2cd6743e0c3e184ef776d01fc1eaa00863ded%2F0_47_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20good%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Andrew%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fam-i-good-person-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20good%20person%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Andrew%20Brown&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fam-i-good-person-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc0e2cd6743e0c3e184ef776d01fc1eaa00863ded%2F0_47_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 The Book of Job, dating from the 11th century. Photograph: Alamy 
Virtue ethics gets round the first objection (and in this light, Christianity 
is a kind of virtue ethics, since the command is to love God and neighbour 
before you follow any particular rules). What matters is not whether you won or 
lost, but how you played the game. The price you pay for this is tragedy. You 
have to acknowledge that really good people will lose and suffer horribly, or 
even devote their goodness to wicked causes. This seems to me a gain in realism 
rather than cheerfulness. In the Old Testament, Job was a good man andlook what 
happened to him 
<https://www.lds.org/manual/old-testament-stories/chapter-46-job?lang=eng>. 
Satan got to take away his health, his family and everything he owned.

Job, however, is not held up as a virtuous man, who cultivated courage, or 
temperance, or justice, so much as one who followed the rules. He did what God 
commanded, and what society expected. Leaving, if you like, God out of it, 
that’s how most people most of the time have always lived, and had to do. You 
do what’s expected and expect the reward of good behaviour. Then you die, and 
never realise that in a couple of hundred years, society will have moved on, 
and some of the things you took for granted are regarded as monstrous crimes.

The only certain thing about this question is that if you’ve never thought to 
ask it, the answer has to be “no”.
 