
Natasha Walter <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/natashawalter>: Ask 
yourself some questions about what you do

I like to take an open view of this question. If you believe in equality 
between men and women, then, as far as I’m concerned, you’re a feminist. But 
whatever the reason that you felt you had to ask this question, it’s likely 
that as soon as you did so you started to wonder what kind of feminist you are.

If you thought the Labour party was split, wait till you’ve cut yourself on 
some of the schisms in the women’s movement. In the 1980s we got angry with one 
another about some hard questions. Is Margaret Thatcher a feminist?Are 
heterosexual women sleeping with the enemy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/jan/30/women-gayrights>? Is 
pornography always violence against women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/apr/15/gender.politicsphilosophyandsociety>
?

The questions haven’t got any less tough, though they have shifted. Is Theresa 
May a feminist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/14/theresa-may-women-tory-feminist-equality-immigration>
? Is it biological sex or gender identity that defines women? Is prostitution 
always violence against women? And nobody’s ever quite decided whether men 
should be allowed in the room while we’re arguing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23297744eefe21f2710702e8b69601a7f20dd359%2F0_15_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23297744eefe21f2710702e8b69601a7f20dd359%2F0_15_5568_3342%2F5568.jpg>
 ‘You don’t need everyone in agreement to fight for equality. The suffrage 
movement split, but they still got the vote.’ Photograph: Heritage Image 
Partnership Ltd/Alamy 
The buying and selling of feminism – What would a feminist do?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/audio/2016/oct/03/the-buying-and-selling-of-feminism-what-would-a-feminist-do>
But here’s the thing to remember: you don’t need to get everyone in agreement 
to get on with the vital business of fighting for equality. The suffrage 
movement split, but they still got the vote. So even when you are fiercely 
angry with your fellow feminists, keep the real enemy, the patriarchy, in mind.

Because it’s important to talk the talk, but if you are a feminist you will 
also want to walk the walk. I’ve found my own relationship with the women’s 
movement so much more straightforward now that I work every day in an area – 
with refugee women – where we can focus on action rather than theory.

So if you want to know if you are a feminist, try asking yourselves some 
questions about what you do – in your work, in your home, in your everyday 
life. Do you support women rather than pull them down, do you refuse to judge 
women – including yourself – on the absurd standards of hypersexual femininity, 
do you speak out against violence against women, do you support victims of male 
violence, do you listen to women less privileged than you are, and talk to 
women from different backgrounds and ethnicities about what they want from 
equality, do you buy dolls for your son or encourage your daughter to be strong 
and fierce? Yes? Then you’re a feminist.

We can chat about the other questions a bit later, maybe over wine, and 
definitely not on Twitter.

Lola Okolosie <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lola-okolosie>: Sexist 
thinking forms the fabric of our daily lives

Would you like, to quote black feminist bell hooks, to “end sexism, sexist 
exploitation and oppression”? Do you want to redress the imbalance of power 
that runs along gender lines? Are you up for wrestling gender equality from 
those who would rather evade the issue by pretending there isn’t a problem? If 
your answer is yes to all of the above, you could easily be mistaken for a 
feminist.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb05e4f07c8c659025bc29d2f747c3573a35d943%2F0_63_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb05e4f07c8c659025bc29d2f747c3573a35d943%2F0_63_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 ‘Men and women can be guilty of sexist thinking and behaviour because it forms 
the fabric of our daily lives.’ Photograph: Ben Cawthra/REX/Shutterstock 
And before the exasperated harrumphing, that does not mean a feminist wants to 
wage an all-out offensive on men. That “you hate men” shtick is really only 
another way of getting us to focus our discussion on, you guessed it, men. Men 
and women can be guilty of sexist thinking and behaviour because it forms the 
fabric of our daily lives. Feminists have, in fact, been at the vanguard of 
examining what men lose as a result of living in a society that confers them so 
much power by virtue of their maleness. It is a dominance that as constraining 
as it is intoxicating.

Being a feminist is not believing your particular struggles as a woman are the 
struggles of all women. All women do not experience life in the same way. And 
anyway, as black feminists have been saying since the dawn of feminism, that 
kind of universalising talk only serves to marginalise anyone who differs from 
the white norm.

A feminist is committed to understanding and working with women whose 
struggles are impacted by a range of social categories from age to sexuality, 
class to nationality, race to ability. Feminists understand this is difficult 
work. The payoff is the wonderful women we meet on the way.

Kate Maltby <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kate-maltby>: You don’t have 
to be a lesbian, or burn your bra

You’re looking for a quiz, aren’t you? That’s what Google thinks: the question 
“am I a feminist?” takes you to a smorgasbord of Buzzfeed and Huffpo quizzes.

But if anyone tells you they can calculate your feminist quotient with a 
quickfire round of questions on trans issues, sex-worker rights and abortion, 
they’ll probably leave you more confused. Well-intentioned, self-described 
feminists frequently disagree about all three. For feminism’s enemies, the very 
diversity of feminist thought is a sign of weakness, proof of intellectual 
inconsistency. Instead, it should be celebrated as a strength.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1c766e503a260b9a7cdeb025453e3b1619165c%2F0_321_5070_3042%2F5070.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c1c766e503a260b9a7cdeb025453e3b1619165c%2F0_321_5070_3042%2F5070.jpg>
 ‘Do you look at the world and ask why more women than men become stay-at-home 
parents? Then you’re a feminist.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Try seeing feminism as a series of challenges to be solved. Do you think 
there’s a link between biological sex and structural inequality? Then you’re a 
feminist. Do you look at the world and ask why more young men are committing 
suicide, or why more women than men become stay-at-home parents? Then you’re a 
feminist.

Feminism <https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> isn’t an economic policy 
manifesto, it’s a system of critique. Self-declared feminists have never agreed 
on all the answers to the world’s problems. But they share an understanding of 
what those problems are.

So you don’t have to be a lesbian, or burn your bra. You don’t even have to be 
a socialist, despite a long tradition of lefty men who’ll tell you otherwise – 
starting withCharles Fourier 
<http://www.newworldencyclopedia.org/entry/Charles_Fourier>, the Frenchman who 
coined the term “feminism” in 1837. (Conversely, some of us believe that modern 
capitalism has lifted more women out of poverty than it’s hurt, although 
admittedly this doesn’t make us popular.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa88bc6043bb295c7d2f72042f9f8954fd6d03727%2F0_101_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Am%20I%20a%20feminist%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Natasha%20Walter%2C%20Lola%20Okolosie%20and%20Kate%20Maltby&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fam-i-a-feminist-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa88bc6043bb295c7d2f72042f9f8954fd6d03727%2F0_101_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 ‘One stereotype is true. Feminist are angry. We’re not satisfied with the 
world as it is.’ A Femen activist is detained by police in 2012 during a 
protest against Islamic regimes supported by the Olympic committee. Photograph: 
Tal Cohen/EPA 
One stereotype is true. Feminists are angry. We’re not satisfied with the 
world as it is. We don’t believe that sexism is a thing of the past, or that 
millennia of gender-based oppression have been erased in a century of slow 
progress. So look around at the experiences of men, women, or anyone who 
rejects simple definitions of either. If what you see makes you angry, you’re a 
feminist.

• You can comment on this article and others on our Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/your-opinions-are-you-a-feminist-join-us-to-discuss-this-and-more>
, which opens every Wednesday at 10am
 