
Those who can’t rule today try to rule yesterday. This week’s demand by 
Labour’s Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/31/orgreave-inquiry-burnham-accuses-rudd-of-nakedly-political-act-video>
 for a show trial of police tactics at the battle of Orgreave, 32 years 
ago, was a piece of pure politics. His rebuff by the home secretary, 
Amber Rudd, was proportionate and wholly reasonable.

We know what happened at Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/01/what-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
. The police reaction to the miners’ union picketing was excessive. But this 
fact has been examined, fought over and iconised for decades.To equate it with 
Hillsborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
 or Bloody Sunday is an offence to those who died in those tragedies. There 
were no deaths at Orgreave. There was violence on both sides. But the arrested 
miners were tried and acquitted. That some suffered through being bailed is 
sadly true of thousands of innocent citizens every year.

Why does Burnham suddenly want an inquiry into Orgreave? Back in 2005 he was a 
junior minister at the very Home Office he now wants to put on trial. There was 
no inquiry then. Could it be that Burnham was part of Tony Blair’s New Labour 
establishment, eager to forget the taint of Scargillism, whereashe now wants to 
be mayor of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
?

Orgreave was miserable for those involved, but pit closures are history. The 
miners were victims of that history, as were workers at the same time in 
dockyards, steel foundries and newspapers. Protest was understandable and 
probably inevitable. But does Burnham really want to go back to subsidising 
dirty coal? Public policy – and resources – should surely go into helping the 
stranded, demoralised communities left behind. Buy jobs, not lawyers. Who will 
invest in these places if they continue picking at old sores? This was a third 
of a century ago.

We’ve had Alder Hey (1999), Climbié (2001) and Soham (2004). What good did 
they do?

Public inquiry has become a catch-all salve to any political embarrassment or 
lingering grievance. No one asks if it really delivers “justice”, which is 
strictly a job for the courts. No one asks the opportunity cost. No one doubted 
thatwhat happened in Derry on Bloody Sunday in 1972 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/feb/01/derry-bloody-sunday-1972> 
was a ghastly mistake. The 12 years and £179m spent re-investigating it by Lord 
Saville would surely have been better spent compensating victims’ families and 
on wider community rebuilding. As for the three inquiries into the1989 
Hillsborough football disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/apr/26/hillsborough-disaster-deadly-mistakes-and-lies-that-lasted-decades>
, they have still not laid it to rest, with calls for yet more 
criminal investigations.

The supposition that a drawn-out “judicial” inquiry is somehow macho 
accountability is bizarre. The brisk inquiries familiar in the 1950s and 1960s 
lasted on average three months. By the 1990s this had tripled to 10 months. The
1992 Scott inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/nov/17/archive-1992-scott-inquiry-arms-iraq>
 drooled over a relatively trivial issue of arms for Iraq for four years, to no 
particular end.Franks on the Falklands 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/bbc_parliament/3631505.stm> took six 
months in 1982. By this year, Chilcot on Iraq had taken seven years and £10m.

The current inquiry into child sex abuse has become an industry, a parody of 
the genre. We have had inquiries into the inadequacies of the child care system 
for decades. There has been Cleveland (1987), North Wales (1996), Alder Hey 
(1999), Victoria Climbié (2001) and Soham (2004), among many others. What good 
did they do, that we need yet another?

We do not know if this abuse inquiry, under Professor Alexis Jay 
<https://www.iicsa.org.uk/about-us/who-we-are/professor-alexis-jay-obe>, is to 
be a court hearing of a number of elderly men or an encyclopaedia of past 
maladministration. All we know is that it has spawned 13 sub-inquiries, 180 
staff and a battery of victim lobbyists. Meanwhile, victims’ hopes of 
compensation are inflated – and postponed – as lawyers pump up each line of 
inquiry and costs soar. Is it really sensible to starve a desperately 
under-resourced care service for this circus?

It seems no longer to matter how long these inquiries take. Politicians and 
officials alike have a vested interest in distancing themselves from publicity 
and blame. Accountability postponed is accountability denied. Public inquiries 
have become a cynical appendix of modern government, like honours, tsars and 
special advisers.

Inquiries should be for specific system failure, like investigating a 
political scandal or a dreadful accident. They used to be incisive exposures, 
as of theProfumo affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/apr/10/past.derekbrown>, the Aberfan 
disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/oct/09/aberfan-50-years-owen-sheers-the-green-hollow-film-poem>
, theBrixton riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/apr/02/brixton-riots-anniversary> 
and the death ofStephen Lawrence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/lawrence>, 
where no other mechanism seemed appropriate. Such a case today might be the 
collapse of audit and regulation in the BHS/Philip Green affair. All we got was 
an abusive torrent from the prime minister and MPs alike.

Meanwhile, there has been no inquiry into the Bank of England’s handling of 
the 2008/9 crash, or the chaotic state of NHS finances, or allegations of
bribery by Rolls-Royce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/rolls-royce-middlemen-may-have-used-bribes-to-land-major-contracts>
 and BAE. Inquiries into project cost-concealment, as with the Olympics legacy, 
HS2 or Hinkley Point, must presumably await the retirement of the politicians 
concerned.

Orgreave was part of the class war that ended with 96 dead at Hillsborough | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/orgreave-class-war-96-dead-hillsborough-amber-rudd-inquiry>
Public inquiries have assumed from parliament the job of debating public 
policy. As such they upstage both the House of Commons and the investigative 
functions of select committee. They anaesthetise controversy, lancing some 
political boil by removing it from the theatre of parliament. But they have 
come to seem more like kangaroo courts, with the voices of victims loudest, and 
little attempt to balance blame. Chilcot lost credibility by being absurdly 
indulgent of Downing Street officials. Leveson sought to chain the press, yet 
let the police and BBC off the hook.

Inquiries are always bidden to “learn lessons”. A few do, such as Scarman on 
riot policing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/1999/feb/17/guardiansocietysupplement4>, 
but most tell us little more than we already know: that public services operate 
under stress, must take risks and can sometimes fail. Inquiries seldom 
acknowledge risk, because risk is not a concept known to law.

Trial and error is part of the relationship between ministers and officials. 
It is a trial and error that should be vulnerable to constant scrutiny by 
parliament, the courts and the media, not delegated to some passing judge. As 
for the past, there should be some statute of limitation. History is for 
historians. I cannot believe Tony Blair’s “apologies” for slavery and the Irish 
famine were about “justice”, or made anyone feel better, except him.

The poet George Santayana warned us not to not forget history, lest we repeat 
it. But harbouring old grievances blights too many societies around the world. 
Sometimes we should put our faith in the future and move on. More misery is 
caused by those who cannot forget the past than by those who cannot remember it.
 