
I have driven by many roadside zoos in my time, but have never stopped at one. 
It seemed unlikely they could be any less depressing than a conventional zoo – 
in fact, it seemed likely that they could be even more depressing.

Roadside zoos generally provide less enrichment for the animals and less 
education for their public. While conventional zoos have moved to enclosures 
for animals for at least part of the day, animals at some roadside zoos can 
spend their entire lives in a cage. The difference between the two is not 
euphemistic. At a roadside zoo, a single chimpanzee might live its entire life 
behind bars on concrete. Half a dozen wolves pace a cage smaller than a studio 
apartment. Tigers might appear to be surrounded by trees, but there are no 
trees in their cages – they are only a backdrop used to trick the tourist into 
thinking that the animals live out their lives in a space that is as wooded and 
lush as the one the tourists are visiting. Roadside zoos are, in many ways, the 
way conventional zoos used to be before zoo visitors demanded more.

US government cracks down on letting zoo visitors play with lion and tiger cubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/us-government-cracks-down-zoo-lion-tiger-cubs>
In 2012, a group of organizations – the Humane Society of the United States, 
World Wildlife Fund, Detroit Zoological Society, International Fund for Animal 
Welfare, Born Free USA, Big Cat Rescue, Fund for Animals and Global Federation 
of Animal Sanctuaries –filed a legal petition with the US government to 
prohibit public contact with big cats, bears and non-human primates 
<http://www.ifaw.org/sites/default/files/default/APHIS-2012-0107-0001.pdf>. 
Earlier this year, the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) finallyresponded 
with guidance about that makes it clear that exhibitors violate the Animal 
Welfare Act 
<http://www.humanesociety.org/news/press_releases/2016/04/usda-tiger-cub-abuse-roadside-zoos-040416.html>
 by allowing members of the public to handle or feed infant exotic cats like 
tigers, lions, cheetahs, jaguars or leopards. But these groups believe further 
action beyond just “guidance” is necessary.

You might have thought that bottle feeding bears, cuddling chimpanzees and 
swimming with tigers are not things you would be allowed to do, even if you 
wanted to. But at least 75 roadside zoos in the US sell interactions with 
dangerous animals, such as tigers, lions, primates and bears.

This information comes from a report put together earlier this year by myself 
and my colleagues at New York University for the Humane Society. The report – 
which is not publicly available – summarized roadside zoos that offered 
interactions with dangerous animals. Searching both online text and images, we 
found 77 distinct facilities that allow human interactions with endangered 
wildlife. Florida alone has 15 roadside zoos that offer these interactions, 
while California has a dozen. While federal laws regulate animal exhibition 
facilities, state and local laws dictate whether individuals can possess 
dangerous animals. So, I decided to visit one of the more notorious roadside 
zoos that sells these interactions with dangerous animals.

When I arrived, I was asked if I was part of an animal activist group, and was 
warned to not “talk about in person, internet, mail, fax or in any way” about 
the visit, and to not record video or audio. Is there another family activity 
that refuses these basic vacation rights? (I can’t say which zoo because I 
signed the nondisclosure agreement sent to me as a condition of my visit. An 
NDA is required for all visitors.)

In exchange for abiding by the NDA, roadside zoos and their visitors do not 
need to abide by other rules common at conventional zoos. The main difference, 
of course, is the possibility to interact with animals, including dangerous 
ones. Visitors to roadside zoos want to be free – to feed, to hold, to snuggle, 
to smile for $100 photograph – but not free enough to get hurt, so the babies 
of dangerous animals are the moneymakers. At an Idaho roadside zoo,visitors pay 
$45 to bottle feed baby bears 
<http://yellowstonebearworld.com/experiences/bottle-feeding>. At a roadside zoo 
in South Carolina, visitors can“cuddle up and get hands on with a baby tiger 
and a young ape while they sit on [their] lap”. 
<https://www.myrtlebeachsafari.com/preservation-station.php> 

What about swimming? A roadside zoo charges $200 to swim with baby tigers 
<http://dadecityswildthings.com/swims/>. Even without the swim component, the 
Humane Society estimates that a single baby tiger can bring in $65,000 in one 
summer (assuming 30 photo sessions at $50 per photo and five private 
interactive sessions at $300 per day, as was documented at one roadside zoo in 
Virginia). Often, the money is in photographs of the tourists interacting with 
those baby animals, the preservation of the experience being at least as 
important as the experience itself.

Bad things can happen to humans at zoos, and roadside zoos are no exception. 
In 2009,a jaguar at a roadside zoo in Maryland attacked a worker and bit her 
face and torso 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/crime/mauling-escapes-and-abuse-6-small-zoos-80-sick-or-dead-animals/2015/09/18/dff46f10-2581-11e5-b77f-eb13a215f593_story.html>
. In 2015,a black bear in Florida mauled a woman 
<http://www.orlandosentinel.com/news/breaking-news/os-ap-bear-attack-dade-city-20150124-story.html>
.

But life for the zoo animals is arguably more dangerous. The Animal Welfare 
Act is the federal law that is supposed to protect these animals from poor 
living conditions, except that it is too weak and infrequently enforced, with 
inspectors usually visiting facilities once a year. The law also does not 
extend to all animals – reptiles are exempt, for instance, which explains the 
reviewer who reported that you can pay $5 at a roadside zoo in Floridato get a 
photograph with a small alligator with its mouth taped shut 
<https://www.yelp.com/biz/big-cat-habitat-and-gulf-coast-sanctuary-sarasota?start=20>
.

Although government inspections of roadside zoos are rare and the database of 
the inspection reports is not easy to search 
<https://acis.aphis.edc.usda.gov/ords/f?p=116:1:0>, the evidence suggests 
widespread negligence and cruelty. A 2014 report from a roadside zoo in 
Arkansas documented a spider monkey that lost the tips of its fingers and 
several baboons that lost the ends of their tails, reportedly from frostbite. 
These sorts of reports seem less about documenting enforcement than about 
formalizing a record of complacency.

Grittier, long term investigations have been done by civil society groups like 
the Humane Society, which is probably why some roadside zoos, like the one I 
visited, have become wary of visitors who are sympathetic toward the animal 
cause. In 2014, the society placed an undercover worker at Tiger Safari in 
Tuttle, Oklahoma – one of the roadside zoos that offers interactions with 
dangerous animals,including tiger feedings at birthday parties 
<http://www.tigersafari.us/birthdays.asp>. A white tiger, Maximus, was born at 
Tiger Safari that spring. He was quickly taken from his mother and his three 
littermates were sent to another roadside zoo in South Carolina. When Maximus 
was three weeks old he became a photo opportunity. According to the Humane 
Society’s report,when he would not cooperate, the white tiger was “punched, 
slapped, dragged, choked, suspended by his legs and tail and tossed into his 
cage and onto the laps of patrons 
<http://www.humanesociety.org/news/press_releases/2015/01/ok-va-exotics-investigation-012215.html>
”. Just a year and a half later, in 2016, Maximus died. According to Tiger 
Safari,he choked on a deer bone 
<http://www.chickashanews.com/news/humane-society-criticizes-tiger-safari-after-death-of-tiger-cub/article_7b01670e-c91c-11e5-9056-a7c5aff34cf8.html>
.

Should zoos be banned? | Alison Benjamin and Toby Moses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/01/should-zoos-be-banned-head-to-head>
It is clear that roadside zoos need a major overhaul if they are going to 
reflect the broader social values about animals in captivity. The Barnum & 
Bailey Circus recentlyannounced the end of elephants in their shows 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/05/01/us/ringling-bros-elephants-last-show/> and 
SeaWorld isnow phasing out the use of captive orca whales in performances 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/money/2016/03/17/seaworld-orcas-killer-whales/81900498/>
. Today’s public is too educated about animal behavior to enjoy watching 
animals perform and also to enjoy feeding desperate babies.

That is why one of the first steps to improving roadside zoos is to ban 
dangerous interactions at the federal level. These would make these animals 
less valuable and therefore less likely to be bred, mistreated and 
commoditized. There is currently a petition under evaluation by the government 
to amend the Animal Welfare Act Regulations andprohibit public contact with big 
cats, bears and primates of any age 
<https://www.federalregister.gov/articles/2016/06/24/2016-14976/petition-to-amend-animal-welfare-act-regulations-to-prohibit-public-contact-with-big-cats-bears-and>
.

Contrary to how it might feel, fondling dangerous animals only accentuates the 
divide between us and them. Haven’t we done enough to force that divide already?

That any roadside zoo would ask visitors to choose between advocating for 
animals and entering their zoo only underlines on which side of the fence I 
would rather be.
 