
Most Americans would probably be astounded to realize that the president who 
has been painted by Washington pundits as a reluctant warrior has actually been 
a hawk. The Iran nuclear deal, a herculean achievement, and the opening of 
diplomatic relations with Cuba unfortunately stand alone as President Obama’s 
successful uses of diplomacy over hostility.

While candidate Obama came to office pledging to end George W Bush’s wars, he 
leaves office having been at war longer than any president in US history. He is 
also the only president to serve two complete terms with the nation at war.

President Obama did reduce the number of US soldiers fighting in Afghanistan 
and Iraq, but he dramatically expanded the air wars and the use of special 
operations forces around the globe. In 2016, US special operators could be 
found in 70% of the world’s nations, 138 countries –a staggering jump of 130%  
<http://www.commondreams.org/views/2017/01/05/year-commando>since the days of 
the Bush administration.


Obama has handed a surveillance state and war machine to a maniac | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/president-trump-national-security-nuclear-arsenal>
Looking back at President Obama’s legacy, the Council on Foreign Relation’s 
Micah Zenko added up the defense department’s data on airstrikes and made a 
startlingrevelation <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/micah-zenko>: in 2016 
alone, the Obama administration dropped at least 26,171 bombs. This means that 
every day last year, the US military blasted combatants or civilians overseas 
with 72 bombs; that’s three bombs every hour, 24 hours a day.

While most of these air attacks were in Syria and Iraq, US bombs also rained 
down on people in Afghanistan, Libya, Yemen, Somalia and Pakistan. That’s seven 
majority-Muslim countries.

One bombing technique that President Obama championed is drone strikes. As 
drone-warrior-in-chief, he spread the use of drones outside the declared 
battlefields of Afghanistan and Iraq, mainly to Pakistan and Yemen. Obama 
authorized over 10 times more drone strikes than George W Bush, and 
automatically painted all males of military age in these regions ascombatants 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/05/29/world/obamas-leadership-in-war-on-al-qaeda.html>
, making them fair game for remote controlled killing.

President Obama has claimed that his overseas military adventures are legal 
under the 2001 and 2003 authorizations for the use of military force passed by 
Congress to go after al-Qaida. But today’s wars have little or nothing to do 
with those who attacked the United States on September 11, 2001.


Think Trump's scary now? Obama is leaving him with broad war powers | Trevor 
Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/donald-trump-barack-obama-president-broad-war-powers>
The twisted legal architecture the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has constructed to 
justify its interventions, especially extrajudicial drone killings with no 
geographic restrictions, will now be transferred into the erratic hands of 
Donald Trump.

What does the administration have to show for eight years of fighting on so 
many fronts? Terrorism has spread, no wars have been “won” and the Middle East 
is consumed by more chaos and divisions than when candidate Barack Obama 
declared his opposition to the invasion of Iraq.

While the switch from US troops on the ground to airstrikes and special forces 
has saved US lives, untold numbers of foreign lives have been snuffed out. We 
have no idea how many civilians have been killed in the massive bombings in 
Iraq and Syria, where the US military is often pursuing Isis in the middle of 
urban neighborhoods. We only sporadically hear about civilian killings in 
Afghanistan, such as the tragic bombing of the Doctors Without Borders hospital 
in Kunduz that left 42 dead and 37 wounded.

Pushed to release information about civilian deaths in drone strikes, in July 
2016 the US government made the absurd claim it had killed, at most, 116 
civilians in Pakistan, Yemen, Somalia and Libya between 2009 and 2015. 
Journalists and human rights advocates said the numbers were ridiculously low 
and unverifiable, given that no names, dates, locations or others details were 
released. The London-based Bureau of Investigative Journalism, which has 
tracked drone strikes for years,said the true figure 
<https://www.thebureauinvestigates.com/2016/07/01/obama-drone-casualty-numbers-fraction-recorded-bureau/>
 was six times higher.

Given that drones account for only a small portion of the munitions dropped in 
the past eight years, the numbers of civilians killed by Obama’s bombs could be 
in the thousands. But we can’t know for sure as the administration, and the 
mainstream media, has been virtually silent about the civilian toll of the 
administration’s failed interventions.


Victim of Obama's first drone strike: 'I am the living example of what drones 
are'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/23/drone-strike-victim-barack-obama>
In May 2013, I interrupted President Obama during his foreign policy address 
at the National Defense University. I had just returned from visiting the 
families of innocent people killed by US drone attacks in Yemen and Pakistan, 
including theRehman children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/29/pakistan-family-drone-victim-testimony-congress>
 who saw their grandmother blown to bits while in the field picking okra.


Speaking out on behalf of grieving families whose losses have never been 
acknowledged by the US government, I asked President Obama to apologize to 
them. As I was being dragged out, President Obama said: “The voice of that 
woman is worth paying attention to.”

Too bad he never did.
 