
If you’ve ever sat through a rightwing YouTube rant or spent five minutes on 
Twitter, you’ve likely heard the word “snowflake”. The term has supplanted the 
old standby of “social justice warrior” to describe a certain kind of liberal. 
This is thanks in large part to the far-right blog Breitbart, which lobbed it 
at anyone who criticized Trump’s incendiary rhetoric. But if you’re unfamiliar 
with the term, allow me to explain.

We “special snowflakes” are delicate beings obsessed with our own uniqueness. 
We identify with genders and sexual orientations we made up off the top of our 
heads in order to confuse people. We demand that everyone at whatever liberal 
arts college we’re doubtless attending respect these fabricated identities, and 
we punish our peers with mean words like “bigot” and “racist” when they refuse 
to comply.

We can only survive within the confines of our “safe spaces,” where we are 
protected from criticism and dissenting opinions. When we are confronted with a 
point of view from outside our snow globe of mandatory tolerance, we become, as 
the deplorables say, “triggered”. The word was originally intended to describe 
a reaction to a reminder of trauma, but has been recast as meaning almost any 
kind of upset, no matter how minor.

In sum: self-imposed victimhood, an inflated sense of self-importance, an 
inability to handle criticism, and a totalitarian demand for respect are the 
criteria that define the snowflake. It’s ironic, then, that the public figure 
who most reliably projects those qualities at the moment isDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. America is soon to 
inaugurate its first Snowflake-in-Chief.

Here is a man who, when a journalist like Jim Acosta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-press-conference-cnn-journalist-acosta>
 hurts his feelings with a simple question, threatens to have him ejected. A 
man who, when he feels insulted, and he frequently feels insulted, goes on 
Twitter to berate whoever it is has damaged his delicate ego. A man who cannot 
handle an ounce of criticism without having a meltdown.

Donald Trump demands complete and total respect from everyone around him, 
including the press, whose job it is to hold him accountable. He portrays 
himself as the victim in petty spats with news outlets, journalists, 
celebrities, aformer Miss Universe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/donald-trump-alicia-machado-miss-universe-fox-and-friends>
, thecast of a Broadway show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/19/mike-pence-booed-at-hamilton-performance-then-hears-diversity-plea>
, aGold Star mother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/world-grieving-mother-donald-trump-muslim-ghazala-khan>
. The list goes on.

Indeed, Trumpism is a movement built on victimhood. It holds that Americans 
are unemployed because immigrants stole their jobs. It argues that people of 
color are diluting the culture of America and that LGBT people having rights is 
an attack on the traditional family. Its slogan, Make America Great Again, 
speaks to that victimhood. We were great once. We aren’t anymore, because of
thosepeople.

Saying “Happy Holidays” instead of “Merry Christmas” is enough to inspire a 
meltdown. Nando’s, a chicken chain, recently “triggered” multiple Trump 
supporters by simply handing out “#everyoneiswelcome”posters 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/americas/donald-trump-inauguration-us-restaurants-political-stance-a7518106.html>
 in their DC stores. The act of simply existing while transgender sends some 
into a tizzy.

The reality is that, yes, we actually are all unique, no matter our political 
leanings. Having strong reactions to things does not necessarily imply weakness 
or fragility, and is not the same thing as being triggered. The phenomenon of 
living in an ideological bubble where opinions that align with our own are 
considered good and opinions that challenge your beliefs are considered bad is 
not unique to either party or any movement. It is also not the same thing as a 
safe space.

Not every protest is a tantrum. Using speech to criticize speech is not 
censorship. Dismissing the struggles of marginalized communities as “identity 
politics” is intellectually lazy. Sometimes, something just is racist or 
sexist, and if describing it as such is enough to make you have a meltdown, 
then maybe you’re the fragile one. I’m talking to you, Donald.
 