
As I write, president-elect Donald Trump – soon to become the most powerful 
individual on Earth – is having a tantrum onhis Twitter feed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/trumps-tweets-keep-us-manufacturers-on-their-toes>
. Losing the popular vote can have devastating consequences for a bigoted 
plutocrat’s ego, andaccusations that Vladimir Putin’s regime intervened to his 
advantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 are getting him down. “The ‘intelligence’ briefing on so-called ‘Russian 
hacking’ was delayed until Friday,”he claims 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2017/01/03/trump-says-a-delay-in-his-briefing-on-so-called-russian-hacking-is-very-strange/>
 (falsely, apparently), “perhaps more time needed to build a case.Very strange 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/816452807024840704>!”

Did Putin intervene in the US election? It is entirely plausible, although 
evidence from theCIA <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> (with its 
dubious record) and the FBI needs to be carefully scrutinised, whatever our 
feelings on Trump. And if the Democratic establishment pin the supposedly 
unthinkable calamity of Trump’s triumph on a foreign power, they will fail to 
learn the real lessons behind their defeat.

Donald Trump is technology's befuddled (but dangerous) grandfather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/30/donald-trump-technology-computers-cyber-hacks-surveillance>
That doesn’t mean alleged interference by the Russian regime shouldn’t be 
taken seriously. Putin heads a hard-right, kleptocratic, authoritarian 
government that persecutes LGBT people, waged a murderous war in Chechnya, and 
has committed terrible crimes in Syria in alliance with Bashar al-Assad’s 
dictatorship. It is a pin-up for populist rightwingers across the west, from 
Trump to Ukip, from France’s Front National to Austria’s Freedom party. Its 
undemocratic manoeuvres should be scrutinised and condemned.

But while Americans feel justifiably angry at alleged interference with their 
political process, they have also been handed a mirror, and the reflection 
should disturb them.

For the US is a world leader in the field of intervening in the internal 
affairs of other countries. The alleged interference is far more extensive than 
hacking into emails belonging to unfavoured political parties. According to
research by political scientist Dov Levin 
<http://www.dovhlevin.com/dissertation-and-other-research>, the US and the 
USSR/Russia together intervened no less than 117 times in foreign elections 
between 1946 and 2000, or “one out of every nine competitive, national-level 
executive elections”.

Indeed, one cannot understand US-Russian relations today without acknowledging 
America’s role in the internal affairs of its defeated cold war foe. AsStephen 
Cohen <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Stephen_F._Cohen> puts it 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/c/cohen-crusade.html>, after the collapse 
of the Soviet Union, the approach of US advisers “was nothing less than 
missionary – a virtual crusade to transform post-communist Russia into some 
facsimile of the American democratic and capitalist system”.

As soon as Bill Clinton assumed the White House in 1993, his experts discussed 
“formulating a policy of American tutelage”, including unabashed partisan 
support for President Boris Yeltsin. “Political missionaries and evangelists, 
usually called ‘advisers’, spread across Russia in the early and mid-1990s,” 
notes Cohen: many were funded by the US government. Zbigniew Brzezinski, the 
former national security adviser,talked of 
<http://www.nytimes.com/books/first/c/cohen-crusade.html> Russia “increasingly 
passing into de facto western receivership”.

The results were, to put it mildly, disastrous 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9508159>. Between 1990 and 1994, life 
expectancy for Russian men and women fell from 64 and 74 years respectively to 
58 and 71 years. The surge in mortality was “beyond the peacetime experience of 
industrialised countries”. While it was boom time for the new oligarchs, 
poverty and unemployment surged; prices were hiked dramatically; communities 
were devastated by deindustrialisation; and social protections were stripped 
away.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20will%20retaliate%20against%20Russia%20over%20election%20hacking%2C%20vows%20Barack%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fus-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio&media=>
US will retaliate against Russia over election hacking, vows Barack Obama – 
audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/16/us-will-retaliate-against-russia-over-election-hacking-vows-barack-obama-audio>
To the horror of the west, Yeltsin’s popularity nosedived to the point where a 
communist triumph in the 1996 presidential elections could not be ruled out. 
Yeltsin turned to the oligarchs, using their vast resources to run an 
unscrupulous campaign.As Leonid Bershidsky puts it 
<https://origin-www.bloombergview.com/articles/2016-03-07/the-u-s-election-s-echoes-of-1996-russia>
, it was “a momentous event that undermined a fragile democracy and led to the 
emergence of Vladimir Putin’s dictatorial regime”. It is even alleged that, in 
2011, Putin’s key ally – then-president Dmitry Medvedev – privatelysuggested 
the election was rigged. 
<http://content.time.com/time/world/article/0,8599,2107565,00.html> In the 
run-up to the election, Russia was granted a huge US-backed IMF loan that – as
the New York Times noted at the time 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/03/27/world/10.2-billion-loan-to-russia-approved.html>
 – was “expected to be helpful to President Boris N Yeltsin in the presidential 
election”.

Yeltsin relied on US political strategists 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1996-07-09/news/mn-22423_1_boris-yeltsin> – 
including a former aide to Bill Clinton – who had a direct line back to the 
White House. When Yeltsin eventually won,the cover of Time magazine was 
<http://content.time.com/time/covers/0,16641,19960715,00.html> “Yanks to the 
rescue: The secret story of how American advisers helped Yeltsin win”.

Without the chaos and deprivations of the US-backed Yeltsin era, Putinism 
would surely not have established itself. But it’s not justRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> by any means, for the record of US 
intervention in the internal affairs of foreign democracies is extensive.

Take Italy in 1948: as the cold war unfolded, the US feared that a 
socialist-communist coalition would triumph in Italian elections. It barred 
Italians who “did not believe in the ideology of the United States” from even 
entering the country; funded opposing parties via the CIA; orchestrated a 
massive propaganda campaign, including millions of letters from Americans of 
Italian origin; and made it quite clear, viathe State Department, that 
<https://williamblum.org/chapters/killing-hope/italy> there was “no further 
question of assistance from the United States” if the wrong people won. Its 
efforts were a success. This was the first of many Italian elections featuring 
US interference.

CIA concludes Russia interfered to help Trump win election, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
Take the CIA’s self-professed involvement in the military coup that overthrew 
democratically elected secular Iranian president Mohammad Mosaddeq in 1953: it 
was “carried out under CIA direction as an act of US foreign policy, conceived 
and approved at the highest levels of government”,as the agency later confessed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/19/cia-admits-role-1953-iranian-coup>
. The nature ofthe 1979 Iranian revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/blog/2009/feb/03/iranian-revolution-archive> 
cannot be understood without it. Or what of CIA backing for Augusto Pinochet’s 
murderous overthrow of Salvador Allende in Chile in 1973?

There are more recent examples too. Take the military overthrow of Honduras’ 
Manuel Zelaya in 2009. The then secretary of state – a certain Hillary Clinton –
refused to describe the toppling of Zelaya as a “military coup” 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/04/19/hillary-clintons-dodgy-answers-on-honduras-coup/>
, which would have required the suspension of US aid, including to the armed 
forces. Rather than call for Zelaya’s reinstatement, Clinton called for new 
elections. US assistance – including military aid – continued as dissidents 
were treated brutally; as death squads re-emerged; as violence against LGBT 
people surged; andas widely boycotted unfair elections took place 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/31/hillary-clinton-honduras-violence-manuel-zelaya-berta-caceres>
.

Allegations of Russian interference in the US elections are undoubtedly 
alarming, but there’s a double standard at play. Meddling in foreign 
democracies only becomes a problem when the US is on the receiving end. The US 
has interfered with impunity in the internal affairs of so many other 
countries. The day that all such interference is seen for what it is – a 
democratic outrage, unworthy of any great nation – will be a great day indeed.
 