
When Angela Merkel addressed a press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/police-raid-berlin-refugee-shelter-after-christmas-market-attack>
 in Berlin yesterday morning, only hours afterthe attack on the Christmas market
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlin-christmas-market-attack> and not far 
distant from it, she was unflinching. She took head-on the hardest question of 
how the country would feel if the perpetrator turned out to be one of the 
million refugees to whom she had offered protection not much more than a year 
ago.

It would be hard to bear, she said – in one version of a German phrase that 
has been variously translated as “particularly repugnant” and “sickening” – if 
it were a refugee. It would be an insult to all those who had helped refugees 
and all those who needed Germany’s protection. And that was it.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmerkel-assume-it-was-terrorist-attack-berlin-market-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Merkel%3A%20'we%20must%20assume%20it%20was%20a%20terrorist%20attack%20in%20Berlin'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmerkel-assume-it-was-terrorist-attack-berlin-market-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Merkel%3A%20%27we%20must%20assume%20it%20was%20a%20terrorist%20attack%20in%20Berlin%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fmerkel-assume-it-was-terrorist-attack-berlin-market-video&media=>
Merkel: ‘we must assume it was a terrorist attack in Berlin’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/20/merkel-assume-it-was-terrorist-attack-berlin-market-video>
Christmas markets are as much a part of German national life as the 14 July 
festivities are French (in Nice nearly 100 people died in a similar attack). 
That makes Monday’s attack seem like an unmistakable act of terror, apparently 
motivated by jihadism.

It may well turn out to be someone who had come to the country as an asylum 
seeker. But Merkel’s appeal at that subdued press conference was for the 
country to distinguish between terrorists and refugees, and to keep faith with 
her version of what it is to be German. “We will find strength for the life we 
want to live inGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> – free, 
united and open.”

In one sense, everything the chancellor said 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/germany/what-the-attack-in-berlin-means-for-merkel-a-1126856.html>
 was intensely political. She faces elections next September, and her fate is a 
preoccupation for all of Europe. Yet there is a difference between conveying a 
potent political message and politicking; and not so much as a zephyr of 
politicking appeared to ruffle the trademark Merkel demeanour – reassuringly 
impassive as a dumpling, as always.

There was no overt concession to those colleagues who fear that her refugee 
policy, the subject of so much criticism on the right, is likely to eat 
savagely into her – and their – majority. Nothing explicitly betrayed the 
challenge she will face from her partners in government, the Bavarian Christian 
Social Union (CSU), who are ramping up the pressure on her. There was certainly 
no nod in the direction of the far right’s charge that the casualties of Monday 
night’s attack were“Merkel’s dead” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/berlin-attack-angela-merkel-german-mp-blames-chancellor-for-lorry-deaths-latest-a7485486.html>
.

Merkel has established herself as the best and strongest voice of the values 
of a liberal Europe, and her steadfastness under pressure – at least her 
rhetorical steadfastness, for her policies have been modified to accommodate 
some of her critics’ concerns – is a beacon in a continent that is increasingly 
inward turning, nativist and afraid.

And every time she stands up for what postwar Europe represents, she 
consolidates Germany’s rebirth. When in her summer press conference, on 31 
August last year, as thousands of refugees trekked northwards into Hungary, she 
told the world “We can do it”, and when a few days later she announced that no 
one would be stopped from seeking asylum, and when a few days after that she 
posed for a selfie with one of the refugees from the first train to draw into 
Munich station, for millions of people around the world she reset the image of 
her country.

Only months earlier, the Greeks had portrayed Merkel in a stormtrooper helmet. 
In September she seemed to banish the faint but lingering stench of 
20th-century history for good. In its place camewhat Merkel called 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/15/angela-merkel-defends-germanys-handling-of-refugee-influx>
 Germany’s “friendly, beautiful face”.

It has not been an easy 15 months, and Merkel has been forced into making 
concessions to her critics. But that merely makes her calm, mostly endorsed by 
other politicians, the more admirable yesterday.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Berlin%20attack%3A%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri's%20fingerprints%20found%20in%20truck%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Berlin%20attack%3A%20suspect%20Anis%20Amri%27s%20fingerprints%20found%20in%20truck%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&media=>
Berlin attack: suspect Anis Amri’s fingerprints found in truck 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/21/german-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
As important, it was reflected in the actions of authority everywhere – in, 
for example, how quickly the police acknowledged they had picked up the wrong 
person. How tempting it must have been to hang on to the appearance of having 
speedily apprehended at least one of the perpetrators, and how attractive to 
the security forces who had, after all, failed in the most devastating way 
imaginable to try to redeem themselves.

It was there in the strong clear message that there would always be soft 
targets that could not be protected, and in the refusal to panic and shut down 
the hundreds of other Christmas fairs across the country. Of course security 
will be tighter; understandably some cities are erecting concrete blocks at the 
entrance to their shopping areas. Naturally there will be a more visible police 
presence. Yet out of the bloody carnage of violence and hate of Berlin on the 
Monday before Christmas comes the enviable impression of a country that is true 
to the values of liberal Europe.
 