
The man who for decades has been Israel’s best known literary voice is 
proclaiming his “deep love” for “one of the greatest Jews who ever lived”. Amos 
Oz recalls falling for “this Jew” many years ago, when, as a teenage 
kibbutznik, he became enchanted by “his poetry, his humour, his compassion, his 
warmth, his simplicity”. Oz’s sweet hymn of praise is addressed to Jesus Christ.

If that comes as a surprise, it’s not only because Oz is an Israeli Jew. It’s 
also because he’s written often – and fiercely – of the role centuries of 
Christian persecution played in nurturing the Jewish longing for a homeland. 
But whatever anger he harbours toward Christian Europe, for Jesus, Oz expresses 
only fond admiration. Even if, the writer adds with a smile, “he and I disagree 
on many things – like any two Israelis”.

Now aged 77, his spectacles attached to a cord around his neck, he is still 
blessed with the rugged good looks and spellbinding English that have made 
international literary audiences swoon since the 1970s. This autumn cinemagoers 
might join them, thanks to the release ofNatalie Portman’s film adaptation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/may/15/cannes-2015-a-tale-of-love-and-darkness-review-natalie-portman-film-directing-debut>
 ofA Tale of Love and Darkness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/sep/11/featuresreviews.guardianreview>, 
Oz’s bestselling memoir-cum-novel. But for now he is in London to promote his 
latest novel, the first for more than a decade:Judas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/03/judas-by-amos-oz-review> in 
English, it was published in Hebrew asThe Gospel According to Judas.

In neatly formed, well-honed paragraphs, he tells me of his teenage 
fascination with the New Testament. “I realised at the age of 16 that unless 
I read the gospels, I would never have access to Renaissance art, to the music 
ofBach <https://www.theguardian.com/music/jsbach> or the novels of Dostoevsky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/fyodordostoevsky>. So in the evenings, when 
the other boys went to play basketball or chase girls – I had no chance in 
either – I found my comfort in Jesus.”

For most of his contemporaries, especially then, the New Testament would have 
felt like forbidden territory, a place nice Jewish boys feared to tread. But Oz 
and Jesus had a family connection. His great-uncle, the scholar Joseph 
Klausner, was the author ofJesus of Nazareth, published in 1921, a book that 
scandalised Jews and Christians alike: it reclaimed Jesus as a Jew. As Oz puts 
it, “Jesus was born a Jew and he died a Jew. It never occurred to him to 
establish a new religion. He never crossed himself: he had no reason to. He 
never set one foot in a church. He went to synagogue.”

But as much as the young Oz was enthralled by Jesus, the story of Judas 
irritated him. Not theologically. But rather “the little detective within me” 
was appalled by the Judas tale, which, Oz says, is a “vicious, ugly story”, 
arresting for being so badly written: had the gospels had a decent editor, he 
says, it would have been struck out.

This is not an innocent story. It is responsible for rivers of blood, for 
generations of hatred and persecution

Nothing about it adds up. Judas Iscariot is meant to be a rich man, yet he 
performs his great act of treachery for just 30 pieces of silver – “about £400 
in today’s money”. A decent sum, but surely not enough to provide a motive. And 
why would Jesus’s pursuers need Judas to point him out via the unforgettable 
gesture of a kiss? The miracle-worker was already notorious in Roman Jerusalem, 
having caused such a commotion at the temple. None of it makes any sense, says 
Oz.

These inconsistencies nagged away at him for more than half a century. Not 
least because the Judas legend has had grave consequences. “This is not an 
innocent story. This story is responsible, more than any other story told in 
history, for rivers of blood, for generations of hatred and persecution and 
inquisition and massacres and possibly the Holocaust.”

For Judas is a double synonym: a byword for traitor, but also for Jew. “In my 
dictionaries, it’s difficult to distinguish the two,” Oz says, before rattling 
off the words for Jew and Judas in both German and Spanish: in each language, 
the two words sound almost the same. How could a three year old German child, 
hearing the word for Judas, the ultimate betrayer, separate that concept from 
their idea of “Jew”, asks Oz. In his view, the story of Judas is “the Chernobyl 
of world antisemitism”.

And yet it took the arrival of this new novel’s central character to suggest a 
way of wrestling with the Judas problem at long last. (Oz tends to speak this 
way about his characters: as if they are wholly independent actors, constantly 
able to surprise him, even to move him to tears, by words and deeds they choose 
for themselves. In line with Jewish conceptions of the Almighty, Oz may be 
their creator, but they have free will.)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd70ef3f0897d723597ce07135958f8017a857603%2F0_0_3504_2339%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amos%20Oz%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20Israel%2C%20but%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20like%20it%20very%20much%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amos%20Oz%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20Israel%2C%20but%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20like%20it%20very%20much%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd70ef3f0897d723597ce07135958f8017a857603%2F0_0_3504_2339%2F3504.jpg>
 Natalie Portman inA Tale of Love and Darkness. Photograph: Allstar 
The protagonist in question is Shmuel Ash, a cuddly, clumsy, directionless 
postgraduate student who answers a noticeboard advert seeking a paid live-in 
companion for a lonely, aged intellectual. The novel follows one Jerusalem 
winter, as 1959 turns into 1960, in the small house occupied by Ash, the old 
man and his mysterious, fortysomething, widowed daughter-in-law, Atalia. (Oz 
says she reminds him of the Jerusalem of his youth: “She’s not young. She’s 
very beautiful. She’s deeply injured. She is ferociously independent and she is 
very angry.”) As Oz himself says, much of the book consists of this trio 
drinking gallons of tea and talking, talking, talking.

Many of the familiar Oz motifs are present. A triangle, or series of 
intersecting triangles, each containing two men and a woman. A protagonist 
paralysed into inaction. A woman out of reach. A mystery, perhaps a buried 
scandal, related to the country’s recent past. But what will gladden those 
readers who may have found some of Oz’s past fiction forbidding, even as they 
lapped up his journalism and essays – delighting in their moral rigour and 
deployment of fresh, clarifying metaphor – is that this novel offers aspects of 
both genres. It is a novel of ideas, packed with argument and inquiry, 
displaying Oz’s dizzying range of skills.

Judas believed in Jesus more than Jesus believed in himself

For Ash’s field of inquiry is Jewish attitudes to Jesus and, especially, the 
maligning of Judas. He unfolds his theory of the true story of Judas – a tour 
de force that, alone, ensures this book will linger in the memory.

Ash presents a persuasive case that, far from being a betrayer, Judas was the 
truest believer in Jesus. Indeed, the tragedy was that, as Oz puts it, 
“He believed in Jesus more than Jesus believed in himself.” Judas put aside his 
initial scepticism and became convinced that the Nazarene truly was the one: 
the purity of his teachings, the wonder of his miracles, left no doubt in his 
mind.

But to convince the wider public, a few remarkable feats of magic in the 
Galilee would not be enough. As Oz tells me, Jesus would have to pull off 
something incredible “on prime time television” in Jerusalem, where everyone 
would witness it. If he were to be crucified and yet miraculously defy his own 
death, somehow climbing down from the cross in front of a watching Jerusalem 
public, why, then everyone would bow down to him in an instant: the kingdom of 
heaven would be upon us.

Jesus was anxious, fearing his own death, but Judas was adamant. He played the 
impresario, working overtime to nudge the authorities to crucify this 
wonder-worker from Galilee – not because he did not believe in him, but because 
he did. Judas got his way, but when he saw that Jesus was not able to escape 
his fate, that he could not come down from the cross, that his father had 
forsaken him, he was distraught. He understood his mistake and duly hanged 
himself. “So died... the first Christian. The last Christian. The only 
Christian.”

Judas by Amos Oz – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/05/judas-amos-oz-review> 
It is a remarkable reimagining of this toxic tale, one that would indeed, in 
Oz’s words, “neutralise the lethal radiation” of antisemitism’s Chernobyl, were 
it ever to become the accepted view of Judas. Instead, Judas remains the hated 
betrayer, routinely depicted in artists’ evocations of the Last Supper with 
the dark, exaggerated features of anti-Jewish caricature – a man apart from his 
fellow apostles who are, oddly enough, all fair skinned and blessed with Aryan 
good looks.

This thesis sits comfortably in the novel because both share a defining theme: 
treachery. The enigmatic widow, Atalia, saw her father ostracised as a traitor, 
shunned for opposing the establishment of the state of Israel a decade earlier. 
He was an idealist, with a Jesus-like faith in universal love and brotherhood. 
He opposed all states, with their borders and flags and armies, and hoped that 
Jews and Arabs might live side by side in a loose community free of such 
apparatus. For this, he was accused of treason.

Oz does not share the dead man’s politics – he stresses that while he may be a 
peacenik, he has never been a pacifist – but he knows what it’s like to be 
branded a traitor. He denounced the occupation of the territories Israel 
conquered in 1967 almost as soon as the six-day war was over, when his 
countrymen were still giddy with victory. A soldier in that conflict – and 
again in 1973 – Oz first came to prominence as one of a group of young 
kibbutznik writers who assembled a dissenting collection on the war just won:
The Seventh Day. Long before it became a matter of international diplomatic 
consensus, Oz was advocating the partition of historical Palestine into two 
states – Israel and Palestine – alongside each other. And he was a founder 
member of the movement that became famous as Peace Now.

At each turn, strident voices on the nationalist right have been quick to 
denounce him as abetrayer of his people 
<http://forward.com/news/breaking-news/332428/right-wing-group-sorry-for-calling-israeli-artists-traitors/>
. He says he regards it as “a badge of honour”, offering a rollcall of 
visionaries who were similarly denounced for treason, starting with the prophet 
Jeremiah and including Abraham Lincoln, the German officers who plotted to 
assassinate Hitler, Charles de Gaulle,Anwar Sadat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2010/oct/07/archive-president-sadat-assassinated>
,Mikhail Gorbachev <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mikhail-gorbachev> and, 
closer to home, Israel’s founder,David Ben-Gurion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/from-the-archive-blog/2012/may/14/archive-1948-establishment-israel-jewish-state>
 along with Menachem Begin,Yitzhak Rabin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/02/israel-yitzhak-rabin-assassination-palestinian-military-solution>
 andShimon Peres <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shimon-peres> – all Israeli 
leaders excoriated at some point for their readiness to compromise on 
territory. (Later, on the night it emerges that Peres has suffered a major 
stroke, Oz will be anxiously checking his phone, awaiting word on a man he has 
long considered a good friend: Peres, even as prime minister and even when they 
strenuously disagreed with each other, was a faithful reader of Oz’s novels. 
The two saw each other and spoke often.) To this traitors’ hall of fame, Oz adds
Thomas Mann <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomasmann>, Boris Pasternak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/oct/30/boris-pasternak-refuses-nobel-prize-1958>
,Albert Camus <https://www.theguardian.com/books/albertcamus> and Aleksandr 
Solzhenitsyn <https://www.theguardian.com/books/solzhenitsyn> for good measure. 
Sometimes, he says, what others lambast as treason is simply “the courage to be 
ahead of your time”.

This is my political credo and my business as a novelist: the changes that 
occur in the hearts and minds of people

In the novel, these questions of fidelity and treachery hover. For Oz, 
an accusation of betrayal is often the reward a person receives simply for the 
act of changing. If they change their mind, they are accused of betraying the 
cause – even if they are simply finding a new way to serve the cause better.

And yet change they must. “This is my political credo and this is my business 
as a novelist: the changes that occur in the hearts and minds of people.” Think 
of Begin orAriel Sharon <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ariel-sharon>, 
longtime hawks who found themselves pulling out of occupied territory and 
uprooting Israeli settlements. Admittedly, the changes experienced by Oz’s 
characters tend to be of the subtler, less spectacular variety, but the 
essential truth is the same: Oz insists that people have a tendency to surprise 
us – and themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda5004b41a6cc6079cc93fbd7e8edb10b0405fd%2F0_0_2008_1252%2F2008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Amos%20Oz%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20Israel%2C%20but%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20like%20it%20very%20much%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Amos%20Oz%3A%20%E2%80%98I%20love%20Israel%2C%20but%20I%20don%E2%80%99t%20like%20it%20very%20much%E2%80%99%20&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Famos-oz-i-love-israel-bit-i-dont-like-it-very-much-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffda5004b41a6cc6079cc93fbd7e8edb10b0405fd%2F0_0_2008_1252%2F2008.jpg>
 Amos Oz in 1999. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
So what about him? How has he changed? On the core issues, he seems remarkably 
consistent, despite the dramatic shifts that have shaped and reshaped his small 
country. I first interviewed him in 1985, when I was 18. He was younger then 
than I am now. I remember asking him about the biblical injunction that the 
people of Israel be “a light unto the nations”. At the time, he told me that 
the day Israel abandoned that objective would be the day he would lose interest 
in Israel as a project.

“I take it back,” he says now. “Israel should aspire to be a decent country. 
That’s good enough for me.”

And what of the two state solution, an idea for which he was something of an 
intellectual pioneer nearly 50 years ago? Many who believe it’s right in 
principle have given up on it in practice, believing the moment has passed: 50 
years of occupation and settlements have made it impossible. AB Yehoshua told
the Guardian earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/22/ab-yehoshua-books-interview-the-extra-israel-palestine>
: “We have to rethink the two state solution.” It was not good enough to repeat 
the same old slogan for half a century.

Oz is impatient with such impatience. He believes nothing in human affairs is 
irrevocable. If De Gaulle could move a million settlers out of Algeria, Israel 
could take its settlers out of the West Bank – if it had the will to do it.

Interview: Amos Oz
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/feb/14/amos-oz-interview>
And he makes a point about time. “Different clocks are working 
simultaneously,” he says, meaning that there are always different time scales 
at work. He’s opposed the occupation for every one of its 50 years. But 
compared with the many centuries the people of Europe took to stop killing each 
other and settle their borders? The Palestinian-Israeli conflict “just began 
yesterday”.

Besides, he’s suspicious of those who are so insistent that the two state 
solution is dead. He points to the curious alliance of “the Israeli far right 
and the radical left in Europe, including this country [Britain]. Both are 
amplifying the same music, saying, ‘There’s no going back on the occupation, 
the only solution is to live ... in one state.’ I think this is nonsense.” He 
is especially impatient with the leftist vision of a single state, which he 
brands a kind of “kitsch”, imagining that the two peoples can forget the 
bloodshed and conflict of the last century and “jump into bed with each other, 
like in a lousy Hollywood movie”.

That’s just one of many scoldings Oz is keen to dish out to the harder edges 
of the continental and British left. On this visit, he toldNewsnight that to 
argue that Israel should not exist 
<http://www.jpost.com/Israel-News/Politics-And-Diplomacy/Amos-Oz-Those-who-deny-Israels-right-to-exist-are-antisemites-467706>
 is to cross the line from anti-Zionism into antisemitism, because no one “ever 
said after Hitler that Germany should cease to exist, or after Stalin that 
there should be no Russia”. He believes that if you want to change Israel, 
boycotting it is foolish because “it deepens the Israeli paranoia that the 
whole world is against us”, thereby strengthening the Israeli right.

And he notes what he feels is a double standard. He thinks liberals overlook 
violence in parts of the developing world, “saying, ‘Well those people have 
suffered a lot, you have to understand it is only natural they are violent.’” 
But, “When it comes to the Jews they often say: ‘Well, they have suffered so 
much. How can they be violent after such an experience?’” In our conversation, 
he gives short shrift to those who think the Holocaust should have turned Jews 
into pacifists. He recalls the words of a relative of his, a survivor of the 
Nazi concentration camps, who always reminded him that her liberators “were not 
peace demonstrators with placards and olive branches. They were soldiers, with 
helmets and sub-machine guns. A Jew of my generation cannot afford to forget 
it.”

Societies immersed in conflict tend to become more racist, intolerant and 
unforgiving

None of which is to suggest he’s happy with the status quo in Israel. On the 
contrary, he says frankly: “I love Israel, but I don’t like it very much.” What 
he loves remains the same as it ever was. “I love it because of the 
argumentativeness, because every staircase in Israel is full of memories and 
stories and conflicting ideas.” But he resents, hesays 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07tqpxx>, “the politics, the occupation, the 
oppression of the Palestinian people and the deterioration in civil rights 
standards.” He thinks “50 years of occupation and 100 years of solitude” have 
taken their toll, adding that “societies immersed in conflict tend to become 
more racist, intolerant and unforgiving”. With the weariness of a man who has 
seen too much history, he reflects that “long wars stink”.

Yet he remains resistant to any quick fixes or revolutionary answers. As the 
old man in the new novel says, big sweeping dreams of world reform “always 
involve slaughter, crusades or jihad or Gulag or the wars of Gog and 
Demagogue”. Indeed, this aversion to all-encompassing ideological dogmas is 
another Oz theme. His bestselling essay, “How to Cure a Fanatic”, is now taught 
in Swedish schools.

“A fanatic wants to change other people for their own good,” Oz tells me. 
“He’s a great altruist, more interested in you than in himself. He wants to 
save your soul, change you, redeem you – and if you prove to be irredeemable, 
he will be at your throat and kill you. For your own good.” Oz worries that the 
current era is proving hospitable to fanatics, who exist on every side and in 
every culture, because “as things get more complicated, people crave the 
simple, one-sentence answer to everything”.

The novelist says he’s always preferred “solutions, not salvations”, 
confirmation that for all his teenage infatuation with Jesus, he never did 
become a Christian. And so he keeps rising at 4am – the legacy of all those 
years on the kibbutz, waking early to milk the cows – leaving the Tel Aviv 
apartment he calls home, and taking a walk – limping slightly, thanks to a war 
wound – to the beach or the park to clear his head. And when he sees a window 
with a light on, he still finds himself imagining what’s keeping that person up 
at night, what’s troubling them. And, just like that, a story begins.

• Judus by Amos Oz is published by Vintage. To order a copy for £15.57 (RRP 
£18.99) go tobookshop.theguardian.com 
<http://bookshop.theguardian.com/judas-443518.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders 
min p&p of £1.99.
 