
As susceptible as anyone else is to the charms of Ed Balls, I nevertheless had 
an eerie feeling watchingStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/20/strictly-come-dancing-x-factor-ratings-5m-viewers>
. In the 90s, we used to talk a lot about the primacy of the retro, whether or 
not constantly referring back to the past meant that our innovative spirit was 
spent. But the reference was always knowing, and partial; you wouldn’t hark 
back to the 1960s without putting a fresh spin on it. You wouldn’t create a TV 
show that could literally have been made in the 1960s.

Nostalgic for the 50s? Let me give you a history lesson | Catherine Bennett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/26/catherine-bennett-50s-nostalgia>
Yet that’s exactly what Strictly is; a glitzy, feelgood experience that you 
can put a nine-year-old in front of, knowing that it is indistinguishable in 
atmosphere from a Royal Variety show from when you were nine, or when your 
mother was. The breathless banality, the fist-bumping attainments: “I never 
dreamed that five weeks ago, I’d be able to dance a paso doble.” The whole 
nation roots for them, heart-in-mouth, as it did for Bake Off. What kind of a 
monster wouldn’t? What kind of a person would want some edge, some cynicism, on 
a Saturday night? And then on a Sunday, who wouldn’t wantAndrew Marr to be 
talking to REM 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/iplayer/episode/b083zzc7/the-andrew-marr-show-20112016>? 
Whose heart would be so hard as to think it a shame that we are still talking 
about a band formed 36 years ago, that pop music should be a young person’s 
game?

The passion for an idealised past is very reassuring, culturally; the worst 
you can throw at it is blandness. Creativity isn’t always successful – if you 
put a joke that doesn’t work against a piece of nostalgia that does, there is 
no doubting which is the most affecting. Emotional spaces carved out in 
childhood exist for ever, and there will always be comfort in their 
inhabitation. The only reason I was watching Strictly in the first place was 
that I’d just suffered the anguish of finishingThe Chrysalids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/dec/07/chrysalids-john-wyndham-review> 
for the 37th time. I just wanted to dial that down to “17th” to be believed. 
It’s weird there isn’t a word for “do the opposite of exaggerate, for the sake 
of credibility”.

Politically, nostalgia is poison. Nostalgia is Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, on Any Questions?, saying 
the demise of grammar schools was the worst thing that ever happened to social 
mobility in this country, which is indivisible from the same man, on the same 
programme, promising civil unrest if we didn’t leave the single market. 
Nostalgia is Jonathan Dimbleby failing to point out that five months ago, 
before the referendum, Farage wanted to remain in the single market. The 
paradox of nostalgia is that it has a terrible memory – or rather, like 
senility, it has a terrible short-term memory and very vivid, utterly 
inaccurate, recall for the long-ago. Nostalgia is blaming everything on 
immigrants and multiculturalism, since purity and the past are similar 
destinations, similarly meaningless, similarly unreachable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnostalgia-political-poison-strictly-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698f57eeb3a333e3e3dd39a4b95730dc07abf4f3%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=An%20obsession%20with%20nostalgia%20offers%20us%20only%20political%20poison%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnostalgia-political-poison-strictly-bake-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=An%20obsession%20with%20nostalgia%20offers%20us%20only%20political%20poison%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fnostalgia-political-poison-strictly-bake-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698f57eeb3a333e3e3dd39a4b95730dc07abf4f3%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Belt-tightening, like picnicking in the rain, isn’t necessarily a good thing. 
Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
Ideologically, nostalgia is a retreat from a frightening future. You can see 
this most clearly in the way people talk about the economy: from the left and 
right, there is a sense that the past is a foreign country where they do things 
not so much differently as better. The past is always Denmark.

On the right, it’s a place where workers knew their place; on the left, it’s 
where workers knew how to organise. It’s where we hadn’t forgotten the 
principle of a decent day’s pay for a decent day’s work. On the right, it’s 
where we still had an empire; on the left, it’s where we were still proud 
people who made things. It is the crucible not only of every nativist myth, but 
of all that passes for an understanding of what the economy is for: people will 
opine quite confidently about the economic verities of the 1970s, while 
accepting that modern problems – to pluck one wild example, the possible 
consequences of leaving the single market – are so complicated that to discuss 
them at all is fear-mongering.

The past is the reason “austerity” took off, and stayed aloft, even while its 
destructive contradictions became plain. There was a time when we knew how to 
tighten our belts; ergo, belt-tightening will be good for us, uncomfortable but 
quite jolly and English, like picnicking in the rain.

Political nostalgia leaves you with a burning, indignant desire for a thing 
you can’t have. Cultural nostalgia doesn’t seem to unleash such self-harming 
effects, but merely acts as fuel. Recycling old formats reinforces the 
comfort-seeking brain that cannot brook challenge and simply refuses to be 
exhilarated by novelty.Bake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/27/great-british-bake-off-viewers-final-candice-brown>
, incidentally, is morally worse than Strictly; as saccharine, as 
old-fashioned, perhaps, but mixing in the disproportionate glorification of a 
timeless craft that, however dauntingly complicated it becomes, will never 
deliver anything but simplicity.

The familiar debate around public service broadcasting is whether or not it 
has a duty to be highbrow, given that there is no requirement to please 
advertisers: whether and to what extent it has to fulfil theReithian principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/15/bbc-origins-future> of educating 
as well as entertaining. In fact, a far more important duty is that it 
innovates, and reflects a society back to itself, one in which things change, 
and that need not be a disaster. It might even be a good thing.

So it’s an imperative of good citizenship to stop watching Strictly, or if 
that’s too much, stop voting, or if that’s too much, at least stop voting forEd 
Balls <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs>. It probably seems to REM 
like their country has never needed them more, but in fact, their country needs 
them to knock it off. Stop watching Star Wars, stop making Jurassic World, stop 
rehashing old memories and maybe the potent spells of Self-Ruling Britannia and 
Making America Great Again will wear off.

(PS … except Doctor Who. Regeneration is very modern.)
 