
Google’s contactless smartphone payment system Android 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/android> Pay has finally launched in 
the UK with support for MasterCard and Visa cards from at least eight banks.


The service, which requires the Android Pay app 
<https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.google.android.apps.walletnfcrel>
, a smartphone running Android 4.4 KitKat or later and near field 
communications (NFC), will allow users to buy goods and services anywhere with 
a contactless payment terminal.

Versions of Android supporting the new payment system, which include Android 
4.4 KitKat, 5 Lollipop and 6 Marshmallow account for 75.6% of all Android 
devices in operation, according to data fromGoogle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/google>. Not every Android smartphone 
supports NFC, however, but the contactless technology that also allows instant 
Bluetooth pairing with supported devices, is included on the majority of top 
and middle-tier Android smartphones sold in the UK.

To pay for goods costing less than £30 using Android Pay, the smartphone 
simply needs to be awake and tapped on to the contactless reader. For payments 
more than £30, the user needs to authenticate the payment by unlocking their 
smartphone with either a pin, unlock pattern or fingerprint.

Similar to Apple Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jul/14/apple-pay-launches-uk-how-to-use>
 on the iPhone andSamsung Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/01/samsung-reveals-apple-pay-competitor-samsung-pay>
 on Samsung Android devices, Android pay uses tokenisation to secure your 
payment information. The user’s credit card information is never sent, and 
transactions are immediately confirmed to aid in identification of suspicious 
activity if a user falls victim to fraud.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandroid-pay-apple-samsung-pay-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f43d3b64e7a47dd044076a979f58e975eb1235a%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Android%20Pay%20launches%20in%20the%20UK%20to%20rival%20Apple%20and%20Samsung%20Pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandroid-pay-apple-samsung-pay-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Android%20Pay%20launches%20in%20the%20UK%20to%20rival%20Apple%20and%20Samsung%20Pay&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fmay%2F18%2Fandroid-pay-apple-samsung-pay-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f43d3b64e7a47dd044076a979f58e975eb1235a%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Android Pay supports Transport for London’s tube network. Photograph: Google 
Visa credit or debit cards and MasterCards from the Bank of Scotland, First 
Direct, Halifax, HSBC, Lloyds Bank, M&S Bank, MBNA andNationwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nationwide> Building Society will be 
supported from launch, with London’s Underground network also supporting 
Android Pay for travel in the same way it does Apple Pay.

Some apps will also allow users to use Android Pay to pay for goods and 
services on their devices instead of a traditional check out. JD Sports,
Deliveroo <https://www.theguardian.com/business/deliveroo> and YPlan will be 
some of the first apps to support Android Pay for purchases.

Google will also have a bespoke offer system called Android Pay Day, operating 
on the last Tuesday of the month starting in June when retailers including 
Starbucks UK and Deliveroo will have special offers. Loyalty cards can also be 
integrated into Android Pay.

The UK is the first market out of the US to see Google’s contactless payments 
system roll out, after Android Paylaunched in the US in March last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/mar/02/google-launches-android-pay-take-over-where-google-wallet-failed>
. Samsung Pay has yet to reach the UK, leaving only a small collection of 
mobile-network tied contactless payment services and Apple Pay the only 
smartphone-based systems until now. Samsung Pay, which uses both NFC and 
magnetic stripe for payments, has yet to launch in the UK, but is expected soon.

Over 84m contactless credit cards have been issued in the UK as of February 
2016 and over £1.3bn was spent using contactless payments in the month with 
usage growing 36.5% year-on-year. There are also 332,607 bank-owned contactless 
payment terminals across the UK, according to the UK Cards Association.

“The number of contactless card payments is set to surpass 3bn in the UK this 
year,” said Jeremy Light, managing director of Accenture Payment Services. “For 
the time being, however, cash remains king among UK consumers with more than 
half of transactions relying on coins or notes.”

The market opportunity for technologies companies including Google, Samsung 
and Apple is clear, but it is unclear how frequently smartphone-based payment 
solutions such as Apple Pay are being used. In January Transport for London 
recorded 3.2m journeys using mobile devices in six months from July, but Apple 
has yet to release numbers related to Apple Pay transactions.

Barclays recently unveiled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/12/barclays-contactless-payment-app-android-phones>
 its own unrelated contactless payment app for Android devices, which is will 
be built into the Barclays mobile banking app.
 