
When it comes to the government’s treatment of disabled people, we are now all 
too familiar with the punitive“fit-for-work” tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/08/fit-for-work-tests-double-cost-dwp-disability-cuts>
, the widely scorned assessment that determines who’s eligible for out of work 
sickness benefits and who’s not. But the story of Andy Davis* – a disabled 
55-year-old currently struggling through the endless hoops of the jobcentre – 
gives a stark insight into what is often obscured: what happens next.

-The DWP’s fit-for-work tests are a national catastrophe | Clare Allan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/07/fitness-for-work-tests-national-catastrophe-suicides-vulnerable-people>
Davis – a former oil rig labourer – had his leg almost completely severed in 
an accident at work 20 years ago. As he’s got older, the impact of the injury 
has taken its toll and he struggles to walk. “Every step requires 
concentration,” he tells me from his sheltered accommodation in Merseyside. “I 
either wince all day or doze off from the painkillers.”

The damage to his leg is severe enough to mean he’s been given a lifetime 
award of Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit – and this year his doctor 
told him he’s not physically able to hold down a job. Regardless, in May, the 
Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) ruled Davis “fit to work”. Like every 
disabled or chronically ill person rejected for out-of-work sickness benefits, 
that means he has no choice but to claim jobseeker’s allowance (JSA) and look 
for work instead.

“When I got the assessment result letter, I went to the jobcentre and asked 
the adviser behind the desk, ‘Who on earth is going to employ somebody with a 
GP’s diagnosis as ‘unfit for work’?” Davis says. “The answer came lightning 
quick: ‘Nobody.’”

The adviser then told him that he didn’t have to tell prospective employers 
about the GP note or his leg, he adds. Davis now has to spend 35 hours per week 
searching for a job. Or he will have his benefit sanctioned.

The routine is as pointless as it is disheartening. He spends all day on 
Universal Jobmatch <https://www.gov.uk/jobsearch> – the government’s 
much-maligned website for jobseekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/16/dwp-jobs-website-universal-jobsmatch>
 – only to find work he’s not qualified for (teacher, nurse) or jobs he can’t 
physically do because they request fitness or strength (scaffolder, postroom 
worker). Each Monday or Friday – sometimes both – he has to get himself to a 
meeting with a jobcentre adviser and find a way to explain why he hasn’t found 
a job.

“I fear for my sanity,” he says. “I’m being instructed to mislead potential 
employers and spend 35 hours per week – compulsorily – applying for jobs I have 
no chance of obtaining. Or starve.”

This is the reality for the disabled and chronically ill people who, found 
“fit for work”, are then – to use Davis’s words – “thrown back into the main 
JSA pool”. Judged by the system as not disabled enough for disability 
unemployment benefits – but too disabled to have a fair chance in the job 
market.

The Tories are presiding over repellent rhetoric around worklessness – yet are 
doing little to deal with the problem

There are two (related) issues at play here: government “fit-for-work” tests 
are routinely, inaccurately judging disabled people as not in need of 
out-of-work sickness benefits (as Davis puts it, “My doctor’s opinion can be 
legally ignored by the DWP”); and that they – as well as those disabled people 
who, with tailored support, could work – are being abandoned to a JSA system 
that assumes they are fit and healthy.

Davis tells me he has asked the jobcentre if he could see a disability 
employment adviser to get some specialist help. “‘Oh we don’t do them any 
more’, my adviser said,” he explains. Instead, he was booked on to a generic 
two-week employability course and told to update his CV.

The Conservatives are presiding over repellent rhetoric around disability and 
worklessness, but are less forward in doing anything to deal with the 
complexities of the real problem. On the contrary, they’re introducing policies 
that are proven topush disabled people further from work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/cutting-disabled-benefits-wont-work>
, and have cut the specialist disability employment advisers people like Davis 
need by over60% in jobcentres 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/dwp-cuts-specialist-disability-employment-advisors-in-jobcentres-by-over-60-per-cent-a6728881.html>
 across the country.

With little fuss, the DWP’s long-promised disability and employment white 
paper has just beenquietly shelved 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/crabb-scrapped-idss-white-paper-because-he-didnt-like-the-look-of-it/>
. It’s hard to believe any answers are coming.Theresa May’s cabinet changes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
 mean thatDamian Green <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/damian-green> is 
the third work and pensions secretary in the space of a year.

Meanwhile, Davis is anxious about the future. JSA – barely £70 a week – is not 
designed as a long-term income but for him, it may have to be. “I’m sick and 
tired of the hunger,” he says. “It’s emotionally crippling.” His hopes rest on 
theDWP’s mandatory reconsideration 
<http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/appeals-and-mandatory-reconsideration> 
overturning the “fit-for-work” ruling (after seven weeks, he’s had no word from 
them). If the DWP upholds the decision, Davis will have no choice but to apply 
for jobs or be sanctioned.

“I actually found myself out practising normal walking yesterday, seeing how 
long I could keep it up,” he says. “It’s a horrific situation to be in.”

• Andy Davis is a pseudonym
 