
There is an admirable calm in Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> that contrasts immensely with 
the bluster and hysteria that has come to dominate a lot of the political 
discourse in Europe. So when on Saturdayshe distanced herself from the “Wir 
schaffen das” 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/angela-merkel-drops-the-we-can-do-it-slogan-catchphrase-migration-refugees/>
 (we can do it) slogan she’d so often repeated about the refugee crisis, many 
wondered if the chancellor had lost her confidence. Merkel may not be called 
“Mutti” that often any more. Yet she remains Europe’s towering figure. She also 
appears rather lonely at the top. In fact, Germany as a whole looks lonely 
these days, as it deals with the monumental task ofintegrating more than a 
million refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/germany-unveils-integration-law-for-refugees-migrants>
, whose arrival last year up-ended politics and triggered much national 
soul-searching.

Angela Merkel and Marine Le Pen: one of them will shape Europe’s future | 
Natalie Nougayrède
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/angela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny>
Don’t be under any illusion that diplomacy, whether at the European summit in 
Bratislava 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/16/bratislava-summit-donald-tusk-urges-eu-leaders-not-to-waste-brexit-crisis>
 or in New York, where theUN summit on refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/13/united-nations-criticism-refugee-crisis-plan-human-rights>
 opens on Monday, will offer much relief. Germany will basically need to cope 
on its own. If I had to bet, I’d say its chances are good. This is arguably the 
single most important challenge Europe faces: overcoming the shock of seeing 
huge numbers of victims of the world’s chaos turn up in cities and regions 
previously sheltered from external disruption. Germany stands at the heart of 
this test, and its neighbours are watching closely.

There is no lack of gloomy predictions. Nor is schadenfreude entirely absent 
when Germany’s European partners wring their hands at the refugee problem. 
(France’s prime minister, Manuel Valls, stooped low last year when he publicly 
smirked at suggestions Merkel should get the Nobel peace prize for welcoming 
refugees.) No small amount of criticism has been levelled at Merkel from 
populists across the continent, as well as from within her own party and 
governing coalition. Much less vociferously highlighted are the reasons why
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> may just succeed.

Of course, public mood can swerve in unpredictable directions. Amazing scenes 
of Germans applauding refugees as they got off trains were swiftly forgotten 
after theCologne New Year’s Eve attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/06/cologne-sex-assault-attacks-case-collapses>
. That’s not to say German civil society isn’t deploying impressive efforts to 
make sure the migration phenomenon ends on a positive note.

On a recent study tour of “Germany and the refugees story” organised by the 
Robert Bosch Foundation, I met incredibly dedicated social workers, NGO 
representatives and city or regional officials in Cologne and Stuttgart. Many 
did speak of the difficulties they encounter, not least the bureaucratic 
hurdles that stand in the way of easing refugees into the labour market after 
they’ve taken German language courses. But what struck me was how upbeat most 
of these interlocutors wanted to appear. Merkel may want to play down “Wir 
schaffen das”, but those words have nevertheless said something about the 
nation’s state of mind. One outstanding example of can-do spirit comes from a 
business in Stuttgart called Lapp Group, which has taken 12 young refugees into 
apprenticeship programmes. Hearing these smiling young men from Syria, 
Afghanistan and Eritrea describe how they intend to make the most of this 
chance helps dispel doubts. The Lapp family, who founded this electric cable 
producing firm in the 1950s and still run it, are keen to take their proud 
share of a nationwide effort.

Germany unveils integration law for refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/germany-unveils-integration-law-for-refugees-migrants>
Just as Germany reinvented itself after the war, and just as it achieved 
reunification, this is seen as a defining moment in the country’s history. The 
Lapp family’s role may be small in the wider picture, but it certainly makes 
the word “solidarity” sound less empty than it does in much of the rest ofEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

If any country can succeed in coping with a massive influx of refugees, surely 
this is it. Stuttgart’s lush residential neighbourhoods and its industrial 
powerhouses point to Germany’s thriving economy. And the prosperity and 
stability of Germany’s institutions are key assets in the integration effort. 
Unemployment is at its lowest since 1990, and trade surpluses are at a record 
high. As Armin Laschet, deputy federal chairman of Merkel’s CDU party, puts it, 
the question isn’t so much whether Germany can afford financially to deal with 
the refugee equation, “it’s whether our society can get to grips” with the new 
situation.

Globalisation is widely faulted for breeding populism. But Germany has 
dramatically benefited from globalisation, thanks to its exports. What is at 
stake here has more to do with adapting to new forms of diversity, as the 
country imports population groups. This is the first ever wave of Arab 
immigrants to Germany, whose Muslim community had since the 1950s been 
essentially composed of Turkish “Gastarbeiter” (guest workers).

The positive side is that Germany has none of France’s historical hangovers in 
dealing with Arab immigration. The less positive side is that it took decades 
for Germans to accept that Turkish workers and their families would stay and 
become full citizens.

It’s been said German officials have tried to paper over the magnitude of the 
task – including when information was scant about the Cologne attacks. But it’s 
hard to deny that managing public perceptions is as important as setting up 
education, housing and work for the newly arrived. This sits at the centre of 
Merkel’s numerous “keep calm” messages. It is also at the centre of Germany’s 
revived interest in European defence and security. Merkel is acutely aware that 
if terrorism rears its head again,as it did this summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/germany-bavaria-police-attacks-munich-ansbach-wurzburg>
, the nation’s quest for a new sense of cohesion might quickly be shattered.

Germany’s strengths in addressing its refugee challenge can be easily 
overlooked. The reasons why Merkel repeated “Wir schaffen das” so often have 
not suddenly vanished – even if she’s toned down the message. But just as 
Europe needs Germany to succeed in integrating refugees (otherwise populists 
will benefit everywhere), the country needs Europe to act collectively to make 
sure the conditions for integration aren’t thwarted by violence. Loneliness is 
something it can’t afford.
 