
Two very different women hold Europe’s future in their hands – and neither of 
them is Theresa May. The battle for Europe’s soul is being waged betweenAngela 
Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel> and Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>. This is a clash of 
personalities and visions: Germany’s chancellor v the leader of France’s Front 
National, the largest far-right party in Europe. As Britain prepares to leave 
the EU, the Franco-German dimension of the continent’s destiny has arguably 
never been so important since the end of the cold war. What is at stake is 
momentous: whether Europe can survive as a project, and whether fundamental 
principles such as the rule of law, democracy and tolerance can be salvaged. 
The battle will play out nationally in 2017, in key elections in France and 
Germany, but it concerns all Europeans.

French elections: Front National makes no gains in final round
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/front-national-fails-to-win-control-of-target-regions-amid-tactical-voting>
It may seem strange to reduce Europe’s existential crises to just one personal 
confrontation. Merkel has been in powersince 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/oct/11/germany.topstories3> and is 
trying to remain there, while Le Pen may dream of being in office but has never 
approached it (last year her partyfailed to take control 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/front-national-fails-to-win-control-of-target-regions-amid-tactical-voting>
 of a single French region in local elections). Some may ask: why would a 
French opposition figure count more than the man currently sitting in the 
Elysée Palace? But François Hollande has become so weak – even more sowith this 
week’s resignation of his economics minister, Emmanuel Macron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/30/frances-economy-minister-emmanuel-macron-resigns>
 – and terrorism has transformed French politics to such a degree that Le Pen’s 
prospects now stand out as a key defining factor of where France, and Europe 
for that matter, may be heading.

It is only partly reassuring to say that Le Pen has little chance of becoming 
president next year (the French electoral system makes that difficult). The 
trouble is, in recent months, her brand of anti-Muslim, xenophobic and 
nationalistic politics has spread across the French mainstream right like 
wildfire. Le Pen is fast capitalisingon this summer’s burkini episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/burkini-ban-france-failed-minorities-muslim>
 and on the national trauma left by jihadi terrorism. It’s hard to see which 
French politician or movement can find the authority and strength to push back 
against her ideas, or counter their appeal among the French suburban middle 
classes as well as in rural areas. Nicolas Sarkozy hopes to win primaries in 
November, but hiswhole strategy hinges on imitating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/burkini-row-nicolas-sarkozy-calls-for-nationwide-ban>
 rather than disputing Le Pen’s line of thinking.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fangela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24f95049d506e40dc3615a1de5205cae227c5a89%2F0_60_3435_2061%2F3435.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Angela%20Merkel%20and%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%3A%20one%20of%20them%20will%20shape%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20future%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fangela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Angela%20Merkel%20and%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%3A%20one%20of%20them%20will%20shape%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20future%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F02%2Fangela-merkel-marine-le-pen-europe-destiny%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24f95049d506e40dc3615a1de5205cae227c5a89%2F0_60_3435_2061%2F3435.jpg>
 ‘Le Pen lashed out at Hollande, describing him as a subdued ‘vice-chancellor 
of Germany’, after he’d denounced populism in a speech.’ Photograph: Philippe 
Wojazer/AFP/Getty Images 
Marine Le Pen’s single most powerful opponent is to be found outside France: 
Angela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>. Le Pen hates 
Merkel, and Merkel despises Le Pen. They confront each other in a fight of 
European proportions. Le Pen has often attacked the chancellor – once 
describing her as an “empress” imposing “illegal immigration” on the whole of 
Europe. Merkel sees Le Pen as an acute political threat to Europe, although she 
has rarely mentioned her in public. If France embraces the far right, the wider 
impact will be far more serious than it was with, say, Hungary’s illiberal 
slide.

Merkel and Le Pen have never met, nor have they had any reason to. Once, last 
year, they sat not far from each other in the European Parliament chamber – but 
Merkel kept her gaze away, out of contempt. That day, Le Pen furiously lashed 
out at Hollande, describing him as a subdued “vice-chancellor of Germany”, 
after he’d denounced populism in a speech.

These two women have one thing in common and one thing only: the depth of 
their political conviction. Angela Merkel has been unwavering in her message 
thatwelcoming refugees is the right thing to do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/17/refugees-did-not-bring-terrorism-to-germany-says-angela-merkel>
; Le Pen fumes against “rampant Islamisation” of the continent. Merkel wants to 
save the European project; Le Pen is fully aligned with forces that want to 
dismantle it (she recently said on CNN that France had become an EU 
“province”). Merkel nurtures the transatlantic link; Le Pen admires Putin’s 
Russia – her party sits at the heart ofpro-Kremlin networks in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/08/russia-europe-right-putin-front-national-eu>
, financial ones among them. Le Pen’s ideology draws from France’s historical 
far right, the ideas of Charles Maurras and colonial racism; Merkel is the 
daughter of a Protestant pastor for whom individual freedoms are paramount 
values. Le Pen has always made much about being divorced and smoking cigarettes 
(trying to cast herself in the image of a modern woman); Merkel’s personal 
style is more subdued, which isn’t to say her character is less ironclad.

For decades what drove the European project was the so-called “Franco-German 
engine”. It is now all but broken – mainly because of France’s economic 
weaknesses, which have severely unbalanced the relationship. What now drives 
European politics is a different kind of Franco-German equation, one in which 
Merkel, often faulted for her eurozone policies, has on several occasions 
attempted to give France’s socialist government some financial breathing space 
against Le Pen – including by sparing France the wrath of the EU commission for 
disrespecting deficit targets.

Merkel’s anti-Le Pen strategy has largely been discreet. But in May she made 
it very plain. Speaking at Berlin’s French lycee, she said she would try to 
make sure “other political forces are stronger than the Front National, if that 
can be accomplished from abroad”. It was an unusually blunt statement. Le Pen’s 
supporters immediatelyaccused the chancellor of meddling in French politics 
<http://europe.newsweek.com/marine-le-pen-angela-merkel-front-national-germany-455974?rm=eu>
; but Merkel has long identified the populist dynamics connecting Le Pen’s rise 
with the rise of Germany’s far-rightAfD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/19/frauke-petry-acceptable-face-of-germany-new-right-interview>
, a party that threatens to upend politics in her own country.

This coming Sunday, regional elections in Mecklenburg-Vorpommern offer a key 
test for Merkel’s CDU party, which has trailed in local polls behind the AfD. 
Le Pen will be watching closely, and little wonder: one of the two will shape 
the future ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. The 
question is which.

We should beware Russia’s links with Europe’s right | Luke Harding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/08/russia-europe-right-putin-front-national-eu> 