
At the centre of the Conservatives’ so-called welfare reform is the promise to 
“make work pay” 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/economy/news/63265/david-cameron-speech-making-work-pay>
. But after Angela – a carer for her husband, who has the chronic fatigue 
condition, ME and depression – took a part-time job last month, her family have 
lost the support they need in order to eat and pay the rent.

Living in a council house in rural Devon, the 43-year-old has four children to 
look after. Her husband, Gary, needs daily help with washing, dressing, keeping 
calm and taking his medication. Angela doesn’t speak about it much but she’s 
unwell herself, withfibromyalgia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/experience-i-am-in-constant-pain>
, a chronic illness that makes the body and mind tired and pained.

A mix of social security enables the family to get by: housing benefit to pay 
the rent, Gary’s disability living allowance (DLA) to lease aMotability 
<http://www.motability.co.uk/> car, free school meals for the kids, carer’s 
allowance and income support.

But income support comes with strings attached. Every three months – under 
threat of having her benefits sanctioned – Angela has to go to her nearest 
jobcentre and attend a “work-focused interview”: this is a Department for Work 
and Pension (DWP) term forchecking up 
<https://www.benefitsandwork.co.uk/employment-and-support-allowance/esa-glossary/1483-work-focused-interview>
 on someone’s “job prospects and barriers to work”.

Despite the fact she’s still caring for her husband, Angela’s carer’s 
allowance – £62 a week – would be removed

Angela tells me that, in her case, jobcentre advisers focus on her husband’s 
having had a “miraculous” recovery from ME, or on what she’ll do if he dies. 
“He’s sitting next to me when they say that,” she adds.

As a carer, Angela officially has no obligation from the DWP to take 
employment; but in reality, she says there is definite pressure to find work – 
“any work”.

“The jobcentre staff say: ‘You’ll have to find a job sometime. What are you 
doing to find work?’” she tells me. “But when have I got time? They want you 
off their books, and they’ll find any way to do it.”

Last month Angela reached the point where she could no longer cope with this 
pressure to find a job. She said: “At times it was soul destroying.” She felt 
she had to take any work she could – which was 25 hours a week housekeeping at 
a local hotel.

The job means she would now be eligible for working tax credits (estimated to 
be £80 a week). But it also means a stack of the social security the family 
relies on would be automatically pulled away. Despite the fact she’s still 
caring for her husband, Angela’s carer’s allowance – £62 a week – would be 
removed. Income support – at £190 a fortnight – would also go. Her children 
will lose their free school meals (that’s £45 a week in total), as well as the 
reduced bus passes to get them to school (another £45 a week).

At the same time, the family would have to pay out more: £40 a week towards 
rent (if Angela doesn’t work, it’s all covered by housing benefit) and £48 a 
month for council tax (over twice as much as before). The job only pays £7.50 
an hour.

“Going through the online calculators, I’ll probably be worse off,” she says. 
“You do wonder why you bother. But I don’t feel as if I’ve been left with any 
option.”

I speak to Angela again over a week after she’s started work and she’s 
noticeably worried. Within days of taking the job, she tells me her carer’s 
allowance and income support were stopped. At the same time, the family’s 
housing benefit and council tax support have been suspended (now she’s working, 
the council need to re-assess their income).

Before either the help for rent or council tax is reinstated, Angela has to 
take the council a pile of evidence: anything from five weeks of payslips, 
three months of bank statements (including her paypal account), two proofs of 
ID, to a letter from her eldest daughter’s college.

“After all that, it could take up to six weeks [to get those benefits back],” 
she says. “I’ve no idea when tax credits will be paid so we’ve got £60 to last 
us to cover food, petrol and electric on a key meter. It’s been horrendous.”

PIP is a disaster for disabled people. At last the full horror is emerging | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
It may be emblematic of the government’s race for reform that in the same week 
the family’s benefits have been taken, Gary has had his re-assessment for
personal independence payments (PIP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/11/iain-duncan-smith-pip-payments-punish-poor-ill-dying>
 – the Conservatives’ replacement for DLA. Angela has little hope her husband 
will keep his support: he had an anxiety attack throughout the test to the 
extent that he couldn’t eat for two days after. “[The assessor] made him try 
and get up from his wheelchair and said, ‘we’ll call that a half squat,’” she 
says.

That the changes to the disability benefit were coming was lurking in the back 
of Angela’s mind when she looked for work: because of the wayPIP is linked to 
other benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
, she knew that if her husband was rejected for PIP, she’d lose the carer’s 
allowance and income support anyway. “Plus we’d lose the car,” she says. “It’s 
like we jumped before we were pushed.”

A week later, Angela emails me: she was nearly hospitalised a few days earlier 
– the physical effort of the work took its toll – and she’s had to resign. 
She’s already applied for two new jobs: office work, she says, so she at least 
won’t be on her feet all day. She also tells me she’s had a letter from the 
housing association informing her she’s now in rent arrears. The family’s tax 
credits have come through (for £40 more than the council’s website predicted) 
but no other benefit has been reinstated. Meanwhile, she hasn’t had one payslip 
from work.

“My dad always said, ‘make sure you’ve got food in the cupboard,’” she says. 
“Luckily, we’ve not had to go to a food bank yet. I don’t think we’ve got the 
money for petrol.”
 