
As we sat by the campfire, Gervais, a ranger from the forests of Malawi, 
slowly pulled back his hair to expose a 20cm scar left by a machete attack that 
nearly killed him. Poachers, he told me.

I was at an international rangers’ conference, held 13 years ago in a national 
park on the southern tip of mainland Australia. Another ranger, Jobogo Mirindi 
from the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), showed me a photo taken five 
years before. Arranged football team-style were 30 or so of his smiling 
colleagues. Six rangers’ heads were circled in red; those were the only ones 
still alive.

I was shocked. How could I not know such extreme violence was happening to my 
colleagues and friends around the world? As a ranger myself, I knew that 
protecting wildlife could be dangerous – but I had no idea just how deadly 
their situation was. This was a war.

Since that pivotal moment, I’ve worked with rangers on six continents through 
theThin Green Line Foundation <https://www.thingreenline.org.au/>, which 
supports these brave men and women and their families. I am consistently 
inspired by their humour, dedication and humility.

Cameroonian ranger killed by wildlife poachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/10/cameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers>
I’ve also come to know that two to three rangers die each week in the line of 
duty. Last year 112 paid the ultimate price; in the last decade,more than 1,000 
<https://www.thingreenline.org.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/2009-2016-Honour-Roll-1.pdf>
. About 65-70% of those who die are murdered by poachers seeking to steal our 
collective heritage.

I have seen too many reports and images of rangers slain. To an extent, I have 
had to turn off emotionally. But every now and then one gets through, and I 
find myself silently weeping. Sometimes it is someone I have worked with, or 
even someone who has saved me from attacks by poachers or militia – a debt I 
can never repay.

In the DRC in 2008, a ranger named Venant Mumbere Muvesevese and 15 of his 
colleagues guided me safely out of an ambush, as five militia laid in wait for 
my vehicle. Just two weeks after I had left the park, those same militia, now 
50 in number, stopped a vehicle on the way to the market. It was carrying 20 
people, including rangers and their families. There were no demands and no 
questions – they just opened fire on everyone, injuring many and killing a 
ranger’s wife and daughter. This year, Venant himself was gunned down by armed 
rebels.

Protecting wildlife is no longer just a case of stopping poaching by poor 
local villagers. Illegal wildlife crime is now estimated to be worth more than
$20bn (£16bn) per year 
<https://cites.org/eng/international_dimension_of_illegal_wildlife_trade>, 
ranked only behind drugs, weapons and human trafficking in the criminal value 
chain. Rangers face well-organised criminal gangs and hardened armed militia. 
Rebel groups often use poaching as a way to fund their operations. We are now 
seeing reports thatterrorist groups do too 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/africa-wild/2015/aug/30/case-proven-ivory-trafficking-funds-terrorism>
.

But wildlife poaching isn’t the only threat rangers face. When Mohammed Akram, 
a community ranger in the mountains of Pakistan, confronted timber poachers he 
was offered bribes worth half his yearly salary to disappear and leave them to 
their work. Akram refused and told the poachers that it was not about money but 
his duty to protect his forest. They shot him six times with their AK47s, and 
when that didn’t kill him they decapitated him.

Why the Guardian is spending a year reporting on the plight of elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/why-the-guardian-is-spending-a-year-reporting-on-the-plight-of-the-worlds-elephant-population>
This honourable man, this humble ranger, who lived in a tent with his family, 
gave his life for conservation. This should shock you and I wouldn’t blame you 
if you wanted to stop reading now. But please honour these rangers by hearing 
their stories.

Esnart Paundi will stay with me the most. Esnart was a ranger from Zambia. As 
she and her colleague arrested two poachers, they were overpowered by a third 
hiding in the bushes. Her fellow ranger was struck down with a machete in front 
of her. Esnart ran, but the poachers tracked her and murdered her. She left 
behind five children, aged from three to 15.

Venant, Mohammed, Esnart: I suspect that is enough tragedy for one article. 
But every week more rangers die, doing a job that the rest of the world wants 
and expects them to do: protecting our wildlife and our most precious wild 
places.

Just this week I received another email with images of a ranger shot and killed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/10/cameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers>
 while on an anti-poaching patrol in Cameroon. RIP Ranger Ngongo. We will 
support your family.

The news of these sacrifices deserves our attention. There are also as many 
inspiring stories of rangers and their fight. Yet both good and awful go almost 
completely unreported by media in the west.

Saving Africa's elephants isn't just a 'white man's job'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/07/saving-africas-elephants-isnt-just-a-white-mans-job>
Surely if a country lost 100 of their soldiers, each and every year, we would 
call it a war and report it as such. This is a war to protect nature, fought 
silently by men and women who go under-resourced, under-trained and 
under-equipped.

These tireless warriors put their lives on the line to defend this planet 
every day. It is about time that we stood with them and gave them the support, 
recognition and respect that they deserve. They fight on behalf of us all.

 * To support rangers and their families, visit the Thin Green Line Foundation 
website <https://www.thingreenline.org.au/donate/>.
 