
The UK’s first pop-up village in south-east London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/18/pop-up-village-in-south-east-london-to-house-homeless-families>
, which houses 24 formerly homeless families, is a novel attempt at helping 
tackle Britain’s housing crisis and will serve as a blueprint for factory-made 
accommodation across the capital and in other cities.


The 96 residents of the brightly coloured Ladywell development in Lewisham 
previously lived in B&Bs or private rented accommodation and started moving in 
from August after it was built in eight months.

Mariatu Turay moved from a noisy flat above a 99p store on the main shopping 
street in Catford with her two daughters. She said her new home was far nicer 
and quieter than where she lived before.

The Ladywell flat costs Turay £1,061 a month. She is able to pay the rent 
since becoming a health science student at the University of EastLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Ceyda Eray previously lived in a damp house in Brockley with her two 
daughters, then aged nine and 14. “I went to the doctor and he gave them asthma 
pumps because my oldest one, when she was doing PE, after five to 10 minutes 
she was breathless, and my youngest one had eczema,” she said.

“But after we left that place she was fine and now she doesn’t have anything. 
No asthma pumps, no eczema creams, nothing.

“My husband says: ‘I hope these flats stay and we’ll be there permanently.’”

The two-bedroom homes are temporary and will stay in Ladywell for up to five 
years while Lewisham council finalises its long-term plans for the area. They 
were designed by Richard Rogers’ architectural practice, Rogers Stirk Harbour + 
Partners (RSHP), which worked in partnership with the council, the construction 
company AECOM and insulation company SIG.

When the residents moved in, rents were generally paid through housing 
benefit, but most now pay at least part of the rent. Lewisham council expects 
to find them permanent accommodation within 18 to 24 months and stresses that 
no one is going to be homeless when the project ends.

RSHP believes its concept for high-quality accommodation, made in factories 
and designed to last for 60 years, could help achieve the government’s target 
of building 100,000 modular homes out of a planned 1m homes over the course of 
this parliament.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Flondon-uk-housing-crisis-lewisham-pop-up-homes-ladywell-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd857b9f2c7fdece1ba303fce60ee43003b96a4a2%2F0_778_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Another%20London%20pop-up%3A%20the%20project%20that%20could%20ease%20the%20housing%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Flondon-uk-housing-crisis-lewisham-pop-up-homes-ladywell-development%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Another%20London%20pop-up%3A%20the%20project%20that%20could%20ease%20the%20housing%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Flondon-uk-housing-crisis-lewisham-pop-up-homes-ladywell-development%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd857b9f2c7fdece1ba303fce60ee43003b96a4a2%2F0_778_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
 One of the homes being lifted into place. They cost £156,000 each to build and 
are designed to last for 60 years. Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Each flat in the £5m Ladywell development consists of two units made in a 
Derbyshire factory, put on lorries and lifted into place by cranes. They can be 
taken apart and rebuilt elsewhere up to five times.

Lewisham council said each home cost £156,000 to build, about 20% cheaper than 
a typical council home.

The flats are bright, spacious – 77 sq metres (829 sq ft), above the London 
space standard of 75 sq m – and well insulated, costing about £500 a year in 
utility bills. There are shops, a cafe, a community cinema and co-working 
spaces for small local businesses on the ground floor.

Another resident, Christelle Kapeu, said: “When we came in, my second son 
actually didn’t want to sleep at all – he was so excited about the place and 
the balcony. You usually have houses with balconies, but it’s huge.

“When you are outside, you can’t even imagine what is inside. You think, oh, 
this must be a small place, but when you come in, oh my God. I put all my stuff 
in and there is still some space left. It’s so spacious.”

Roger Harding, the director of policy at the homelessness charity Shelter, 
said: “This scheme is a great way of helping homeless families get back on 
their feet and it’s really positive to see Lewisham borough council looking for 
new ways to tackle the housing crisis.

“We would encourage other councils to look at this model as a cost-effective 
way of keeping homeless families in good-quality homes in their local borough, 
close to friends, family, schools and jobs.

“Ultimately, what’s most important to avoid families needing this sort of 
urgent support in the first place is to make sure we are building homes that 
are genuinely affordable to buy and rent for the long term.”

Councils across the country are struggling to get people off their housing 
lists and into permanent accommodation, faced with rapidly rising property 
prices and rents, and the loss of social housing through the right-to-buy 
scheme.

Lewisham council has 9,422 households on its waiting list for homes, 526 of 
them in nightly paid temporary accommodation, such as B&Bs.

The council is drawing up plans with RSHP for more modular housing in the 
borough, which will be permanent, and another project is at the design stage.

The Ladywell scheme has attracted a lot of interest and the company hopes to 
build similar housing, either temporary or permanent, elsewhere in London and 
in other cities including Manchester.
 