
An international agreement to protect some of Antarctica’s unique and pristine 
marine ecosystems could be reached within a fortnight, with scientists and 
conversationists hopeful of a breakthrough after five years of failed 
negotiations.

Delegates from 24 nations and the European Union gathered in Hobart on Monday 
to commence two weeks of talks at the annual meeting of the Commission for the
Conservation <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> of 
Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR).

The commission has been working since 2011 towards protecting a range of areas 
in the Southern Ocean.

The ice cold war: fight for sealife in remote wilds of Antarctica
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/07/antarctica-ross-sea-sancturay-marine-life-russia-china-fishing>
If an agreement is reached, it would represent the first time a marine 
protected area was established in international waters by consensus.Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has consistently blocked the 
agreement, with China also scuppering the deal each year until 2015.

This year there are signs Russia, which is chairing the meeting for the second 
year in a row, is prepared to make a deal to protect the Ross Sea and possibly 
EastAntarctica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>.

“There has been a lot of movement within Russia for more environmental 
awareness – coming from high up in the Putin government,” said Andrea Kavanagh, 
director of Antarctic and Southern Ocean work at the Pew Charitable Trusts.

 In the past year, Russian president Vladimir Putin’s former chief of staff, 
Sergei Ivanov, has been appointed  
<http://en.kremlin.ru/events/president/news/52688> special presidential 
representative for environmental protection, ecology and transport, and Ivanov 
has increased protection to waters around the Arctic.

Can ‘Speedo diplomacy’ save one of the world's last pristine oceans?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/09/can-speedo-diplomacy-save-one-worlds-last-pristine-oceans>
In January Putin declared 2017  
<https://www.rt.com/politics/328531-putin-declares-2017-year-of/> the Year of 
Ecology in Russia. In September, the US secretary of state, John Kerry, said he 
had been in discussions with Putin, and revealed Russia had conducted an 
“interagency assessment” of the Antarctic proposals.

“I don’t know what the results of that assessment will be, but we obviously 
all remain hopeful that Russia will step up and join us in this endeavour,”
Kerry said <https://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2016/09/262048.htm>.

Scientists have estimated 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v427/n6969/full/nature02127.html> the 
Southern Ocean produces about three quarters of the nutrients that sustain life 
in the rest of the world’s oceans. The region is also home to most of the 
world’s penguins and whales.

Kavanagh said Antarctica marine reserves were “vital because they will protect 
pristine ecosystems”.

“At the height of the cold war the Antarctic treaty was signed that protected 
all of the land of Antarctica for peace and science, but they left out the 
oceans,” she said. “That was a reflection of how people viewed the oceans at 
the time.”

Over the coming fortnight, 250 marine scientists, conservationists and 
policymakers from 24 countries and the EU will discuss three proposed marine 
protected areas: the Ross Sea, East Antarctica and the Weddell Sea.

Russia accused of blocking creation of vast Antarctic marine reserves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/oct/31/russia-accused-of-blocking-creation-of-vast-antarctic-marine-reserves>
The chair of the CCAMLR, Vasily Titushkin, said  
<https://www.ccamlr.org/en/organisation/world-experts-antarctic-marine-conservation-meet-hobart>
he was 
<https://www.ccamlr.org/en/organisation/world-experts-antarctic-marine-conservation-meet-hobart>
 “looking forward to the challenge of dealing with the many complex scientific 
and political issues that come up in this commission each year”.

“In the past, CCAMLR members have demonstrated an incredible commitment to 
work through these issues, to understand divergent views and work 
collaboratively to find mutually acceptable outcomes.

“This year will be no different and I intend to do everything I can, as chair, 
to foster an environment for that international collaboration to continue to be 
a main feature of CCAMLR’s annual meeting.”
 