
A polar scientist who helped to uncover dramatic historical warming in 
Antarctica and became the first woman to lead the British government’s research 
in the region has been made a dame in theNew Year honours list 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/new-year-honours-list>.

Prof Jane Francis, the director of the British Antarctic Survey and a veteran 
of more than a dozen expeditions to the Arctic andAntarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>, receives the award for her 
services to polar science and diplomacy.

“It’s a complete surprise and I’m greatly honoured,” Francis told the 
Guardian. She will travel to Antarctica on Sunday for a week and again at the 
end of January to visit the Halley research station, which is being moved to 
avoid anominous-looking crack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/british-antarctic-research-station-crack-ice>
 in the ice sheet.


Francis, who first sailed into Antarctic waters on a BAS expedition in 1989, 
said: “The word awesome was invented for Antarctica. It completely blows your 
mind. It is incredibly beautiful, but also very humbling. Being a fragile human 
in such a cold and remote place can be daunting.”

Also awarded a damehood is Prof Amanda Fisher, the director of the MRC 
Clinical Sciences Centre at Imperial College in London. Fisher’s discoveries 
helped pinpoint HIV as the virus that causes Aids. The honour also recognises 
her work on stem cells and epigenetics, and her advocacy forwomen in science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/31/women-science-industry-structure-sexist-courses-careers>
.

Other researchers to receive damehoods are Prof Ottoline Leyser, the director 
of the Sainsbury Laboratory at Cambridge University, and Prof Caroline Watkins, 
the only nursing professor of stroke care in the UK.


Sir Alec Jeffreys, whose accidental invention of DNA fingerprinting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/may/24/dna-fingerprinting-alec-jeffreys>
 transformed forensic science, has been awarded the companion of honour, as has
Mary Warnock <https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/jul/19/society1>, who 
brought about an overhaul of special needs education and shaped Britain’s 
fertility regulations, now widely regarded as the best in the world.


A number of scientists receive knighthoods, including Prof Shankar 
Balasubramanian, a Cambridge University chemist and co-inventor of 
next-generation DNA sequencing, a procedure available for less than £1,000 that 
can read a whole human genome. Nicholas Black, a professor of health services 
research at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, and Jim Smith, 
the director of research at the Francis Crick Institute, have also been awarded 
knighthoods.
 