
The tip of the Antarctic peninsula has cooled over the past 15 years, 
scientists have found, but the discovery does not mean global warming has 
stopped.

Researchers analysed air temperature data from the area, which covers about 1% 
of the continent, and found it had warmed quickly from the 1920s until the late 
1990s, as climate change drove up global temperatures. Since then, temperatures 
have fallen.

The scientists said the change is related to local changes in wind patterns, 
partly driven by therecovery of the ozone hole 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/30/ozone-layer-hole-appears-to-be-healing-scientists-say>
. If carbon emissions continue to rise at the current rate, they expect 
temperatures on the peninsula to rise by several degrees by 2100.

Prof John Turner of British Antarctic Survey (BAS), who led the study 
published in Nature <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature18645>, said: 
“The Antarctic peninsula climate system shows large natural variations, which 
can overwhelm the signals of human-induced global warming.”

Globally, June was the 14th month in a row 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/20/june-2016-14th-consecutive-month-of-record-breaking-heat-says-us-agencies>
 to set a record high temperature and2016 is expected to be the hottest year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/17/shattered-records-climate-change-emergency-today-scientists-warn>
 recorded, beating the previous record set in 2015.

In Antarctica, another paper published last week 
<http://dx.doi.org/10.1126/science.aae0017> showed that the retreat of 90% of 
the Peninsula’s glaciers since 1940 is mostly due to warming of the oceans, not 
the air. Previous work has shown thecollapse of parts of the giant Antarctic 
ice cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/12/western-antarctic-ice-sheet-collapse-has-already-begun-scientists-warn>
 may already be unstoppable, potentially causing 4 metres of sea level rise in 
coming centuries.

Shattered records show climate change is an emergency today, scientists warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/17/shattered-records-climate-change-emergency-today-scientists-warn>
Prof Andrew Shepherd, at the University of Leeds, said: “It’s completely 
unsurprising that in any long-term temperature record there will be a decade of 
measurements that buck the trend. There are few scientists left who believe 
that atmospheric warming will be the main cause of Antarctic [ice] instability 
over the next century. The real threat is ocean warming, which has triggered 
widespread loss of ice just around the corner in westAntarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> and we should not lose sight of 
that.”

Prof Nerilie Abram, at the Australian National University, said: “This new 
research definitely doesn’t imply that warming of the planet has stopped. But 
it is a good example of how the long-term changes in our climate also have a 
layer of year-to-year variability on top that can cause some decades to warm 
particularly quickly and others to apparently not warm at all.

She said: “For a remote place like Antarctica, where climate measurements are 
especially short and those year-to-year swings in climate are very large, our 
records really aren’t long enough yet to see the full picture of human-caused 
climate change.”
Along the Bellingshausen Sea coast of West Antarctica, ice has been retreating 
inland or being lost to the sea as show this two views from February 18 1975 
and March 2, 2015. Scientists knew this, but they lacked a full picture of the 
scale. Now a team of researchers has compiled a Landsat-based data set and 
found that such losses have been going on for at least the past four decades 
and along the vast majority of this coast. Credits: Nasa 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/c74ad3c7469ea3339a187f64c95666a3eb3d5ffb/0_0_4000_4000/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/c74ad3c7469ea3339a187f64c95666a3eb3d5ffb/0_0_4000_4000/1000.jpg&label_before=Then&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/5431e5abbea50c269649b37520cb364b58c64955/0_0_4000_4000/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/5431e5abbea50c269649b37520cb364b58c64955/0_0_4000_4000/1000.jpg&label_after=Now&>
 Along the Bellingshausen Sea coast of West Antarctica, ice has been retreating 
inland or being lost to the sea as show this two views from February 18, 1975 
and March 2, 2015. Scientists knew this, but they lacked a full picture of the 
scale. Now a team of researchers has compiled a Landsat-based data set and 
found that such losses have been going on for at least the past four decades 
and along the vast majority of this coast. Credits: Nasa 
In June, levels of the carbon dioxide in the atmosphere above Antarctica rose 
past the 400 parts per million milestone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/16/antarctic-co2-hits-400ppm-for-first-time-in-4m-years>
, contrasting with the pre-industrial level of 280ppm, said Robert Mulvaney, an 
ice core researcher at BAS and co-author of the Nature paper.

“Climate model simulations predict that if greenhouse gas concentrations 
continue to increase at currently projected rates their warming effect will 
dominate over natural variability - and the cooling effect associated with 
recovering ozone levels - and there will be a warming of several degrees across 
the region by the end of this century,” he added.
 