
The election for a new general secretary 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/about-us/general-secretary-election.html> of the ASCL, 
one of the two main headteacher organisations, is fascinating for those of us 
who like reading the education runes.

With almost 18,000 members – heads and other senior secondary leaders across 
the UK – the Association of School and College Leaders has enormous potential 
clout. It is now in the throes of a contest between two candidates whose 
personal and professional backgrounds seem to illustrate the fault lines in 
current policy debate.

The previous general secretary, Brian Lightman, left abruptly 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35432631> and somewhat mysteriously almost 
a year ago amid rumours of a dispute about how to respond to government policy.

The ASCL’s recruitment process allows for a nomination committee of nine 
members of its ruling council to come up with a preferred successor. They seem 
to have found a candidate who is accomplished and experienced, but who could 
have been provided by Department for Education central casting.Chris Kirk 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/utilities/document-summary.html?id=CEA9527F-91CA-4783-96CF85F050429548>
 is a consultant and former civil servant who worked for the international 
profit-making education companyGems <http://www.gemseducation.com/> and is now 
with an academy chain, but has never been a head.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fanti-academy-head-union-election-ascl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646603bbfb1011c57cc2f3afbd1ef24f4d1c2ba0%2F489_153_1444_1444%2F1444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Anti-academy%20head%20squares%20up%20to%20establishment%20elite%20in%20union%20election%20%7C%20Fiona%20Millar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fanti-academy-head-union-election-ascl%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Anti-academy%20head%20squares%20up%20to%20establishment%20elite%20in%20union%20election%20%7C%20Fiona%20Millar&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fanti-academy-head-union-election-ascl%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F646603bbfb1011c57cc2f3afbd1ef24f4d1c2ba0%2F489_153_1444_1444%2F1444.jpg>
 The ruling council’s nomination, Chris Kirk, is a consultant who worked for 
Gems, an international for-profit education company. 
His appointment would normally be a done deal but, to fulfil the 
organisation’s obligations under trade union legislation, the selection process 
allows for nominations from the association’s membership, with a potential 
challenger needing to win the support of at least 75 members from 10 different 
branches.Geoff Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/nativity-play-financial-crisis-education>
, a Suffolk headteacher well known in the profession and beyond as a consummate 
head, education commentator and passionate champion of local state 
comprehensive education, has put himself forward, leading to an election – the 
first in the organisation’s history.

Barton, who recently said he would be the “last person in England 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-views/i-will-be-last-person-england-dragged-kicking-and-screaming-be>
 dragged kicking and screaming to be an academy head”, is backed by 300 
nominations from fellow professionals. This suggests significant support for 
his core message: that concerns of rank and file headteachers must be more 
vigorously represented and that the union needs a more robust stance in 
influencing policy.

To be fair to the ASCL, and indeed most other unions and professional 
organisations in current times, their job involves walking a tightrope. Shout 
too much from the sidelines, or even take direct industrial action, and you can 
be quickly sidelined and branded as militant luddites, stuck in the past and 
lacking the slick reforming zeal in which all governments like to clothe 
themselves.

But take the softly-softly, behind closed doors, influence-from-within 
approach and you can equally quickly be stamped as ineffective, corporate and 
too cosy with the powers that be.
 Geoff Barton, a Suffolk headteacher, has said he would be ‘the last person in 
England dragged kicking and screaming to be an academy head’. 
This is especially the case at a time when life at the chalkface feels more 
precarious than ever for many heads, whose schools face a funding cliff edge, 
chronic teacher shortages and ever more pressure to raise performance with 
fewer resources.

ASCL’s troubles may not be helped by the fact that its rival union, the 
more-primary focusedNational Association of Head Teachers 
<http://www.naht.org.uk/#> (which is also led by a non-head), seems to balance 
on the tightrope while still managing to critique government policy and 
campaign on issues such as forced academisation, testing and curriculum change.

It may be predictable that the ASCL, with such a huge and diverse membership 
across the state, private and selective sectors, comes across as staid and 
prone topolicy papers 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/policy/blueprint-for-selfimproving-system/> that 
reflect rather than challenge the direction of government policy. This is 
especially the case with the drive towards multi-academy trusts, whose leaders 
seem to be influential in the ASCL inner sanctum.

But reading the candidates’ election addresses 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/about-us/general-secretary-election.html> and supporter 
statements it is hard to escape the conclusion that this really is a struggle 
at the heart of the profession – between a conservative establishment elite and 
a grassroots insurgent speaking for the rank and file.

It is certainly odd that the ASCL preferred candidate doesn’t even mention the 
grammar school question, even though the union’s polling suggests80% of heads 
<http://www.ascl.org.uk/news-and-views/news_news-detail.four-out-of-five-heads-and-teachers-oppose-new-grammar-schools.html>
 oppose the creation of new selective schools.

Who knows what will happen next? Voting started last week and runs until the 
end of the month. It would be significant if Barton won, sending a clear signal 
that anger, frustration and fear among school leaders needs to be acknowledged, 
not only by the ASCL hierarchy but by the government, whose policy 
implementation is dependent on the professionals’ goodwill.

If those voices are not heard, I suspect we will see more and more local 
headteacher groups organising their own campaigns and possibly some leakage of 
secondary heads from ASCL towards the NAHT.

The Headteachers’ Roundtable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/oct/22/education-reform-twitter-heads>
 campaign group arose out of a frustration with the usual means of influencing 
policy. And in the past three months we have seen heads inKent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/grammar-schools-plan-kent-headteachers-tell-education-secretary-deep-opposition>
 andSurrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/surrey-headteachers-express-vehement-opposition-to-grammar-schools-plan>
 speaking out collectively against more academic selection.

That is not necessarily a bad thing. Headteachers have always had much more 
power than they may realise through their parents’ influence on local MPs.

But too many fragmented campaigns could be counterproductive at a time when 
ministers need to see a united front on the fundamental issues: primarily 
funding and teacher supply. Which comes down to the need for the unions all to 
speak with one voice, as forcefully as possible. Whether the ASCL’s members 
vote for change or not, the union may need to move outside its comfort zone and 
joint the fight.
 