
A report by anti-abortion campaigners in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has claimed that 100,000 
people were born in the region because the 1967 Abortion Act was never extended 
to the province.

The Both Lives Matter <https://bothlivesmatter.org/> report published on 
Wednesday comes as the former justice minister inNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> confirmed this week that he 
will resubmit his private member’s bill in the next Stormont assembly calling 
on the new devolved parliament to legalise abortions in cases of fatal foetal 
abnormalities where the pregnancies are doomed.


Dawn McAvoy of Both Lives Matter said: “The debate around abortion is in 
danger of becoming polarised by those only concerned with the unborn child on 
the one hand and those solely concerned with the rights of the women on the 
other. The reality is that both lives matter.”

“There are people alive in Northern Ireland today who would not have been born 
if the 1967Abortion <https://www.theguardian.com/world/abortion> Act had been 
introduced here. People we all know and love – spouses, children, friends and 
family.”

“We estimate that there are 100,000 people alive today, who would not be, had 
we introduced the 1967 Abortion Act.

Northern Ireland's attorney general to appeal ruling on abortion ban
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/25/northern-ireland-attorney-general-appeal-ruling-abortion-ban>
The group’s report comes at a time when the battle lines are being redrawn 
over abortion in Northern Ireland, the only part of the UK where the procedure 
is banned in almost all circumstances except when there is a direct threat to 
the mother’s life.

Thousands of Northern Irish women are forced to travel across to England to 
terminate their pregnancies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/northern-ireland-nhs-abortions-supreme-court-law>
 due to the near-total ban.

David Ford, the former leader of the cross-community Alliance Party 
<https://www.allianceparty.org/>, who was justice minister in the regional 
government before the 2016 May elections, has vowed to continue to press for 
abortion reform.

He said that in the next parliament after the scheduled elections on 2 March, 
there would be another private members bill calling on assembly members to 
liberalise the near-total ban on abortion.

Ford said: “Should the people of South Antrim re-elect me to the position of 
their MLA, on my first day back I will go to the Speaker’s office and resubmit 
my bill, with a view to progressing it through the next assembly term.”

The Both Lives Matter campaign is being backed by the former police ombudsman 
in Northern IrelandNuala O’Loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nuala-o-loan>, who said extreme cases of 
crisis pregnancies were being used to push a pro-abortion agenda.

Lady O’Loan said: “There is an urgent requirement at a time when heart-rending 
cases are being extensively utilised by those seeking to diminish legal 
protection for the unborn, to be more focused on recognising and providing for 
the needs and care of both mother and child. ‘Both Lives Matter’ is an 
excellent response to that pressing need.”

The group has also won the support of economist Esmond Birnie, a former 
adviser to ex-first minister and Nobel peace prize winner David Trimble.

Both Lives Matters said it is a new collaborative movement of individuals and 
organisations seeking to reframe the abortion debate in Northern Ireland.

In 2015 a high court judge in Belfast ruled that Northern Ireland’s almost 
outright ban on abortionbreaches the human rights of women and girls, including 
rape victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/30/northern-ireland-law-on-abortion-ruled-as-incompatible-with-human-rights>
. The ruling is being challenged by the province’s attorney general John Larkin.

At least 1,000 women and girls from Northern Ireland travel to hospitals in 
Britain for terminations every year.For instance, official figures for 2013 
suggest 800 Northern Irish pregnancies were terminated in Britain – although 
that number is regarded as an underestimate. Among the 800 was that of a 
13-year-old who became pregnant through incest.

The only law applying to abortion in Northern Ireland is the Offences Against 
the Persons Act 1861, which contains a life sentence for anyone convicted of 
carrying out a termination even in cases of rape or incest.
 