
Students from the rest of the world have been flocking to UK universities for 
decades, eager to get the most out of doing a degree here. In 2014-15 alone, 
some437,000 students came to the UK 
<http://institutions.ukcisa.org.uk//Info-for-universities-colleges--schools/Policy-research--statistics/Research--statistics/International-students-in-UK-HE/#International-(non-UK)-students-in-UK-HE-in-2014-15>
 from other countries to study. Butthis number is shrinking 
<http://institutions.ukcisa.org.uk/Info-for-universities-colleges--schools/Publications--research/resources/94/UKCISA-Briefing-on-international-students>
.

To the dismay of universities, there have been recent reports that the 
government is consideringcutting international student numbers by nearly half 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
 in an effort to meet the immigration targets set by prime minister Theresa May.

Foreign students from within the European Union are concerned that the UK’s 
Brexit decision will leave them stranded. But students from outside the EU have
already begun to turn away from the UK 
<https://www.nus.org.uk/en/news/press-releases/international-students-feel-unwelcome-in-uk-as-immigration-bill-set-to-create-new-barriers-to-study/>
 and consider more welcoming countries with renowned universities, such as the 
US and Australia.

And that’s because of strict visa rules introduced when May was home secretary.

What changed?

Until 2011, the number of students coming to the UK had been growing by 3-4% 
annually, but the rate has pretty much stagnated in recent years. This is down 
to changes introduced in 2012 that tightened the rules on foreign students 
staying on once they had completed their degrees.


Before the changes, a post-study work scheme allowed non-EU students who 
graduated in the UK to stay on and work for two years. Since then, there’s been 
a big drop in the number of people moving from study visas to work visas.


Amreet Shah (not his real name) moved to the UK from India to study a masters 
in ICT at the University of Manchester. He came over on a dependent visa, as 
his wife was on a four-year PhD programme in the UK.

Shah says Britain offers the best opportunities for his subject. “Outside of 
the UK, India and the US are possible places for my line of work. But in the 
UK, opportunities are more concentrated and there are more university 
programmes within my research interest.”

The Guardian view on international students: too valuable to limit | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/the-guardian-view-on-international-students-too-valuable-to-limit>
Though India’s prime minister Narendra Modi has urged May to open up British 
universities to more of the country’s students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/india-urges-theresa-may-to-open-uk-doors-to-university-students>
 and liberalise the visa system, students such as Shah are now facing strict 
conditions.

“Since coming to the UK to study, the rules have changed. At the time when I 
got this visa, dependants of students could get their own visa sponsorship once 
they landed a job,” he says. “But the rules were changed after I moved, and it 
has unfair consequences on my future prospects.”

Dominic Scott, chief executive of UK Council for International Student 
Affairs, thinks the changes are counterproductive and damaging. He points to 
research showing that thepublic does not see students as “immigrants” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/14/most-britons-do-not-see-foreign-students-as-immigrants-survey-shows>
.

“If everybody accepts that students aren’t migrants… that they come here to 
learn not to earn, and that they are subject to particular rules, it seems 
absolutely bonkers that somebody is trying to reduce the number,” he says.

How easy is it for international students to work in the UK?

For non-EU students, the rules on moving from a student visa to a work visa 
are pretty strict. Essentially you’ve got to have a graduate job, with a 
graduate salary, with a licensed Home Office employer.

These criteria are hard to meet. For starters, the graduate salary needs to be 
a minimum of £20,800 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/02/get-a-job-or-get-out-the-tough-reality-for-international-students>
, which for a first job is pretty difficult, especially outside of London.

“We had a student with an MSc in marketing who was offered a job with a top 
firm as a marketing assistant. But that is not a graduate job – you’ve got to 
be a marketing manager,” explains Scott. “And you can’t just work for a little 
tech company down in Hackney.”

Currently, non-EU students can work part time for 20 hours a week and full 
time in vacations. If they go to a private college, they’re not allowed to work 
at all. This was one of the measures introduced last year in a Home Office 
“crackdown on visa fraud”, targeting students at “bogus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/dec/02/students-private-higher-education-colleges-taxpayer-subsidy-benefits-nao-loans>
” private colleges.

What about EU students?

At the moment, EU students have the right to work in the UK. Students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/students> must apply for a national 
insurance number, although they don’t need this to arrive before they start 
work. However, these rules are likely to change when the UK leaves the EU. The 
worst-case scenario is that they will face the same rules as other 
international students.

It’s unlikely there will be changes any time soon though. Last month the 
government offered reassurance to EU students in relation to their fees. It 
confirmed that those applying to study at English universities from autumn 2017 
willcontinue to pay the same fees as domestic undergraduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/11/eu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote>
 and will remain eligible for the same loans and grants, despite the vote to 
leave the EU.


But do students feel welcome working in the UK?

In October, the home secretary Amber Rudd prompted criticism when she proposed 
that businesses should disclose how many foreign workers they employ. The 
government has since rowed back from the suggestions, but universities fear 
that this kind of rhetoric will put many young people off wanting to come to 
the UK.

Nigel Carrington, vice-chancellor of University of the Arts London, is 
especially worried about EU students’ perceptions of the UK. “Art and design 
students come to Britain because they think our creative industries and 
universities are the most influential, open and connected in the world.

International student numbers have been plummeting for years. Now what?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/14/international-student-numbers-have-been-plummeting-for-years-now-what>
“But we’ve already had worrying indications that some EU students don’t sense 
this connection any more, with a small but notable drop in the number taking up 
their places. We need to rebuild international perceptions of Britain as 
connected to Europe and the world.”

Kent Roach, careers and employability consultant at Sheffield Hallam 
University, says: “The students from countries overseas that I speak to are 
very, very aware of the social and cultural impact of Brexit and conscious of 
how the debate is being framed. People’s perceptions of the overall social, 
cultural and economic environment here is going to shape their experience and 
could well in the future put people off wanting to study and remain in the UK.”

Students like Shah are now having to reconsider their future plans. Although 
he is currently doing a PhD part time and working full time, he is stuck on a 
dependent visa and will not be able to continue working in the UK after his 
wife’s study comes to an end, unless he secures sponsorship.

“If I had known this, I would have remained in the lucrative job I had in 
India or at least applied to EU universities where settlement is a 
possibility,” he says. “By 2017, we will have been in the UK for five years, 
but it does not get counted for settlement. Unless you come to the UK as a 
single student and hitch up during your time here, the Home Office just counts 
you as immigrants.”

Shah now fears that he might have to give up on an academic career. “If it is 
not possible to remain in research, I will have to go back to data analytics,” 
he says.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 