
The dramatic melting of Arctic ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/21/arctic-will-be-ice-free-in-summer-next-year>
 is already driving extreme weather that affects hundreds of millions of people 
across North America, Europe and Asia, leading climate scientists have told the 
Guardian.


Severe “snowmageddon” winters are now strongly linked to soaring polar 
temperatures, say researchers, with deadly summer heatwaves and torrential 
floods also probably linked. The scientists now fear theArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> meltdown has kickstarted abrupt 
changes in the planet’s swirling atmosphere, bringing extreme weather in 
heavily populated areas to the boil.

The northern ice cap has been shrinking since the 1970s, with global warming 
driving the loss of about three-quarters of its volume so far. But the recent 
heat in the Arctic has shocked scientists, withtemperatures 33C above average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
 in parts of the Russian Arctic and 20C higher in some other places.

In November, ice levels hit a record low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
, and we are now in “uncharted territory”, said Prof Jennifer Francis, an 
Arctic climate expert at Rutgers University in the US, who first became 
interested in the region when she sailed through it on a round-the-world trip 
in the 1980s.

“These rapid changes in the Arctic are affecting weather patterns where you 
live right now,” she said. “In the past you have had natural variations like El 
Niño, but they have never happened before in combination with this very warm 
Arctic, so it is a whole new ball game.


“It is inconceivable that this ridiculously warm Arctic would not have an 
impact on weather patterns in the middle latitudes further south, where so many 
people live.

“It’s safe to say [the hot Arctic] is going to have a big impact, but it’s 
hard to say exactly how big right now. But we are going to have a lot of very 
interesting weather – we’re not going to get around that one.”

Arctic sea ice loss 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/01/now-and-then-embed/embed/embed.html?mobile_before=//media.guim.co.uk/2066d3b9138ae3815a3962ecaf37bd0523a251da/0_0_2048_1536/500.jpg&desktop_before=//media.guim.co.uk/2066d3b9138ae3815a3962ecaf37bd0523a251da/0_0_2048_1536/1000.jpg&label_before=September 
1984&mobile_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c93b16a63f0343eef55c993b3456074bf9eb0687/0_0_2048_1536/500.jpg&desktop_after=//media.guim.co.uk/c93b16a63f0343eef55c993b3456074bf9eb0687/0_0_2048_1536/1000.jpg&label_after=September 
2016&>  The area covered by Arctic sea ice at least four years old has 
decreased from 718,000 sq miles in September 1984 to 42,000 sq miles in 
September 2016. Older ice tends to be less vulnerable to melting. The age of 
the ice is indicated by shades ranging from blue-gray for the youngest ice to 
white for the oldest. Credits: Nasa 
The chain of events that links the melting Arctic with weather to the south 
begins withrising global temperatures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/25/arctic-ice-melt-trigger-uncontrollable-climate-change-global-level>
 causing more sea ice to melt. Unlike on the Antarctic continent, melting ice 
here exposes dark ocean beneath, which absorbs more sunlight than ice and warms 
further. This feedback loop is why the Arctic is heating up much faster than 
the rest of the planet.


This in turn narrows the temperature difference between the Arctic and lower 
latitudes, which is crucial because it is the temperature gradient between them 
that drives the jet stream wind, which streaks around the pole at up to 250mph 
and about 8km above the surface.

The jet stream forms a boundary between the cold north and the warmer south, 
but the lower temperature difference means the winds are now weaker. This means 
the jet stream meanders more, with big loops bringing warm air to the frozen 
north and cold air into warmer southern climes.

Furthermore, researchers say, the changes mean the loops can remain stuck over 
regions for weeks, rather than being blown westwards as in the past. This 
“blocking” effect means extreme events can unfold.

“There have been recent studies showing very plausible physical mechanisms of 
how rapid warming in the Arctic can influence weather in the mid latitudes, 
both in summer and winter,” said Dim Coumou at the Potsdam Institute for 
Climate Impact Research in Germany. Coumou is a former offshore industry 
geophysicist who has studied the link between extreme weather events and global 
warming since 2010.

“A couple of years ago this was the main criticism on any such links, that the 
physics was not well understood,” he said. “But the big question [now] is, how 
important are these mechanisms?”
How Arctic meltdown can lead to extreme weather 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/jet_stream-zip/giv-3902J7MIVVRbms65/>
The other main influence on the jet stream is sea surface temperature in the 
tropics, which waxes and wanes with El Niño, while solar cycles and even 
volcanic eruptions have smaller effects.

The clearest connection so far between the melting Arctic and weather is for 
extreme winter conditions, such as the intense winters that hit parts of North 
America and northern Europe in 2009-10, 2010-11 and 2013-14, causing record 
snowfalls and billions of dollars of damage.

In those years, the jet stream deviated deeply southwards over those regions, 
pulling down savagely cold air. Prof Adam Scaife, a climate modelling expert at 
the UK’s Met Office, said the evidence for a link to shrinking Arctic ice was 
now good: “The consensus points towards that being a real effect.”

While downswings of the jet stream can bring freezing winters, the 
accompanying upswings have been linked to worsening the drought in California. 
“These northward jet stream swings are of course the reason California is 
having such a terrible drought,” said Francis. This effect was in factpredicted 
back in 2004, with those researchers now saying 
<https://thinkprogress.org/scientists-predicted-a-decade-ago-arctic-ice-loss-would-worsen-western-droughts-is-that-happening-f6cf630c2aca#.t66isoeau>
: “Reality is moving faster than we thought or hoped it would.”

But the winter extremes can also swing the other way and bring mild but 
torrential weather, as seen in the past two winters in the UK, leading to 
severe flooding, said Prof Edward Hanna, at the University of Sheffield in the 
UK.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=150%20years%20of%20global%20warming%20in%20a%20minute-long%20symphony%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2F150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video&media=>
150 years of global warming in a minute-long symphony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/18/150-years-global-warming-minute-long-symphony-video>
He pointed to the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), a cyclic variation in air 
pressure that may be affected by the fast melting of Arctic ice. The 
variability of the NOA has doubled in the last century, he said: “Within the 
last decade, there have been wild swings in the NAO values in December.”

The connection between the vanishing Arctic ice and extreme summer weather in 
the northern hemisphere is probable, according to scientists, but not yet as 
certain as the winter link.

Blocking patterns caused by slow-moving meanders of the jet stream have been 
firmly linked 
<https://www.pik-potsdam.de/news/in-short/new-study-on-extreme-weather-events-and-planetary-waves>
to some devastating events 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/mg20727730.101-frozen-jet-stream-links-pakistan-floods-russian-fires/>
, including the 2010 summer floods in Pakistan, which killed 2,000 people and 
affected 20 million, and also the searing heatwave in Russia in the same year, 
which killed 50,000 people and wiped out $15bn (£12bn) of crops.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8fd4aad9bc6f7593ccbed3b603dd8a41053f5d%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20'already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20%27already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a8fd4aad9bc6f7593ccbed3b603dd8a41053f5d%2F0_0_3456_2304%2F3456.jpg>
 Villagers stand outside their homes during flash floods on the outskirts of 
Peshawar, Pakistan, on April 2016. Photograph: Mohammad Sajjad/AP 
“We also see such summer events more often in recent years,” said Coumou. 

Blocking events have also been linked to summer deluges in the UK, leading to 
disastrous flooding in 2007 and 2012 which caused billions of pounds in damage.

The year 2012 was also an extreme year for Greenland, with record melting 
across its entire surface flushing water into the ocean and accelerating sea 
level rise. The hot loop of air that sat on Greenland that year may also be 
linked to one of the biggest weather disasters of recent years:Hurricane Sandy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hurricane-sandy>, which killed 233 people 
and cost $75bn in damages.

Scientists suspect 
<http://rsta.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/373/2045/20140170> that the 
blocking event over Greenland, potentially linked to therecord low Arctic ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/sep/14/arctic-sea-ice-smallest-extent>
 that summer,prevented the hurricane veering north-east 
<http://www.news.cornell.edu/stories/2013/03/arctic-ice-loss-amplified-superstorm-sandy-violence>
 out into the Atlantic like most storms. Instead, blocked by the high pressure, 
Sandy swung left over the most populated area of the east coast of the US.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d556659cf2927c5833b293246a40430cb52055%2F0_0_2000_1327%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20'already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20%27already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F11d556659cf2927c5833b293246a40430cb52055%2F0_0_2000_1327%2F2000.jpg>
 Damage caused by Hurricane Sandy in Rodanthe, North Carolina, October 2012. 
Photograph: Steve Earley/AP 
Another consequence of the fast melting Arctic raises the possibility that 
there may be even worse extreme weather to come, according to a few scientists: 
titanic Atlantic superstorms and hurricanes barreling across Europe.

The melting of Greenland ice is pouring about 250bn tonnes a year of fresh 
water, which is less dense than salty sea water, into the ocean. As a result, 
the water mass sinks less and the current that drags warm water up the Atlantic 
is weakened – scientists have already found that thecurrent is at its weakest 
for <http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/v5/n5/full/nclimate2554.html> a 
millennium.

This means a region of the north Atlantic is becoming relatively cool and this 
exaggerates the contrast with tropical waters to the south, which is the driver 
for storms. In the worst case scenario, said the renowned climate scientist Prof
James Hansen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JP-cRqCQRc8&feature=youtu.be>, 
this “will drive superstorms, stronger than any in modern times – all hell will 
break loose in the north Atlantic and neighbouring lands”.

Hansen– who was one of the first scientists to alert the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/jun/23/climatechange.carbonemissions>
 to the dangers of climate change in 1988 and has beenarrested more than once 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/04/02/science/james-e-hansen-retiring-from-nasa-to-fight-global-warming.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
 outside the White House while protesting against fossil fuel developments – 
pointed to the historical record as a precedent: 118,000 years ago a superstorm 
tossed 1,000-tonne mega boulders on to the shores of the Bahamas.

Hurricanes will worsen as planet warms and sea levels rise, scientists warn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/climate-change-hurricane-matthew-sea-level-rise>
“I would certainly not call such [superstorm] scenarios ridiculous,” said 
Coumou. “But it is speculative – we don’t have the hard evidence.”



But even with what is known so far, there is cause for concern that the 
complex interactions are turning the slow burn of global temperature rise into 
sudden weather disasters.

“The worrying aspect is that such dynamical changes can occur more abruptly 
than simple background warming of the climate,” said Coumou. “Dynamical changes 
can change more rapidly and can therefore lead to surprises and I think there 
are many such possibilities in the system.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fdebbf951c1088a9ebc80e02ba41fd0c0470cea%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20'already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Arctic%20ice%20melt%20%27already%20affecting%20weather%20patterns%20where%20you%20live%20right%20now%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Farctic-ice-melt-already-affecting-weather-patterns-where-you-live-right-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6fdebbf951c1088a9ebc80e02ba41fd0c0470cea%2F0_0_2500_1667%2F2500.jpg>
 A polar bear swims in Svalbard. The fjords there would usually be partially 
covered with sea ice, but last winter most of the archipelago was surrounded by 
open water. Photograph: Nick Cobbing/Greenpeace 
Amid the gloomy prospects, there is some cause for hope however. 

“A large fraction of the US public still doesn’t believe that it is humans 
that are affecting the climate system,” said Francis. “But one of the silver 
linings of this pretty dark cloud is that the Arctic is such an obvious and 
conspicuous change, that anybody can see them happening. There is no ambiguity 
whatsoever.”

But this changing of minds needs to happen quickly, said Hansen: “If we wait 
for the natural world to reveal itself clearly, it may be too late.”
 