
They’re edgy, funny and, at times, borderline offensive, but three comics who 
have dominated Channel 4’s evening schedule over the last fortnight might just 
have achieved a breakthrough for a subject that is notoriously hard to tackle.

Adam Hills, Alex Brooker and Josh Widdicombe on Saturday finished their stint 
as presenters ofThe Last Leg: Live from Rio 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/the-last-leg-live-from-rio/on-demand/64201-001>
, the comedy programme that has accompanied the Paralympics in what, for the 
first year, has been a prime-time viewing slot of 8pm. The show has tackled 
everything from how an athlete with no arms eats M&Ms to whether or not 
athletes stash their prosthetics in the overhead lockers of aircraft. In doing 
so, it has attracted a growing audience of loyal fans.

Australian comedian Adam Hills: 'I was born without a foot. Dull. Move on'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/aug/24/adam-hills-comedian-disability-tv-paralympics>
Its nightly shows have averaged 1.8 million viewers – up 47% on its initial 
run during London 2012 – whileChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4> also credits the show with helping 
to bring in a record number of young viewers to the Paralympic coverage. 
“There’s never been anything like this on television. We’re taking the mick out 
of Paralympians!” Alex Brooker laughs.

The Last Leg had the benefit of what is a unique format: part sports show, 
part comedy panel, and all underlined with an often close-to-the-wire take on 
disability. The “Is it OK?” segment, in which the panel charges headfirst into 
the do’s and don’ts of talking to disabled people (“Is it OK to ask if an 
amputee takes their leg off in the shower?”) has been a staple of the show.

Ask any of the main players and there’s no worthy intention behind The Last Leg
. “It was never, ‘Hey, this can do this for disability.’ It was never about 
breaking down barriers,” Hills insists. But against a TV schedule where 
disability is still widely absent, let alone discussed in terms of humour, the 
show has been noticeable for the bold way it tackles the subject.

There are some limits. “Disability’s the same as anything else,” Hills says. 
“In the writers’ room, we’ll say things and then think, ‘Oh God, we can’t say 
that’.” But nevertheless the show has stood out for its ability to laugh 
successfully at subjects often shied away from.

This is partly down to who is making the jokes: two out the three presenters, 
Hills and Brooker, are disabled themselves. Widdicombe describes himself as 
both “an honorary disabled person” and “the token able-bodied, white male” of 
the show.

Still, Brooker is conscious of the fact, as he puts it, that they “don’t want 
it to be a little club” of disabled people. For the Rio coverage, the show has 
brought non-disabled comedians, including Katherine Ryan, Stephen Mangan and 
Johnny Vegas, into the joke with clear success. This is tricky territory, with 
comedians such asFrankie Boyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/aug/31/frankie-boyle-paralympics-twitter-jokes>
 andJimmy Carr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/nov/05/jimmy-carr-paralympics-joke> 
having previously come under fire for jokes about Paralympians.

Hills terms the key to this dilemma as the desire to “punch up, not down”. 
“Rich people mocking the poor isn’t funny. Powerful people mocking the 
powerless isn’t funny,” he says. “Able-bodied mocking the disabled isn’t funny.”

The context of the Paralympics <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/paralympics>
, Brooker says, helps give them licence for material. “If you were in a random 
show and you told a joke about a blind guy falling over, you’d be like, ‘what?’”

Above anything, what seems to have set The Last Leg apart is its tone: whether 
it’s disabled regulars or non-disabled guests, it has not been about being 
mean-spirited or shocking for effect. “We’re never nasty,” Brooker says.

At the heart of every joke there has been a respect for the sport and the 
athletes involved. Hills is a genuine Paralympics enthusiast , while Brooker 
started his career in Paralympics commentary. This love of the Games has 
produced some of this run’s best comedy: from watching a weightlifter be 
“caressed, then slapped” by his coach, to Brooker, who has a prosthetic leg, 
taking three tries to jump over a bench in an attempt to win his own high jump 
title.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDAXBOcv6AS4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDAXBOcv6AS4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DDAXBOcv6AS4&media=>
 Alex Brooker pays tribute to Alex Zanardi on The Last Leg 
Occasionally it’s also produced surprisingly moving moments. Viewers saw 
Brooker close to tears on Thursday’s episode as hespoke about Alex Zanardi 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DAXBOcv6AS4>, the ex-Formula One driver who 
won a Paralympic gold in hand cycling on the eve of the 15-year anniversary of 
losing his legs in a crash. This caused an outpouring of support on Twitter 
from fans of the show, including comedian Miranda Hart andPointless presenter 
Richard Osman.

“It was genuine,” Hills says. “When he [Alex] hugged Josh … That bit wasn’t 
for the camera.”

The chemistry between the three presenters is one of the aspects of the show 
that’s clearly progressed over the past four years. “It feels like a 
conversation that would be going on between me, Alex and Adam anyway,” says 
Widdicombe, who flies back to the UK to begin a tour this week. What started 
as, in Brooker’s words, him having “a chat on a sofa with Adam about our legs” 
developed into slick one-liners and teasing between friends.

Paralympians have been keen to get involved in the camaraderie each night, 
includingthe gold medallist Jonnie Peacock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/10/jonnie-peacock-libby-clegg-seven-golds-paralympics-gb>
 in a tutu. “And the best thing was that had nothing to do with disability,” 
Hills says.

Do the Paralympians ever get shocked by the show? “The Paralympians have heard 
worse,” he says. “Even the audience has become immune to it.”

PUNCHLINES

Alex Brooker, on having to listen to God Save the Queen so many times after 
ParalympicsGB’s successes:

“I find it a little bit unnerving singing for God to save a multimillionaire 
when you’re surrounded by disabled people. I mean, I like the Queen, but what 
about the guy with the leg and arm missing over there?”

Adam Hills: “Last night 3,000 disabled people were herded into an enclosed 
space and a flaming torch was set alight in the middle of them all. No, it 
wasn’t a Donald Trump rally. It was the opening ceremony of the Paralympic 
Games.”

Alex Brooker: “There are so many disabled people here. It’s like someone’s got 
one of us wet and we’ve multiplied.”

Josh Widdicombe on a painting of an amputee swimmer: “I’m assuming he’s got no 
arms and they’ve not just not finished the graffiti.”

Alex Brooker, after successfully making it over his own high jump: “That’s my 
benefits gone. You wait until they find out that I can cook.”
 