
Expect fireworks next Tuesday during a panel discussion at City, University of 
London when four people debate whether campus campaigns against the sale of the 
Sun, Daily Mail andDaily Express 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailyexpress> are justified.

On the panel will be Neil Wallis, the former deputy editor of the News of the 
World who spent five years as editor of the Sunday People; Tom Slater, deputy 
editor ofSpiked Online <http://www.spiked-online.com/>; Liz Gerard, the former 
Times night editor who runs the excellent SubScribe blog 
<http://www.sub-scribe.co.uk/>; and Miqdaad Versi, assistant secretary general 
of theMuslim Council of Britain <http://www.mcb.org.uk/>. It will be chaired by 
a City, University of London student, Ghazzala Zubair.

In November last year, members of City’s student union voted to ban the three 
papers from the campus. They argued that the papers had run Islamophobic 
stories and also“actively scapegoat the working classes they so proudly claim 
to represent” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/18/city-university-students-vote-for-campus-ban-sun-daily-mail-express>
.

They further claimed that “freedom of speech should not be used as an excuse 
to attack the weakest and poorest members of society” and that the titles 
publish stories that are “inherently sexist”.

Fewer than 200 of the university’s 19,500 student population attended the 
meeting, which has since beenopposed by a large group of students studying 
journalism at the university 
<http://www.pressgazette.co.uk/city-university-journalism-students-stage-mannequin-challenge-protest-over-students-union-newspapers-ban/>
.

So the debate could get quite heated. It’s part of the university’s journalism 
futures series of events, and will take place in the Oliver Thompson lecture 
theatre on 24 January, starting at 6.30pm.

It’s free to get in and there will be networking drinks afterwards. To book a 
place,go here 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/events/2017/january/why-do-so-many-students-want-right-wing-tabloids-removed-from-campuses>
.
 