
The ability to forecast tomorrow’s weather is something farmers have at their 
fingertips in many parts of the world, but in some regions weather forecasting 
is much trickier.

“In the tropics, weather processes are faster and up to a thousand times 
smaller than up here,” says Liisa Petrykowska, managing director of Ignitia, a 
Stockholm-based startup. “The weather forecasting systems developed by western 
governments haven’t focused on the tropics.”


Existing next-day forecasts are accurate less than half the time, she says, 
making them next-to-useless for farmers. Ignitia has built its ownatmospheric 
models <http://www.ignitia.se/?page_id=51> to deliver forecasts that are right 
up to 85% of the time, and sends them out as simple text messages costing just 
4 cents (2p) a day.

“Many farmers were sceptical at first,” says Petrykowska, “But we quickly 
built up trust. Now 90% of Ghanaian farmers who receive them say the forecasts 
have helped them to make the correct decisions about planting, sowing, spraying 
and transportation.”

Indoor LED farms

Ignitia was one of a number of food tech startups that gathered in Stockholm 
last week for the Future ofFood <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food>, 
an event organised by the Nobel Foundation. The startups believe applying 
technologies such as machine learning, advanced materials and open-source 
practices can revolutionise food production.

“What happens in the next 50 years will determine what happens to society over 
the next 10,000,” Johan Rockström, professor of environmental science at 
Stockholm University, told the conference. “Food is the deciding factor. Food 
is the primary cause behind loss of diversity, the largest user of fresh water, 
and is responsible for30% of all greenhouse gas emissions 
<http://www.nature.com/news/one-third-of-our-greenhouse-gas-emissions-come-from-agriculture-1.11708>
. If we get it right on food, we are likely to get it right for planet Earth.”

Caleb Harper, director of Open Agriculture <http://openag.media.mit.edu/> at 
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, thinks sensor-controlled hydroponic 
and aeroponic growing systems are part of the answer. “We are slaves to climate 
in agriculture. But what if we could give every country access to good 
weather?” he said.

#colors courtesy of the #foodserver. #openag #peppers #hotpeppers #mitmedialab 
#foodcomputer #hydroponics <https://www.instagram.com/p/_kQXu7kMHP/>

A photo posted by Open Agriculture Initiative (@mitopenag) on Dec 21, 2015 at 
12:00pm PST

In his lab, plants grow under LED lights and the watchful gaze of dozens of 
sensors – collecting more than 3m data points for every plant. Harper claims 
his crops grow five times faster than they would outdoors, and need 90% less 
water while doing so. Everything his lab discovers is then made freely 
available through open source hardware and software websites. “The open food 
movement gives access to biology, in the same way that HTML gave us access to 
the internet,” says Harper.

The fish farm of the future - interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/ng-interactive/2015/oct/29/the-fish-farm-of-the-future-interactive>
Fish farms and reuseable chill bags

Aside from weather, another big topic at the event was the shift away from 
raising animals for meat, which is responsible for a disproportionate share of 
the land, water and energy used in food production. “Americans eat four times 
as much beef as all seafood combined, but aquaculture is emerging as a possible 
solution,” says Peter Tyedmers of Dalhousie University in Canada.

He has been evaluating new, floating semi-closed fish farming tanks 
<http://agrimarine.com/> that can recycle fish waste as fertiliser and avoid 
contaminating nearby water systems. One drawback is that they need more energy 
than traditional open-water farms, meaning they might increase carbon emissions 
even as they reduce pollution.

Tyedmers also warns that fish food should be sourced from low-impact 
agricultural crops rather than other marine organisms. “Aquaculture is not a 
panacea but it can be a key wedge in moving away from land-fed livestock to the 
sea,” he says.

Food technology is also giving us solutions at home. As more people use online 
grocery or meal services, there has been a growing demand for refrigerated 
lorries, together with expensive Styrofoam boxes and gel packs to keep food hot 
or cold on that last mile.

The Food Climate Research Network estimates 
<http://www.fcrn.org.uk/research-library/frost-bitten-refrigeration-dependence-uk-food-chain>
 around half a percent of the UK’s greenhouse gas emissions come from mobile 
refrigeration units moving chilled food around the country.iFoodbag 
<http://ifoodbag.se/>, another Stockholm startup, aims to replace traditional 
delivery methods with reusable, recyclable bags made from laminated paper.

The bag can keep chilled groceries from becoming dangerously warm for around 
five hours, which its makers think is long enough to use a normal van (or 
presumably a drone, in the future) for delivery. Adding a frozen gel pack 
extends the time to eight hours, and the bag can be reused up to seven times.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 