
As Donald Trump prepares to move into the White House, you may still be 
wondering how the billionaire Republican managed to win the US election while 
simultaneously promisingtax cuts for the richest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-money-blog/2016/jul/24/trump-tax-plan-average-american-burden>
 and claiming to be on the side of workers.

Academics in Scandinavia think they may have the explanation. It comes down to 
how far Americans are happy to accept inequality.

Research <https://www.nhh.no/en/research-centres/the-choicelab/publications/> 
by behavioural economists at theNorwegian School of Economics 
<https://www.nhh.no/> and Stockholm University <http://www.su.se/english/> 
found people in the US were far more prepared to accept inequality and less 
willing to try to redress it than Norwegians.


They conducted an experiment where “spectators” – 1,000 from the US and 1,000 
fromNorway <https://www.theguardian.com/world/norway> – were asked to decide 
how “workers” should be paid for tasks they had completed online. The 
researchers recruited the 1,334 workers on an online jobs marketplace where 
people can pay others for one-off tasks such as setting up a website or 
translating some text.

In this case, workers were told they would get a $2 participation fee for 
doing sentence unscrambling tasks and a code recognition exercise asking them 
to spot occurrences of a particular number in a grid. Together they took around 
20 minutes.

Workers were then paired, giving groups of “worker A” and “worker B”. In order 
to assess the relative acceptance of inequality of people in the US and 
Norwegians, the spectators were asked to decide how a bonus should be shared 
between the pair of workers under three different scenarios. The bonus was in 
addition to the participation fee.

In the first scenario, the researchers wanted to assess how people reacted to 
inequality that stemmed frombrute luck. Spectators were told that worker A and 
worker B did work of the same quality but that in a lottery it had been 
randomly decided the entire $6 earnings bonus would go to worker A. The 
spectators were asked if they would like to leave things as they were or 
redistribute the bonus between the two workers.

The researchers’ findings were striking. Among Norwegian spectators, 80% chose 
to redistribute the bonus and make it equal between the two workers. Among 
Americans only 50% chose to share it out.

“In this ‘luck’ treatment, we want to see if people see the initial source of 
inequality as unfair or not,” said one of the authors,Prof Bertil Tungodden 
<https://www.nhh.no/en/employees/faculty/bertil-tungodden/#tab2> at the 
Norwegian School of Economics.

“Americans are much, much more likely to say in the same situation: ‘Well, 
good for you, we’ll leave it as is.’”

Applying the findings to Trump’s victory, Tungodden said: “Americans voted for 
a candidate that promised tolower taxes for the richest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/trump-tax-plan-cuts-wealthy-low-income-inequality>
 when the country faces historically high levels of inequality. This is 
surprising from a European perspective, but our study shows that Americans are 
much more likely than Scandinavians to consider an inequality as fair, even in 
cases where inequality is caused by brute luck.”

Under the second scenario, the researchers wanted to measure how people 
reacted tohigher earnings based on merit. The spectators were told that one 
worker got the bonus because he or she had done better work. The spectators 
were then asked if they wanted to leave things that way or redistribute the 
bonus.

In this case, Norwegians were much happier to accept the unequal earnings, 
with only 35% opting to redistribute. Just 15% of Americans wanted to 
redistribute.

“We found that the source of inequality mattered enormously. As soon as it’s 
linked to performance, people are very ready to accept inequality and this 
happens in both the countries,” said Tungodden.

The economist said the result should help to bust some myths about the nature 
of redistribution in Norway and neighbouring countries. “People don’t 
appreciate enough that there is a merit element in the Nordic welfare state.”

Finally, in the third scenario, the researchers wanted to test how people felt 
aboutredistribution when it came at a cost. Spectators were told worker A and 
worker B had done the same quality of work but that one had been given the 
entire $6 bonus in a lottery. The spectators were told they could leave things 
as they were or share out the bonus, but that the total bonus would shrink if 
it was shared. For example, worker A would get $2 and worker B $2.

In this case, the results were the same as under the luck scenario. In other 
words, a large proportion of Norwegians still wanted to equalise the earnings 
between the two workers despite that redistribution coming at a cost. So80% of 
Norwegians and 50% of Americans still wanted to equalise, said Tungodden.

“Absolutely nothing changes,” he said. “People in general are not that focused 
on the cost of redistribution.”

Tungodden saw lessons in that finding for politicians in the UK who campaigned 
for remain in the EU referendum by warning about the potential costs of leaving 
the bloc, in what became known as “project fear”.

Many people were motivated to vote leave because of unfairness, said 
Tungodden. “People [in the remain camp] argued there were a lot of gains from 
not exiting the EU but voters were concerned with the fairness aspect, not the 
cost.”

• Cut-throat capitalism versus cuddly socialism: Are Americans more 
meritocratic and efficiency-seeking than Scandinavians? 
<https://brage.bibsys.no/xmlui/bitstream/handle/11250/2423528/DP18.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y>
(pdf)
 