
The new boss of Argos, John Rogers, is planning a remarkable nationwide tour 
in an attempt to boost staff morale and improve customer service at the 
catalogue retailer after it was bought by Sainsbury’s. Rogers will visit eight 
shops a day for five days in the run-up to Christmas.

Just 10 weeks into the job, Rogers has already toured numerous distribution 
centres, a couple of call centres and delivered parcels to people’s homes. When 
the Guardian joined Rogers on his latest trip with a delivery driver, he had 
just encountered some of the challenges of the job. “Last time the guy came to 
the door in his boxers. Everyone made sure to keep eye contact,” he jokes.


Rogers is working hard to turn Argos, considered by many to be one of the 
dying dogs of the high street, into a modern growth story for Sainsbury’s. The 
supermarket chain paid £1.4bn for Argos in September, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/05/sainsburys-says-600-jobs-could-go-in-home-retail-group-merger>
 with Rogers moving from hisrole as finance director of Sainsbury’s to become 
chief executive of its new business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/10/sainsburys-finance-chief-lead-argos-john-walden>
.

Argos and its new owner face their biggest test yet later this month in Black 
Friday, now thebiggest sales day of the year for online retailers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/amazon-to-spread-black-friday-sales-over-two-weeks>
 and Argos.

Around 12m visitors hit the Argos site on Black Friday last year, making 18 
purchases a second. Rogers expects this year to be even bigger. Over the black 
Friday weekend, which starts on 25 November, Brits are expected to spend 38% 
more than last year – or £2.9bn – according to accountancy firm PwC. Argos will 
kick off 13 days ofBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> deals from this Friday, 18 
November.

In an attempt to avoid the IT and delivery problems that have dogged some 
retailers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/27/mince-pies-not-mini-riots-cautious-shops-open-for-black-friday>
 in previous years,including Argos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/02/argos-shoppers-black-friday-delivery-delays>
, the company has invested £10m in improving its FastTrack same-day delivery 
service. It has added up to 200 more delivery vans, taking the total to more 
than 800, while its computer software has also been improved to ensure Argos 
can cope with surges in demand.


For Black Friday itself, Argos will set up three “war rooms”. One will monitor 
and tweak deals, one will oversee systems – standing ready to tackle any 
technical glitches - and the third will oversee communications with shoppers.

Rogers predicts that Argos will take 70% or more of its orders online on that 
day, compared with 50% during normal trading, and that the company is better 
prepared for Black Friday than last year after rigorously testing its systems.

“Our underlying stability it a lot stronger. We can tap into Black Friday and 
know that our systems are robust,” Rogers says. “Last year we underestimated 
how digital it would be, and it was really mobile focused. People were getting 
on the bus in the morning, and tapping on their mobiles to see what deals they 
could get. This year I would expect to see the same and possibly a step up in 
that trend.”

However, he says the group’s 800-plus stores, nearly 30 of which are now 
Sainsbury’s outlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/sainsburys-argos-outlets-habitat-home-retail-group>
, are an important and overlooked part of the chain’s future.

In Rogers’ eyes, one of the key things Sainsbury’s can bring to Argos is 
expertise in customer service.

“Sainsbury’s is very good at making colleagues in stores feel really valued 
and in a world that is increasingly digital, stores can feel slightly 
forgotten. But the reality is that, although we get more and more orders online 
80% of those are fulfilled in stores. Stores are still really important,” he 
adds.


Over the next three years Argos will open 250 more outlets in Sainsbury’s 
stores. While Rogers will not confirm how many of those will replace existing 
outlets, analysts expect as many as half will be new stores. Furthermore, the 
10 Argos outlets which opened in Sainsbury’s stores a year ago, before the 
takeover deal was agreed, are enjoying sales growth of up to 30% year-on-year.

That growth story and the strengthened buying power of Sainsbury’s, which now 
combines its £2.5bn of clothing and home sales with Argos’s £4.1bn total sales, 
should help the group to cope with suppliers keen to raise prices following the 
EU referendum and theslump in the value of sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/british-pound-given-boost-by-projected-remain-win-in-eu-referendum>
.

“Our growth trajectory can’t be replicated by the competition and we can say, 
‘Come with us on this journey’ [to suppliers]. If you do you are going to drive 
the top line even more. To me this is an incredibly great deal irrespective of 
Brexit,” he says. “It’s not survival of the fittest. It’s the ability to adapt 
that matters.”

 