
Republican lawmakers in Arizona <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/arizona> 
are pushing to prohibit school courses and events that promote ethnic studies 
and social justice, with legislation that critics say broadly targets academic 
freedom and students of color.

The newly introduced bill 
<http://www.azleg.gov/legtext/53leg/1R/bills/HB2120P.htm> – which seeks to 
build on an existing GOP-backed law that banned a Mexican American studiesclass 
<https://www.theatlantic.com/education/archive/2015/07/how-one-law-banning-ethnic-studies-led-to-rise/398885/>
 – marks the latest attack in academia on activism and research centered on 
marginalized groups. Some opponents said the proposal is part of a national 
trend, tied to the election of Donald Trump, of lawmakers working to suppress 
progressive organizations and protests.

The bill, from state representative Bob Thorpe, would prohibit “courses, 
classes, events and activities” in public schools that promote “social justice 
toward a race, gender, religion, political affiliation, social class or other 
class of people”. Courses and events that are “designed primarily for pupils of 
a particular ethnic group” or advocate “solidarity” based on ethnicity, race, 
religion or gender would also be banned.

“This really challenges a bedrock foundation of what it means to be involved 
in the academy,” said Rashad Shabazz, head faculty in the program of justice 
and social inquiry at Arizona State University. “It really puts a target on 
people of color and various academic fields that have emerged out of struggle.”
 Rashad Shabazz. Photograph: Stephanie Seguino 
The proposal comes at a time in which the polarizing presidential election has 
fueled intense debates surrounding first amendment rights and academic freedom 
in American universities. In recent months, conservative groups on campuses 
across the US have launched coordinated attacks againstprofessors 
<https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjl8_DkhsDRAhXlK8AKHU9nDKoQFgggMAE&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.washingtonpost.com%2Fnews%2Fpost-politics%2Fwp%2F2016%2F12%2F27%2Fprofessor-keeps-job-after-white-genocide-tweet-but-conservatives-seek-out-more-academic-and-media-controversy%2F&usg=AFQjCNF-dKpdWcoWZ81xPN6Zyj2gN1R-WQ&sig2=ZxlgbY_cfk2scBcQbE8oAA&bvm=bv.144224172,d.eWE>
 and courses that promote liberal ideologies or challenge traditional views on 
race and gender.

In Wisconsin, a Republican senator recently attacked an undergraduate program 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/university-of-wisconsin-masculinity-program-republicans>
 focused on “unpacking masculinity 
<https://msc.wisc.edu/unpacking-masculinity-with-the-mens-project/>”, which the 
lawmaker called a “war on men”. Lawmakers there have also threatened to cut 
funding over a race relations course calledThe Problem of Whiteness 
<http://african.wisc.edu/content/problem-whiteness> and a reading assignment 
<http://www.twincities.com/2016/07/07/senator-warns-uw-class-essay-on-gay-sex-could-impact-budget/>
 about gay men’s sexual preferences that a legislator said was “offensive”.

The University of California, Berkeley, last year cancelled a course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/15/uc-berkeley-israel-palestine-class-suspended-decal>
 examining Palestine “through the lens of settler colonialism” following an 
outcry from pro-Israel groups, but laterreinstated the class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/uc-berkeley-palestine-class-controversy>
.

Meanwhile, some universities have faced scrutiny from progressive activists 
for allowingwhite nationalists 
<http://www.sfgate.com/bayarea/article/Pharmabro-Martin-Shkreli-joins-Milo-10854516.php>
 and leaders of the “alt-right” – a far-right movement in the US – who promote 
hate speech to speak on campus.

Thorpe’s bill is particularly far-reaching in its targeting of social justice 
organizing and ethnic studies, said Martín Quezada, a Democratic state senator, 
and has prompted an outcry on Arizona campuses.

“Our students are terrified that their freedom of speech, their freedom of 
thought and their ability to learn about issues and think at a higher level is 
in jeopardy now,” he said. “The scariest part of this bill is that the impacts 
are so broad.”

Thorpe declined the Guardian’s interview request, but told Tucson.com 
<http://tucson.com/news/local/education/arizona-lawmaker-proposes-more-ethnic-studies-limits/article_35c1e97e-31a1-537b-9c7d-d8adc0527703.html>
 he wanted to target an ASU course called Whiteness and Race Theory, as well as 
a university event called a “privilege walk”, where students are supposed to
reflect 
<https://www.life.arizona.edu/sites/default/files/privilege-walk---race.pdf> on 
their race and privilege.

The legislation, which says a violation would allow the state to cut 10% of a 
district’s funding, would not prohibit courses that cover the “accurate history 
of any ethnic group” and allows for teachings on the holocaust or “any other 
instance of genocide”.

But Katt McKinney, organizer with Black Lives Matter in Arizona, said it 
seemed obvious that the language of the bill was targeting groups like hers 
that fight for racial justice.

“They want to shut it down,” she said. “This is a direct attack on the 
constitutional rights of citizens.”

The state’s 2010 law banning a specific Mexican American studies program in 
Tucson has been the subject oflengthy litigation 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/01/12/mexican-american-studies-_n_6459696.html>
 and targeted a course that was proven to be effective for students, according 
to Quezada.

The Arizona school boards association said it opposes Thorpe’s bill because 
the state should not have control over school content. “It should be up to each 
district what kind of curriculum should be approved,” said spokeswoman Heidi 
Vega.

Though Arizona has a history of these kinds of proposals, Shabazz said he felt 
that Trump’s victory and the GOP wins in November have emboldened Republican 
lawmakers to aggressively target the work of minorities.

“By attempting to legislate against certain types of activities that focus on 
people of color, women or social justice issues,” he added, “it really 
undermines the ability of the university to function as a space of intellectual 
engagement and debate.”
 