
A Conservative defence minister has launched an extraordinary attack on Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, accusing the 
Labour leader of collaborating with Russian aggression.

Mike Penning, the armed forces minister, took issue with Corbyn’s comments 
that it was “unfortunate that troops have gone up to the border on both sides” 
– referring toNato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato> and Russian forces 
on either side of the Estonian border.

“I don’t want to see any more troops deployed on the borders between Nato and 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>,” Corbyn told BBC Wales 
Today. “I want to see a de-escalation, ultimately a de-militarisation and 
better relationships between both sides of it … there cannot be a return to a 
cold war mentality.”

It comes after Nia Griffith, the shadow defence secretary, was reportedly 
“livid” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/labour-in-turmoil-as-corbyn-briefing-clashes-with-defence-position>
 to hear a spokesman for Corbyn say the Labour leader had “expressed concerns 
about that [the deployment] being one of the escalations of tensions that have 
taken place”.

Griffith has visited some of the British troops who are part of a Nato 
taskforce inEstonia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/estonia>, where 800 are 
set to join the operation in the spring and 200 more will be stationed in 
Poland.

Penning issued a statement in response to Corbyn’s interview saying the 
comments about Nato in Estonia proved thatLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> would not defend the UK’s Nato 
allies and “cannot be trusted with Britain’s national security”.

He said: “Britain has Nato’s second biggest defence budget and plays a leading 
role in the alliance. It is unprecedented for a leader of the opposition to 
attack the defensive deployment of British troops in Nato territory.


“These comments suggest that the Labour leader would rather collaborate with 
Russian aggression than mutually support Britain’s Nato allies. As with 
Trident, everything Labour says and does shows that they cannot be trusted with 
Britain’s national security.”

Corbyn met Griffith on Thursday evening to discuss Estonia but the issue 
appears unresolved. A source close to the shadow defence secretary would only 
say that talks were ongoing.

However, another Labour source played down the differences between Corbyn and 
Griffith, saying it had been based on a misunderstanding and there was no real 
argument.

A spokeswoman for Corbyn said: “Jeremy had a friendly and constructive meeting 
with Nia today.”
 