
Meat grown artificially in labs could be a greener alternative for consumers 
who cannot bear to go vegetarian but want to cut the environmental impact of 
their food, according to new research.

The study found that growing meat in the lab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2009/dec/01/lab-grown-meat> rather than 
slaughtering animals would generate only a tiny fraction of the greenhouse gas 
emissions associated with conventional livestock production.

The researchers believe their work suggests artificial meat could help feed 
the growing world population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/aug/16/artificial-meat-food-royal-society>
 while reducing the impact on the environment.

According to the analysis by scientists from Oxford University and Amsterdam 
University, lab-grown tissue would reduce greenhouse gases by up to 96% in 
comparison to raising animals. The process would require between 7% and 45% 
less energy than the same volume of conventionally produced meat such as pork, 
beef, or lamb, and could be engineered to use only 1% of the land and 4% of the 
water associated with conventional meat.

"The environmental impacts of cultured meat could be substantially lower than 
those of meat produced in the conventional way," saidHanna Tuomisto, the 
researcher at Oxford University <http://oxford.academia.edu/HannaTuomisto> who 
led the study.

"We are not saying that we could, or would necessarily want to, replace 
conventional meat with its cultured counterpart right now.

"However, our research shows that cultured meat could be part of the solution 
to feeding the world's growing population and at the same time cutting 
emissions and saving both energy and water. Simply put, cultured meat is 
potentially a much more efficient and environmentally friendly way of putting 
meat on the table."

Aside from its predicted environmental benefits, lab-cultured meat should also 
provide cheap nutrition, and would help improve animal welfare as well as 
potentially taking huge pressure off farmland around the world.

Animal protein is an increasing part of diets, as millions of people in 
rapidly emerging economies such as China and India are drawn out of poverty and 
become able to afford more meat in their diets. The pressure this creates has 
been an important factor in rapidly rising grain prices, deforestation in the 
Amazon, increasing water scarcity and rising pressure to find new farmland, 
leading to"land grabs" where countries such as China buy up farmland in poorer 
nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/mar/07/food-water-africa-land-grab>
.

Tuomisto predicts that if more resources are put into the research, the first 
commercially lab-grown meat could be available within five years. The first 
samples are likely to be like mincemeat in texture, while producing steaks 
could take at least five years longer.

"We can demonstrate that it is possible, but it is expensive. Getting to 
[commercial production] depends on more money being put into this research," 
she said.

The anti-meat organisation People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals 
<http://www.peta.org/> is already funding research into the technique.

The Oxford-led research, to be published in Environmental Science & Technology 
<http://pubs.acs.org/journal/esthag>, was funded by New Harvest 
<http://www.new-harvest.org/default.php>, a non-profit research organisation 
working to develop alternatives to conventionally produced meat. An earlier 
version of the study waspresented at a conference last year 
<http://www.new-harvest.org/img/files/tuomisto_teixiera_de_mattos_2010_cultured_meat_lca.pdf>
.

The study showed some of the complex implications of tissue engineering. For 
instance, it would take more energy to produce lab-grown chicken than it does 
for poultry, but would only use a fraction of the land area and water needed to 
rear chickens. But the research did not take into account other effects such as 
transport and refrigeration.

The research team based their calculations on a process using the bacterium 
Cyanobacteria hydrolysate as a nutrient and energy source for growing muscle 
cells.
 