
Official reaction on the continent to the high court’s ruling on article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 has been muted, with national governments and the European commission 
regarding the decision as an internal matter.

High court says parliament must vote on triggering article 50 - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/03/article-50-high-court-ruling-high-court-set-to-rule-on-whether-mps-should-vote-on-triggering-article-50-politics-live>
Privately, however, EU diplomats said they were worried the British court’s 
decision – that the UK government could not start Brexit without parliament’s 
approval – might complicate the process and cause unwelcome delay.


A spokesman for the commission said its president, Jean-Claude Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/jean-claude-juncker>, would discuss the 
Brexit process with Theresa May, the UK prime minister, at her request in a 
phone call on Friday, but declined to comment on the ruling.


The EU’s executive “will not comment on any issues that pertain to the 
internal legal and constitutional order of our member states”, he said, adding 
that all remaining EU members would like to see a swift notification of article 
50 and any agreement would require the consent of the European parliament.

EU diplomats in Brussels and London said it was not immediately clear what the 
decision would mean for the bloc’s remaining members. “This wasn’t about 
whether article 50 will be invoked, but how,” said one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20'this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20%27this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Victorious Gina Miller reacts to article 50 ruling: ‘this case was about 
process, not politics’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/victorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Another EU government official said: “This may complicate things for the prime 
minister, but she has said the Brexit timetable will not be affected. For the 
EU-27, we must still wait to hear what Britain wants.”

EU-27 governments and the Brussels institutions have been increasingly tough 
on the bloc’s negotiating position but have stressed since the referendum that 
while they regret the vote the will of the British electorate must be respected.


Markets and sterling responded favourably to the ruling, with traders and 
investors apparently hopeful it could delay the Brexit process or make it 
harder for the government to push through a hard Brexit.

Brexit plans in disarray as high court rules parliament must have its say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
But some diplomats said member states would be concerned that May’s promise to 
trigger article 50 before April 2017 might not now be kept, stressing any delay 
in the exit process would not be welcome.

“The most important thing is that we keep on track with the timetable,” a 
diplomat said, adding that it seemed possible MPs might now seek to put 
conditions on May’s negotiating remit. “It makes something that was already 
very complicated even more complicated.”

One official said parliamentary scrutiny could “slow things down a lot, which 
would not be good news”, and another added: “We all know that involving 
parliaments in complicated, detailed, negotiations is not the smoothest way to 
go.”

Brexit ruling will not derail article 50 timetable, says No 10
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/brexit-ruling-will-not-derail-article-50-timetable-says-no-10>
Keen to avoid uncertainty and instability in the bloc, the EU-27 have said 
since the referendum in June that Britain should leave as soon as practically 
possible – although it was accepted that London needs time to define its 
position.

The EU is also eager to get the formal two-year article 50 leaving process 
started before the spring, both to avoid clashes with potentially difficult 
elections in France, Germany and the Netherlands later in 2017 and to ensure 
Britain is out before the nextEuropean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> elections in spring 2019.

It has also repeatedly made clear than Britain will not be allowed to “cherry 
pick” and cannot expect to enjoy EU rights, such as special access to the 
single market, without obligations such as people’s freedom of movement.

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, said on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/02/prevent-brexit-or-face-political-fallout-german-economists-warn-eu>
 that she hoped the negotiations would not lead to friction between the UK and 
the EU, but that the EU’s “four freedoms” – movement of goods, services, 
capital and labour – were non-negotiable and had to form the basis for Brexit 
talks.

Some EU politicians, however, were less reluctant to pass comment on the 
court’s judgment. “The high court’s decision is a victory for parliamentary 
democracy in Britain,” said Axel Schäfer, deputy chair of Germany’sSocial 
Democratic party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/15/brexit-cross-party-mps-renew-calls-for-parliamentary-scrutiny>
.

“The attempt to smuggle such a momentous decision past parliament has luckily 
been stopped by the court. Now … Labour and Liberal Democrats would do well to 
say no to a calamitous exit from the EU during the parliamentary debates.”

The leader of the anti-migrant, anti-EU, Northern League party in Italy said 
the decision demonstrated a lack of democracy. “Britons have voted and what 
matters for me is the vote of the people,” saidMatteo Salvini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/01/northern-league-gains-italian-elections-matteo-salvini>
. “This position surprises me – but I don’t think it will change anything.”

But Mercedes Bresso, an Italian MEP in the Democratic party led by the prime 
minister, Matteo Renzi, welcomed the court’s decision. “I have always thought 
the [UK] parliament should be involved, just as the European parliament is 
involved from the side of the EU,” she said. “For me, this is democracy.”

She said it was possible Brexit would not happen due to the decision, but that 
although the vote had been close she believed parliament would “probably 
respect the decision of the people”.
 