
Gina Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gina-miller> invites us to 
conduct the interview at her private members’ club in Mayfair. On arrival, as I 
register the heart-stopping opulence of the Georgian townhouse – where our bar 
bill for two small glasses of wine will come to £40, and the scented air smells 
too expensive to breathe – I think this is exactly what angry working-class 
Brexiters picture when they imagine the lives of London’s elite.


When Miller greets us, the concierge blanches at the camera equipment and says 
we can’t take pictures, so I suggest we relocate to a nearby hotel. “Its lounge 
is a bit deathly,” I say, “but it will do.” Miller’s smile freezes. “Ah. I’m 
afraid not. ‘Deathly’ is the word, you see. It isn’t safe for me to go outside.”

The online abuse and threats to her life began within minutes of last week’s 
high court ruling. Miller had taken the government to court and won;to trigger 
article 50 without parliament’s consent was, the judges agreed, unlawful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/brexit-ruling-will-not-derail-article-50-timetable-says-no-10>
. She didn’t take the death threats seriously at first. “It sounds awful, but 
they’re kind of normal nowadays, aren’t they?” Following her appearance 
opposite Nigel Farage show on last Sunday’s The Andrew Marr show, however, they 
began targeting her family and children, and Miller went to the police.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20'this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20%27this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Victorious Gina Miller reacts to article 50 ruling: ‘this case was about 
process, not politics’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/victorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
“It felt surreal. I thought: I did a court case about preserving the rule of 
law and the British constitution, and now on a Sunday afternoon I’m walking 
into a police station.”

Article 50 could be reversed, government may argue in Brexit case
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/brexit-could-be-reversed-government-lawyers-may-argue>
She left her husband and children outside in the car, thinking it would take a 
few minutes. “And the next moment, CID are telling me to send them home because 
I’d be there for hours. They are taking it very, very seriously.”

She asks me not to disclose the full range of extraordinary security measures 
CID have imposed, several of which I had never heard of before, and she has 
been told to avoid all public places, even the tube.

With her office and staff bombarded by abusive calls and hate mail, Miller is 
having to run her life and her business from her club, less a VIP sanctuary for 
her than gilded prison. “We knew it would be bad. But nothing like this, 
obviously.”

In the past nine days, Miller has been attacked in the press as a 
“foreign-born immigrant” trying to “subvert” British democracy, and the three 
judges who ruled in her favour denounced as “enemies of the people”. Farage has 
called for pro-Brexit protesters to march on the supreme court in December when 
it hears the government’s appeal, and warned of anger “we have never seen in 
this country in our lifetime” and civil disorder if the ruling is upheld.

But when I ask if any bit of Miller was tempted to jump on a plane and go into 
hiding, she laughs at me in amazement. “Why? I’m absolutely stoic about this. 
It’s bullying of the worst degree, and I’m not going to let them win. This is 
not the society we have to live in. If anything, all this has proved, more than 
anything, is that I have to do this.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5m-ZczqD46Y&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5m-ZczqD46Y>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D5m-ZczqD46Y&media=>
Nigel Farage v Gina Miller on Brexit <https://youtu.be/5m-ZczqD46Y> 
She is disgusted with Liz Truss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/liz-truss-rebuffs-criticism-over-newspaper-attacks-on-brexit-judges>
, the lord chancellor, for allowing judges “to be denigrated in this way by the 
press” and for releasing a mealy mouthed written statement only belatedly. 
“That is so shameful. She should have gone personally to a camera and said 
something straight away. I think it’s absolutely disgraceful that she did not 
defend the judiciary.”

Far from hiding from the press, Miller is determined to keep talking. “So many 
red lines have been crossed that people seem to think it is acceptable for 
politicians and the media to actually incite hatred and violence. Where in the 
press do you ever see ‘foreign-born Boris Johnson?’ It’s just fuelling all the 
nastiness, and it is disgraceful.”

Yet until last week’s ruling, the journalists Miller had approached had paid 
almost no attention to her case, “and didn’t really understand what I was 
talking about”.

The story began four days after the referendum, when the investment expert 
gave a talk on diversity in the City, organised by the law firm Mishcon de 
Reya. She got chatting to a partner afterwards, and discovered he shared her 
view that constitutional law did not allow the prime minister to remove British 
citizens’ rights by royal prerogative, without parliamentary consent.

Two other parties were also interested, instructing the firm to make a legal 
challenge, but ultimately were “too frightened for themselves and their 
families to put their heads above the parapet”. When both dropped out, “My 
question to Mishcon was: If I don’t do this, who will? And they said, ‘Either 
you do this, or it doesn’t get done.’”

Miller studied law at university, but spent her career in business and 
finance. “So I actually spent my summer reading case law.” She read Sir Edward 
Coke’s 1610 Case of Proclamations in the original. ”That’s how sad I am,” she 
says with a smile. “I’m afraid I’m a complete workaholic perfectionist. It’s 
how I operate in business in the City. I have to know more than everyone else 
in the room. In a roomful of men, I have to know more than them.”

Both the Referendum Act and article 50, she discovered, “are actually very 
poorly drafted pieces of legislation. Had the act made the referendum binding, 
not advisory – and they had that option, of course they did – all of this could 
have been prevented. But I think nobody ever thought they would lose the 
referendum. And article 50 was badly drafted by lawyers who thought it would 
never be used either.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6fac2b3fd3e0c978abed4b38935355afa735390%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Article%2050%20claimant%20Gina%20Miller%3A%20'It%20isn%E2%80%99t%20safe%20for%20me%20to%20go%20outside'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Article%2050%20claimant%20Gina%20Miller%3A%20%27It%20isn%E2%80%99t%20safe%20for%20me%20to%20go%20outside%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6fac2b3fd3e0c978abed4b38935355afa735390%2F0_0_3500_2333%2F3500.jpg>
 A protester outside the high court. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
 So watertight was her case, Miller was “quite surprised it went to court at 
all”. She thinks the government only fought it, and then appealed, in order to 
buy time. “The appeal is unwinnable, it’s just ludicrous. It is unappealable.”

In addition to two other individuals who have joined the case as interested 
parties, the Scottish and Welsh governments have signed up, and Northern 
Ireland and Gibraltar are expected to follow suit. They will argue that article 
50 also requires the devolved parliaments’ consent, but Miller has her doubts 
about that. “We haven’t seen any legal arguments yet, but it doesn’t make sense 
to me. It’s still the mother of parliaments who make the decision, so I’m a 
little baffled by that.” She campaigned for remain, but wants to be very clear 
that her motivation is not political but legal.

Isn’t it her intention to block Brexit? “No. I just want MPs to do their job.” 
If they vote to block it, would that be democratically legitimate? “I find that 
question so baffling, because we have a representative democracy. People keep 
asking me what I think of direct democracies, but that’s a different 
discussion. That is not what we have now in Britain. MPs are paid to be 
representatives of their constituents. They have to do that job. They need to 
find out what their constituents want. They have to put their own egos and 
ambitions and interests and power struggles to one side. They have to. And if 
they get a resounding ‘No, we want to leave’, well then they have to do that as 
well.”

What if parliament votes for a second referendum before triggering article 50? 
“I’m not a politician, it’s up to whatever they decide. My argument is simply 
that it is not legal for the government to use the royal prerogative. Once 
we’ve asserted that, it’s up to the politicians.”

Like many people, I had been both impressed and slightly bewildered by 
Miller’s intervention in the politics of Brexit. How and why had a 51-year-old 
businesswoman dedicated her time and money to an obscure point of 
constitutional law? But she finds such puzzlement equally peculiar, and says it 
isn’t shared by anyone who knows her. A friend told her recently, “Gina, the 
problem with you is you’ve always been a bloody modern day suffragette.” She 
laughs. “The word they tend to use is ‘incorrigible’.”

Miller was born in what was then still British Guyana, the daughter of a 
lawyer and politician who served as attorney general. “He was a fighter for 
social justice. He was my inspiration, he’s instilled everything I believe in.”

When she was 10, political unrest persuaded her parents to send her to 
England. They considered the heavily traditional Roedean boarding school near 
Brighton, “But it looked like Colditz prison, and I absolutely refused”, so 
instead she enrolled in an “eclectic” day and boarding school in Eastbourne 
called Moira House, nicknamed Moron House “because it produced some very 
strange girls. We were all very single-minded.”

So single-minded was Miller, in fact, that at 12 or 13 she’d had enough of 
boarding, and with her 15-year-old brother moved into a flat in Eastbourne 
alone. Guyana was by then “on lockdown” and her parents were unable to get 
funds out of the country, so Miller dressed up in high heels from a charity 
shop to make herself look older, and got a part-time job as a chambermaid.

In the press she is described as a “former model”, but rolls her eyes at this. 
“The inaccuracies are just unbelievable. I did some work as a model at 
university because I needed to make money. I held down three jobs at 
university, leafleting outside Pizza Express – whatever it was I would I do.”

A lot of the people having stones thrown at them deserve it, because they have 
been irresponsible with their success

Her first marriage broke down while she was still a student, leaving her a 
single mother of a young daughter with learning disabilities in a one-bedroom 
flat. “And I remember vividly, I’d have a loaf of bread and baked beans to live 
on for a week. I know what it means not to have any money.”

Miller wanted to be a criminal barrister, but was put off by the 
discrimination against women at the bar, and set up various marketing companies 
before gravitating towards investment management. After a difficult second 
marriage, in 2006 she married Alan Miller, then a hedge fund manager, with whom 
she has a son and daughter.

The family live in a £7m Chelsea townhouse, so my eyebrows go up when she 
attributes the public anger fuelling Brexit to inequality created by the 
financial crash. “I absolutely understand why people are so angry. The divide 
is getting worse because businesses have not operated as they should. A lot of 
the people having stones thrown at them deserve it, because they have been 
irresponsible with their success. They pretended to put things right after the 
crash, and they didn’t.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6bc64b4e58c06ab61cda608cd3e486456787ee7%2F0_0_4008_5990%2F4008.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Article%2050%20claimant%20Gina%20Miller%3A%20'It%20isn%E2%80%99t%20safe%20for%20me%20to%20go%20outside'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Article%2050%20claimant%20Gina%20Miller%3A%20%27It%20isn%E2%80%99t%20safe%20for%20me%20to%20go%20outside%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Farticle-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6bc64b4e58c06ab61cda608cd3e486456787ee7%2F0_0_4008_5990%2F4008.jpg>
 Gina Miller talks to the press after the high court judgment in London. 
Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
But look around us, I say, at this room full of sumptuous City affluence. If 
people are right to be furious with the monied elite, isn’t she part of the 
problem? “No, I’ve worked for everything I’ve got, and I class myself as a 
conscious capitalist. Every business should have a triple bottom line – profit, 
people and the planet.”

Her husband gave up hedge fund management 10 years ago when the couple set up 
the philanthropicTrue and Fair Foundation 
<http://www.trueandfairfoundation.com/index>, and she campaigns against 
mis-selling and hidden fees in the investment industry, and the boardroom bonus 
culture.

“I’m absolutely hated for it in the City, because my view is there should be 
no bonus culture at all. Ten years ago, no FTSE CEO walked away with million 
pound bonus packages. Now it’s normal. No, I’m sorry, you get paid to do a job. 
Why do you then need another bonus package on top of it? The majority have not 
thought about what they are doing to people. They are just a disgrace.”

I cease to find it at all surprising that the most powerful response to the 
referendum result has come from Miller when she tells an anecdote about queuing 
for a flight and seeing a stressed mum with three screaming young children slap 
one of them round the face. “And I felt so awful, so I went over and said: ‘Can 
I help?’ And she just screamed and shouted at me. My husband said to me, ‘You 
shouldn’t do that, she might hit you too.’ But I said: ‘That’s all right,’ and 
so I persevered, and said: ‘Are you okay?’ And she really wasn’t coping. She 
was waving her arms about, and giving a bit of racial abuse – but that’s just 
the easiest thing to do when you feel like that. So I just walked up to her and 
hugged her.”

I cannot remember meeting a more impressive woman. She has always voted 
Labour, and I wish she would go into politics. It says something about the 
state of our political culture that the suggestion appals her. “Oh no, no, no. 
I think our political system is pretty broken.”
 