
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is heading for a 
rebellion over her Brexit strategy after the high court ruled that the UK could 
not leave the European union without the permission of the British parliament.

Three senior judges ruled on Thursday that the government could not press 
ahead with triggering article 50 of the Lisbon treaty, the formal process for 
beginning Brexit, without first consulting MPs and peers in the Commons and 
Lords.

Court ruling means act of parliament would be needed for Brexit, says May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/theresa-may-concedes-triggering-article-50-will-need-act-of-parliament>
The decision, made after a legal challenge brought following the EU referendum 
result in June, is a dramatic setback for the prime minister, who had argued 
that she had the personal authority to begin the process without a 
parliamentary vote on the issue.

Downing Street has said they will challenge the judgment and an appeal with 
the supreme court is expected to be lodged. But David Davis, the Brexit 
secretary, acknowledged thatthe ruling 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/judgment-r-miller-v-secretary-of-state-for-exiting-the-eu-20161103.pdf>
 (pdf) as it stood meant the UK’s departure from the bloc would require the 
consent of both MPs and peers through an act of parliament. “The judges have 
laid out what we can’t do, and not exactly what we can do, but we’re presuming 
that it requires an act of parliament and therefore both Commons and Lords,” he 
said.

Parliamentarians are unlikely to block Brexit outright, given that 52% of 
voters among the public opted, on 23 June, to leave the EU, but the need for 
legislation gives MPs the opportunity to disrupt the process by demanding May 
reveals more details about her plan for negotiating the terms of departure.

The Guardian understands that a cross-party group of Tory and Labour MPs met 
this Thursday afternoon to discuss how the ruling could be used to force May to 
reveal more about her broad negotiating aims.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd063fddf231000f8e7c3000c34855c97a5023679%2F0_56_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Article%2050%20ruling%20leaves%20Theresa%20May%20facing%20potential%20MP%20revolt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Article%2050%20ruling%20leaves%20Theresa%20May%20facing%20potential%20MP%20revolt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd063fddf231000f8e7c3000c34855c97a5023679%2F0_56_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, says the PM must clarify her aims 
on the single market. Photograph: Ken McKay/ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, said he now believed it was 
“inevitable the prime minister will have to answer the big questions” on 
whether she wanted the UK to be in the single market or the customs union, as 
there appeared to be a majority of MPs demanding greater transparency.

“This is about accountability and scrutiny,” he said. “Very many MPs accept 
and respect the referendum of course, but the terms upon which we exit are 
vitally important. I think there is now consensus that the prime minister has 
got to disclose the overarching strategy. The idea that we are all to be kept 
in the dark until some time in 2019 only has to be said to be rejected.”

May has repeatedly insisted that she will deliver the “best possible deal for 
the country” but has so far refused to specify whether that deal would include 
access to the single market or enhanced immigration controls.

Within hours of the judgment senior Conservatives were openly calling for a 
change of approach. Andrew Tyrie, chair of the Treasury committee, said May’s 
government needed to be “much more transparent about its objectives in the 
negotiations, in some detail, and the sooner the better”.

After this Brexit ruling, MPs must seize their moment | Martin Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/brexit-ruling-mps-seize-moment-theresa-may-eu-plans-parliament>
He added: “It should also ensure that parliament can scrutinise the objectives 
and vote on them. The UK is leaving; a public debate is needed about where we 
want to arrive. Before taking off, it is always a good idea for the pilot to 
discuss with the passengers and crew where they might want to land.”

Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, told BBC Two’s Victoria 
Derbyshire show: “It does need to be not just a vote, but a formal short bill 
about the triggering of article 50, and then the focus is on that. The other 
thing, of course, that parliament will want then is a clearer plan on the 
government’s Brexit plans and that will be, I think, important in helping the 
government to win that vote.”

On the other side of the debate the ruling infuriated many eurosceptics, with 
several Tory MPs suggesting May should call an early general election to get 
another mandate from voters.

 Dominic Raab, the former minister and Tory MP, said any attempt to stall the 
triggering of Brexit could increase the chances of an early general election. 
“If we get to the stage where effectively [some MPs] are not willing to allow 
this negotiation to even begin, I think there must be an increased chance that 
we must go to the country again. I think that would be a mistake and I don’t 
think those trying to break the verdict of the referendum would be rewarded,” 
he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc79d2e81a6d84bb5423c47b915ca2b19f86a6aff%2F0_0_4868_2921%2F4868.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Article%2050%20ruling%20leaves%20Theresa%20May%20facing%20potential%20MP%20revolt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Article%2050%20ruling%20leaves%20Theresa%20May%20facing%20potential%20MP%20revolt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fruling-on-brexit-opens-way-to-mps-revolt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc79d2e81a6d84bb5423c47b915ca2b19f86a6aff%2F0_0_4868_2921%2F4868.jpg>
 Former UKip leader Nigel Farage warned on Thursday of ‘public anger’ over a 
Brexit delay. Photograph: Frederick Florin/AFP/Getty 
Douglas Carswell, the Ukip MP, even suggested it showed there needed to be 
reform of judicial appointments, while the party’s interim leader, Nigel 
Farage, said he feared a “betrayal may be near at hand”. He said: “I now fear 
that every attempt will be made to block or delay the triggering of article 50. 
If this is so, they have no idea of the level of public anger they will 
provoke.”

The prime minister is expected on Friday to speak to Jean-Claude Juncker, the 
European commission <https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> 
president, to discuss her plans for keeping the article 50 process on track.

However, the unanimous judgment delivered by three of the most senior judges 
in England and Wales will make it difficult for government lawyers to overturn 
the ruling in the supreme court and avoid delay.

The three judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/-three-judges-mps-vote-brexit-article-50-high-court>
, the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas, the master of the rolls, Sir Terence 
Etherton, and lord justice Sales at one stage dismissed the government’s 
argument as being “divorced from reality”.

Government lawyers had argued that prerogative powers were a legitimate way to 
give effect “to the will of the people” who voted by a majority to leave the EU 
in the referendum. But the lord chief justice declared: “The government does 
not have power under the crown’s prerogative to give notice pursuant to article 
50 for the UK to withdraw from the European union.”

Brexit has caused havoc already. Now parliament must save us | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/brexit-parliament-article-50-mps>
The judgment ruled: “The most fundamental rule of the UK constitution is that 
parliament is sovereign and can make and unmake any law it chooses ... By 
making and unmaking treaties the crown [ie the government] creates legal 
effects on the plane of international law, but in doing so it does not and 
cannot change domestic law. It cannot without the intervention of parliament 
confer rights on individuals or deprive individuals of rights.”

The pound surged to a four-week high in the hours after the ruling as 
investors interpreted it as a sign parliament could put the brakes on any 
attempt by May to pursue a so-called “hard Brexit” that prioritised controlling 
immigration over trade with the EU.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20'this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20%27this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Victorious Gina Miller reacts to article 50 ruling: ‘This case was about 
process, not politics’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/victorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Although a related legal challenge failed in Northern Ireland’s high court, 
the claimants are expected to appeal against that decision, particularly on 
Brexit’s impact on the devolved legislation. Their claim will be joined at the 
supreme court hearing with the London case.

Nicola Sturgeon deciding whether to join article 50 legal battle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/nicola-sturgeon-scotland-mps-joining-article-50-legal-battle-brexit-high-court>
Nicola Sturgeon, the SNP first minister of Scotland, said the Scottish 
government would “actively consider” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/nicola-sturgeon-scotland-mps-joining-article-50-legal-battle-brexit-high-court>
 whether it would formally join in the next legal battle over the right of MPs 
to vote on article 50, opposing the Westminster government.

The two main claimants in the high court case in London insisted they were not 
attempting to prevent Brexit.Gina Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/gina-miller-the-woman-behind-the-article-50-legal-challenge>
, an investment manager and lead claimant in the case, said: “It was the right 
decision because we were dealing with the sovereignty of parliament. It was not 
about winning or losing. It was about what was right. Now we can move forward 
with legal certainty.”

Deir Dos Santos, a hairdresser and the other lead claimant, said: “Today’s 
judgment is a victory for everyone who believes in the supremacy of our 
parliament and the rule of law. I have never challenged the result of the 
referendum – in fact I voted for Brexit for the sole reason that I wanted power 
to be returned fromEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to 
the British parliament. But I did not think it was right for the government 
then just to bypass parliament and try to take away my legal rights without 
consulting parliament first.”
 