
Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd> has a strategy 
for reducing immigration to Britain: getting rid of me.

The home secretary announced at Conservative party conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 on Tuesday that among the measures she will be taking to reduce immigration to 
the UK will be a crackdown on the number of students from outside Europe and 
the families who come with them.

That’s me. I’m Australian, and have been able to live and work in this country 
for the last two years because my partner, also Australian, is doing a PhD here.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Famber-rudd-comes-down-on-immigration-and-foreign-workers-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Home%20secretary%20Amber%20Rudd%20targets%20immigration%20and%20foreign%20workers%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Famber-rudd-comes-down-on-immigration-and-foreign-workers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Home%20secretary%20Amber%20Rudd%20targets%20immigration%20and%20foreign%20workers%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F04%2Famber-rudd-comes-down-on-immigration-and-foreign-workers-video&media=>
Home secretary Amber Rudd targets immigration and foreign workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/04/amber-rudd-comes-down-on-immigration-and-foreign-workers-video>
My partner is on what’s called a Tier Four student visa 
<https://www.gov.uk/tier-4-general-visa/overview>; I’m here on the Tier Four 
dependent spouse visa, which I’ve always thought was erroneously named. I can 
report that there is very little “dependency” involved in being the partner of 
an international student in this country.

Despite the fact that international students are worth an estimated £8bn a 
year to the economy, often pay tuition fees that are triple those paid by local 
students andsupply roughly 30% of revenue for British universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/the-guardian-view-on-foreign-students-dodgy-evidence-duff-policy>
, it is very difficult to get a visa to study here as an international student 
from outside the European Economic Area.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Faustralian-amber-rudd-speech-students-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcba396950f8f485685fc0a23f5db35a63ee634dd%2F13_24_1263_908%2F1263.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20an%20Australian%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20privileged%20migrant.%20But%20Amber%20Rudd%E2%80%99s%20speech%20scared%20me%20%7C%20Kate%20Lyons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Faustralian-amber-rudd-speech-students-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20an%20Australian%2C%20I%E2%80%99m%20a%20privileged%20migrant.%20But%20Amber%20Rudd%E2%80%99s%20speech%20scared%20me%20%7C%20Kate%20Lyons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Faustralian-amber-rudd-speech-students-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcba396950f8f485685fc0a23f5db35a63ee634dd%2F13_24_1263_908%2F1263.jpg>
 My Australian passport: ‘The message stamped on my visa and stuck inside my 
passport is “No recourse to public funds”.’ 
To qualify for a visa you first need to prove that you’ll cost the British 
government absolutely nothing. Applicants need to have a certain amount of 
money in their bank account to prove they can get by in case of an emergency 
without resorting to government help. The NHS isn’t free for them either; 
non-EEA migrants now also have to pay an“immigration health surcharge” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/08/john-key-health-charge-for-new-zealanders-and-australians-is-uk-being-pretty-cheap>
, at the time of their visa application. This costs between £150 and £200 per 
year (though this was introduced after I arrived in the country, so it doesn’t 
apply to me).

It is also made clear to you before you apply to live in the UK that if you 
do, you will have no access to state assistance – no benefits at all. Indeed, 
this message is literally stamped onto my visa, right across the centre: “No 
recourse to public funds.” Why on my visa, which is stuck inside my passport 
and which I only see while waiting in queues at airports? I don’t know. In case 
I’m tempted to ask a border official for a financial handout as I head through 
customs, perhaps. The rules are that I may live here and work, but can expect 
no government help.

Which is fine by me. I like working. I am healthy and able and have been lucky 
enough to get a job I love. I pay taxes, I contribute to the economy; in short, 
I’m abiding by the rules laid out by the Home Office. Except it seems that 
those rules, or at least the goalposts, have shifted.

While announcing her proposed changes to immigration laws, Rudd observed with 
incredulity that “while an international student is studying here, their family 
members can do any form of work”.

The Guardian view on foreign students: dodgy evidence, duff policy | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/the-guardian-view-on-foreign-students-dodgy-evidence-duff-policy>
Putting aside her disingenuous talk of “family members”, as if international 
students are bringing with them three generations of relatives, rather than the 
family members who are actually allowed to accompany them – a partner and 
dependent children – when did it become an outrageous thing for people coming 
to a country to get jobs, earn money and support themselves – and pay taxes?

Rudd is creating an impossible situation for migrants. Those who receive 
benefits are demonised, those who cannot receive benefits will now be demonised 
for working. What is she proposing? That only those who have enough savings to 
support themselves for five years can move here? That international students 
and their families must live in a penniless unemployed limbo, filling their 
bellies with sheer gratitude at being allowed into Britain? That they can work, 
but only in a crummy job that pays minimum wage, assigned to them as they 
arrive at Heathrow? It’s hard to see what she is suggesting a “good migrant” 
might look like and indeed, whether she believes they actually exist.

Amber Rudd announces crackdown on overseas students and work visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
On the scale of migrant privilege I’m right up at the advantaged end. I’m not 
here seeking asylum, I haven’t left a country rife with war or hardship. I’m 
white and speak English and, unlike some who move here (and indeed some who 
were born here) I’ve never had racism directed at me. I love living in Britain 
– beautiful, opportunity-rich, quirky place that it is – but if worse came to 
worst, I could leave and go home to a country where there is peace, economic 
prosperity and considerably better weather.

But despite my being among the most privileged migrants in the UK, Rudd’s 
speech scared me. She asserted that these immigration policies were not about 
“pulling up the drawbridge”, but I see no other way to interpret them.

The message from the Conservative party is that no matter how brilliant the 
research of international students, how much that work advances the reputation 
of British universities, how high the tuition fees they pay, how hard their 
partners work or how much we contribute in taxes, because we are not British, 
this country simply doesn’t want us.
 