
In between fetching cold flannels, letting my wife crush my hand and avoiding 
reminding her to breathe, I wondered if our daughter would finally arrive in 
time for my job interview: an interview for a job and a pay cut I wasn’t sure 
that I even wanted.

Related: Half of fathers want less stressful job to help more with 
child-rearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/16/half-of-fathers-want-less-stressful-job-to-help-more-with-child-rearing>

A few weeks before I had noticed a lecturer’s post advertised at the 
University of Hertfordshire. The interview date was a week after our baby’s due 
date. I was two years into a good job elsewhere with great benefits and a 
research sabbatical coming up in the spring. This new job would mean starting 
out again – probation, promotion – and a 50% pay cut. Half the work, but half 
the money.

There was a buggy to buy. A car seat. Nappies. This was not the time to take a 
pay cut. I’d gone to a private primary school, a grammar school, and aRussell 
group institution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/01/russell-group-rejects-prospects-disadvantaged-students-social-mobility>
 – the first generation of my family to go to university. I was meant to 
provide financially for my wife and children.

Lying next to my wife as she tried to get comfortable on the couch in the last 
trimester, I tried to feel our baby kick. She moved with my wife’s body, got 
active when she rested, responded to what she ate. The two of them had been 
bonding for seven months and I couldn’t wait to meet this small being. My 
academic job meant flexibility over the summer, but come late August I’d be 
back teaching three or four classes, attending evening events, hearing about 
rather than seeing our baby grow.

When a neighbour’s husband got a promotion, we had congratulated them on how 
it would help towards ever-increasing university fees. But at the same time we 
debated doing the opposite. And I’m not alone in my desire to be involved more. 
The 2017 Modern Families Index reveals that53% of millennial fathers want more 
family time and less stress at work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/16/half-of-fathers-want-less-stressful-job-to-help-more-with-child-rearing>
, even if this means less money.

As my wife and I deliberated, we found we had no models to follow. When I was 
five, my father opted for a significant salary rise working in Germany. That 
money sent me and my brothers to good schools, and provided for our futures. We 
had holidays in Germany every summer, yet most of the year someone was missing 
from the dining table. My father was someone who came back, rather than was 
around.

When my wife and I finally decided I should apply for the job, we deliberated 
over whether I should tell them we were expecting. Would it hurt my chances, 
the way it hurts prospective mothers? In the end we let them know our 
situation, asking for their understanding if I was unavailable for the day-long 
Friday interview.

When I was five, my father opted for a salary rise working abroad. He was 
someone who came back, rather than was around

The story of the week begins on Tuesday evening when my wife goes into 
pre-labour. We make the 45-minute journey to the hospital, and are told it 
isn’t time yet. We go home, I sleep a little, my wife doesn’t. As rush hour 
ends on Wednesday morning, we return, this time to be admitted. It crosses my 
mind that I’ll make the job interview.

Wednesday evening, our midwife goes off shift, promising to come first thing 
to meet the little one. When she returns on Thursday, we’re still waiting; 
we’ve been up for over 48 hours, catching sleep for 10 minutes or so between 
contractions.

“It’s time to deliver this baby,” she declares at 10am. My wife pushes for 
two-and-a-half hours; June appears just after midday, grasping lungfuls of air. 
The world around me disappears into holding this tiny human close.

Later, my wife talks me into going home while she and June stay overnight on a 
shared ward. “One of us should sleep,” she says. “Go get that job.” I 
reluctantly agree; there’s no bed for me anyway. In leaving for a night, I’m 
hoping to avoid having to leave every day.

After the final interview stage, the panel promises to let me know, and wish 
me all the best with the baby. Crying is rarely a great interview strategy, but 
I can hardly hold back tears as I tell them my daughter is just over 24 hours 
old.

I got the job. I’m now at the university two and a half days a week, cycling 
across Hertfordshire, back for tea or lunch. My wife teaches evening classes at 
Birkbeck College. One or the other of us is always with June; some days, we’re 
both around for part or all of the day.

Taking a pay cut means watching the pennies: the days it rains and I take the 
bus, I count the pound coins I have to fist over. I get to know when Waitrose 
marks down about-to-expire veg. I learn to make purees rather than buy baby 
food. At least half the week, June is with me. She takes naps in a sling on my 
chest as I walk for an hour, maybe more, along canal paths and supermarket 
aisles, feeling her sleep. It’s like having a womb on my chest. No amount of 
money in the world could buy this.
 