
What do we see each morning, post-Brexit vote, when we look in the mirror? Is 
it a great first-world power that knows its place in an interconnected world 
partly of its own design, and assumes the responsibilities that flow from that? 
Or is it a diminished place – shorn of perspective, hollowed out in terms of 
compassion? As officials and the media debated the possibility that the British 
authorities may conductdental checks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/home-office-rules-out-unethical-dental-checks-for-calais-refugees>
 to verify the ages of refugees granted entry to the country from Calais, that 
judgment would have been a fine one.

The idea was proposed by David Davies, the Conservative MP for Monmouth. There 
are many elected members within our House of Commons with questioning minds and 
the facility for good judgment. If one examines Davies’ record, factoring in 
perhaps hisattack on same-sex marriage as “barking mad”  
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-20657595>and advocacy of chain gangs for 
feckless fathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/13/david-davies-feckless-fathers-mp-monmouth-child-support>
, it quickly becomes clear that he is not one of them. But he knew enough to 
understand that in this angry time he could unleash his dehumanising proposal 
and watch it gain traction.

He knew he could rely on the Sun to embrace the idea with a front-page 
witticism:“Tell us the tooth 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2003927/mps-demand-dental-tests-of-child-migrants-as-concerns-grow-over-ages-of-asylum-kids-arriving-in-britain-who-look-closer-to-40/>
,” ran its banner headline. He knew that his idea would grant him, if not a 
day, then a morning in the limelight, and there he wason the Today programme 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07zx6k7>. That was him again, crossing swords 
with Piers Morganon Good Morning Britain 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3851140/I-think-making-series-sneering-fatuous-little-points-Good-Morning-Britain-host-Piers-Morgan-hits-Tory-MP-David-Davies-pair-clash-child-refugee-age-row.html>
 and insisting: “We need to be hard-nosed about this.”

The glow endured until late morning, when the Home Office intervened to 
declare the idea unethical. But he knew an idea that a year ago would have been 
instantly dismissed as sinister would find its place in a public discourse 
increasingly toxified by indecency and incivility. He knows that when we look 
in the mirror, we are not our best selves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frefugees-teeth-britain-children-calais-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05808ef9d3e6f6162ccf689e917b49b65053b29b%2F0_27_6981_4189%2F6981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20a%20nation%20would%20we%20ever%20sink%20so%20low%20as%20to%20check%20refugees%E2%80%99%20teeth%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frefugees-teeth-britain-children-calais-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20a%20nation%20would%20we%20ever%20sink%20so%20low%20as%20to%20check%20refugees%E2%80%99%20teeth%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F19%2Frefugees-teeth-britain-children-calais-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05808ef9d3e6f6162ccf689e917b49b65053b29b%2F0_27_6981_4189%2F6981.jpg>
 MP David Davies proposed dental checks to verify the ages of refugees. 
Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
One can raise a practical objection to what Davies, fearing that adult 
refugees were being admitted to the country as children, had proposed. The 
British Dental Association, aghast, did just that, saying the tests he would 
like were “an inaccurate method for assessing age”.

But efficacy is not the issue here. Are we a nation that would stoop to 
treating the vulnerable human beings we would purport to help as livestock, to 
be collated, corralled and verified by their individual body parts? Are we 
willing to put those we should be rescuing from peril at further risk with a 
procedure that would produce no guaranteed benefit? “It is inappropriate and 
unethical to take radiographs of people when there is no health benefit for 
them,” warns the dental association. Have we reached the stage where we would 
apply a lower set of safeguards to migrants than we might apply to ourselves?

While the Davies dental initiative collapsed under the weight of its 
contradictions, its reception said much about our state of mind with relation 
to the European refugee crisis and specifically the continuing problems at 
Calais. On Tuesday,writing in these pages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/uk-moral-duty-calais-unaccompanied-children-asylum>
, Bernard Cazeneuve, the French interior minister, departed from the diplomatic 
argot of his profession to insist that the British government intensify its 
efforts to identify and resettle child migrants.

The UK must fulfil its moral duty to Calais’ unaccompanied children | Bernard 
Cazeneuve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/uk-moral-duty-calais-unaccompanied-children-asylum>
The view in many countries is that Britain, sour and introverted, is failing 
to do its bit. In his speech at the Liberal Democrat party conference, Tim 
Farronspoke of being confronted by an aid worker 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/aid-worker-told-tim-farron-britain-must-take-some-effing-refugees_uk_57e14996e4b0d584f7f2d0a3>
 as he was handing out water bottles to refugees on the Greek coast. “Stop 
handing out bottles of water,” she said. “Take some fucking refugees.” But the 
indication, perhaps the evidence, is that we are reluctant to take our fair 
share. In Julya report by the House of Lords European Union committee said 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/child-migrants-europe-house-of-lords-theresa-may-uk-government-syria-refugees-a7155516.html>
: “We deplore the continuing resistance of the UK government to show solidarity 
with its European partners in helping to relocate such children.” A month 
earlier, when European leaders agreed a voluntary system for sharing the 
refugee burden across the continent, the UK opted out.

And this lies at the crux of the discussions. Our preoccupation with migrant 
children reflects the fact that as children they will encounter the least 
public resistance. That is inevitable. In its way, it is laudable. We saw 
pictures of thousands of migrants arriving after a perilous, sometimes 
murderous, journey on the Mediterranean coast. But it was photographs of 
three-year-oldAlan Kurdi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alan-kurdi>, 
drowned on a Turkish beach, that pricked the public conscience.

However, let’s not confuse what we are doing with what we should be doing. A 
charitable scheme to help isolated children – hopefully very young, with 
features, teeth and teddy bears to prove it – is one thing. A proper effort to 
fulfil our responsibilities as Europeans, whether or not we are members of the 
EU, is another.

The migrants conveyed from Calais may be young enough to dispel doubts. It may 
be, as some suggest, that they are youths whose experiences have aged them. But 
as we examine them for signs of maturity or worldliness, don’t lose sight of 
why the issue of age verification has become so important. We want to do right 
by a handful of children, but it is really a way of shirking our duty to do the 
right thing.

• To discuss the issues raised by this piece please use this form 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/share-your-views-on-the-governments-response-to-calais-child-refugees>
 