
A night of national celebrations ends in ­horror and tears. France is yet 
again in shock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/why-does-france-keep-getting-attacked>
. Yet again in mourning. Bodies strewn in the road, families frantically 
searching for loved ones, crowds running wildly in the dark, a city in 
lockdown. In the immediate aftermath, political extremes actively trying to 
capitalise on the blind violence.

After Charlie Hebdo and the Bataclan, now it is Nice’s waterfront 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/charlie-hebdo-bastille-day-france-reels-after-deadly-nice-attack>
. The attack happened on Bastille Day, as the anniversary of the French 
Revolution was being celebrated. That symbolism only added to the gut-wrenching 
pain of seeing photographs of some of the84 dead and more than 200 wounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/who-were-the-nice-attack-victims-bastille-day-dead>
, including children.

The attack happened hours after France’s annual military parade on the Champs 
Élysées, attended by the president, François Hollande, an event meant to 
demonstrate patriotic strength and unity. And it struck days after the Euro 
2016 football tournament had finished without the dreaded news of another 
assault. There had barely been time to heave a sigh of relief. Now we have been 
plunged into yet more trauma.

France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> feels devastated. The 
country is reeling from its third major terrorist attack in less than 18 
months. Since 2015 the death toll has reached 231 – and could still rise – to 
which should be added the seven people killed by Mohammed Merah in 2012, in 
­Montauban and Toulouse.

How and why this could have been prevented will be much debated. Just days ago 
a French parliamentary investigation into the Paris attacks of November 2015 
had concludedthere had been a “global failure” of the country’s security and 
intelligence services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/05/paris-attacks-inquiry-multiple-failings-french-intelligence-agencies>
. Yet, in a reflection of France’s patchy record of public accountability, no 
one in government seems to be considering resigning.

Details about the assailant, a 31-year-old Franco-Tunisian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/15/bastille-day-truck-driver-was-known-to-police-reports-say>
 who worked and lived in Nice, and his motives are still sketchy. But already 
Hollande has announced more airstrikes in Iraq and Syria against Islamic State, 
as well as the calling up of reservists and a three-month extension of France’s 
state of emergency – none of which is likely to address the roots of the 
problem.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fas-horror-strikes-again-all-eyes-are-on-how-france-reacts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b966caecaf1597a916f95d799e6f61066c95a5a%2F0_250_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20horror%20strikes%20again%2C%20all%20eyes%20are%20on%20how%20France%20reacts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fas-horror-strikes-again-all-eyes-are-on-how-france-reacts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20horror%20strikes%20again%2C%20all%20eyes%20are%20on%20how%20France%20reacts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fas-horror-strikes-again-all-eyes-are-on-how-france-reacts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b966caecaf1597a916f95d799e6f61066c95a5a%2F0_250_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Far-right National Front head Marine Le Pen is expected to benefit from 
religious and ethnic tension in the forthcoming presidential elections. 
Photograph: Philippe Lopez/AFP/Getty Images 
Terrorism has upended politics in France since 2015, and now that is about to 
get worse. It has put the nation on a war footing, heightened religious and 
ethnic tensions and fed growing partisan polarisation, which the National Front 
is set to benefit from during next year’s presidential election campaign.

The fallout will be felt across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> too, bringing a sinister boost 
to xenophobic narratives conflating immigrants and refugees with the threat of 
bombs and automatic rifles. Now, even without any link to Isis yet evident, 
jihadi terrorism has taken on a new face: the wild rampage of a truck on a 
touristy, festive Mediterranean shoreline.

Nice is a cosmopolitan city, a huge social and ethnic mixture, a place where 
you find former “pieds noirs” – French colonials from Algeria, middle-class 
pensioners from across France, communities of Muslim immigrants, rich Russians 
and tourists from all over the world. With past visitors from Chekhov to F 
Scott Fitzgerald, the city’s palaces and palm tree-lined squares have long been 
celebrated as part of France’s proud cultural heritage. A terror strike here is 
an attack not just at the diverse fabric of a society but at a vivid tourist 
industry and at an entire country’s sense of itself.

There are two ways this can play out politically in France, and they may well 
be combined. If it turns out the attacker had connections with homegrown 
terrorist groups the country will be again confronted with burning questions 
about its difficulties in integrating second and third-generation immigrants 
who feel alienated – not least because of France’s brand of secularism and its 
economy, where youth unemployment and discrimination are rife. But if the focus 
is on his Tunisian heritage, then there will be further examination of foreign 
fighter networks.

France’s plight points to how Europe has been unable to exert any influence on 
the Syrian civil war, where it has been sidelined from diplomacy while Russia 
and the US pursue an ambiguous rapprochement. This could strengthen Syria’s 
dictator, whose scorched-earth policies of repression have provided a prime 
breeding ground for Isis.

After Nice, expect France’s far-right leader, Marine Le Pen, to be on a roll. 
Her statements after the attack made that clear. With nine months to the 
presidential vote, French identity and security will be at the centre of all 
public discourse, and she will stand to gain.

Beyond the terrible loss of families for ever torn apart and traumatised just 
because they wanted to watch fireworks on a warm summer evening, the wider 
result of this tragedy is that extremes, political and religious, will continue 
to feed off each other. Voices of reason and ­moderation will be drowned out – 
“the bloody wedding of repression and terrorism”, as Albert Camus once called 
it.
 