
Where there’s brass there’s muck, and where there’s muck there is usually a 
rake.The Daily Telegraph’s exposure of England’s football boss, Sam Allardyce, 
was just about fair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/sep/27/why-the-daily-telegraphs-sam-allardyce-sting-was-justified>
within journalism’s code of conduct. There was prima facie suspicion of 
wrongdoing and no other way of securing evidence.

Britain is no paragon of sporting virtue – let’s stop pretending otherwise | 
Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/britain-sporting-virtue-sam-allardyce-fair-play>
The former Football Association chairman David Bernstein when asked about 
corruption in footballthis morning kept saying that “nothing is proven”. But 
that is the trouble with international sport. Nothing is ever proven if left to 
self-regulation. Look at the Olympics,Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa>, cycling, cricket, athletics. All 
have been to varying degrees rotten. It has taken journalists – mostly British 
ones – to subject them to at least rudimentary accountability.

I have some sympathy for Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-arrogant-clot-england-manager>
. Reading and listening between the lines of the Telegraph material, it is 
clear that he moves with ease through the murkier reaches of big-time football. 
But the chit-chat among covert reporters who had carefully cultivated his 
confidence is not the same as criminal, fraudulent or, in the context, 
inappropriate behaviour.

Discussing the various ways round the transfer rules must be routine among 
agents and managers. Bad-mouthing colleagues in private is hardly a hanging 
crime. The specific offer of cash for consultancy, as Allardyce emphasised, was 
something he would “have to run by” his seniors at the FA. As for bungs and 
bribes, he could hardly have been more explicit in condemning them: “I haven’t 
heard that. I haven’t heard that, you stupid man. What are you talking about? 
... You daren’t even think about it.” The sting was justified, but whether the 
offences were sacking offences must be doubtful.
interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/participation/poll/embed/?id=samreplace> 
The truth of the matter is that these sports reek of money, and money 
unregulated or uncontrolled soon reeks of corruption. In the absence of 
self-discipline, and shielded by dubious members of the accountancy profession, 
these organisations have only one thing to fear – and that is embarrassment. 
Allardyce this week committed the one capital crime: he embarrassed the FA.

The affair recalls the fate of David Triesman, Bernstein’s predecessor as 
chairman of the FA prior to 2010.Triesman was taped commenting on the 
corruption of various Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2010/may/16/lord-triesman-quits-bribery-claims>
members before the ill-fated venture of Gordon Brown and then David Cameron to 
try to “win” the 2018 World Cup for England. Hisfurious FA colleagues forced 
him to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/may/17/lord-triesman-fa-2018-bid>
, on which the then sports minister, Hugh Robertson, congratulated them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgreed-governs-sport-corruption-football-sam-allardyce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc539a49aa7283aa38e15016814fde6d65225ce%2F0_131_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=As%20long%20as%20greed%20governs%20global%20sport%2C%20corruption%20will%20be%20endemic%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgreed-governs-sport-corruption-football-sam-allardyce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=As%20long%20as%20greed%20governs%20global%20sport%2C%20corruption%20will%20be%20endemic%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fgreed-governs-sport-corruption-football-sam-allardyce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2bc539a49aa7283aa38e15016814fde6d65225ce%2F0_131_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Prince William, David Cameron and David Beckham fronted England’s thwarted bid 
to host the 2018 World Cup. Photograph: Matthew Childs/AFP/Getty Images 
I will never forget the faces on England’s “three lions”, Cameron, David 
Beckham and Prince William, later that year in Zurich. They had been derisorily
locked out of hosting the 2018 World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2010/dec/01/world-cup-2018-2022-zurich>
, and looked like dead men walking. The BBC and the Sunday Times had told them 
the voting was corrupt. They were gullible to the point of negligence. They had 
even tried to censor the BBC for revealing their forthcoming humiliation.

Many of Triesman’s allegations were subsequently shown to be true. Many of 
those who voted against England have now resigned or face prosecution. Did the 
FA apologise or invite Triesman back? No. Did the FA refuse all further 
dealings with Sepp Blatter’s blatantly corrupt Fifa? No.

I cannot take seriously sports I used to love when I cannot trust what I see 
before my eyes. I was baffled at the reason for last-minute player 
substitutions in football matches, untilI was told these were fee-sharing deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-arrogant-clot-england-manager>
. Cricket’s dropped catches and no-balls turned out to be paid for. British 
cyclists who suddenly won gold medals had superior equipment to other 
competitors. How did Qatar get to hold a summer World Cup, or Russia a winter 
Olympic games? You can guess. Are we soon to learn that referees are bribed for 
the inexplicable penalties that decide most rugby matches?

If Sam Allardyce is to be sacked it should be for calling Hodgson ‘Woy’ | 
Claire Mitchell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/sam-allardyce-sack-mocking-roy-hodgson-speech>
Supranational governance suffers the blight of unaccountability. No one is 
responsible to anyone. A tide of money rises to cover every sin. 
Unaccountability afflicts the United Nations and its agencies. It afflicts the 
European Union. It afflicts organised religion and international charity. But 
sport is especially afflicted because it is flush with television revenue and 
glory sanitised by the political prestige of global triumph.

George Orwell referred to sport as “bound up with hatred, jealousy, 
boastfulness, disregard of all rules and sadistic pleasure in witnessing 
violence” – and he was writing when it was amateur. Now there is money at 
stake, Cameron had to fawn at Sepp Blatter’s door, and confer on IOC bosses the 
extraordinary honour ofOlympic traffic “Zil lanes” across London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/jul/23/olympic-lane-minimum-downing-street>
. Murky organisations may claim to be overseeing “ethics”. But why pay them any 
heed? When Russia is halfheartedly thrown out of the 2016 Olympics, it 
retaliates with that new weapon of international conflict,the hacked email and 
leaked health record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/sep/15/chris-froome-and-bradley-wiggins-targeted-in-wada-hacking-scandal>
. That should make the IOC quake.

These bodies are run by self-perpetuating cliques sustained in various tax 
havens by other self-perpetuating cliques in member states.Fifa was rumbled 
last year only when the media gathered enough evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/may/27/several-top-fifa-officials-arrested>
for Swiss police, on behalf of the US authorities, to arrest its officials for 
“racketeering, wire fraud, money laundering and corruption” over many decades. 
The FA cannot have been unaware of the stink of corruption emanating from Fifa.

As long as the financial and political rewards to international sport are so 
inflated, it is doubtful whether its rulers will ever truly come clean. The IOC 
has yet to purge doping in its sports and probably never will. The concept of 
what is a drug and what is performance enhancement is forever changing. The 
remedy for an honest sport, or an honest country, is to decline to collaborate 
with these international junkets. They should play “friendlies” and hope 
against hope that Fifa and the IOC will one day go the way of cock-fighting and 
all-in wrestling. The moral is never to trust a governor you cannot remove with 
a vote.

Everyone in “football street” appeared to know what Allardyce was talking 
about. They just did not like it being known by others. As long as these people 
indulge the greed of international sport, the only discipline they will 
acknowledge is embarrassment. That is why the only person they really fear is 
the investigative journalist.
 