
An A-list guest list of musicians, actors and activists danced until 4am at 
the Obamas’ last White House party, held on Friday night.

Cooler than all of us: how the Obamas upheld African American pop culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/obama-black-pop-culture-art-beyonce-michelle>
The guest list included Stevie Wonder, George and Amal Clooney, Lena Dunham, 
Chance the Rapper, Paul McCartney,Bruce Springsteen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/springsteen>, Dave Chappelle, Gwyneth 
Paltrow, Usher, Robert DeNiro and George Lucas.

In a December interview with People magazine 
<http://people.com/pen/00000158-d8fa-d4d6-a7dd-fffbd88c0000/00000158-da73-da13-ab5f-dff77c540000/>
, Barack Obama said he and his wife, Michelle, were “going to have a big party 
before we leave office”.

In a video recorded at 4.33am outside the White House and posted to Instagram, 
Chance the Rapper declared the party “amazing”.

“They wouldn’t let us bring cameras into this shit but just know it was 
historic, it was black, it was beautiful, there was dancing, there was 
laughing, there was loving there was hugs,” the rapper said.

CNN reporter Betsy Klein tweeted <https://twitter.com/betsy_klein> updates of 
guests as they arrived: Tom Hanks with his wife, Rita Wilson; the model Chrissy 
Teigen with her musician husband, John Legend; the retired late-night TV host 
David Letterman, wearing a sweater.

The actor Meryl Streep <https://www.theguardian.com/film/merylstreep> arrived 
in a cab, followed by the producer and comedian Tyler Perry; the former 
basketball player Magic Johnson; the film producer Harvey Weinstein; the 
Saturday Night Live creator, Lorne Michaels; and the chef José Andrés. Anna 
Wintour, the Vogue editor, did not take questions on her meeting earlier in the 
day with Obama’s successor, Donald Trump.

The actor Olivia Wilde posted a selfie with her husband, Jason Sudeikis, as 
they left the party.

Stumbling out of the White House at 4am after a night of celebrating 8 
incredible years. 😭 <https://www.instagram.com/p/BO9ZVe2jlZl/>

A photo posted by Olivia Wilde (@oliviawilde) on Jan 7, 2017 at 2:10am PST

The former Saturday Night Live actor Jay Pharoah posted a photo of himself 
with the musiciansUsher <https://www.theguardian.com/music/usher>, Wale and 
Kelly Rowland and the TV personality La La Anthony.

All that Ebony at the White House Ayyyyyyyeeeee..We looking like the last 
episode of 106 & Park out this Bih😂😂😂 @usher @wale @lala @kellyrowland 
#blackstarpower #Whitehouse #MichelleObama #usher #lala #wale #kellyrowland 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO8V_RjhHEO/>

A photo posted by Jay Pharoah (@jaypharoah) on Jan 6, 2017 at 4:22pm PST

The musician Nick Jonas posted a photo before the party.

Straight off the plane to the White House... 
<https://www.instagram.com/p/BO8jNAzhAT_/>

A photo posted by Nick Jonas (@nickjonas) on Jan 6, 2017 at 6:17pm PST

Reports before the party said Beyoncé and Jay Z, Oprah Winfrey and Bradley 
Cooper were invited, although their attendance remained unconfirmed.
 