
Travelling from Europe to Asia can provoke a tinge of envy. Asia will define 
the 21st century. Europe resembles a basket case. Asia is the new world. Europe 
is the old continent. That is, until you arrive and take stock of east Asia’s 
reality, a tangled web of unresolved historical disputes and rising tensions. 
It makes Europe’s accomplishments over the past six decades seem dazzling.

“Let us learn from the mistakes of the past,” reads a sign at Hiroshima’s 
memorial to the 140,000 victims of the A-bomb. In a park tourists stroll past 
the gutted dome of the only building at the centre of the atomic blast of 6 
August 1945 that was left standing. A museum displays waxworks of the living 
dead who struggled from the rubble, their clothes torn, their bodies scorched. 
There are few places where the devastation wreaked by the 20th century comes 
across as powerfully as in Hiroshima – whichBarack Obama will visit later this 
month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/11/hiroshima-survivors-welcome-barack-obama-visit-shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor>
 – and it is this that explains why Japanese people see themselves as victims, 
not perpetrators, of second world war atrocities.

How China's artificial islands led to tension in the South China Sea
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
Asia may be thriving, but it is haunted by the ghosts of its past – 
nationalist passions are high. China has all but spread panic among its 
neighbours by pushing its territorial claims and bybuilding artificial islands 
in the South China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/tensions-and-territorial-claims-in-the-south-china-sea-the-guardian-briefing>
 to extend its military reach. The Chinese leadership refers to ancient 
imperial history to legitimise its actions, but that only exacerbates the fears 
of countries from the Philippines to Vietnam, which say their interests are 
being encroached upon. “The Chinese keep repeating they were humiliated for 200 
years – does that mean we should accept anything they do?” a Japanese defence 
analyst asked me.

In Tokyo, I visited the Yasukuni shrine and its controversial museum, where 
Japan’s war dead – including war criminals – are honoured. The site is 
dedicated to “the souls of the defenders of the homeland”. Later, I attended a 
conference on tensions between China andJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> over the disputed Senkaku Islands. 
The general assessment was grim. “For the first time since the end of the 
second world war,” said one speaker, “military power is being integrated into 
statecraft” – that was meant as a description of China.

Tensions are mounting in the region and they include a worrying amount of 
nuclear sabre-rattling. In JanuaryNorth Korea carried out its fourth nuclear 
test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/06/north-korean-nuclear-test-suspected-as-artificial-earthquake-detected>
, and this month it announced it hadlaunched a ballistic missile from a 
submarine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/may/11/update-1-south-korea-expresses-concern-over-norths-submarine-missile-test-0>
 (although South Korea declared that it had failed). Kim Jong-un is pursuing a 
strategy of military expansion, driven by an obsession with the regime’s 
political survival and the legacy of the 1950s Korean war.

A regional arms race is well under way – led by China. In 2014 defence spending
in the Asia-Pacific region ($338bn 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/4ab37572-0b4a-11e6-b0f1-61f222853ff3.html#axzz48XX9F8Be>
) surpassed that of Europe. Everyone has their eyes set on a confrontation 
between China and the US. One American defence expert in Tokyo estimates there 
is a “50-50” chance of a US-China military clash “in the next five to 10 years”.

This may all seem distant and irrelevant to Europeans. But if anything, east 
Asia’s mounting tensions should serve as a reminder of how valuable the 
European construct is. Europe built its unity on the notion of overcoming old 
hatreds and antagonisms. Asia has done none of that – nor does it seem likely 
to any time soon. The region lives in the shadows of the second world war and 
the Korean war, and the legacy of the cold war still looms large. Asia has no 
unity, nor has it sought genuine reconciliation (even if Japan and South Korea 
have made efforts to set aside theirdispute over the issue of “comfort women” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/former-sex-slaves-reject-japan-south-koreas-comfort-women-accord>
).

Europe has a shared cultural background and a geographical cohesion that Asia 
lacks. Robert Dujarric, a professor at Tokyo’s Temple University, points out 
that there is no word in Japanese or Chinese for “Asian”: the phonetic 
expression “Asia” was taken from Europeans. It was colonial Europe that told 
Asians they were Asians.

In 2011 Obama announced that the US was “turning its attention to the vast 
potential of the Asia-Pacific region”. It seemed to acknowledge the ascendancy 
of Asia and that Europe was on the decline. But five years on all of America’s 
allies, from Europe to Asia, are worried about the solidity of US commitments 
to their security. They want reassurances – to know that there is a deterrent 
for their adversaries.

Just as Europe has been shaken by Russian military action in Ukraine, China is 
forcing a strategic reshuffle of the Asia-Pacific region. America’s increased 
isolationism is watched with concern. There is a growing debate about how Japan 
might start to play a more active role in counteringChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, and speculation that Tokyo might 
pursue nuclear ambitions – hardly a reassuring prospect.

Japan still has a long way to go before it can entertain regional ambitions 
without reigniting fears of its past. The family history of Japan’s prime 
minister, Shinzo Abe, offers a telling example. Some experts say it goes a long 
way to explaining his brand of nationalism. Abe’s grandfather, Nobusuke Kishi, 
was an official in the puppet state of Manchukuo set up by Japan in 
north-eastern China in the 1930s. After the war Kishi was imprisoned in Tokyo, 
accused of enslaving thousands of Chinese people. But he was released, on the 
grounds of insufficient evidence.

This had more to do with political expediency than with justice, according to 
the American historian John Dower. The cold war had started and the US was 
focused on fighting communism rather than prosecuting Japanese war criminals. 
In the 1950s Kishi went on to become prime minister. Imagine transposing that 
to Europe and postwar Germany, and the contrast between these two parts of the 
world is startling.

Asia’s tensions have their roots not just in rivalries between countries but 
in a battle over memory. The traumas of the 20th century were never overcome in 
this region. They were in Europe. In east Asia, the past has never been 
properly acknowledged. It has been in Europe. Twentieth-century wars still 
resonate, and poison diplomacy and internal politics. But in Europe the lessons 
of history have been spelled out and learned. That’s something Europeans should 
treasure.

• This article was amended on 19 May 2016. An earlier version said the 
Hiroshima peace memorial was the only building left standing by the atomic 
bomb. It was the only building at the centre of the explosion to survive.
 