
Students in Asian countries have been notified that their scores on the 
writing section of last month’s ACT college entrance exam are being cancelled, 
in the latest example of how standardised test makers are struggling to contain 
an internationalepidemic of cheating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/exams-cancelled-for-170000-students-in-india-after-officials-leak-test-paper>
.


 The incident comes a few months after ACT Inc, the Iowa-based nonprofit that 
operates the test,was forced to cancel its exam for all takers in South Korea 
and Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/11/us-college-exam-cancelled-in-south-korea-and-hong-kong-after-leak>
. That incident, in June, marked the first time the high-stakes exam was 
cancelled for an entire country.

The ACT, like the SAT test, is used by thousands of US colleges to help choose 
from among millions of student applicants.

 ACT spokesman Ed Colby declined to say how many students were affected by the 
October score cancellations, which he said involved test centres in Asia and 
Oceania. He described the incident as the result of “a compromise in the 
testing process” and said the affected students “amounted to only a small 
portion of examinees in the region”.

Exams cancelled for 170,000 students in India after officials leak test paper
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/05/exams-cancelled-for-170000-students-in-india-after-officials-leak-test-paper>
 Affected students for the October score cancellation received a message from 
ACT that stated: “Unfortunately events occurred which compromised the testing 
process for the writing portion of your test event. As a result you will not 
receive a score for your writing test response/essay. Your multiple choice ACT 
tests – English, mathematics, reading, and science tests – WILL be scored.”

 The message added that ACT would issue each student a $16 refund.

 The ACT writing section is nominally voluntary but many colleges require 
students to take it to gauge an applicant’s writing and reasoning abilities.

 The latest security incident was “a frustrating and complicated situation for 
our students”, said Kristin J Dreazen, president of the international affiliate 
of the National Association for College Admission Counselling.

 The day before the ACT was administered on 22 October, Reuters obtained a 
copy of an ACT writing test on the subject “Fame” that an Asian source said had 
leaked and was to be given the next day. Test administrators in Asia were 
instructed shortly before the test to substitute a different essay topic than 
the one that originally shipped. Colby declined to comment on the test Reuters 
obtained.

 Reuters reported in July that ACT’s test security unit repeatedly had 
recommended tightening security overseas before the June breach, but that ACT 
executives had rejected the recommendations. The organisation later laid off 
the head of the unit. ACT’s chief executive, Marten Roorda, has declined to be 
interviewed.

 ACT recently began shipping some of its test booklets and answer sheets in 
lock boxes to guard against leaks. But the use of lock boxes still is not 
universal, according to test administrators.

 In July, Reuters detailed widespread cheating in the ACT-owned Global 
Assessment Certificate programme. The programme, which offers college 
preparatory courses, has about 5,000 students and operates in about 200 
centres, mostly in Asia.

 Seven students who attended three different GAC centres in China described 
how school officials and proctors ignored and were sometimes complicit in 
cheating on the ACT. Eight teachers or administrators who have worked at seven 
different Chinese GAC centres also described cheating in programme courses.

 ACT’s chief rival, the New York-based College Board, which administers the 
SAT, has been struggling with its own security problems. The College Board 
recently notified an undisclosed number of test-takers in Egypt that their 
scores were being cancelled for the October test.

 College Board spokesman Zach Goldberg said the cancellations were “based on 
evidence that a test preparation organisation illegally obtained and shared the 
test content before the administration”.
 