
Sexual equality – the right for consenting adults to love who they want, the 
way they want it – is a human right. In 2017 the right to have the kind of sex 
we want is still under threat.

Once again gay people, single women, the non-monogamous, the kinky, and many 
other people whose sexuality does not conform to the heterosexual, 
child-producing marital bedroom, will be forced to articulate their right to 
sexual freedom. For many adults, merely having sex, and being sexual, will 
become a political act. Welcome to the year of assertive sexuality.

In the 21st century the state wields control over sexuality through access to 
healthcare. In the United States, Donald Trump has appointed an orthopaedic 
surgeon,Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
, as his secretary of health and human services. Price has a record of 
opposition to LGBTQ and abortion rights and has voted in the past to deprive 
non-profit organisationPlanned Parenthood <https://www.plannedparenthood.org/> 
of taxpayer support.

Even if Trump chooses not to revoke the Affordable Care Act, it’s likely the 
mandate that covers contraception will be repealed. A woman’s sexual freedom 
depends on her ability to access affordable contraception, treatment for 
infections and abortion services. Trump, who has a lifetime of boasting about 
his sexual promiscuity (both consensual and not), wants to impose a paradigm of 
risk on women, who will lose autonomy and safety and will face unnecessary and 
prohibitive expense and inconvenience in their pursuit of sexual happiness.

The United Kingdom also saw an attempt to thwart sexual freedom by denying 
access to healthcare in 2016. It was only after a successful lawsuit filed by 
the National Aids Trust and persistent lobbying by activists that the NHS 
announced in December that it would fund a three-year clinical trial that will 
make pre-exposure prophylaxis available through the NHS to 10,000 people at 
risk of contracting HIV. This was a shift from earlier in the year, when the 
NHS had made it clear that it would limit availability of PrEP to 500 men “most 
at high risk”.

Denying healthcare to certain populations in a misguided attempt to influence 
their sexual behaviour is a form of social control and exclusion that 
arbitrarily codes certain sexual acts as good or bad and certain lives as more 
dispensable than others. The point of such efforts – and other forms ofsexual 
censorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/23/censor-non-conventional-sex-acts-online-internet-pornography>
, like the attempts of the Conservative government to block pornographic 
websites that show female ejaculation or that break the “four finger rule” – is 
to assert a hierarchy of sexual cultures in which heteronormativity occupies a 
place at the top and alternative sexual preferences are maligned as risky or 
obscene.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-must-fight-politicisation-of-sex-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd19df774e6f36d22e42f6697fb616589205fd40%2F0_110_3294_1976%2F3294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Assertive%20sexuality%20%E2%80%93%20yet%20again%2C%20we%20must%20fight%20the%20politicisation%20of%20sex%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-must-fight-politicisation-of-sex-again%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Assertive%20sexuality%20%E2%80%93%20yet%20again%2C%20we%20must%20fight%20the%20politicisation%20of%20sex%0D%0A&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fwe-must-fight-politicisation-of-sex-again%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffd19df774e6f36d22e42f6697fb616589205fd40%2F0_110_3294_1976%2F3294.jpg>
Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
, US secretary of health and human services, has a record of opposition to 
LGBTQ rights. Photograph: Lucy Nicholson / Reuters/Reuters 
Attempts to re-establish a notion of “normal”, “conventional” and 
“responsible” sexuality come at a time in which consensus about what an adult 
life should look like is rapidly dissolving. In the United States and the 
United Kingdom, adults are getting married later or not at all. In the years of 
their lives in which they are dating and having shorter-term sexual 
relationships, technology has offered new ways of meeting people, of 
fantasising and of finding sexual community.

A shift in cultural morals has opened space for the articulation of a broad 
spectrum of sexual identities, orientations and gender identifications. If the 
first decade of the new century was about broadening access to institutions 
such as marriage, the second might be about taking pride in sex as an end in 
itself.

The culture finds itself at a crossroads: either attempt to restore a false 
consensus about what constitutes a legitimate sexuality, an ideal of monogamous 
fidelity that always contained hypocrisy, that not even the president-elect of 
the United States can claim to have upheld; or embrace a more honest view of 
the contemporary way some people relate to each other.

For the growing population of adults who have failed in one way or another to 
live up to an ideal of what a “good heterosexual” looks like, either because 
they have never married, or have divorced, or because they are not heterosexual 
at all, attempts by politicians to marginalise their sex lives would be comical 
if they didn’t come at such a high cost.

The only response that feels right, at this juncture in history, is to 
dispense with euphemism. Don’t call contraception “family planning”. Don’t 
limit the idea of sexual freedom to the right to marry (although even that 
right remains threatened.)

Don’t let the enjoyment of pornography be pathologised. Don’t meekly try to 
make your sexuality palatable to the people who are determined to deny its 
legitimacy.

In 2016 cautious appeals for responsibility lost out to ostentation and lies; 
2017 is not a time to be demure.

Emily Witt is based in New York City and is the author of Future Sex
 