
The UK would lose “negotiating capital” in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> if it unilaterally granted EU 
citizens the right to remain after Brexit, the government has said.

In a letter to a group of EU citizens from the office of the home secretary, 
Amber Rudd <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/amber-rudd>, the government 
said it “recognises that EU nationals make an invaluable contribution to our 
economy and society”.

However, in an apparent hardening of the official position, the letter warned 
that the government cannot do anything to address their position after Brexit 
until it has assurances that British citizens in Europewill receive reciprocal 
protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/liam-fox-refuses-to-guarantee-right-of-eu-citizens-to-remain-in-uk>
 in the country where they have settled.

“Agreeing a unilateral position in advance of these negotiations would lose 
negotiating capital with respect to British citizens in EU member states and 
place the UK at an immediate disadvantage,” said the letter signed by Peter 
Grant, an official in the free movement policy team of the immigration and 
border policy directorate of the Home Office.

“The prime minister has been clear that she wants to protect the status of EU 
nationals already living here, and the only circumstances in which that would 
not be possible are if British citizens’ rights in other EU member states were 
not protected in return,” it added.

Man told to take citizenship test despite living entire life in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/man-told-to-take-citizenship-test-despite-living-entire-life-in-uk>
Nicolas Hatton, the chairman of campaign group the3million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/eu-citizens-living-in-uk-lobby-for-post-brexit-residency-law>
, which represents EU citizens in the UK, said: “This is a very disappointing 
letter.Whatever happens in the negotiations, they will have to find a way to 
register 3 million people, and if they do not start this process early, it will 
be impossible.

“The Home Office is overwhelmed by [the backlog of 100,000] applications for 
permanent residency. The system is not working, but instead of addressing it, 
they just stick their heads in the sand. It is quite shocking really.

“It is quite clear that there is no change in their position and no 
recognition that the current system will not work.”

The letter has incensed members of the3million 
<https://www.the3million.org.uk/>, a grassroots organisation founded by Hatton 
and a group of French citizens in Bristol following the EU referendum in June 
last year.

One member wrote on a closed Facebook group on Monday: “We have been referred 
to as ‘main cards in the negotiations’, ‘bargaining chips’ and now ‘negotiating 
capital’. Does that make you feel valued?”

Another said: “We are, it seems, not really people at all, just ‘negotiating 
material’. I have never been described as a ‘chip’ or ‘material’ before. Surely 
this is discriminatory language prohibited under equality laws?”

The letter was sent in reply to one from the3million before Christmas warning 
Rudd that up to 1 millionEU citizens could face deportation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-eu-citizens-living-britain-risk-deportation-3-million-campaign-european-union>
 after Brexit, unless the Home Office came up with a simple way of recognising 
their status in Britain.

The group is concerned that families with one or more EU citizens are becoming 
collateral damage in Brexit talks, facing stress and anxiety because their 
right to remain willnot be enshrined in law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/government-unilateral-eu-citizens-right-to-remain-brexit-roger-casale-nicolas-hatton>
 when the UK leaves the EU.

Some EU citizens who have been in the UK for more than five years are seeking 
paperwork to support their status, a process that entails filling in an 85-page 
application form for permanent residency that was designed for non-EU citizens 
coming to Britain.

Hatton said others who have been in the UK for less than five years are opting 
for a “residency certificate” to enable them to provide proof that they were in 
the country before the referendum.

Brexit: 1m EU citizens in Britain 'could be at risk of deportation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-eu-citizens-living-britain-risk-deportation-3-million-campaign-european-union>
Completing both forms involves a large number of supporting documents. They 
have been criticised as unfit for purpose.

The permanent residency form requires evidence of every absence out of the 
country and, in some cases, such as stay-at-home parents, proof of 
comprehensive sickness insurance.

This has come as a shock to many, including Britons married to EU citizens 
whose partners have stayed at home to bring up children. It may also cause 
problems for those who find that a five-year continuous period in Britain does 
not qualify them for residency, if they have taken a year or two out of work.

Hatton pointed out that the systems deployed by other EU member states for EU 
residents who are not nationals are much simpler.

“The amount of proof they require in this country is quite ridiculous and I 
wish that the Home Office would have at least started to think about that and 
think laterally,” he said.

Several EU citizens who have contacted the Guardian, including German 
neuroscientist Sam Schwarzkopf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
, received letters asking them to make preparations to leave the country, even 
though they have been in the UK for more than a decade.
 