
Hans Blix, the former head of the International Atomic Energy Agency, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iaea> has claimed it would be disastrous for 
the world if the US tore up the Iran nuclear agreement, but warned that the 
president-elect, Donald Trump, would be unlikely to heed advice from the 
British government on the benefits of the deal.

In the wake of Theresa May’s insistence last week that the agreement 
“neutralising” the risk of Iran acquiring nuclear weapons was vital, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-iran-nuclear-deal-vitally-important-speech-bahrain-donald-trump>
 Blix said that while “many Brits would like to think” they could sway Trump, 
he could not see “anyone who would be influential in talking to him”.

“The special relationship, the old brotherhood? I don’t know whether he would 
be open to such things”, Blix told the Observer at the International Luxembourg 
Forum on Preventing Nuclear Catastrophe held in London. “Maybe the Brits will 
talk aboutthe golf course in Scotland? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/22/trump-resumes-fight-against-windfarm-near-his-golf-course>
 I think he is not a very international figure but I can’t indicate anyone who 
would be influential in talking to him.”

Trump has threatened to scrap the nuclear deal, signed by six major powers 
including Britain, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-key-points> in 
which Iran agreed to scale down its nuclear aspirations in exchange for 
sanctions relief.

During the presidential campaign, Trump told supporters that his main foreign 
policy objective was to “dismantle the disastrous deal with Iran”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/09/donald-trump-ted-cruz-anti-iran-nuclear-deal-rally>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fatomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06ff5b493705bc187f3d378e39a22bfabe0bc1bb%2F0_0_5018_3013%2F5018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Atomic%20agency%20leader%20warns%20of%20disaster%20if%20Trump%20tears%20up%20Iran%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fatomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Atomic%20agency%20leader%20warns%20of%20disaster%20if%20Trump%20tears%20up%20Iran%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fatomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F06ff5b493705bc187f3d378e39a22bfabe0bc1bb%2F0_0_5018_3013%2F5018.jpg>
 Theresa May in Bahrain, where she emphasised her support for the Iran nuclear 
deal. Photograph: Carl Court/Getty Images 
However, in a speech last week the British prime minister underlined her 
belief in the importance of the 2015 agreement: “We secured a deal that has 
neutralised the possibility ofIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> 
acquiring nuclear weapons for more than a decade”.

Britain along with France, Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>
, Russia and China, has resumed trade relations with Iran since sanctions were 
lifted. Blix said he believed that the solidarity of the EU signatories could 
be an important influence.

He said: “I think the signs from the EU are pretty categorical. It is an 
agreement reached multilaterally and they will stand by it. I don’t think the 
Europeans would allow any American attempt to tear it apart.

“On the US side they should realise that if they unilaterally decided to 
reintroduce sanctions they might not be able to bring the others along. It will 
be messy. And in that situation the Americans may think twice.”

Tearing up US deal with Iran would be disastrous, says CIA chief
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/john-brennan-tearing-up-us-deal-with-iran-would-be-disastrous-says-cia-chief>
Vladimir Dvorkin, chairman of the organising committee of the Luxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/luxembourg> Forum, said, “We would hope that 
the new US administration would be able to reverse the negative trends and 
start discussions, including on nuclear security. In the last ten years, the 
threat of nuclear catastrophe has not weakened.

“Work has been suspended on agreements. It is a shame to lose such agreements 
and we all hope dialogue will be resumed.”
 