
“Don’t be rude! Don’t be rude!” barked the president-elect with the authority 
of a school principal reprimanding a two-year-old. Not for the first time in 
the course of 18 months of Donald Trump’s wild ride to the White House – and 
surely not for the last – the world’s media found itself gathered at his feet, 
dutifully soaking up his scorn like naughty children.


“Don’t be rude! No, I’m not going to give you a question!” repeated the man 
destined in seven days’ time to become the 45th president of the United States 
as he shut down CNN’s senior White House correspondent. The reporter’s misdeed? 
Having the temerity to try to ask a question.

The Trump dossier doesn't faze his voters: 'I haven't been following that'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/trump-supporters-reaction-russia-dossier>
It was one of those moments, of which there have been many along the way, when 
observers of the Trump phenomenon had to pinch themselves to maintain 
equilibrium. Was this man really about to occupy the most powerful office on 
the planet? And were we actually receiving a lesson in good behavior from the 
individual whomocked <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IQ_XcztaXd0> a disabled 
person and bragged aboutgrabbing pussy 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html?utm_term=.f7cdecfd0a6e>
?

This week’s event was the first press conference Trump had held since his 
shocking victory in November, the first indeed for six months since he took the 
unusual decision to cut out the media middleman and communicate directly to the 
American people through Twitter. Even before he appeared in the lobby of Trump 
Tower, his Fifth Avenue HQ and home, he had put us firmly in our places – 
squashing about 250 reporters into a space barely able to hold half that 
number, prompting an unseemly scramble for journalistic real estate.

To add to the enervating claustrophobia, Trump further packed the lobby with 
staffers who proceeded to cheer raucously at all the right moments in the 
manner of canned laughter in a recorded TV show. The subliminal message to the 
gathered media throng was clear: cheer along with us, or risk being subjected 
to the CNN treatment.

So much has changed, so much stayed the same in the half year since his last 
media encounter. Physically, Trump emphasised his altered status by drawing a 
blue curtain across the lobby and placing 10 American flags with eagle finials 
in front of it, as a suitably televisual presidential backdrop.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BuzzFeed%20branded%20'garbage'%20by%20Trump%2C%20who%20then%20attacks%20CNN%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BuzzFeed%20branded%20%27garbage%27%20by%20Trump%2C%20who%20then%20attacks%20CNN%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftrump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video&media=>
BuzzFeed branded ‘garbage’ by Trump, who then attacks CNN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/trump-press-conference-buzzfeed-cnn-video>
But in himself the man remained his own unpredictable, infuriating, 
charismatic, deeply flawed self. Not to mention inconsistent or paradoxical. 
How is it possible that an individual who has such paper-thin skin that he 
feels duty bound to repay Meryl Streep’s criticism by calling her“over-rated” 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064> can the next 
minute wrap himself in an impenetrable hide?

Trump responded with remarkable insouciance to the cringe-inducing 
descriptions of sexual perversions included in thedossier of unsubstantiated 
allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/trump-supporters-reaction-russia-dossier>
 about his Russian dealings. He came across as irritated, certainly, but about 
as flustered as a bull whose nose has been tickled with a feather.

If anything, the unverified claim that he engaged a few years ago in 
activities unfit to be mentioned anywhere but the darkest corners of the 
internet while staying in the presidential – presidential! – suite of the Ritz 
Carlton in Moscow merely seemed to make him more bombastic and expansive than 
ever. He stretched his arms out wider, puckered his lips farther, jabbed his 
fingers towards CNN more forcefully than before.

Fictional or not, the Trump dossier affair is another win for Putin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/fictional-or-not-the-trump-dossier-affair-is-another-win-for-putin>
More than anything, he heaped praise on himself with an alacrity that even 
outdid his own exceptional record. He was the only person in the world who was 
capable of running his “great, great company” and the country at the same time; 
he had spawned a political movement “like the world had never seen”; and he 
will be the “greatest jobs producer that God ever created”.

In one of the more striking signs of the excesses of his ego, Trump slipped 
into referring to himself in the third person, a form usually reserved for 
monarchs such as that king ousted in the American revolution.

“Nobody has ever had crowds like Trump has had,” he said, the effect of the 
comment heightened by the court that he brought with him to the conference – on 
the one side his imperially tall children, Don Jr, Ivanka and Eric, and the 
rictus smile of vice-president elect Mike Pence; son-in-law Jared Kushner and 
his tousle-haired chief strategist Steve Bannon on the other.

Further enhancing the sense of royalty were the golden marble walls of Trump 
Tower and the faux gold metalwork with which the president-elect likes to 
surround himself.

 “I think we have one of the greatest cabinets ever put together,” he said, 
evoking a fresh eruption of canned applause from staffers. It was another 
pinch-able moment: was he referring to Rex Tillerson, his pick for secretary of 
state, who at the same time was floundering in his Senateconfirmation hearing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/rex-tillerson-confirmation-hearing-trump-russia>
 over ExxonMobil’s lobbying against Russian sanctions while he was its CEO?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Or did he mean Jeff Sessions, the senator from Alabama nominated for US 
attorney general, who on the same day was facing historically unprecedented 
criticism from a fellow Senate member at a confirmation hearing over whatCory 
Booker <http://www.cnn.com/2017/01/11/politics/cory-booker-jeff-sessions/> of 
New Jersey said was his “hostility” towards civil rights?

In The Art of the Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/donald-trump-tony-schwartz-art-of-the-deal-out-of-control>
, Trump writes that “a little hyperbole never hurts. People want to believe 
that something is the biggest and the greatest and the most spectacular.” This 
week, it sounded as though he had followed this mantra for so long that there 
had ceased to be any distinction in his mind between hyperbole and reality.

Russia dossier: what happens next – and could Donald Trump be impeached?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-russia-dossier-what-happens-next>
By Friday, reality had returned to Trump Tower. The blue curtain and flags had 
gone and the lobby was back to normal – if a mass of fake gold and marble can 
be deemed normal. Trump himself popped down in the afternoon to have a quick 
word with the press in its pen, where daily it observes all the comings and 
goings.

He wanted to make sure that the world saw him with his guest, the comedian 
Steve Harvey, who happens to be African American. “He’s a good friend of ours, 
Steve,” said the president-elect, now using the royal “we”.

Before he went back upstairs to his penthouse, Trump made a point of asking 
after the well-being of the gathered reporters. “Everybody OK? Everybody having 
fun?” he said.

He didn’t stick around to hear the answer.
 