
“Austerity <https://www.theguardian.com/business/austerity>” is a term so 
abstract that, during the televisedleaders debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/leaders-debates> at the last general 
election, the most commonly Googled phrase in Britain was “what is austerity?” 
That was after five years of it. Yes, workers suffered the longest squeeze in 
their wages since the 19th century, but the fall in living standards was 
somehow decoupled from the issue of cuts. Government cuts pursued the following 
strategy: to target people who were less likely to vote (such as young people) 
and who preferably were held in low esteem by wider society (such as benefit 
claimants); or where the consequences would not be felt for a long time. A case 
in point: the prison system.

Over the last few days, the crisis enveloping Britain’s prison system stopped 
being a warning scribbled in press releases. It become an actuality. This 
weekend, up to 200 inmatesrioted in Bedford prison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/06/fire-service-called-to-riot-at-bedford-prison>
. Yesterday, two prisonersescaped from Pentonville prison 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-37902148> and are now on the run. And on 
the same day, there were reports of ariot in Exeter prison 
<http://www.exeterexpressandecho.co.uk/disruption-reported-at-hmp-exeter-after-serious-incidents-across-country/story-29876442-detail/story.html>
.

Our Victorian prison system – which is more interested in locking up mentally 
ill poor people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/prison-doctor-jails-inmates-addicts-sentences>
 than rehabilitation and crime prevention – is overcrowded, under-staffed and 
underresourced. No one can say the warnings weren’t there. While our prison 
populationdoubled in the space of two decades 
<http://www.prisonreformtrust.org.uk/PressPolicy/News/vw/1/ItemID/279>, last 
week the Prison Officers’ Association warned that falling staff numbers and 
cuts mean a“bloodbath in prisons” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/government-to-recruit-2500-new-prison-officers-after-warning-cuts-are-leaving-jails-unsafe-a7394141.html>
, adding that “staff are absolutely on their knees, lost all morale, all 
motivation”. Opponents of cuts are frequently accused of alarmism: we are now 
seeing how prophetic they were.

Some of the other consequences of austerity are becoming visible, too. A UN 
inquiry has condemned government cuts for “systematic violations” of therights 
of disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights>
, whether it be the bedroom tax or cuts to disability benefits. And today the
Trussell Trust reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/trussell-trust-to-deliver-more-emergency-food-parcels-than-ever-before>
 that – partly due to benefit sanctions and delays in social security payments 
– it is set to deliver the biggest number of emergency food parcels ever. After 
Britain was battered by floods over the festive period last year, it was 
revealed howcuts to flood defences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/02/tory-cuts-wrecking-uk-flood-defences>
 had put households at risk.

The danger is that – even as these cuts hit – they will remain abstractions, 
headlines to goggle at and then turn the page. Those most badly affected can 
all too easily be ignored. But the failure to invest in a country’s future 
means we will all increasingly suffer the consequences. We are beginning to see 
what some of them are.
 