
Rex Tillerson’s cosy relationship with the Russian government was set to be 
the big controversy of his confirmation hearings to become the next US 
secretary of state. But it was the subject of Chinese construction in theSouth 
China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, and his 
statement that Chinese access to their facilities on the islands is “not going 
to be allowed”, that held the biggest implications for American foreign policy 
and security in Asia Pacific.

The suggestion of a more aggressive, interventionist, American regional 
involvement highlights the pressing task of developing a more independent 
foreign policy for Australia. A foreign policy which works closely with the US 
when it is undergirding regional peace and stability, but is willing and 
equipped to break from it when it is not.

Trump risks 'war' with Beijing if US blocks access to South China Sea, state 
media warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/trump-risks-war-with-beijing-us-blocks-access-south-china-sea-state-media>
Since Donald Trump’s election there has been a notable increase in calls for 
Australia to pursue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/10/paul-keating-calls-for-more-independent-australian-foreign-policy-after-us-election>
a more independent foreign policy 
<http://www.smh.com.au/comment/trumps-election-is-a-turning-point-for-australian-foreign-policy-20161114-gsp5kd.html>
. Trump’s comments on Taiwan and the “One China” policy, as well as his 
questioning of the alliance with Japan and South Korea – and raising the 
prospect of their development of nuclear weapons – have raised the spectre of a 
potentially destabilising American influence in the region. This latest 
indication of an incoming period of intense confrontation between China and the 
US will only amplify those calls.

Speaking before the Senate committee on foreign relations, Tillerson raised 
the issues of both construction in the South China Sea, and the unilateral 
declaration of an Air Defense Identification Zone over a large swathe of the 
East China Sea. He stated that the US would have to send a strong message to 
China over this activity, that the construction in the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea must stop, and that China’s 
access to the installations it has already constructed is to be disallowed.

The Chinese military construction in the South China Sea has proceeded at such 
a pace that it now constitutes a number of significant installations. Two years 
ago the news that China had placed mobile artillery pieces on one of its 
artificial islandsreverberated across headlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/31/china-great-wall-sand-spratlys-us-navy>
 around the world. Today China commandsanti-aircraft, anti-ship, and 
anti-missile systems 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-southchinasea-china-arms-exclusive-idUSKBN1431OK>
, surveillance and intelligence facilities, naval port facilities, and military 
aircraft housing, across a number of island installations, some of which have 
ballooned in size both approaching and beyond theUS naval base at Pearl Harbour 
<https://warontherocks.com/2016/09/chinas-artificial-islands-are-bigger-and-a-bigger-deal-than-you-think/>
.

Unilateral Chinese expansion in the South China Sea should be discouraged 
through a variety of economic, diplomatic, and even military means, in the form 
of freedom of navigation exercises. But if Tillerson’s policy was to be 
implemented, nothing short of direct American military intervention would 
foreseeably prevent China from accessing these installations in what it 
considers its own sovereign territory. The mere prospect of this raises 
important questions regarding Australia’s role in regional security, and its 
alliance with the US.

The US alliance has been an object of near-continuous bipartisan political 
orthodoxy in Australia ever since John Curtin proclaimed that we would now 
“look to America’ for our security in 1941. Despite a constantly shifting 
security environment since that time, Australian policymakers and politicians 
have in-the-main regarded the US alliance as the best foreign policy vehicle 
for achieving the dual pillars of the national interest: security and 
prosperity.

A robust American regional presence that reflects the interests of its broad 
array of local allies, and conducts a firm but restrained military policy, is 
certainly in Australia’s best interests. But a rash power, which threatens open 
conflict with our biggest trading partner over bases, which frankly are grossly 
overshadowed and outgunned by theUS’s own vast network of military assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/03/why-is-china-building-a-great-wall-of-sand-look-no-further-than-darwin>
 throughout the region, is not.

Why is China building a 'great wall of sand'? Look no further than Darwin | 
Stuart Rollo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/03/why-is-china-building-a-great-wall-of-sand-look-no-further-than-darwin>
The US marine base in Darwin is an important component of this regional 
military build-up, and the implications it holds for Australian freedom of 
action should the US decide to militarily intervene in the South China Sea are 
troubling. The Marine Air-Ground Task Force stationed there specialises in the 
exact amphibious operations and integration with air assets which would be 
necessary to enforce the kind of intervention that Tillerson has called for.


Australia’s ability to dictate the terms of use of American military assets 
stationed in our country, should conflict with China arise, is extremely 
doubtful. As is our ability to influence the shape of the US presence in Asia 
through our alliance if it takes the form of raw US hegemonic interest and 
overwhelming military power, rather than an anchor within a framework of the 
diverse interests of states in the region.

Tillerson’s comments on intervening in the South China Sea may come to 
nothing, he may not even pass his confirmation hearings. Regardless, they are a 
stark reminder of the stakes involved in military conflict in our region, and 
Australia’s ability to independently navigate them. Australian policymakers 
must commit to a more robust engagement with our own foreign policy, and place 
our country in the position to diverge from American action when we do not 
judge it to be in our own best interests.
 