
The world of children’s publishing is in mourning after the death on Sunday of 
one of its brightest, most eccentric and anarchic characters, Babette Cole.

Children’s laureate Chris Riddell and Michael Rosen were among those to pay 
tribute to the author and illustrator, whose books include the 1986 classic of 
feminist fairytale revisionism, Princess Smartypants, which reimagined the 
archetypal girl heroine as a motorbiking tearaway.

Riddell described the Jersey-born author, who died after a short illness at 
the age of 66, as unique.

 “I met her at publishing parties and she was always so full of fun and 
dressed to the nines,” he said. “It was in keeping with the joyful wit of her 
work, exuberant, heartfelt and very funny. Princess Smartypants. We will all 
miss her.”

Cole’s anarchic sense of humour figured high in tributes from fellow writers. 
Former children’s laureate Rosen said Cole had broken new ground in writing 
about sex, death and gender with “books that come over first and foremost as 
incredible fun, full of laughs and craziness”.

“Clearly, behind this lay a belief that shame and self-blame were destructive 
forces and that we had everything to gain from being truthful, frank and equal 
in our dealings with each other,” he added.

Lucy Coats, who writes picture books as well as children’s novels, said: “Her 
wit, humour and dedication to breaking down the barriers of gender stereotyping 
will be much missed, as will her eccentric dress sense.”

Two years ago, Cole was left battered and bruised after she was trampled by a 
herd of cows 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/news/cole-injured-cow-stampede-306621>. Recalling 
the attack, Grunts creator Philip Ardagh said: “Despite the seriousness of her 
injuries, it somehow felt sotypical … if anyone was going to be attacked by 
cows it would be her.”

He added: “Her glorious drawing style made her illustrations easily 
identifiable at 50 paces and her stories – whether they were about where babies 
come from, death, bunnies or a princess called Smartypants – were clever and 
captivating, often covering important topics with accessible ease.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHl6jIUz0e4o&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHl6jIUz0e4o>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DHl6jIUz0e4o&media=>
News of her death was announced by Inky Sprat 
<http://www.inkysprat.com/About_Us.html>, the ebook publishing company she 
founded with Manus Home and Neil Baber in 2013. “We will dearly miss her, as 
will children around the world miss her wonderful, often irreverent, and always 
unique stories and illustrations,” the statement read.

Home said: “She was one of the great rulebreaking characters of children’s 
publishing. We are all just stunned at this news. She was very much the driving 
force of the business.”

The flamboyant author was known as much for her personal style as her funny 
books.On her blog <http://http//jabberworks.livejournal.com/767883.html%20()>, 
fellow children’s author and illustrator Sarah McIntyre, who presented a number 
of events with her, said: “She lived by her own set of rules. I was a bit 
scared of her – she might say or doanything, but I loved her.” She added: “She 
often left me dizzy and bewildered, but always laughing.”

Babette Cole obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/16/babette-cole-obituary> 
Cole wrote and illustrated more than 70 children’s books. Dr Dog, about the 
Guimboyles’ family pet, who doubles as their physician, was adapted into a 
successful cartoon series. In 1986 she received the Kate Greenaway medal for 
Princess Smartypants, an honour she repeated with Prince Cinders in 1987.

Not one to shy away from difficult subjects, she helped parents broach tough 
subjects with their children. Mummy Laid an Egg, which covered sex education, 
was a “godsend to parents” Lucy Coats said. It was acclaimed illustrated book 
of the year at the 1994British book awards 
<http://www.thebookseller.com/events/british-book-awards>.

After graduating from Canterbury College of Art, where she studied animation, 
Cole collaborated with Peter Firmin and Oliver Postgate to create children’s 
BBC TV programmes including Bagpuss. She also worked on The Clangers and Basil 
Brush.

In 2015 she was commissioned to illustrate a 70th-anniversary edition of Enid 
Blyton’s classic The Famous Five: Five on a Treasure Island.

Passionate about horses, she owned a small stud farm in Devon 
<http://www.devonshirestud.co.uk>, which bred multi-award winning show ponies, 
hunters and cobs.
 