
The number of animals shot in England’s controversial badger cull soared to 
more than 10,000 this autumn, as part of the government’s attempt to cut 
tuberculosis (TB) in cattle.

Ministers claimed the result as a success but a leading scientist said there 
was “no basis” for suggesting the cull was effective, while wildlife charities 
said badgers were being used as a scapegoat for failures in the intensive 
livestock industry.

Badger culling was rolled out to seven new areas in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/30/badger-cull-areas-more-than-triple-under-new-government-licences>
, and with ongoing shooting in three other areas, 10 culls took place across 
Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Gloucestershire, Herefordshire and Somerset.


A total of 10,866 badgers were killed 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/578436/summary-badger-control-monitoring-2016.pdf>
 between August and October, according to government data published on Friday, 
bringing the overall total to more than 14,800 since culling began in two areas 
in 2013. Half the badgers killed in 2016 were shot without first being trapped, 
a method rejected asinhumane by the British Veterinary Association 
<https://www.bva.co.uk/News-campaigns-and-policy/Newsroom/News-releases/badger-cull/>
 in 2015.

Badger cull numbers 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-16T17:49:43/embed.html>
Proposals to extend badger culling beyond the four years originally planned 
<https://consult.defra.gov.uk/bovine-tb/supplementary-badger-disease-control/> 
were also published on Friday, as well aswider use of a more accurate blood 
test for TB 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/bovine-tb-controls-in-the-high-risk-and-edge-areas-of-england>
 in cattle to help prevent herds retaining infectious animals.

TB in cattle is a serious problem for some farmers in England, with 28,000 
infected cattle slaughtered in 2015 at a cost of more than £100m a year to 
taxpayers. An earlierdecade-long trial of badger culling 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090330154646/www...uk/.../final_report.pdf>
 found it could “make no meaningful contribution to cattle TB control in 
Britain”.

The extension of the badger cull is horribly cruel – and it won’t help farmers 
| Brian May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/badger-cull-bovine-tuberculosis-tb>
However, ministers have remained adamant that changes to culling practices, 
alongside other measures such as controls on cattle movement, would help to cut 
TB. But almost all scientists have said the badger cull is very unlikely to 
work and could make matters worse.

The environment secretary, Andrea Leadsom, also announced on Friday that the 
government would apply for official TB-free status in 2017 for the half of 
England where TB is rare, a move that would help farmers sell their beef and 
dairy products.

“We have much still to do in the worst-affected parts of the country, but this 
shows that our strategy – combining practical biosecurity measures, a robust 
cattle movement and testing regime, and badger control in areas where the 
disease is rife – is right and is working,” said Leadsom.

The chief veterinary officer (CVO), Nigel Gibbens, said the 2016 results 
showed “culling can deliver the level of effectiveness required to be confident 
of achieving disease control benefits”.

However, badger expert Prof Rosie Woodroffe from the Zoological Society of 
London told the Guardian: “There is no basis for drawing any conclusions about 
the effectiveness of culling.”

Over 70% of badgers in an area must be killed to be sure that the disturbed 
remaining populations do not range more widely and spread the disease further. 
But the minimum targets set for badger kills in each area were changed during 
the culls depending on how many were being shot, being reduced by up to 50% in 
some places.

“This means that there is really no way to tell what reduction in badger 
numbers was achieved by these culls,” said Woodroffe. “Culling that was 
consistently ineffective would look like a low badger density and prompt a 
reduced target. I would therefore consider the CVO’s conclusion to be based on 
extremely shaky evidence.”

An independent assessment of the first year of culling found it was neither 
effective nor humane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/28/badger-cull-humaneness-test-tb-cattle>
, but the government then disbanded the expert panel. There is also no evidence 
that the culls since 2013 have cut TB, although it takes two years for the data 
to come through. “The government has embarked upon a widespread rollout of 
badger culling in the absence of firm evidence that this approach can reduce 
cattle TB,” said Woodroffe.

“We could kill every badger in England but bovine TB would continue to spread 
in cattle herds due to inaccurate TB testing, excessive numbers of cattle 
movements and poor biosecurity controls,” said Dominic Dyer, the chief 
executive of theBadger Trust <http://www.badger.org.uk/>. “The badger is being 
used as a scapegoat for failures in the modern intensive livestock industry 
that have led to a significant increase in bovine TB.”

Claire Bass, the director of the Humane Society International/UK 
<http://www.hsi.org/world/united_kingdom/?referrer=http://www.hsi.org/world/united_kingdom/?referrer=https://www.google.co.uk/?referrer=http://www.hsi.org/world/united_kingdom/?referrer=http://www.hsi.org/world/united_kingdom/>
, said: “Badger culling is a costly distraction from the real solution to TB in 
cattle. It’s a disease of cattle, primarily spread by cattle, and it’s 
cattle-focused control measures that will stop it. But the government has 
sanctioned large-scale ‘badgercide’.”

However, the National Farmers’ Union <http://www.nfuonline.com/home/> said the 
latest cull results were a success and it should be rolled out further. “If 
culling is to have the maximum impact on disease it is vital that it takes 
place in as much of the area where bovine TB is rife as possible,” said the NFU 
president, Meurig Raymond. “Farmers continue to play their part in helping 
tackle this disease through cattle movement controls, cattle testing [and] 
improving biosecurity on farms.”

The government is proposing that badger culling can continue indefinitely via 
the granting of five-year licences. However, Woodroffe said it was worrying 
that the licences would carry less strict conditions than the current culls, 
heightening the risk of badgers spreading the disease more widely.

The government said it would use badger vaccination to help prevent TB 
spreading to new areas of England, but could not do so until 2018 due to a 
global shortage of supply.
 