
Sir James Dyson said: “Engineers are the people who can create practical 
solutions to our 21st-century challenges of sustainability, housing and an 
ageing population. And we need more of them.”

We won't get more engineering students by lowering tuition fees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/feb/23/we-wont-get-more-engineering-students-by-lowering-tuition-fees>
I couldn’t agree more. Analysis by the Royal Academy of Engineering suggests 
that the UKneeds more than a million new engineers 
<http://www.raeng.org.uk/news/news-releases/2014/october/profession-called-to-action-on-securing-the-future>
 and technicians by 2020 to meet industry demand.

Employers, the government, the education sector and professional bodies are 
searching for new ways to tackle the problem. As a result, employer networking 
events, work placements and outreach programmes with schools are taking place 
across the UK.

But while universities are working to fill the gaps in industry, there’s a 
risk that we’re neglecting our own needs. What – if anything – are we doing to 
incentivise our most promising engineering graduates to become the academics of 
the future?

This is the question posed by the Royal Academy of Engineering in a recent 
report <http://www.raeng.org.uk/publications/reports/pathways-to-success> 
looking at the pathways of engineering graduates. It shows that in 2012, just 
3.2% of UK engineering graduates went on to further study and research.

This came as a surprise to many, but not to academics – we know that this is a 
common occurrence. I know of a final-year student who had the potential to 
become a successful researcher – when he was asked if he had considered 
studying a PhD, he said that he’d already been offered an industry role, and 
thought it better to get a job straight away.

I’m not disputing the fact that we need great engineering minds working in 
industry, but we also know that world-class research – which we have a long 
history of in the UK – plays a key role in economic growth and improves the 
health and wellbeing of society.

Eight ways to encourage more students to study engineering
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jan/20/eight-ways-encourage-students-study-engineering>
Why aren’t we attracting students into research? 

One major issue is that engineering undergraduates receive plenty of 
information about potential careers in industry and opportunities for work 
experience, but they are rarely offered a taste of research until they’ve made 
their minds up about their careers.

Students’ first exposure to the research environment is often in their 
final-year project. We need more opportunities to experience this in 
undergraduate programmes. The use of research-based teaching and enquiry-based 
learning exposes students to academic methods much earlier in their 
undergraduate courses, as does interacting with engineering researchers and 
learning about what they do. This can go a long way in making research more 
appealing to engineering students.

Research <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/research> 
careers are on the radars of science undergraduates much earlier than they are 
for engineering students. Today’s engineers aren’t necessarily avoiding 
research-based careers – they’re just not being given the same exposure to them 
as students of other disciplines.

Universities are rightly proud of the work placements that form part of most 
engineering degrees, but they should be equally keen to offer research 
placements.

We launched the Sheffield Engineering Leadership Academy 
<http://www.sela-sheffield.org/> (Sela) in 2014, which exposes undergraduates 
to research at an early stage of their degrees. We approve up to 10 research 
bursaries per year and students complete a 10-week placement focused on areas 
such as 3D printing, nuclear waste and carbon fibre materials. They gain 
transferable skills to take into their future careers – in either academia or 
industry.

In an ideal world, the two would not be mutually exclusive. I’d like to see 
more engineering doctorates who later move into industry and vice versa.

Engineering in higher education: a bright future? – live chat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/jan/20/engineering-higher-education-teaching-debate>
The best solution for the UK’s engineering industry would be to nurture 
engineers who understand research, as well as researchers with industry 
experience. More graduates opting for careers in research would eventually mean 
a win for industry.

But that requires a change in the prevailing culture across higher education, 
in order to keep more brilliant young minds in academia. If we are to have the 
best engineers – in industry and universities – universities need to start 
actively promoting research as an equally important first step towards an 
engineering career.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 