
10 Tony Blair 

The politician who just won’t lie down. Even the publication of the Chilcot 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/10/the-chilcot-report-by-sir-john-chilcot-digested-read-iraq-inquiry>
 couldn’t dampen his megalomania, and he is still frequently found on TV news 
channels trying to persuade the country he has a vital role to play in the 
Brexit negotiations. Despite this, he could be around a while longer; after 
losing two elections and heading for a third defeat, many Labour MPs still 
regard him with affection.

9 Neil Hamilton



OK, so leader of Ukip in the Welsh assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/10/ukip-group-neil-hamilton-elected-lead-welsh-assembly-wales>
 may not be the highest office in the land, but it’s a great deal higher than 
many in Ukip, let alone the rest of the country, would have had in mind for 
him. Given his track record for being unable to avoid controversy and scandal, 
Hamilton’s is likely to be one of the shorter comebacks.

8 Liam Fox

Most people thought they had heard the last of Fox when he was forced to 
resign as minister for defenceafter including one of his friends, Adam 
Werritty, in various international trade talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/14/guardian-broke-fox-werritty-story>
. Since then, he has been a seething rage of Euroscepticism on the backbenches. 
After the Brexit vote, Fox stood for leader of the Conservatives and came 
fourth out of five, and most people assumed that was that. But Theresa May 
decided to keep her friends close and her enemies closer by appointing him 
international trade minister, in which rolehe has done nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/23/tories-cutting-each-others-throats-on-theresa-mays-leaking-ship>
.

7 Nigel Farage

Not so much a comeback as the politician who refuses to go away. After 
arguably proving himself to be the most successful politician of the century by 
winning the EU referendum,Farage promised to fade into obscurity by standing 
down as Ukip leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/04/nigel-farage-resigns-as-ukip-leader>
. Whereupon he promptly decided he was best placed to take the top job again. 
As if that weren’t enough, hebecame best mates with Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-nigel-farage-picture-trump-tower>
 and has now been positioning himself as Britain’s next ambassador to the US.

6 Andrea Leadsom

Very few people outside her close circle of friends had heard of Leadsom until 
she found herself going head to head with Theresa May for the leadership of the 
Conservative party. Having got herself into all sorts of bother with a dodgy CV 
and her“as a mother” mantra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/10/andrea-leadsom-apologises-for-motherhood-remarks>
, she sensibly withdrew early on, sinking without trace as quickly as she had 
risen. Only then, to her and everyone else’s surprise – shehadn’t been sure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/05/leadsom-vows-to-continue-with-uks-climate-commitments>
 if climate change was real or not – she was made minister for the environment.

5 Keith Vaz

Having been outed by the Sunday Mirror for masquerading as Jim, the industrial 
washing machine salesman of the year, who was allegedly happy to hand over £150 
to sex workers to buy cocaine, Vaz reluctantlystepped down from his role as 
chair of the home affairs select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/06/keith-vaz-resigns-as-chair-of-home-affairs-select-committee>
. Most MPs follow such public humiliation with time away from the House of 
Commons as an expression of contrition. Not Vaz: he was back in the house the 
next day asking questions and within weeks he had got himselfelected to the 
justice select committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/keith-vaz-could-lose-justice-committee-post-in-unusual-mps-vote>
.

4 David Davis

When you last served as a minister 19 years previously, in 1997, it’s 
reasonable to assume that your career in frontline politics is over. In the 
intervening years, Davis has shown every sign of making himself comfortable on 
the backbenches as the voice of general dissent. But following the EU 
referendum, Theresa May has brought him back into the fold as the minister for 
exiting the EU. Presumably on the grounds of you broke it, you fix it. For 
Davis, it has been a case of be careful what you wish for. The job is proving a 
lot trickier than he thought and he issounding less and less hawkish by the day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
. Come 2019, he could even be a Europhile.

3 Iain Duncan Smith

Flouncing out of his job as work and pensions minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/18/iain-duncan-smith-resigns-from-cabinet-over-disability-cuts>
 because the changes he had made to welfare payments had actually been one of 
the few pieces of government policy to achieve its objectives, looked a curious 
move. And, when Theresa May had overlooked him for a cabinet position while 
over-promoting his even less competent Brexiteers, it looked like time was up 
for IDS. As the Conservative Cabinet continues to struggle to understand 
whether Brexit means Brexit, and what they should do about it if it does, IDS 
is looking to be first in line for promotion in any reshuffle.

2 Boris Johnson

Returning to the Commons after taking time out to be London mayor had only 
ever been a stepping stone for Bozza. So, when faced with the decision of a 
lifetime – to remain in or leave the EU – Boris had to think carefully: what 
would make him most likely to be Tory leader?He seemed to choose leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/boris-johnson-joins-campaign-to-leave-eu>
 on the grounds that remain would probably narrowly win, which would tee him up 
nicely for the top job when David Cameron stepped down in 2019. Much to his 
surprise, leave won and Boris found himself having to rethink his plans. Before 
he could do so, Michael Gove stabbed him in the front and it looked as though 
Boris was going to be condemned to a lifetime of hubris. But then Theresa chose 
him to be her foreign secretary. He and the rest of the world arestill coming 
to terms with that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/saudi-row-boris-johnson-job-theresa-may>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fballs-to-blair-2016-year-unpopular-politician-comebacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b7f23bf5069b9570153dd740e228f8ed8d91e52%2F0_115_2474_1483%2F2474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Balls%20to%20Blair%3A%20top%2010%20unpopular%20politicians%E2%80%99%20comebacks%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fballs-to-blair-2016-year-unpopular-politician-comebacks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Balls%20to%20Blair%3A%20top%2010%20unpopular%20politicians%E2%80%99%20comebacks%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fballs-to-blair-2016-year-unpopular-politician-comebacks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9b7f23bf5069b9570153dd740e228f8ed8d91e52%2F0_115_2474_1483%2F2474.jpg>
 Highsteppin’ … Ed Balls. Photograph: Jay Brooks/BBC/PA 
1 Ed Balls

Think back to the general election of May 2015, when the then shadow 
chancellor of the exchequerlost his seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/may/08/ed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video>
. No one but him mourned, as he was generally remembered by the country as 
offering little resistance to the austerity measures of George Osborne, and by 
his own party as having been an unpopular bully boy for Gordon Brown. Cut to 
December this year, and Balls is now the most loved politician in the country 
thanks to his eccentric and enthusiastic dance shapes on Strictly Come Dancing. 
Were Balls to fight an election as leader of the Labour party right now, few 
would bet against him winning. Politics in 2016: it’s all become an extension 
of reality TV.
 