
The managers of bands including Arctic Monkeys and One Direction are 
spearheading a new campaign against online ticket touting that aims to pile 
pressure on the government to end the resale rip-off.

The FanFair Alliance <http://fanfairalliance.org>, which was unveiled on 
Thursday, is designed to unite fans, artists and music businesses against 
online touts who have been accused of systematically exploiting gig goers, 
breaching UK laws and diverting revenues from the creative economy.

The campaign launch comes just days before an expected government announcement 
on what ministers intend to do – or not do – to tackle the problems.

“The black market in ticket resales is now widely recognised to have reached 
an industrial scale, with touts operating anonymously and with impunity on 
under-regulated secondary ticketing sites,” claim those behind the initiative.

Campaigners are urging the government to take “four pragmatic steps” that 
would disrupt the touts and help get more face-value tickets into the hands of 
fans. Meanwhile, gig goers are being encouraged to sign up atfanfairalliance.org
 <http://fanfairalliance.org> where they can share their experiences and 
stories, and there are plans to produce educational guides for fans and music 
businesses.

Last year, in the wake of a growing outcry over the reselling of tickets at 
vastly inflated prices, the government announced an independent review of how 
the secondary ticketing market was working. This sector is dominated by four 
players: Seatwave, Get Me In, Viagogo and StubHub (the first two of which are 
owned by Ticketmaster).

Two months ago the review team, headed by Professor Michael Waterson, 
published their report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525885/ind-16-7-independent-review-online-secondary-ticketing-facilities.pdf>
. This found that thesecondary ticketing sites “are seemingly falling short” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
 when it comes to ensuring compliance with rules brought in last year to 
protect consumers.

The black market is widely recognised to have reached an industrial scale, 
with touts operating with impunity

The report also suggested that touts who sell large numbers of tickets to 
concerts and other events at inflated prices might eventually be required to 
apply for official licences.

The government only has a few days left to issue its official response to the 
review team’s findings, as parliament will rise for the summer recess on 
Thursday.

Rules introduced in May 2015 require anyone reselling tickets via a secondary 
ticketing website to provide details of the block, row and, crucially, seat 
number, as well as the face value. But campaigners and consumer bodies say the 
websites are failing to ensure the required information is provided when people 
list tickets for sale.

There are plenty of examples of tickets for in-demand events being sold for 
far above the face value on secondary sites. For example:

• Get Me In was this week listing tickets for Black Sabbath’s last-ever show, 
in Birmingham on 4 February 2017, for £715 each, even though these particular 
seats have a face value of £50 and are at the rear of the Genting Arena. Two 
seats would set you back a total of £1,697, which includes Get Me In’s £267 
“processing fee”.

• Seatwave was this week listing tickets to the David Bowie Prom at London’s 
Royal Albert Hall on 29 July for £190 each. Yet the face value is £30, and the 
venue’s website is warning that “once purchased, [Proms] tickets cannot be 
resold – reselling a ticket makes it void and the ticketholder may be refused 
entry”.

Initially backed by more than 40 individuals and businesses that have signed a 
declaration supporting fair ticketing practices, the FanFair Alliance – which 
also has the backing of trade bodies such as the Musicians’ Union – is urging 
ministers to:

• Give the existing consumer protection rules in the Consumer Rights Act 2015 
more “teeth”.

• Give fans more clarity about who they are buying from. Professional traders, 
often known as “power sellers”, are currently able to operate anonymously on 
secondary ticketing sites, say the campaigners, who add: “We believe their 
identities should be made clear to buyers.”

• Ensure that secondary ticketing platforms “show proper corporate 
responsibility”. The FanFair Alliance says it believes the resale sites, not 
their users, should bear responsibility for ensuring compliance with consumer 
legislation.

• Make the abuse of technology – via the use of internet “bots” – in order to 
buy up tickets a criminal offence. “Touts frequently hack into primary 
ticketing systems to buy up inventory for resale. The government should clarify 
that such actions are breaking the Computer Misuse Act and attach appropriate 
penalties,” say the campaigners.

Whatever the government says next week, it is thought that politicians keen to 
overhaul the way ticketing works in the UK are now preparing to attach 
amendments to legislation that could be introduced late this year or early next 
year. The Conservative peer Lord Colin Moynihan is understood to be keen to 
attach an amendment about ticketing to a bill already slated for debate, such 
as the policing and crime bill or the better markets bill.

Wildlife Entertainment’s Ian McAndrew, manager of Arctic Monkeys and Royal 
Blood, says: “I am delighted we are launching with such a groundswell of 
support, and I hope more will come on board and join us.”

Meanwhile, the veteran promoter Harvey Goldsmith, who has worked with acts 
such as Pink Floyd and helped organise the 1985 Live Aid concert, has also 
called for more action from politicians, saying touting was “doing untold harm 
to our business”.

He says: “The problem today is that the primary ticketing operations [such as 
Ticketmaster] also own secondary auction sites, and send applicants to them at 
an early stage.”

Goldsmith is an advocate of capping resale prices at face value plus 10%, 
which he says would kill off profiteering touts but still allow people to 
resell tickets they can’t use.

The resale websites say they are simply responding to what fans want: the 
ability to buy and resell tickets when the primary supply is exhausted, or if 
people can no longer make the event.

Ticketmaster has said that ticketing marketplaces “are dynamic and react to 
demand and the willingness of fans to pay … Tickets are sometimes listed at 
prices higher than the face value. Tickets very rarely sell at these elevated 
prices, though, with many selling at face value or below the original price.”

StubHub has spoken of its concern that “there are still insufficient legal 
safeguards to stop event organisers using row and seat number details to cancel 
without compensation tickets offered for resale”.

Whose side is Ticketmaster on?

A Ticketmaster subsidiary is helping professional touts hoover up tickets by 
passing on inside information about fast-selling events, allowing them to 
pounce on “hot” shows ahead of ordinary fans, it is claimed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9479a82dc735df7df182099e191777fa68b52f0%2F0_328_4871_2923%2F4871.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bands%20and%20fans%20declare%20war%20on%20online%20ticket%20touts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bands%20and%20fans%20declare%20war%20on%20online%20ticket%20touts&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fbands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff9479a82dc735df7df182099e191777fa68b52f0%2F0_328_4871_2923%2F4871.jpg>
 Get in line: touts snap up tickets early. Photograph: Richard 
Isaac/Rex/Shutterstock 
The allegation comes weeks after a government-commissioned report lifted the 
lid on the world of event tickets 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525885/ind-16-7-independent-review-online-secondary-ticketing-facilities.pdf>
, which is dominated by “primary” agents such as Ticketmaster and See Tickets, 
and so-called secondary market websites, the best known of which are Seatwave, 
Viagogo, Get Me In and StubHub. The secondary sites are where touts and genuine 
fans alike sell tickets they have bought from the likes of Ticketmaster, which 
is thought to be the world’s biggest ticketing company.

In his official report published in May, Professor Michael Waterson said he 
was convinced that some primary ticket agents or promoters were, behind the 
scenes, supplying the secondary market sites with tickets to be sold at higher 
prices in order to boost their profits.

A well-placed source in the touting world told Guardian Money that inside 
information on Ticketmaster sales was regularly passed on to touts who sell 
tickets on Get Me In, one of two UK secondary market websites owned by 
Ticketmaster (the other is Seatwave).

The information was gleaned from the company’s “on-sale call”, a conference 
call that takes place on the morning that tickets for major gigs go on sale – 
usually on a Friday. Senior figures at Ticketmaster use the call to discuss 
which tickets are selling well. However, account managers at Get Me In are 
understood to have listened in to the call on a regular basis.

Account managers are responsible for managing the needs of major touts, known 
as “power sellers” or brokers, who have built up lucrative businesses by 
listing hundreds of tickets on sites such as Get Me In. When the touts sell a 
ticket, the website gets a cut.

The source claimed that account managers would regularly listen to the on-sale 
call and pass up-to-the-minute information about the bestselling events to 
their power sellers via a separate phone line. This helped them focus their 
efforts on the most popular events and maximise their potential profits by 
snapping up popular tickets – and then selling them to fans at a substantial 
mark-up. “They’re on the call, telling you which tickets are doing well … it 
helps in targeting the right gigs,” said the source, who spoke on condition of 
anonymity.

Ticketmaster declined to comment, but senior staff are believed to have been 
unaware that employees of Get Me In had access to the on-sale call.

Separately, two sources active in the touting world told Money that Get Me In 
pays the most powerful touts for tickets that they are yet to sell. This is 
significant because it helps the touts build up cash reserves that can be used 
to increase the number of tickets they can buy and sell. Ticketmaster stands to 
gain from high prices on the secondary websites because its subsidiaries, such 
as Get Me In, take a percentage commission on each one.

One seasoned tout said that some secondary ticketing websites regularly pay 
touts for tickets they haven’t yet sold. “They do pay out in advance,” he says. 
“They say they don’t, but that’s for consumers.” In his 227-page report, 
Waterson stated that the secondary sites “may reward power sellers … with 
better terms, for example, early payment”.

Speaking to the Guardian, Waterson said primary ticket companies had little 
incentive to rein in touts: “In the absence of instructions to the contrary, 
there are clear financial incentives for a ticket seller to move some tickets 
into the secondary market in the case of potential sell-out events.”
 