
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> should be wary of 
rushing into interest rate rises to curb inflation, according to its chief 
economist, in a warning that the UK economy is vulnerable to a sharper slowdown 
next year than forecasts would suggest.

Andy Haldane said he was comfortable with the Bank’s current wait-and-see 
stance on borrowing costs as it weighs up the conflicting forces of a lower 
pound stoking inflation and the Brexit vote denting business confidence.

In a bid to shore up confidence after the referendum, the Bank cut interest 
rates to a record low of 0.25% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
 and expanded its programme of electronic money-printing, known as quantitative 
easing (QE). It had hinted at another interest rate cut before the end of the 
year but aflurry of brighter than expected economic news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/nov/22/how-has-the-brexit-vote-affected-the-economy-november-verdict>
 forced the Bank torow back on that guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
.


Haldane said on Friday that economic output had outperformed the expectations 
of the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC) back in August while inflation 
had picked up, largely as a result of the pound’s sharp fall since the 
referendum, which makes imports to the UK more expensive.

“That configuration now leaves me comfortable with the current stance of 
monetary policy, with no bias on the direction of the next move in interest 
rates,” he said.

In a speech 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/945.aspx> to 
the Materials Processing Institute in the North Yorkshire town of Redcar, 
Haldane said GDP growth, which came in at 0.5% in the three months following 
the referendum, was stronger than forecast by the Bank and others.

“This is welcome news. The main source of this upside news to activity has 
been the buoyancy of consumers. They appear to have kept calm and carried on 
spending on the high street, in the car showrooms and in the estate agents,” he 
said.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbank-of-england-wary-uk-interest-rate-rise-andy-haldane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3175b077f04a2db0270840c237950618477e7b3f%2F223_431_3974_2387%2F3974.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bank%20of%20England%20must%20be%20wary%20of%20interest%20rate%20rise%2C%20says%20chief%20economist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbank-of-england-wary-uk-interest-rate-rise-andy-haldane%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bank%20of%20England%20must%20be%20wary%20of%20interest%20rate%20rise%2C%20says%20chief%20economist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fbank-of-england-wary-uk-interest-rate-rise-andy-haldane%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3175b077f04a2db0270840c237950618477e7b3f%2F223_431_3974_2387%2F3974.jpg>
 Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of England. Photograph: ANL/REX 
Shutterstock 
However, he joined other economists in warning that the rise in import costs 
could be passed on to consumers and that they would curb their spending as a 
result. The Bank is forecasting GDP growth will slow to 1.4% next year from 
2.2% this year but Haldane said that could prove over-optimistic.

“I think there is still a material chance that growth could underperform 
relative to expectations during the course of next year – for example, if the 
squeeze on household incomes prompts a larger adjustment in household spending. 
In that event, the upside pressures on inflation would be weaker than 
expected,” he said.

If inflationary pressures were lower then the effectiveness of low interest 
rates in boosting the economy could suffer, he added.

“My personal view is that this provides grounds for not proceeding too hastily 
with any tightening of the monetary policy stance,” Haldane said.


Following Chancellor Philip Hammond’s focus on the UK’s urgent need to improve 
its productivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammonds-autumn-statement-welcome-reality-check-brexit>
 in last week’s autumn statement, Haldane used his speech to explore regional 
disparities in productivity levels. He said monetary policy, as set by the 
Bank, had little influence on productivity. But the government’s industrial 
strategy could improve output per hour worked.

Haldane joined other policymakers on the MPC in defending the Bank’s measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/low-interest-rates-inequality-bank-of-england-ben-broadbent>
 to shore up the economy in the wake of the global financial crisis after prime 
ministerTheresa May’s remarks earlier this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
 that there had been “some bad side-effects” from low interest rates and QE.

He echoed the deputy governor, Ben Broadbent, in arguing monetary policy could 
have little influence on how prosperity is shared out in an economy.

“At least over the longer run, it is reasonably clear that monetary policy is 
ill-equipped for the task of either expanding the economic pie or altering the 
way it is sliced,” Haldane said.


He also put forward Bank estimates for how the economy would have performed in 
the absence of QE and the Bank’s deep interest cuts from 5% to 0.5% between 
September 2008 and March 2009.

“Without the support of looser monetary policy, all regions would then have 
experienced a contraction in real GDP per head since 2008,” he said.

“The picture is similar if we turn to unemployment. In the absence of a 
monetary policy easing, unemployment would have risen further after the crisis 
in every region in the UK, by an additional four percentage points. Around an 
extra 1.5 million people would have found themselves out of work.”

On the question of how the Bank’s policies had affected regional disparities 
in the UK economy, he found limited evidence of any damage.

“The regional distribution of incomes does not appear to have changed 
materially during the period of monetary loosening. The same is true of 
unemployment rates. There is some evidence of the higher-wealth regions 
benefiting more than the lower-wealth regions over the period since the 
crisis,” Haldane said.
 