
Banks might have to pay out more in compensation to victims of the £40bn 
payment protection insurance scandal after the financial regulator delayed a 
decision on setting a deadline for complaints.

The Financial Conduct Authority said in August it was considering a mid-2019 
cutoff for PPI claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
 and would decide before the end of 2016. The proposed deadline was more than a 
year later than the industry had expected, raising the prospect of more claims 
being allowed.

The FCA said it had received a large volume of responses to its proposal 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/statements/financial-conduct-authority-statement-ppi>
 and that it would decide on the deadline in the first three months of next 
year. The delay means the final deadline for claims is likely to be pushed back 
by a few months from the mid-2019 date.

Bill for PPI mis-selling scandal tops £40bn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/27/ppi-mis-selling-scandal-bill-tops-40bn-pounds>
The regulator said: “The timetable was … subject to a number of variables 
including the extent and nature of the feedback received in response to the 
consultation. We have received a large amount of feedback and, given the 
importance of this matter, we are carefully considering the issues raised.”


The bill for the PPI scandal topped £40bn in October 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/barclays-ppi-costs-rise-with-600m-bill>
 when Barclays increased its provisions to £8.4bn in response to the FCA’s 
previous announcement. Lloyds, the biggest seller of PPI,increased its 
provisions by £1bn to £17bn the same month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/26/llyods-hit-by-fresh-1bn-ppi-bill>
and said it hoped the charge would cap its costs.

Banks may now need to set more money aside to deal with PPI, which is the most 
expensive scandal to affect the UK financial industry.

Barclays shares closed down 2.5% at 233p on Friday, while Lloyds shares were 
down 1.6% to 61.7p.

The FCA delayed its decision as it emerged Santander had failed to provide 
customers with information about PPI required under rules governing the scandal 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/576138/letter-to-santander-ppi-order-2011.pdf>
.

The Competition and Markets Authority said Santander failed to send letters to 
more than 500 customers that set out the cost of PPI and reminded them they 
were allowed to cancel the product. The CMA said the bank had sent letters in 
which it apologised to customers and said it would issue refunds if the 
customers cancel policies within six months of receiving the apology.

Banks sold highly profitable PPI alongside mortgages, loans and credit cards 
from the late 1990s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/05/how-ppi-scandal-unfolded>. 
PPI was meant to repay borrowings if a customer became ill or unemployed but 
policies were often structured to limit payouts, imposed on customers as a 
condition of a loan or sold to people who would not qualify for a claim.
 