
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> should move quick 
to quash any rapid growth in credit, one of its deputy governors has said.

Sir Jon Cunliffe told an audience of property developers 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/880.aspx> that 
credit was growing at almost the same rate as the economy after contracting in 
the years immediately after the banking crisis.

He said: “If [credit] were to resume growing more than twice as fast as GDP, 
it could take a number of years for debt to income to retain its pre-crisis 
peak. But just as financial cycles build up over a number of years, the risks 
they pose are perhaps best managed over time.

Market turmoil: European markets fall again after Japan's 5% rout – live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/feb/09/market-turmoil-nikkei-plunges-european-stocks-germany-ftse-live>
“Given the vulnerability that already exists and the powerful drivers in the 
UK, particularly in the housing market, if credit began again to grow faster 
than GDP, I would want to think about action to manage the financial stability 
risks sooner rather than later.”

The rate of credit growth has not reached the levels of the 10 years before 
the crisis. During the decade until 2007, credit growth was more than double 
the rate of growth in the economy; at its peak in 2009, credit was 177% of GDP.

Cunliffe said most of this lending was to UK households. The stock of 
households’ debt relative to their income surged from the late 1990s to 155% by 
2007. It fell to 135% in 2012 and remains at that level. He sits on the 
financial policy committee – set up inside the Bank of England by the last 
government to look for risks to the financial system – and said it was up to 
the FPC to monitor the credit cycle.

“Now is a good time to ask: what lay behind the very rapid expansion of credit 
in the 10 years before the crisis. Should we expect – or want – credit to 
return to its pre-crisis path of growing nearly twice as fast as GDP? This is 
an important question for the financial policy committee as it assesses the 
level of financial stability risk in the UK economy – where we are in the 
so-called ‘financial cycle’?”

The aim is not to stifle growth entirely. “The issue, rather, is what are the 
financial stability and broader economic risks for the UK if credit 
consistently grows faster than GDP and as a result, debt-to-income resumes its 
upward path? That cannot continue indefinitely. Trees cannot grow to the sky,” 
he said.

The FPC has powers to restrict the amount of mortgage lending to highly 
indebted individuals and can also rein in sectors it regards as riskier.
 