
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has warned 
households to expect a sharp rise in inflation next year as the weak pound 
ramps up the costs of imports and squeezes family finances.

Predicting rises in petrol prices and other goods that the UK buys in from 
abroad, the Bank said inflation would rise from 1.3% this year to 2.7% in 2017 
and 2018, higher than in its last set of forecasts three months ago. In its new 
outlook, the monetary policy committee (MPC), led by the Bank’s governor,Mark 
Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, said it would take 
until 2020 for inflation to get back to the target of 2% set by the government.

The new forecast was delivered as the Bank kept interest rates at a record low 
of 0.25% and dropped plans to cut them further in the near future, although the 
inflation warning was tempered with a projection that economic growth will be 
much stronger than previously forecast in the near-term.

The pound tumbled to 30-year lows 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/brexit-pound-plunges-to-30-year-lows-as-eu-fears-bite-into-global-markets-again>
 in the wake of the vote to leave the EU and hascome under fresh pressure in 
recent weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/pound-drops-further-after-davis-hints-uk-could-leave-single-market>
 over investor fears that the UK is heading for a hard Brexit deal that would 
leave it shut out of Europe’s single market. The sharp depreciation has made UK 
exports more competitivebut imports more expensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/uk-services-costs-pound-inflation>
 – prompting changes to inflation forecasts.

Carney, who has been forced to fend off criticism that he was overly gloomy on 
the potential blow to the economy from a leave vote, said on Thursday that 
sterling’s sharp fall made the Bank’s usual balancing act more challenging.

He described the UK as facing “exceptional circumstances” and said the MPC was 
making a trade-off between keeping inflation in check and shoring up growth. 
For now, record-low interest rates and a big programme of electronic money 
printing, known as quantitative easing, was appropriate, he said.

“The MPC is choosing a period of somewhat higher consumer price inflation in 
exchange for a more modest increase in unemployment. However, there are limits 
to the extent to which above-target inflation can be tolerated,” Carney told a 
news conference.

His comments about the Bank’s sensitivity to inflation picking up were 
interpreted by investors as a signal that policymakers were in no hurry to 
consider cutting interest rates further. Another rate cut would likely put more 
pressure on the pound and further stoke price pressures in the economy.

The pound, which had received a boost earlier in the day after the high court 
ruled that parliament should have a say over the triggering of article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/theresa-may-concedes-triggering-article-50-will-need-act-of-parliament>
, strengthened further after the Bank’s statement. It rose against the dollar 
and euro as some economists said that 0.25% now marked the low point for 
interest rates and that the next move would probably be up.

“If the relatively sanguine view presented in November’s inflation report 
proves correct, then another interest rate cut now looks unlikely,” said Paul 
Hollingsworth at the consultancy CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>.

“Given that we think that the economy will surprise the MPC on the upside, and 
that inflation may be a bit stronger too, we think that the next move in 
interest rates will be up, and perhaps sooner than most expect.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a65197f1d2173b45d0e871d440942360f7641e%2F0_571_3604_2163%2F3604.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bank%20of%20England%20warns%20households%20to%20expect%20sharp%20rise%20in%20inflation%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bank%20of%20England%20warns%20households%20to%20expect%20sharp%20rise%20in%20inflation%20next%20year&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fbank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47a65197f1d2173b45d0e871d440942360f7641e%2F0_571_3604_2163%2F3604.jpg>
 Mark Carney said UK households had appeared to ‘entirely look through 
Brexit-related uncertainties’. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP 
Back in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, when it reduced interest rates from 0.5% to 0.25%, the Bank had indicated it 
would support another interest rate cut to about 0.1% by the end of this year 
if the economy followed its predictions for a sharp slowdown. On Thursday it 
said that guidance had now “expired” and itrevised up forecasts for economic 
growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live>
 in the final months of this year and throughout 2017.

That reflected a succession of business surveys and official data signalling 
thathouseholds and companies have largely shrugged off the Brexit vote, for now,
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-shrugs-off-brexit-uncertainty-with-05-growth>
 although worries about the UK’s longer-term prospects have dented businesses’ 
investment plans.

Carney commented that households had appeared to “entirely look through 
Brexit-related uncertainties”.

“For households, the signs of an economic slowdown are notable by their 
absence. Perceptions of job security remain strong. Wages are growing at around 
the same modest pace as at the start of the year. Credit is available and 
competitive. Confidence is solid,” he said.

But looking further ahead to 2018, the Bank said a squeeze on household 
incomes from higher inflation and uncertainty about the UK’s future trading 
position would likely curb growth. Taking the near- and long-term forecasts 
together, the economic picture in three years’ time was slightly worse than in 
August’s outlook.

Bank of England leaves interest rates unchanged and raises growth and 
inflation forecasts – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live>


The rate decision comes days after Carney was forced to end weeks of 
speculation about his future as governor by announcing he had agreed tostay on 
until Brexit negotiations with the EU have ended in 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-extra-year-bank-of-england-governor>
.


The move followed criticism from pro-Brexit campaigners and MPs unhappy at 
what they saw as the overpoliticisation of his role in the run-up to the EU 
referendum, when Carney warned a leave vote could tip the UK into recession.

On Thursday, Carney said the independent central bank did not feel under any 
pressure from the government and batted away requests from reporters to further 
elaborate on his own career plans, saying: “I think we’ve had enough of that 
saga.”



 