
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has left interest 
rates at their record low of 0.25% but repeated a warning that higher inflation 
and slower wage growth risk squeezing household budgets and spending next year.

The Bank’s nine-strong monetary policy committee voted unanimously to keep 
rates on hold and maintain the current programme of electronic money printing 
known asquantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/quantitative-easing>. Policymakers had 
cut rates and expanded QE back in August to shore up confidence in the wake of 
June’s vote to leave the EU.

In minutes to its final meeting of the year 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/minutes/Pages/mpc/default.aspx>, 
the MPC said it would continue to trade off the effects of a weaker pound 
raising inflation against the prospects of economic growth and employment 
slowing. For now, policymakers said they saw no need to change policy as little 
had appeared to change since the MPC published its forecasts for the economy in 
November’s inflation report.

Bank of England leaves UK interest rates at record lows - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/15/fed-hike-dollar-bank-of-england-interest-rates-business-live>
“A slowdown in growth remained likely, but there had been little news since 
the time of the November inflation report about domestic activity and, although 
the near-term global outlook had improved, this was counterbalanced by more 
elevated risks,” the minutes said.

The pound fell after the minutes said inflation may not rise as quickly as it 
expected in the near-term. “Since the Committee’s previous meeting, sterling’s 
trade-weighted exchange rate has appreciated by over 6%, while dollar oil 
prices have risen by 14%. All else equal, this would result in a slightly lower 
path for inflation than envisaged in the November inflation report, though it 
is still likely to overshoot the target later in 2017 and through 2018,” the 
minutes said.

The minutes also highlighted a “notable decline in consumer confidence” and 
signs of businesses being nervous about the longer-term. They repeated a 
forecast for unemployment to rise next year and for inflation to overtake pay 
growth “marginally” in 2017.

There were early warning signs on Thursday that higher prices are forcing some 
people to cut back.Official figures showed retail sales continued to grow in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/retail-sales-black-friday-november-ons-fuel>
 but at a markedly slower pace as fuel sales slowed amid higher pump prices.

The MPC also reiterated its previous stance that it was ready to make monetary 
policy tighter or looser depending on how the economy evolves as the Brexit 
process gets under way.

“Monetary policy could respond, in either direction, to changes to the 
economic outlook as they unfolded to ensure a sustainable return of inflation 
to the 2% target.”

Ian Shepherdson, chief economist at the consultancy Pantheon Macroeconomics 
said the minutes’ reiteration that the Bank was ready to move in either 
direction reflected “great uncertainty ahead” and he expected the MPC to 
continue to hold borrowing costs for many months to come, rather than reacting 
to higher inflation with a rate rise.


“Growth is expected to slow and the MPC’s base case remains that higher 
inflation will not become embedded into wages and inflation expectations - some 
measures of which have risen, they noted - so the Bank can continue to look 
through the inflation spike. We think Bank Rate will be on hold throughout 
2017.”

Inflation picked up last month but was still well below the target at 1.2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
. Because inflation was more than a percentage point off target at 0.9% in 
October, the Bank’s governor had to write an open letter to chancellor Philip 
Hammond. His exchange of letters with Hammond was published alongside 
Thursday’s minutes. Carney told the chancellor inflation would soon pick up on 
higher import costs.

City economists had not expected a move in either direction on interest rates 
after a series of speeches from policymakers had suggested they will be in 
wait-and-see mode on the economy for some time to come, weighing up signs of 
rising inflation against indications that business confidence has faltered.

The Bank is forecasting a slowdown in economic growth next year and a pick up 
in inflation, as the pound’s weakness since the referendumraises the cost of 
imports to the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/lego-to-raise-its-prices-in-uk-from-january-sterling>
.

The Bank’s decision to keep rates on hold follows the move by its US 
counterpart the Federal Reserve on Wednesday toraise interest rates for the 
first time in a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/us-federal-reserve-raises-interest-rates-second-time-since-2008>
, and only the second time since the 2008 financial crisis. The US central bank 
also predicted three further rates increase in 2017, up from previous 
expectations of two rate hikes. The Fed’s main interest rate is now a range of 
0.50-0.75%.

Referring to the prospect of higher government spending in the US under 
president-elect Donald Trump, the Bank’s minutes said there could be ripple 
effects for the rest of the global economy.

“Since November, long-term interest rates have risen internationally, 
including in the United Kingdom. In part, this reflects expectations of looser 
fiscal policy in the United States which, if it materialises, will help to 
underpin the slightly greater momentum in the global economy evident in a range 
of data since the summer.”

But it added a note of caution amid greater uncertainty around the world.

“At the same time, however, the global outlook has become more fragile, with 
risks in China, the euro area and some emerging markets, and an increase in 
policy uncertainty.”
 