
The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has cut interest 
rates for the first time in more than seven years and warned high-street 
lenders to pass on cheaper borrowing costs to customers, in a 
bigger-than-expected package of measures designed to prevent a post-Brexit 
recession.

Bank of England cuts interest rates to 0.25% - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-interest-rates-stimulus-inflation-report-business-live>
The Bank cut official interest rates to a new record low of 0.25% from 0.5% 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/008.aspx> and 
signalled they would be reduced further in coming months as the economic 
fallout from the vote to leave the EU becomes clearer. The move will bring 
relief to borrowers but has already angered savers who have been getting low 
returns for years thanks to rock-bottom interest rates.

Desperate to ensure the cut is felt by households and businesses in the real 
economy, the Bank’s governor,Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney>, took a tough line with 
commercial banks, telling them they had no excuse not to pass the lower 
official borrowing costs onto customers.

As part of a four-point package, Carney unveiled additional funds for banks to 
cushion the blow to their profitability from lower interest rates. He 
personally called bank bosses after Thursday’s announcement to make it clear 
the Bank wanted to see the full benefits of its anti-recession strategy felt by 
households and businesses.

Carney used a press conference to argue that a range of measures was needed 
now to limit job losses and support growth in the UK economy as it went through 
“regime change” following the decision to leave the EU. The Bank’s forecasts 
were for a slower earnings growth and for 250,000 job losses, even with these 
stimulus measures.

Early economic indicators suggest confidence among businesses and households 
slumped after the June referendum and that a slowdown in spending threatens to 
tip the UK into recession.

Carney rebuffed suggestions the Bank was over-reacting to the Brexit vote and 
implied the UK would fall into recession without the new measures. “There is a 
clear case for stimulus, and stimulus now, in order to have an effect when the 
economy really needs it,” he said.

Reacting to early economic indicators suggesting demand and output had slowed 
across all parts of the economy since the June referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/uk-services-sector-contraction-adds-to-recession-fears-pmi>
, the Bank announced:

• A cut in official interest rates to 0.25%, the first such move since March 
2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/mar/05/interest-rates-quantitative-easing>
;

• Plans to pump an additional £60bn in electronic cash into the economy to buy 
government bonds, extending the existing quantitative easing (QE) programme to 
£435bn in total;


• Another £10bn in electronic cash to buy corporate bonds from firms “making a 
material contribution to the UK economy”;

• As much as £100bn of new funding to banks to help them pass on the base rate 
cut. Under this new “term funding scheme” (TFS) the Bank will create new money 
to provide loans to banks at interest rates close to the base rate of 0.25%. 
The scheme will charge a penalty rate if banks do not lend;

• The growth forecast for the UK for next year was slashed by an unprecedented 
amount. Growth would come to a near-standstill over coming months and be much 
weaker in 2017 and 2018 than predicted before the Brexit vote.



UK interest rates 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/aug/2016-08-04T09:53:45/embed.html>
 UK interest rates. 
The Bank’s intervention to shore up confidence was welcomed by the chancellor, 
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>. He also 
appeared to respond to repeated assertions from Carney and others that monetary 
policy had limited power to solve Britain’s economic problems and that action 
from government was needed. The chancellor, hinting at action from the Treasury 
in his Autumn Statement later this year, wrote to Carney saying: “Alongside the 
actions the Bank is taking, I am prepared to take any necessary steps to 
support the economy and promote confidence.”

Hammond also sought to reassure households and business owners that the 
government and the Bank had the tools needed to support the economy.

Echoing that, the Bank’s monetary policy committee (MPC), chaired by Carney, 
indicated there was more easing to come this year and that it stood ready to 
expand the credit measures. Minutes from the MPC’s meeting said that if 
economic news proved consistent with the Bank’s latest forecasts then “a 
majority of members” expected to support a further interest rate cut, 
potentially taking official borrowing costs as low as 0.1%. Carney said he was 
strongly opposed to negative interest rates.

But the minutes also indicated that the policymakers were not unanimous on the 
whole stimulus package. All nine members backed the new TFS scheme and the rate 
cut. The additional QE was backed by six committee members but opposed by 
Kristin Forbes, Ian McCafferty and Martin Weale. Forbes also voted against the 
other eight members on the plan to buy corporate bonds, given she was 
“particularly concerned about excessive stimulus at this stage”.

What is quantitative easing? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/brexit-companion/embed/embed.html?id=quantitative_easing>
The Bank’s own forecasts, published in its quarterly inflation report 
alongside its interest rate decision, predicted there would be virtually no 
growth in the economy in the second half of this year. The outlook for the 
coming two years was also cut.


Growth this year was forecast at 2%, unchanged from May’s outlook after a much 
stronger than expected second-quarter growth figure made up for a slowdown 
after the EU referendum. For 2017, the Bank’s growth forecast was cut to 0.8% 
from the 2.3% predicted in May. For 2018 it was cut from 2.3% to 1.8%.

That cumulative downgrade to growth prospects - 2.5% over three years - was 
the biggest between inflation reports since they were launched in 1993. Matthew 
Whittaker, economist at the Resolution Foundation thinktank, said that if the 
Bank’s forecasts proved correct the economy would be £45bn smaller in 2018 than 
the MPC had expected just three months ago.

The interest rate decision was largely as expected among City analysts but 
some were surprised at the scale of additional measures. The pound fell sharply 
against the dollar and euro after the Bank’s announcement but the FTSE 100 
share index rallied.




Hetal Mehta, economist at Legal & General Investment Management, commented: 
“The overall package is broad-based – almost a ‘kitchen sink’ approach – and 
should mitigate the negative impact on banks from ultra-low interest rates.”

But economists also questioned how much effect the package would have when 
there was so much uncertainty about the UK’s future trading relationships.

Credit ratings agency Fitch said the Bank’s package was a “proactive policy 
response” to the EU referendum. “But it is only likely to cushion, rather than 
fully offset, the shock to UK growth that June’s Brexit vote will cause,” it 
said.

Peter Dixon, economist at Commerzbank, said the BoE had “applied its 
much-vaunted sledgehammer”.


“But for all the ammunition which the BoE has expended, we continue to 
question how much relief it can provide to counter what is an uncertainty, not 
a monetary, shock.”

Whittaker agreed, saying: “On the severe near-term economic cooling associated 
with the post-referendum uncertainty, the Bank can help. But longer-term, our 
economic performance rests on the post-Brexit picture on trade, competition and 
– crucially – productivity.

“Influencing those outcomes largely rests with Downing, not Threadneedle, 
Street,” he said.
 