
Britain’s banks and building societies are promising a radical change to the 
way account holders send money to other people in a bid to tackle ballooning 
fraud and “fat finger” problems.

In future, the “confirmation of payee” system will mean that when someone 
types in a sort code and account number to transfer some money, they will 
receive an instant message saying something like “Is ‘Fred Bloggs’ the 
person/business you intended to send the money to?” Crucially, this will appear 
before the money leaves the person’s account.

Currently, customers only receive a confirmation that they have sent their 
money to a specific sort code and account number. Many people also type in the 
account name of the person they’re paying, but this is irrelevant as banks do 
not cross-check this element when processing payments.

After Tesco fraud, are other banks vulnerable to cyber-attacks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/12/tesco-bank-fraud-cyber-attack-card-readers-security>
The result is cases where individuals enter a wrong number on the eight-digit 
account number – dubbed a fat finger error – and the money goes to an 
unintended recipient. In some cases the mistake can be repeated for years – and 
the banks are not liable.

In one case covered by the Guardian, a hairdresser intended to send her 
monthly salary payment from HSBC to a joint Nationwide account with her 
husband, but initially entered a digit incorrectly. Over two years£26,000 of 
her pay went to another individual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/feb/09/26000-banking-error> with a 
Nationwide account, and she has spent years fighting to recover it.

A new-style fraud, meanwhile, is seeing criminals hijack the emails of 
builders or solicitors. Customers are sent instructions to make future payments 
to a new account – still in the name of the builder or solicitor – with a new 
account number. In one case a couple wereconned into sending £25,000 to the 
wrong account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>
, and their bank refused any compensation.

According to the Payment Strategy Forum (PSF), which is handling the 
implementation for the banks and building societies, the “confirmation of 
payee” system should largely eliminate both problems. Account holders will 
still not have to enter the intended recipient’s name, but will continue to 
enter the sort code and account number as they do currently – crucially, 
however, they will then receive a message matching the sort code and account 
number with the specific account holder – such as “John Smith Builders”.

One family's nightmare as fraudsters ransack Barclays account by phone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/barclays-bank-robbery-phone-family-nightmare-criminals>
The exact implementation date and the precise message that account holders 
will be sent is yet to be determined, as the move requires a major systems 
change at banks to enable them to instantly identify recipients. The PSF says 
the latest date will be 2020, but it hopes the system could be in place for 
launch in 2018.

“The confirmation of payee system ... will allow people to avoid sending 
payments to the wrong account, either by accident or being tricked into doing 
so, by ensuring a confirmation of the recipient is sent to the payer before any 
funds leave their account,” said Ruth Evans, chair of the forum, which is also 
examining ways in which account holders can bar their regular direct debits 
from leaving their account when they are short of money.

Currently, if someone is close to their overdraft limit and, say, they have an 
unusually large mobile phone bill that month, it could push them into hefty 
charges when it is paid by the bank, or be bounced and leave the account holder 
with a possible unpaid transaction fee.

The forum’s proposal is for a “request to pay” system whereby the mobile phone 
company would have to send a message to the account holder, through the bank, 
that it is about to take payment. The account holder could then accept or 
decline the payment.

Evans said: “Request to pay will allow customers to authorise a regular 
payment, such as a utility bill or gym membership, before the company withdraws 
the money from their account. This will be a huge boost to people on variable 
incomes who may struggle to settle their accounts at the same time each month.”

Banks' online security is failing customers, says Which?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/20/banks-online-security-is-failing-customers-says-which>
About £75tn in payments was processed through Britain’s banks and building 
societies last year, but it is estimated that about £755m was stolen.

In September, consumer body Which? lodged a “supercomplaint 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/what-are-super-complaints/what-are-super-complaints>
” with financial regulators demanding that UK banks do more to protect 
customers tricked into transferring money to fraudsters.

Which? said banks should “shoulder more responsibility” when someone is conned 
into transferring money, just as they reimburse customers who lose money due to 
scams involving debit and credit cards or fraudulent account activity.
 