
My how far we’ve come in less than eight years. We have seen happen what those 
of us in the climate and energy fields knew could happen. The US has become a 
world leader on climate change, dramatically increased our production of clean 
and renewable fuels, reduced our emissions of greenhouse gases,signed major 
international agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/dec/14/the-paris-agreement-signals-that-deniers-have-lost-the-climate-wars>
 to continue progress into the future, and have done so without cost increases 
or power disruptions that the denial community proclaimed would occur.

As we in the United States get ready to elect a new president, it is helpful 
to think about the impact a president can have. Particularly since we 
transitioned from the worst climate president ever (Bush) to the best (Obama). 
I am going to detail what I think are Obama’s signature accomplishments.

In my mind, the most important part of President Obama’s legacy on climate is 
that he changed the conversation. He showed that not only should the US play a 
role in reducing emissions, but we can do just that. He showed that this 
problem isn’t too big to solve. In fact, most of the solutions are subtle 
enough that we don’t even notice them. He showed that we can change our future 
for the better.

With respect to specific actions, the Clean Power Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
 is one of his biggest accomplishments. By working with the EPA, he created the 
first ever carbon pollution standards for the largest source of pollution – 
power plants. He did this in the midst of a do-nothing congress that fought him 
every step of the way.

Under his presidency, we made huge investments in clean energy, which are 
paying off already. Jump starts to the wind and solar industry have led to 
enormous cost decreases –dirty energy isn’t cheaper anymore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/03/doe-charts-show-why-climate-doom-and-gloom-isnt-needed>
. It is really astonishing – wind power has tripled and solar power has 
increased by 30 times since he took office.


Under his presidency, we improved standards for fuel economy of our vehicles, 
which not only reduces pollution but also saves money. Furthermore, Obama set 
targets to reduce the federal government’s emissions by nearly 20% by 2025. He 
has worked to reduce other types of greenhouse gases such as methane and
hydrofluorocarbons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/15/climate-change-environmentalists-hail-deal-to-limit-use-of-hydrofluorocarbons>
, not only within the US but through international agreements.

And those aren’t the only international efforts. Obama made a joint plan with 
China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/nov/14/fact-check-china-pledged-bigger-climate-action-republican-leaders-wrong>
 that is almost unbelievably ambitious. It will reduce our emissions by 
approximately 27% by 2025 and puts major limits on Chinese emissions as well. 
He also forged an agreement with India to help low-income countries transition 
to modern economies that are not as polluting as current developed nations.

There are many more items which would be too numerous to mention but I wanted 
to know how his presidency is viewed within Washington DC. I mean, among 
climate scientists, he is the president we’ve been waiting for, but what do 
legislators think? I asked representativeBetty McCollum 
<https://mccollum.house.gov/> from Minnesota for her view. Ms. McCollum has a 
long history of focusing on the environment in general and climate change in 
particular – long before it was popular. She told me:

President Obama has acted boldly to address the threat of climate change at 
home and abroad. He has demonstrated American leadership on the world stage in 
forging the Paris agreement and the Kigali amendment, steps that would have 
been unthinkable under his predecessor. And, using existing law, President 
Obama has helped shape a new approach to domestic carbon emissions with the 
Clean Power Plan. Sadly, Republicans in Congress have consistently put 
polluters ahead of our planet and attempted to stymie every administration 
initiative on climate change. That has made President Obama’s job tougher – and 
it makes his accomplishments on climate even more impressive.

We are certainly not out of the woods yet on climate change. We cannot stop 
climate change entirely. But, what the last eight years have shown is that we 
can do really meaningful things that will reduce the impact. If the US can go 
from world laggard to world leader in just one presidency, imagine what else is 
possible.
 