
In the first hours of the new year in 2009, just weeks before Barack Obama was 
to be inaugurated as the next president, shots rang out in Oakland, California. 
A transit officer named Johannes Mehserle shot an unarmed 22-year-old black man 
who lay face-down in handcuffs on a public transportation platform. His name was
Oscar Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/09/oakland-riots-oscar-grant-shooting-verdict>
.

Dozens of witnesses, many of whom were returning to Oakland after New Year’s 
Eve celebrations, watched in horror. Somecaptured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jan/15/oscar-grant-shooting-arrest> his 
killing on smartphones. Shortly afterward, black Oakland exploded in palpable 
anger, with hundreds, then thousands of people taking to the streets, demanding 
justice.

Obama's legacy: the promises, shortcomings and fights to come
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/barack-obama-president-legacy-policy-issues-wins-fights>
Perhaps this outcry would have happened under any circumstance, but the 
brutality of Grant’s death in the few weeks before the country’s first black 
president was to take office felt like a shock of cold water. Police brutality 
had long been a fact of life in California, but the country was supposed to 
have entered into a post-racial parallel universe. The optimism that coursed 
through black America in 2008 seemed a million miles away.

A local movement led by Grant’s family unfolded across the Bay Area to demand 
that prosecutors charge and try Mehserle. Protests, marches, campus activism, 
public forums and organizing meetings sustained enough pressure to force local 
officials to charge Mehserle with murder. It was the first murder trial of a 
California police officer for a “line of duty” killing in 15 years. In the end, 
Mehserle, convicted of involuntary manslaughter, spent less than a year in 
prison, but the local movement foreshadowed events to come.

As for President Obama, he turned out to be very different from candidate 
Obama, who had stage-managed his campaign to resemble something closer to a 
social movement. He had conjured much hope, especially among African Americans 
– but with great expectations came even greater disappointments.

‘Yes, we can’

In the heated race for the 2008 Democratic nomination, Obama distinguished 
himself from the establishment candidate, Hillary Clinton, by campaigning 
clearly against the war in Iraq and vowing to shut down the Guantánamo military 
internment camp. As the campaign continued, he spoke of economic inequality and 
connected with young people who were underwhelmed at the prospect of voting for 
yet another old, white windbag in the form of John McCain.

Black people’s enthusiasm for the Obama campaign could not be reduced to 
racial solidarity or recrimination. Obama electrified his audiences, as inthis 
speech <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/01/08/us/politics/08text-obama.html> from 
January 2008, after the New Hampshire primary:

We’ve been warned against offering the people of this nation false hope. 

But in the unlikely story that is America, there has never been anything false 
about hope. For when we have faced down impossible odds, when we’ve been told 
we’re not ready or that we shouldn’t try or that we can’t, generations of 
Americans have responded with a simple creed that sums up the spirit of a 
people: yes, we can. Yes, we can. Yes, we can.

It was a creed written into the founding documents that declared the destiny 
of a nation: yes, we can.

It was whispered by slaves and abolitionists as they blazed a trail towards 
freedom through the darkest of nights: yes, we can.

It was sung by immigrants as they struck out from distant shores and pioneers 
who pushed westward against an unforgiving wilderness: yes, we can … Yes, we 
can heal this nation. Yes, we can repair this world. Yes, we can.

But it was only in March 2008 that Obama finally gave a comprehensive speech 
on race <http://constitutioncenter.org/amoreperfectunion/>, in which he pulled 
off the feat of addressing the concerns of African Americans while calming the 
fears of white voters.

Obama had been pressured for weeks to rebuke his pastor, the Rev Jeremiah 
Wright, who had delivered a sermon titledGod Damn America 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ix-AMYos0Js>, referring to the wrong the 
United States had committed in the world. Obama’s political enemies had 
unearthed the sermon and tried to attribute Wright’s ideas to Obama. Obama used 
his platform in Philadelphia to distance himself from Wright, whom he described 
as “divisive” and with a “profoundly distorted view of this country”.


He went on to contextualize Wright’s angry comments and condemnations as based 
on his having come of age in a US where legalized discrimination – where black 
people were prevented, often through violence, from owning property, or loans 
were not granted to African American business owners, or black homeowners could 
not access FHA mortgages, or blacks were excluded from unions or the police 
force or the fire department – meant that black families could not amass any 
meaningful wealth to bequeath to future generations.

No one running for president had ever spoken so directly about the history of 
racism in government and society at large. Yet Obama’s speech also counseled 
that a more perfect United States required African Americans “taking full 
responsibility for our own lives … by demanding more from our fathers, and 
spending more time with our children, and reading to them, and teaching them 
that while they may face challenges and discrimination in their own lives, they 
must never succumb to despair or cynicism; they must always believe that they 
can write their own destiny.”

Obama couched his comments in the language of American progress and the 
vitality of the American dream, but the speech was remarkable nonetheless in 
the theater of American politics, where cowardice and empty rhetoric are the 
typical fare. In that sense Obama broke the mold, but he also established the 
terms upon which he would engage race matters: with dubious even-handedness, 
even in response to events that required decisive action on behalf of the 
racially aggrieved.

He spoke quite eloquently about the nation’s “original sin” and “dark history” 
but has repeatedly failed to connect the sins of the past to the crimes of the 
present, when racism thrives, when police stop-and-frisk, when subprime loans 
are reserved for black buyers, when public schools are denied resources, and 
when double-digit unemployment has become so normal that it barely registers a 
ripple of recognition.

Before Ferguson, Obama’s Philadelphia speech was as close as he had ever come 
to speaking truthfully about racism in the US, even though he presented himself 
as an interested observer, a thoughtful interlocutor between African Americans 
and the country as a whole, rather than a US senator with the political 
influence to effect the changes of which he spoke.

The ‘informed observer’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38345b389c0c882f5a63c5ed7ab0c0984b588ed5%2F0_107_2484_1490%2F2484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama's%20original%20sin%3A%20America's%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%27s%20original%20sin%3A%20America%27s%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F38345b389c0c882f5a63c5ed7ab0c0984b588ed5%2F0_107_2484_1490%2F2484.jpg>
 Barack Obama, the ‘informed observer’, seen in 2009 at the White House. 
Photograph: Matthew Cavanaugh/EPA 
Obama would continue in his role as “informed observer” even as president. 

Obama has and will always poll high among African Americans, but that should 
not be mistaken for blind support for him or the policies he champions. As long 
as members of the Republican party treat Obama in a brazenly racist manner, 
black people will defend him because they understand that those attacks against 
Obama serve as a proxy for attacks on them.

Early in his administration, however, with the full effects of the recession 
still pulsing in black communities, conflict between the black president and 
his base could be detected. Black America was in the midst of an “economic 
freefall” as black wealth disappeared.

As black unemployment was climbing into the high double digits, civil rights 
leaders asked Obama if he would craft policies to address black joblessness. He
responded 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2011/07/22/138610263/nprs-interview-with-president-obama-in-full>
, “I have a special responsibility to look out for the interests of every 
American. That’s my job as president of the United States. And I wake up every 
morning trying to promote the kinds of policies that are going to make the 
biggest difference for the most number of people so that they can live out 
their American dream.”

It was a disappointing response, even if that disappointment did not manifest 
itself in his approval ratings. In 2011, with black unemployment above 13%, 86% 
of black Americans approved of the overall job the president was doing, but 56% 
expressed disappointment in the “area of providing proper oversight for Wall 
Street and the big banks”.

For African Americans, Obama’s presidency had been largely defined by his 
reluctance to engage with the ways that racial discrimination was blunting the 
impact of his administration’s recovery efforts. Obama has not shown nearly the 
same reticence when publicly chastising African Americans for a range of 
behaviors that read like a handbook on anti-black stereotypes, fromparenting 
skills <http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/16/us/politics/15cnd-obama.html> and 
dietary choices to sexual mores and television-watching habits.

There is something disingenuous in focusing on poor and working-class black 
people without any discussion about the ways that the criminal justice system 
has “disappeared” black parents from the lives of their children.

When Obama talks about absentee black fathers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/06/16/world/americas/16iht-fathers.4.13747394.html>
, he never mentions the disparity in arrests and sentencing that is responsible 
for the disproportionate number of missing black men. Few media discussions 
about Obama’s candidacy mentioned curbing the nation’s criminal justice 
system’s voracious appetite for black bodies: a million African Americans are 
incarcerated, and one in four black men between 20 and 29 are under the control 
of the criminal justice system.

Over the course of his first term, Obama paid no special attention to the 
mounting issues involving law enforcement and imprisonment, even as Michelle 
Alexander’sThe New Jim Crow 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/07/books/michelle-alexanders-new-jim-crow-raises-drug-law-debates.html>
 described the horrors that mass incarceration and corruption throughout the 
legal system had inflicted on black families.

None of this began with Obama, but it would be naive to think that African 
Americans were not considering the destructive impact of policing and 
incarceration when they turned out in droves to elect him. His unwillingness to 
address the effects of structural inequality eroded younger African Americans’ 
confidence in the transformative capacity of his presidency.

The legacy of the ‘American spring’

There was one moment when black America collectively came to terms with Barack 
Obama’s refusal to use his position as president to intervene on behalf of 
African Americans.

Troy Davis was a black man on death row in the state of Georgia. It was widely 
believed <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/21/troy-davis-10-reasons> 
that he had been wrongfully convicted, which would mean that in the fall of 
2011 he was facing execution for a crime he had not committed.

Davis’s cries of innocence were not a voice in the wilderness: for years he 
and his sister, Martina Davis-Correia, had joined with anti-death-penalty 
activists to fight for his life and exoneration. By September 2011, an 
international campaign was under way to have him removed from death row. The 
protests grew larger and more frantic as the death date crept closer. There 
were protests around the world; support from global dignitaries rolled in as 
the international movement to stop Davis’s execution took shape.

The European Union and the governments of France and Germany implored the 
United States to halt his execution, as did Amnesty International and the 
former FBI director William Sessions. A Democrat in the Georgia senate, Vincent 
Fort, called on those charged with carrying out the execution to refuse to do 
it: “We call on the members of the Injection Team: Strike! Do not follow your 
orders! Do not start the flow of the lethal injection chemicals. If you refuse 
to participate, you make it that much harder for this immoral execution to be 
carried out.”

As Davis’s execution drew near on the evening of 20 September, people from 
around the world waited for Obama to say or do something – but, in the end,he 
did nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/22/troy-davis-execution-last-words>
. He never even made a statement, instead sending press secretary Jay Carney to 
deliver a statement on his behalf, which simply noted that it was not 
“appropriate” for the president to intervene in a state-led prosecution.

In the end, the black president succumbed to states’ rights.

It was a moment of awakening for “Generation O” – and of newfound 
understanding of the limits of black presidential power, not because Obama 
could not intervene, as his handlers insisted, but because he refused to do so.

The Troy Davis protests were certainly not in vain. The day after the state of 
Georgia killed Davis, Amnesty International and the Campaign to End the Death 
Penalty called for a “Day of Outrage” in protest. More than a thousand people 
marched, eventually making their way to a small encampment on Wall Street that 
was calling itself “Occupy Wall Street”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc809fdeb37d86d26831199dcb4a748805d8fdf3b%2F0_224_5960_3576%2F5960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama's%20original%20sin%3A%20America's%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%27s%20original%20sin%3A%20America%27s%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc809fdeb37d86d26831199dcb4a748805d8fdf3b%2F0_224_5960_3576%2F5960.jpg>
 Occupy Wall Street demonstrators take to the streets in New York in 2011. 
Photograph: KeystoneUSA-ZUMA / Rex Features 
The Occupy encampment had begun a week or so before Davis was killed, but it 
was in its fledgling stages. When the Troy Davis activists converged with the 
Occupy activists, the protesters made an immediate connection between Occupy’s 
mobilization against inequality and the injustice in the execution of a 
working-class black man. After the march, many who had been activated by the 
protests for Davis stayed and became a part of the Occupy encampment on Wall 
Street. Thereafter, a popular chant on the Occupy marches was “We are all Troy 
Davis”.

The Occupy movement would develop into the most important political expression 
of the US class divide in more than a generation. The slogan “We are the 99%” 
and the movement’s articulation of the divide between the “1%” and the rest of 
us offered a materialist, structural understanding of American inequality. In a 
country that regularly denies the existence of class, this was a critical step 
toward making sense of the limited reach of the American dream.

Despite the movement’s difficulties in coherently expressing the relationship 
between economic and racial inequality, its focus on government bailouts for 
private enterprise while millions of ordinary people bore the weight of 
unemployment, foreclosures, and evictions addressed some of the most important 
issues affecting African Americans. It was hard to ignore that black homeowners 
had been left to fend for themselves.

The Obama years: timeline of a presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/03/the-obama-years-timeline-of-a-presidency>
Not only did Occupy popularize the notion of economic and class inequality in 
the US by demonstrating against corporate greed, fraud, and corruption 
throughout the finance industry, it also helped to make connections between 
those issues and racism. The public discussion over economic inequality that 
followed rendered incoherent both Democratic and Republican politicians’ 
insistence on locating black poverty in black culture. While it obviously did 
not bury the arguments for culture and “personal responsibility”, Occupy helped 
to create the space for alternative explanations within mainstream politics, 
including seeing black poverty as a product of the system.

The vicious attack and crackdown on the unarmed and peaceful Occupy 
encampments over the winter and into 2012 also provided a lesson about policing 
in the US: the police were servants of the political establishment and the 
ruling elite. Not only were they racist, they were also shock troops for the 
status quo and bodyguards for the 1%.

‘If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon’

The killing of Trayvon Martin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/feb/24/george-zimmerman-trayvon-martin-justice-department>
 in Sanford, Florida, in the winter of 2012 was a turning point. Like themurder 
of Emmett Till 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/29/emmett-till-civil-rights-legacy-commemorated-60-years-after>
 nearly 57 years earlier, Martin’s death pierced the delusion that the US was 
post-racial.

Till was the young boy who, on his summer vacation in Mississippi in 1955, was 
lynched by white men for an imagined racial transgression. Till’s murder showed 
the world the racist brutality pulsing in the heart of the “world’s greatest 
democracy”. To emphasize the point, his mother, Mamie, opted for an open-casket 
funeral to show the world how her son had been mutilated and killed in the 
“land of the free”.

Martin’s crime was walking home in a hoodie, talking on the phone and minding 
his own business. George Zimmerman, now a well-known menace but then portrayed 
as an aspiring security guard, racially profiled Martin, telling the 911 
operator: “This guy looks like he’s up to no good, or he’s on drugs or 
something.” The “guy” was a 17-year-old boy walking home from a convenience 
store. Zimmerman followed the boy, confronted him, and eventually shot him in 
the chest, killing him shortly thereafter. When the police came, they accepted 
Zimmerman’s account. Martin was black and the default assumption was that he 
was the aggressor – so they treated him as such. They tagged him as a “John 
Doe” and made no effort to find out if he lived in the neighborhood or was 
missing.

But the story began to trickle through the news media and, as more details 
became public, it was clear that Martin had been the victim of an unlawful 
killing. Trayvon Martin had been lynched.

Within weeks, protests bubbled up across the country. The demand was simple: 
arrest George Zimmerman for the murder of Trayvon Martin. The anger was fueled, 
in part at least, by the overwhelming double standard: if Martin had been white 
and Zimmerman black, Zimmerman would have faced immediate arrest, if not worse.

The protests were national, as they had been for Troy Davis, but they were 
much more widespread. This was the impact of Occupy, which had relegitimized 
street protests, occupations, and direct action in general. Many of the Occupy 
activists who had been dispersed by police repression the previous winter found 
a new home in the growing fight for justice for Martin. Protests in Florida and 
New York City reached into the thousands, with smaller protests in cities 
across the country.

For weeks, Obama deflected questions, commenting only that it was a local 
case. It took more than a month for Obama to finally speak publicly about the 
case, saying: “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/obama-if-i-had-a-son-hed-look-like-trayvon/2012/03/23/gIQApKPpVS_story.html>
 … When I think about this boy, I think about my own kids.”

But he also said: “I think every parent in America should be able to 
understand why it is absolutely imperative that we investigate every aspect of 
this, and that everybody pulls together – federal, state and local – to figure 
out exactly how this tragedy happened.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c62b866949875c739c87c2d9504c07bc1f182ab%2F0_41_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barack%20Obama's%20original%20sin%3A%20America's%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barack%20Obama%27s%20original%20sin%3A%20America%27s%20post-racial%20illusion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fbarack-obama-legacy-racism-criminal-justice-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c62b866949875c739c87c2d9504c07bc1f182ab%2F0_41_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Activists demand justice for Trayvon Martin in Times Square in 2013. 
Photograph: Adrees Latif/Reuters 
Obama could not come out and say the obvious, but the fact that he spoke at 
all was evidence of the growing momentum of the street protests that had been 
building for weeks. Martin’s killing was a national and international 
embarrassment. Black people may have understood that Obama could not lead a 
social movement against police brutality as the president, but how could he not 
use his seat to amplify black pain and anger? It was exactly for moments like 
these that black people had put Obama in the White House.

It is impossible to know or predict when a particular moment is transformed 
into a movement. Forty-five days after George Zimmerman killed Trayvon Martin 
in cold blood, he was finally arrested. It was the outcome of weeks of 
protests, many of which had been organized through social media, beyond the 
conservatizing control of establishment civil rights organizations.

In the summer of 2013, more than a year after his arrest, George Zimmerman was 
found not guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/14/zimmerman-acquitted-killing-trayvon-martin>
 of the murder of Trayvon Martin. His exoneration crystallized the burden of 
black people: even in death, Martin would be vilified as a “thug” and an 
aggressor, Zimmerman portrayed as his victim. The judge even instructed both 
parties that the phrase “racial profiling” could not be mentioned in the 
courtroom, let alone used to explain why Zimmerman had targeted Martin.

Obama addressed the nation, saying: “I know this case has elicited strong 
passions. And in the wake of the verdict, I know those passions may be running 
even higher. But we are a nation of laws, and a jury has spoken. We should ask 
ourselves, as individuals and as a society, how we can prevent future tragedies 
like this. As citizens, that’s a job for all of us.”

What does it mean to be a “nation of laws” when the law is applied 
inequitably? There is a dual system of criminal justice: one for African 
Americans and one for whites. The result is the discriminatory disparities in 
punishment that run throughout all aspects of American jurisprudence. George 
Zimmerman benefited from this dual system: he was allowed to walk free for 
weeks before protests pressured officials into arresting him. He was not 
subjected to drug tests, though Trayvon Martin’s dead body had been. This 
double standard undermined public proclamations that the US is a nation built 
around the rule of law. Obama’s call for quiet, individual soul-searching was a 
way of saying that he had no answers.

Out of despair over the verdict, the community organizer Alicia Garza posted a 
simple hashtag 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/19/blacklivesmatter-birth-civil-rights-movement>
 on Facebook: “#blacklivesmatter”. It was a powerful rejoinder that spoke 
directly to the dehumanization and criminalization that made Martin seem 
suspicious in the first place and allowed the police to make no effort to find 
out to whom this boy belonged.

It was a response to the oppression, inequality and discrimination that 
devalue black life every day.

It was everything, in three simple words.

Garza would go on, with fellow activists Patrisse Cullors and Opal Tometi, to 
transform the slogan into an organization with the same name:#BlackLivesMatter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/black-lives-matter-movement>.

Zimmerman’s acquittal also inspired the formation of the important black Youth 
Project 100 (BYP 100), centered in Chicago. Charlene Carruthers, its national 
coordinator, said of the verdict: “I don’t believe the pain was a result, 
necessarily, of shock because Zimmerman was found not guilty … but of yet 
another example … of an injustice being validated by the state – something that 
black people were used to.”

In Florida, the scene of the crime, Umi Selah (formerly known as Phillip 
Agnew) and friends formed the Dream Defenders; for 31 days they occupied the 
office of the Florida governor, Rick Scott, in protest at the verdict. Selah 
said: “I saw George Zimmerman celebrating, and I remember just feeling a huge, 
huge, huge … collapse … I’ll never forget that moment … because we didn’t even 
expect that verdict to come down that night, and definitely didn’t expect for 
it to be not guilty.”

Selah quit his job as a pharmaceutical salesman to organize full time. 

Pity the sad legacy of Barack Obama | Cornel West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/barack-obama-legacy-presidency>
No one knew who would be the next Trayvon, but the increasing use of 
smartphone recording devices and social media seemed to quicken the pace at 
which incidents of police brutality became public. These tools being in the 
hands of ordinary citizens meant that families of victims were no longer 
dependent on the mainstream media’s interest: they could take their case 
straight to the public.

Meanwhile, the formation of organizations dedicated to fighting racism through 
mass mobilizations, street demonstrations and other direct actions was evidence 
of a newly developing black left that could vie for leadership against more 
established – and more tactically and politically conservative – forces.

The black political establishment, led by Obama, had shown over and over again 
that it was not capable of the most basic task: keeping black children alive.

The young people would have to do it themselves.
 