
Barclays <https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> has written to 10,000 
customers with payment protection insurance to apologise after it failed to 
send them annual statements telling them how much they were spending on their 
policies and outlining their rights to cancel them.

In 2011, the Competition Commission ordered lenders to provide an annual 
account of their PPIfollowing a two-year inquiry that found serious competition 
problems <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/jan/29/ppi-sales-restrictions> 
in the market.

Barclays said it had been contacted by a customer who had not received a 
statement and investigated the issue. Further investigations revealed that over 
the previous three statement periods a total of 9,404 Barclaycard customers had 
not been sent PPI statements and 740 customers with mortgage-related PPI were 
also affected.

It said the customers affected made up just under 3% of its PPI holders.

All have been sent apology letters explaining the error and offering to refund 
PPI premiums paid since the date of the first missing statement – as well as 8% 
interest – to those who cancelled their policy as a result.

UK's big four banks face £19bn in compensation, fines and legal costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/uk-big-four-banks-face-19bn-compensation-fines-legal-costs-libor-ppi>
The Competition and Markets Authority has written to Barclays about the breach 
of the order, requiring it to provide additional reporting on its controls to 
ensure that all such customers receive their statements in future.

Adam Land, the CMA’s senior director of remedies, said: “The annual statement 
was an important measure resulting from the market investigation which ensures 
customers know they have a PPI policy, how much they are spending on it and 
reminds them of their right to cancel or switch.”

He added: “Barclays has now taken the necessary steps to alert and recompense 
affected customers, as well as to ensure that there is no repeat in future. We 
trust that the extra reporting requirements we’ve put in place will confirm 
this.”

A Barclays spokesperson said the missing statements were the result of “a 
technical issue”.

“We have written to those customers to apologise and outline how we will 
remediate them where they believe they would have cancelled their policy, had 
they received the statements.

 “We apologise unreservedly to those customers affected and have put in place 
a number of controls to prevent this from happening again.”
 