
El Born
One of my favourite places to see art and discover new talent is the Mutuo 
Centro de Arte <http://mutuo.cat/>, a cool, contemporary gallery working to 
promote an alternative arts and design scene. It’s located in the middle of the 
El Born neighbourhood, with its network of cobbled streets, old-town charm, 
independent shops, bars and restaurants. Also in this area isBar Paradiso 
<https://www.facebook.com/Paradiso-928595557214379/>, a secret speakeasy-style 
hideaway accessed via an unassuming sandwich shop. Inside, you’ll find a wooden 
art nouveau-inspired cocoon interior, and award-winning cocktails.

Furnished with new ideas: a designer embraces Barcelona’s creative scene
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/marriott-travels/ng-interactive/2016/nov/30/furnished-with-new-ideas-a-designer-embraces-barcelonas-creative-scene>
Poblenou
Another brilliant cocktail place, this time in the district of Poblenou, is 
Balius Bar <http://www.baliusbar.com/>, which to this day maintains its 
original midcentury modern pharmacy facade. Poblenou is home to some of the 
city’s best examples of street art and some top design studios. As well as 
being close to the beach, the area is also the location for design festivals
Blanc <https://www.facebook.com/blanc.festivaldissenygrafic/> (21–21 October 
2017) andOFFF <https://www.facebook.com/OFFFevents/> (6–8 April 2017) at the 
Design Museum <http://ajuntament.barcelona.cat/museudeldisseny/en>. A crucial 
hub for the area’s creatives isLa Escocesa <http://laescocesa.org/en>, an old 
refurbished factory with walls of colourful murals, artists’ studios and 
regular events.

El Raval and city centre
In the old city centre, behind its flashier neighbour MACBA 
<http://www.macba.cat/en/> (Barcelona Museum of Contemporary Art), you’ll find 
theCCCB <http://www.cccb.org/en/> – the Centre for Contemporary Culture. It 
offers a varied and year-round multidisciplinary programme, one of the best 
design bookshops in Barcelona,Laie <http://www.laie.es/>, and open-air film 
screenings and parties in the summer. The surrounding area is full of great 
shops, from vintage finds to record stores, as well as iconic bars (such as 
Hemingway’s favourite Bar Marsella) and the modern building for theFilmoteca de 
Catalunya <http://www.filmoteca.cat/web/>.

For some great vintage shopping and independent brands, Palo Alto Market 
<http://paloaltomarket.com/en> (first weekend of every month) and seasonal Lost 
& Found Market <http://lostfoundmarket.com/bcn> gather the trendiest crowds in 
beautiful venues, always with a good programme of music and food.

Marriott International spans 30 brands in over 110 countries with more than 
5,700 hotels, including the stunningW Barcelona 
<http://www.w-barcelona.com//?scid=8fcc414d-4e7e-43f4-bc1f-37e6c5970dd6>. Head 
tomarriott.co.uk <http://www.marriott.co.uk/default.mi> to book for your 
Barcelona design experience
 