
BBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> executives are pressing for the 
corporation to commission a flagship “Scottish Six” news programme to help 
answer growing complaints about its weak coverage of Scottish affairs, the 
Guardian has learned.


Executives in BBC Scotland are expected to lobby Tony Hall, the corporation’s 
director general, to agree to the proposal when he comes to Glasgow next week 
to attend a meeting of its governing body, theBBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust>, which will also be briefed on 
the plan.

They want Hall to authorise a significant expansion of its news and 
programme-making budget from about £35m to £100m a year when he finalises the 
BBC’s proposals for charter renewal next year, including funding a third 
national radio service forScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.

BBC Scotland executives are thought to be focusing on these proposals after 
being forced to shelve far more ambitious plans to add an extra digital 
television channel and new online programming in the wake of swingeing spending 
cuts.

Sturgeon's plan for Scottish BBC based on proposals scrapped by corporation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/27/sturgeons-plan-for-scottish-bbc-based-on-proposals-scrapped-by-corporation>
Scottish executives argue the BBC has to invest substantially more in the UK’s 
nations and regions to allow the corporation to keep pace with accelerating 
devolution, by decentralising its programme-making and decision-making.

The case for a “Scottish Six” to replace the UK network Six O’Clock News on 
BBC1 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc1> has been championed since the 
1990s by former first minister Alex Salmond, but was heavily resisted until now 
on spending and journalistic grounds.

The proposal, which is backed by BBC Scotland controller Ken MacQuarrie, who 
led the formal investigation into Jeremy Clarkson’s assault of a Top Gear 
producer, would involve mixing increased and improved Scottish news with the 
BBC’s UK news and global coverage in an hour-long programme.

Sources said Scottish correspondents working as foreign correspondents 
overseas or as specialists in London could be asked to contribute specifically 
to the new programme.


The BBC Trust refused to discuss the agenda for next week’s meeting in 
Glasgow, but a spokesperson said: “The trust has been consulting widely on BBC 
charter review over the past few months and trustees will, as you’d expect, be 
talking to the BBC executive, BBC Scotland management and stakeholders on a 
range of topics related to this.”

The corporation came under fresh pressure from Nicola Sturgeon, the first 
minister, to increase spending and output in August, when she told the Guardian 
International TV festival in Edinburgh that Scottish viewers felt “frustration” 
at the quality and scope of its output in Scotland.

That antipathy spilled over into an angry demonstration by pro-independence 
activists outside BBC Scotland’s Glasgow headquarters in September, anda 
long-running feud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/aug/24/a-disgrace-bbc-condemned-by-alex-salmond-for-referendum-coverage>
between Salmond and the BBC’s then political editor Nick Robinson; Sturgeon had 
to intervene after one BBC Scotland correspondent, James Cook, was vilified by 
nationalists over his reporting of the so-called Frenchgate memo leak.

But the plan is encountering substantial resistance from BBC executives in 
London, who are wrestling with heavy budget cuts of around £700m, and 
continuing demands from rivals and the UK government to trim output and find 
further efficiencies.

Sources with knowledge of the discussions said extra funds for news and 
current affairs were being channelled towards other projects,including a beefed 
up Korean service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/05/bbc-plans-tv-and-radio-services-for-russia-and-north-korea>
. One source said the proposal “was met with laughter” by executives in London.

But BBC officials have confirmed that several proposals for a Scottish Six 
type programme are being debated and are likely to be finalised in early 2016 
after Gary Smith, BBC Scotland’s new head of news and current affairs, takes up 
his post in January.

Options include a direct replacement for the BBC1 Six O’Clock news or a 
standalone programme which could air on BBC2 Scotland in the early evening. The 
BBC’s current regional news programme Reporting Scotland on BBC1 would be 
heavily cut back.

The Scottish Six proposal was broadly backed by Allan Little, the former BBC 
correspondent who covered the recent Iraq wars, Africa, Paris and the Scottish 
independence referendum, when he gave an annual lecture in honour of former 
Guardian editor and BBC Scotland controller Alastair Hetherington at Stirling 
university on Wednesday evening.

Why the BBC is worth saving
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/why-the-bbc-is-worth-saving> 
Little told the audience he had been tentatively approached about anchoring a 
Scottish Six some 15 years ago. “It was all so vague back then but it was 
definitely in the air,” Little said. “But there’s definitely an argument for 
it, and I think that argument is becoming harder and harder to answer.”

If there is to be a Scottish Six, he said its editors had to look carefully at 
how it was implemented, and how it would gather and share material from the UK 
network and content from overseas. It is thought one key issue for the BBC is 
how its non-BBC Scotland specialist journalists could service two separate news 
programmes being aired at similar times, particularly during live stories.

“I’m more worried about its implementation than in its principle. I think its 
principle is very clear and I think, hopefully, we will see movement in that 
direction,” Little said.
 