
The transgender <https://www.theguardian.com/society/transgender> community is 
“very scared and very worried” by a BBC documentary on how to approach gender 
dysphoria in children, organisations and activists are claiming.

The film – Transgender <https://www.theguardian.com/society/transgender> Kids: 
Who Knows Best? – prominently features Kenneth Zucker, a Canadian psychologist 
whose controversial approach with transgender children led to his being sacked 
in 2015 from a Toronto gender identity clinic.

'Crucial' study of transgender children links mental health with family support
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/26/crucial-study-transgender-children-mental-health-family-support>
Zucker disagrees with the now widely favoured “gender affirmative” approach to 
young people who feel they were born with the wrong gender. The approach 
encourages parents to allow their children with gender dysphoria to live as 
their chosen sex.

Instead, Zucker’s approach was likened to reparative therapy, which had the 
intended goal of “curing” children of transgender status. He also advocated 
more exploration into underlying psychological and mental health issues that 
might lead children to believe they were born the wrong gender.

Zucker’s comment in the documentary, where he says, “a four-year-old might say 
that he’s a dog – do you go out and buy dog food?” was a particular concern for 
the Mermaids Foundation, which represents transgender issues.

“That quote in itself is incredibly inflammatory for parents of trans 
children,” said Susie Green, chief executive officer of Mermaids.

“We’ve had real concern that this is going to cause them to be targeted, 
because it supports this idea of trans children being mentally disturbed or 
that they can be cured. Parents are very afraid.”

Green said she had been contacted by the producer of the documentary but only 
to see if she knew anyone who had “detransitioned”, and said it was worrying 
that this had been a focus for the programme makers.

Gender and the tyranny of the 'normal' | Philippa Perry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/23/gender-dysphoria-tyranny-of-normal>
“In certain media outlets there have been a lot of negative comments around 
this idea of parents facilitating, or making their children be trans,” she said.

“To then think that Kenneth Zucker has been given a platform on the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc>, particularly, and be touted as an 
expert, that is going to further undermine the support and acceptance of their 
children.”

Discussion about the healthiest way to deal with children who present with 
gender dysphoria has been in the media headlines recently as numbers of 
referrals to the UK’s main child gender clinic have increased by 1,000% over 
the past five years.

Green expressed concern that Zucker’s approach emphasised links between gender 
dysphoria and mental health issues. In the documentary he says a “whole range 
of psychological issues can manifest themselves in a child’s desire to change 
their gender”.

Green added: “We are trying to move away from the perception of it being 
perceived as a psychological ailment, and this just goes backwards.”

Transgender children: the parents and doctors on the frontline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/13/transgender-children-the-parents-and-doctors-on-the-frontline>
In December 2015 an investigation into the practices used by Zucker at 
Toronto’s Centre for Addiction and MentalHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> found that his clinic, which he 
had run for 30 years, was “not in step with the latest thinking”.

A highly critical external review was released showing the clinic encouraged 
parents to “limit cross gender behaviour”. Zucker was dismissed.

Zucker claimed the sacking was due to the politicisation of transgender 
issues. In the documentary he denies that he had practised conversion therapy 
and calls his approach “developmentally informed therapy”.

However, he had previously said that his goal was “lowering the odds that as 
such a kid gets older he or she will move into adolescence feeling so 
uncomfortable about their gender identity that they think that it would be 
better to live as the other gender and require treatment with hormones and 
sex-reassignment surgery”.

In 1990 he also spoke out in favour of discouraging children to be gay 
because, “a homosexual lifestyle in a basically unaccepting culture simply 
creates unnecessary social difficulties”.

Michelle Bridgeman, a psychotherapist for children with gender dysphoria, 
said: “I don’t think anybody has got this right just yet. But if you set out, 
as Zucker is, with the intention of curing somebody of their gender issues you 
are in danger of causing the very kind of mental health distress that you’re 
talking about avoiding.

“And the problem with putting Zucker on a programme like this is it gives 
further weight to those voices in places like the Daily Mail who say parents 
who let their children live as a different gender are evil or inhumane. It can 
be quite destructive.”


School for LGBT pupils planned for Manchester
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/16/school-for-lesbian-gay-bisexual-transgender-pupils-manchester>
Louie Stafford, of the LGBT foundation in Manchester, said: “We are at a 
precipice in terms of trans rights in the UK and this programme is really 
taking us back a few years, putting forward the question of whether young 
children’s trans experiences are legitimate.”

He was backed by Zinnia Jones, who co-founded Gender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gender> Analysis, a web series offering an 
in-depth look at transgender issues in society.

She described Zucker’s approach as “harmful and coercive” and was scathing of 
his view that such situations were often caused by a damaged childhood.

“Family dysfunction and unhealthy environments for child-rearing are so 
tragically commonplace that if this were a real contributor to transgender 
identity, we would likely see that a vastly greater portion of the population 
is transgender,” said Jones.

However the BBC documentary also features Zucker’s critics. 

A BBC statement said: “With a rise in the number of children being referred to 
gender clinics, this programme sensitively presents different views from 
experts and parents on gender dysphoria in children.

“For more than 30 years Dr Kenneth Zucker ran Canada’s biggest child gender 
clinic and was considered a recognised authority on childhood gender dysphoria 
until he lost his job. He believes he was fired for challenging the gender 
affirmative approach.

“This documentary examines Zucker’s methods, but it also includes significant 
contributions from his critics and supporters of gender affirmation, including 
transgender activists inCanada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and 
leading medical experts as well as parents with differing experiences of gender 
dysphoria and gender reassignment.”
 