
Did he really mean it? The mushroom cloud that has risen over American 
democracy is a question mark. DidDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> mean the hatred, the 
belligerence, the racism, the boasting and the lies? Was his witches’ Sabbath 
of a campaign all a gigantic act, a ritual wallow in mud before the cleansing 
douche of the ballot? Is a man so incapable of courtesy and human kindness 
remotely suitable to lead a nation?

Donald Trump to meet Barack Obama at the White House – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
I have the answer to all these questions. Nobody knows. No one has a clue – 
probably not even Trump. It may soothe the fevered brow of snowflake liberals 
to outbid each other in abusing “the Donald”. But abuse has not worked. He is 
to be president. That’s it. Get a life.


One of Trump’s last predictions was that his election would be “Brexit, plus, 
plus, plus” 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/11/09/politics/donald-trump-farage-us-election-brexit/index.html>
. It was code for the shock given to politics in Europe four months earlier, 
when voters rejected the failure of a perceived ruling class to deliver on its 
duties and promises. For decades an elite of the urban, educated and 
self-righteous had merely made itself richer and the poor poorer. A peasants’ 
revolt of the sort that periodically jolts democracy out of its comfort zone 
was the result.

Both Trump in America and Brexiters in Britain may be unclear what they really 
want. That is often the case with uprisings. But they knew what they did not 
want. Trump told them.

For two decades, half of all Americans had become poorer. They were frightened 
by the world round them, in all its guises. They were told they had been 
cheated and the system that cheated them did not care. Hillary Clinton’s appeal 
was to the young and minorities, it ignored the old, white and dispossessed. 
This was “whitelash” time.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlights%20from%20Trump's%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlights%20from%20Trump%27s%20presidential%20victory%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights&media=>
Highlights from Trump’s presidential victory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/trumps-presidential-victory-speech-video-highlights>
I noted back in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/boring-donald-trump-dangerous-maverick-outrageous-republican-party>
 that of 700 primary Democrats voting for the socialist Bernie Sanders, a 
phenomenal 60% said they would prefer Trump to Clinton. They said they liked 
his “honesty”, by which they meant his brash language. “He may be a horrible, 
racist, misogynist idiot,” said one woman, “but he is our kind of idiot.”

Novelist Dave Eggers likewise sensed the appeal of Trump’s “crazy shit” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/17/could-he-actually-win-dave-eggers-donald-trump-rally-presidential-campaign>
 to a people fed on years of political correctness and “inappropriate” 
language. His populism was that of the bar room rather than the Tea Party. He 
was what the sociologistDaniel Boorstin called “the celebrity as pseudo-event 
<http://transparencynow.com/boor.htm>, his relation to morality and even 
reality highly ambiguous”. His son called him “a blue-collar worker with a bank 
balance”.

To see Trump as a conventional rightwinger is stupid. The left-right spectrum 
should be in the dustbin. The new politics is that of insider v outsider, city 
v province, success v failure. At present, it is outsiders who are in the 
ascendant, in Europe as in America.

Why did people vote for Donald Trump? US voters explain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/why-did-people-vote-for-donald-trump-us-voters-explain>
Trump is a New York wheeler-dealer, not a redneck from the backwoods. He is no 
Reagan ideologue. When he called for more public spending, the rightwing 
National Review called him“a menace to American conservatism”. 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/430137/donald-trump-conservative-movement-menace>
 His policies are inconsistent. He has been for and against gun control, for 
and against abortion, for and against free trade, for Medicare and against 
Obamacare. When a man is so all over the shop, we can at least bank on his 
inconsistencies.

Much is being made of the American constitution as a check on Trump. That 
would be easier were his Republican party not now firmly in control of 
Congress. He is also likely to secure a supreme court majority. But America 
remains a federation. These institutions have their sovereignties, and many 
remain sceptical about Trump. So too will many states, governors and mayors.

Trump will not rule unchallenged. He has promised to clean the Augean stables 
of Washington’s “donor politics”, and will find his hands full with that. He 
has declared war on bureaucracy at home and abroad. Others have tried and 
failed. His supporters will be watching, suspicious of any sign that the 
outsider is going native in Washington.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=World%20leaders%20congratulate%20president-elect%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=World%20leaders%20congratulate%20president-elect%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fworld-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video&media=>
World leaders congratulate president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/world-leaders-congratulate-president-elect-video>
The man’s impetuousness, his shooting his mouth off, must horrify Americans 
accustomed to some dignity in their commander-in-chief. But they have voted for 
a joker, an entertainer-in-chief. They must now take the baggage that comes 
with it.

The outside world has other priorities. It must wander the campaign 
battlefield gleaning bloodied fragments of what passes for a Trump foreign 
policy. Not much is new. His antagonism to free trade and hostility toKipling’s 
“lesser breeds without the law” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Recessional_%28poem%29> echo the isolationism of 
George W Bush’s 2000 campaign. But Bush is a man Trump calls “a liar and war 
criminal 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/donald-trump-george-bush-iraq-invasion_us_56bfe8cbe4b0b40245c6f94b>
”. Trump’s opposition to the Saudi alliance and to meddling in the Middle East 
appears sincere – even if he would somehow “bomb the shit” out of Islamic State.

There is sense in Trump’s desire for rapprochement with Putin’s Russia, and in 
his plea for greater realism in European defence. The intellectual tundra that 
is Nato’s worldview has long been in need of a thaw. As Britain’s former 
defence chief, Lord Richards, told the Times last week, a Russia-enforced 
victory for Assad in the Syrian city of Aleppo would enable intervention to 
concentrate on Isis. “The world could, ironically, be safer with Trump in the 
White House,” he said.

Donald Trump is moving to the White House, and liberals put him there | Thomas 
Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-white-house-hillary-clinton-liberals>
In victory Trump seemed all amity and concord. “We must bind the wounds of 
division,” he said. “We must come together as one united people.” We can only 
wait and hope. Trump was right to claim that America is stuck, constitutionally 
as well as politically. As the historianArthur Schlesinger 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arthur_M._Schlesinger_Jr.> liked to recall, 
American democracy often flies close to the flame and gets itself scorched, but 
it escapes the stronger for it.

This is not about sanitising the unthinkable. It is about adjusting to a new 
reality. Trump is not the worst candidate to become president. He has to beat
Andrew Jackson <http://www.history.com/topics/us-presidents/andrew-jackson>, 
Warren Harding <http://www.history.com/topics/us-presidents/warren-g-harding> 
andRichard Nixon <http://www.biography.com/people/richard-nixon-9424076#!> for 
that title. He is unknown and unqualified rather than proven to be incompetent.

America is a cultural blood brother to Britain, and an important ally. The 
very least Britain can do is wish it well as it emerges from the politics of 
hysteria and embarks on a longer voyage of discovery, into the mystery of its 
political soul.
 