
Anyone who has spent time in the French Alps will have heard of Beaufort. This 
sleepy town in Haute-Savoie is famed for its eponymous cheese, a fruity (and 
pricey) twist on gruyère that features heavily on the menu of every mountain 
restaurant from Morzine to Méribel. Since the middle ages, local farmers have 
grazedtarine cows on the valley’s high summer pastures, and then churned their 
milk into giant 45kg rounds that are matured for over six months as part of a 
carefully guarded, legally protected, tradition.

But while almost every skier has tucked into a fragrant fondue or a pungent 
savoyardepizza, the source of all that stink remains an overlooked left turn to 
the majority of winter holidaymakers, who beat a well-worn path to the super 
resorts of the Three Valleys or Espace Killy. I’ve come to see what we’ve all 
been missing.

At first glance, it’s understandable that tourists head elsewhere: there are 
few restaurants and shops here, and little in the way of après action. We 
arrive on the quiet high street as most of the locals appear to be having a 
siesta, or lunch at traditional bistro Le Bouchon Gourmand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88c05d31ea688c6b77ec3f21a6bd5d32c686ac2a%2F0_345_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88c05d31ea688c6b77ec3f21a6bd5d32c686ac2a%2F0_345_5184_3111%2F5184.jpg>
 Where is everyone? … on the slopes at Beaufort 
Beaufort is clearly more working town than glamorous ski resort, yet it boasts 
a serious trump card in the form of easy access to no fewer than three separate 
ski areas: Arêches-Beaufort, Les Contamines and Les Saisies. And while gentle 
slopes and some heavy investment are fast turning Les Saisies into a popular 
family resort, Arêches and Les Contamines are mountains for whom the term 
“hidden gem” could have been coined.

Budget skiers could stay at L’Hôtel du Grand-Mont (doubles from €70 room-only, 
hotelbeaufort.com <http://www.hotelbeaufort.com/>) in town, which has a couple 
of bars nearby, or at one of the good-value hotels near the Arèches lifts. Le 
Christiania (hotel-areches.com 
<http://www.hotel-areches.com/Hotel_Christiania/Restaurant.html>) has small, 
pine-panelled bedrooms, also from €70, and a great restaurant.

When I arrive, in mid-January, the Alps have been blessed with a dusting of 
new snow; a stone’s throw away in Chamonix, I can almost hear the rumble of ski 
boots as powder hunters spring from their bunks and rush out for the chance to 
make fresh tracks. Here, we drive 16km to Les Contamines lift station 
mid-morning and find an empty car park and no queue at the ticket booths. 
Presumably it gets busier in the school holidays but, on the chairlift, I can’t 
help wondering how such an operation makes any money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ce63a2ff5f81b9158ad5c60ad42e5f1ecff191%2F0_0_4947_2969%2F4947.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2ce63a2ff5f81b9158ad5c60ad42e5f1ecff191%2F0_0_4947_2969%2F4947.jpg>
 ‘It is great value for a mountain which is compact and brimming with potential’
Our guide, Laurent proceeds to show us around the extensive terrain. The 
groomed runs are huge, empty motorways, like those photographs of the M1 in the 
1960s. It is the ideal place for experienced skiers and snowboarders to move up 
through the gears without the dangers of threading through the crowd. Off-piste 
is similarly steep and open, and we pass the afternoon exploring some of the 
many undulating powder bowls that are easily accessible from the lift and yet 
remain gloriously untouched.

Next morning we drive just 5km to Arêches-Beaufort, stopping to pick up lift 
passes at a vending machine in town – with a group discount we enjoy a full day 
of snowboarding for €20 each.

It is great value for a mountain which is compact and brimming with potential. 
From the Col de la Forclaz at 1,527m, a variety of quiet red and blue runs 
spill down towards the treeline, where adventurous types can dive into the 
forest and lose themselves in bottomless turns. Not for nothing has this place 
picked up a reputation among winter sports professionals (athletes, filmmakers 
and photographers) as the ultimate secret spot; it is a reliable magnet for 
powder and a haven in stormy weather.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa18e9c07290dc2e6485d869a9fdf91f736287c%2F0_0_4924_3277%2F4924.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beaufort%2C%20the%20Alps%E2%80%99%20best-kept%20skiing%20secret&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fdec%2F12%2Fbeaufort-france-alps-secret-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4fa18e9c07290dc2e6485d869a9fdf91f736287c%2F0_0_4924_3277%2F4924.jpg>
 Beaufort is a sleepy town in the beautiful Haute-Savoie. Photograph: Gilles 
Lansard/Les Contamines 
Indeed, throw in rapid transfers (1¾ hours to Geneva or Lyon; under an hour to 
Chambéry) and a visit to Beaufort makes you wonder why so many of us keep 
heading up the road to lift queues, overpriced beers and powder-day bun fights. 
It seems a curious accident of history that one farming village, Val d’Isère, 
became an Olympic host, while its neighbour, in a similarly majestic valley, 
keeps one foot in the cattle business. The locals wouldn’t have it any other 
way, of course – as their fierce, decade-long resistance to a proposed lift 
expansion that would link Les Contamines to upmarket Mègeve testifies.

The nimbys have a new sympathiser in my host, Chris Sturgess. For most of the 
year, Sturgess runs theSnowfit Revolutionz <http://www.snowfit.co.uk/> shop in 
Norwich, but he has been lucky enough to buy a small chalet here that he uses 
as an occasional bolthole-cum-test centre. On his balcony, we tuck into fresh 
baguettes with wedges of the cheese born on the stunning hillsides beyond. 
Tourist boards love to sell us the dream of a mountain escape – epic landscapes 
in which you will find inner and outer peace – yet all too often the reality is 
a crowded town whose charm has been swept away on an avalanche of 
over-development and souvenir tat. This place offers authenticity of the kind 
the mega resorts can only grasp at via old-timey postcards and antiques on the 
walls. It’s seductive.

“There’s only one problem,” says Chris. “The longer I spend here, the more I 
wonder why I bother to go home.”

• Easyjet flies from several British airports to Lyon and to Geneva. Ski 
Flights (ski-flights.com <http://www.ski-flights.com/>) has direct charter 
flights to Chambéry from Gatwick and Stansted
 