
Europe will enforce the world's first continent-wide ban on widely used 
insecticides alleged to cause serious harm to bees, after aEuropean commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/european-commission> vote on Monday.

The suspension is a landmark victory for millions of environmental campaigners 
<http://www.avaaz.org/en/hours_to_save_the_bees/>, backed by the European Food 
Safety Authority (EFSA), concerned about a dramatic decline in the bee 
population. The vote also represents a serious setback for the chemical 
producers who make billions each year from the products and also UK ministers, 
who voted against the ban. Both had argued the ban would harm food production.

Although the vote by the 27 EU member states 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-13-379_en.htm> on whether to suspend 
the insect nerve agents was supported by 15 nations, but did not reach the 
required majority under voting rules. The hung vote hands the final decision to 
the European commission, which will implement the ban.

Tonio Borg, health and consumer commissioner, said: "Our proposal is based on 
a number of risks to bee health identified by the EFSA, [so] the European 
commission will go ahead with its plan in coming weeks."

Friends of the Earth's head of campaigns, Andrew Pendleton, said: "This 
decision is a significant victory for common sense and our beleaguered bee 
populations. Restricting the use of these pesticides could be an historic 
milestone on the road to recovery for these crucial pollinators."

The UK, which abstained in a previous vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/15/bee-harming-pesticides-escape-european-ban>
, was heavily criticised for switching to a "no" vote on Monday.

Joan Walley MP, chair of parliament's green watchdog, the environmental audit 
committee, whose investigation had backed a ban and accusedministers of 
"extraordinary complacency" 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/05/mps-owen-paterson-suspend-bees-pesticides>
, said the vote was a real step in the right direction, but added: "A full 
Commons debate where ministers can be held to account is more pressing than 
ever."

Greenpeace's chief scientist, Doug Parr, said: "By not supporting the ban, 
environment secretary,Owen Paterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/owen-paterson>, has exposed the UK 
government as being in the pocket of big chemical companies and the industrial 
farming lobby."

On Sunday, the Observer revealed the intense secret lobbying by Paterson and 
Syngenta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/28/europe-insecticides-ban-save-bees>
.

The environment minister, Lord de Mauley, countered, saying: "Having a healthy 
bee population is a top priority for us but we did not support the proposal 
because our scientific evidence doesn't support it. We will now work with 
farmers to cope with the consequences as a ban will carry significant costs for 
them."

Syngenta, which makes one of the three neonicotinoids that have been 
suspended, said: "The proposal ignores a wealth of evidence from the field that 
these pesticides do not damage the health of bees. The EC should [instead] 
address the real reasons for bee health decline: disease, viruses and loss of 
habitat."

Bees <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bees> and other insects are 
vital for global food production as they pollinate three-quarters of all crops. 
The plummeting numbers of pollinators in recent years has been blamed on 
disease, loss of habitat and, increasingly, the near ubiquitous use of 
neonicotinoid pesticides.

A series of high-profile scientific studies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/mar/29/crop-pesticides-honeybee-decline>
 has linked neonicotinoids – the world's most widely used insecticides – to 
huge losses in the number of queen bees produced and big rises in the numbers 
of "disappeared" bees – those that fail to return from foraging trips.

The commission proposed the suspension after the EFSA concluded in January 
that three neonicotinoids – thiamethoxam, clothianidin and imidacloprid – posed 
anunnacceptable risk to bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jan/16/insecticide-unacceptable-danger-bees>
. The three will be banned from use for two years on flowering crops such as 
corn, oilseed rape and sunflowers, upon which bees feed.

A spokesman for Bayer Cropscience said: "Bayer remains convinced 
neonicotinoids are safe for bees, when used responsibly and properly … clear 
scientific evidence has taken a back-seat in the decision-making process."

Prof Simon Potts, a bee expert at the University of Reading, said: "The ban is 
excellent news for pollinators. The weight of evidence from researchers clearly 
points to the need to have a phased ban of neonicotinoids. There are several 
alternatives to using neonicotinoids and farmers will benefit from healthy 
pollinator populations as they provide substantial economic benefits to crop 
pollination."

Neonicotinoids have been widely used for more than decade and are less harmful 
than some of the sprays they replaced, but scientific studies haveincreasingly 
linked them to poor bee health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2012/oct/22/bees-pesticides>
.

Many observers, including the National Farmers' Union, accept that EU 
regulation is inadequate, as it only tests on honeybees and not the wild 
pollinators that service 90% of plants. The regulatory testing also only 
considers short-term effects and does not consider the combined effects of 
multiple pesticides. The chemical industry has warned that a ban on 
neonicotinoids would lead to the return of older, more harmful pesticides and 
crop losses but campaigners point out this has not happened during temporary 
suspensions in France, Italy and Germany and that the use of natural pest 
predators and crop rotation can tackle problems.

"It is imperative that any alternative chemicals to be used in their place 
must first pass the same tests failed by the neonicotinoids," said Dr 
Christopher Connolly, a bee expert at the University of Dundee. "The recent 
findings have highlighted an urgent need for more rigorous safety testing 
protocols."

In Brussels, the countries that voted against the ban were: the UK, Czech 
Republic, Italy, Hungary, Romania, Slovakia, Austria and Portugal. Ireland, 
Lithuania, Finland and Greece abstained. Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Estonia, 
Spain, France, Cyprus, Germany, Latvia, Luxembourg, Malta, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Slovenia and Sweden voted in favour.
 