
American servicemen came in wartime with concrete and bombs to Coppice Wood. 
They paved the paths with cement and put up a parking lot – a series of wide 
bays with Nissen huts storing explosive shells. Chipped and cracked, this 
network of hard standing remains, though the army is long gone. So too are the 
great elms trees of the wood that hid the ammunition stores from enemy aircraft 
under their canopy.

The elms’ descendants are cursed with perpetual youth. Always a bush, never a 
tree, seems to be the mantra, the leafy sprays doomed to shrivelled adolescence 
by Dutch elm disease. Only a few have made it to the heights.

One tree sports a dryad’s saddle fungus, a flip-out seat low on its 
rough-barked trunk. I look up into the branches, all the way to the outermost 
twigs, interlaced with those of ash and oak. But the elm’s dark fingers are 
devoid of leaves and have been for some years.

Another elm stands tall and straight, a slender telegraph pole, its crown 
broken off three metres from the ground, fallen branches scattered and rotting 
under the brambles and sedges. It has shed its coat too, sheets of bark stacked 
around its base like plates on a drying rack.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbeetles-stem-elms-lofty-wartime-canopy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2d0eaf6cd658249582a10f3105f3b682f7bb6e2%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Beetles%20stem%20elms'%20lofty%20wartime%20canopy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbeetles-stem-elms-lofty-wartime-canopy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Beetles%20stem%20elms%27%20lofty%20wartime%20canopy&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fbeetles-stem-elms-lofty-wartime-canopy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2d0eaf6cd658249582a10f3105f3b682f7bb6e2%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Bark beetle damage in an elm trunk. Photograph: Sarah Niemann 
The last chapter of this tree’s life is written in a circuitboard of 
hieroglyphs on the bare trunk. Each scribble is a web of ghastly beauty, its 
genesis marked with a lentil-sized hole drilled through into the living tissue 
by the female bark beetle. Every one shows a spinal column where the female 
mined and laid her eggs, spacing them evenly along its length.

The next stage of the sequence is written in lines shooting out at right 
angles, as if the beetle and her minors had between them drawn a rib cage. The 
skeletal outline has been repeated so many times that the tunnels, and the 
fungus carried on the beetles’ bodies, have suffocated the tree.

The trunks may die but the elms are not dead. The parent roots live on, 
sending up new shoots. Rise and fall, rise and fall.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>

 * This article was amended on 11 November 2016 to correct editing errors in 
the text and the picture caption.  