
Recently, Guardian website users who have agreed to be contacted by us may 
have noticed we have emailed them about their data and why it matters to us.

As the Guardian’s digital first strategy matures, in common with many 
commercial digital businesses, and with the consent of our readers, we are able 
to use that data to generate revenues to be reinvested into the Guardian. The 
more accurately we can use that data to help advertisers to get the most 
relevant adverts to our readers, and the more effectively we can personalise 
offers and services, the higher the revenues we can generate to support our 
journalism.

Our readers rightly expect transparency around how we manage their information 
and want to have a choice about how that information is shared. It is also 
crucial that the Guardian provides readers with reassurance that we take data 
security very seriously and have rigorous systems and processes in place to 
carefully look after any data that we collect.

So the email we are sending aims to clearly explain how their data is handled, 
explain why their information matters to us as a business, encourage them to 
sign in to our website and provide clear information about how readers can 
manage their email preferences.

At the heart of the email is a reassurance that we’ll continue to provide 
access to our award- winning journalism at no cost, but we’re also being clear 
with our readers about the benefits to them - and to the Guardian - if they 
decide to voluntarily sign into our website.

Namely, a better experience on our website through the delivery of 
personalised content, more relevant advertising, products and services such as 
ourMembership scheme <https://membership.theguardian.com/>, Masterclasses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses> and our recently 
re-launchedGuardian Bookshop <http://bookshop.theguardian.com/>. As our digital 
products develop we’ll create more tools enabling readers to personalise how 
they view content on their terms.

Further information about all of this is online here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/why-your-data-matters>. We have also developed a 
brand newprivacy centre <https://www.theguardian.com/info/privacy>, which 
provides clear explanations about how data is handled.

Any questions can be sent to us at yourdatamatters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:yourdatamatters@theguardian.com>, or feel free to leave a comment below.
 