
Modern Britain, eh? What a soulless, consumerist, materialistic society we’ve 
become, buying more and more stuff to fill our spiritual void, equating 
belongings with status and success, obsessed with owning things and showing 
them off to impress our peers.

It’s a common observation. But it’s also looking increasingly outdated. 
Because one of the striking aspects of the times we live in is that possessions 
seem to be of decreasing importance to us. And that’s good news for our 
economy, good news for our environment and good news for ourselves.

Remember when people were saying that we’ll always want the tangible artefact? 
We were wrong

We can see this most clearly when considering the stuff with which we once 
filled our shelves. More of us are enjoying music, books, TV shows and films 
without ever owning them. The same goes, of course, for newspapers. Remember 
when people were saying that we’ll always want the tangible artefact? I do, 
because I was one of those people. But we were wrong.

A trivial example, you may think. But wait: we’re actually consuming far less 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/29/uk-consumes-far-less-ons-crops-energy-metals-average-material-consumption>
 than we were a decade ago. That’s right. It doesn’t fit the image we’ve 
created of our culture, but it’s true: we’re getting through a lot less stuff. 
But in our disposable economy, we’re still throwing more things away, right? 
Wrong: we’re actually sendingless stuff to landfill 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/577752/UK_Statistics_on_Waste_statistical_notice_Dec_2016_FINAL.pdf>
.

But doesn’t the growth of the orgy of rapacity that is Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/britons-expected-to-spend-13bn-on-black-friday-bargains>
 show that our greed has never been greater? It may look that way, but the 
figures show something different: this year, it justconcentrated the month’s 
spending around one weekend 
<http://brc.org.uk/retail-insight-analytics/retail-sales-reports/retail-sales-monitor/reports>
. Isn’t consumer spending rising, though? Yes it is – but it is beingdriven by 
travel and entertainment more than retail 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-economy-retail-idUKKBN13V00C>. 
Experiences are becoming more important than things.

Hang on, you might say. If we were really less interested in buying and owning 
objects, wouldn’t we be sharing more stuff between us? Well, we are. From how 
we get from place to place, to where we stay when we get there, more of us are 
discovering that we have much to share with others. Transactions in the UK’s 
“sharing economy”doubled last year to £7.4bn 
<http://www.pwc.co.uk/issues/megatrends/collisions/sharingeconomy/outlook-for-the-sharing-economy-in-the-uk-2016.html>
. In fact, it’s a British success story: ours has grown the fastest in Europe, 
and various homegrown companies in the sector are expanding overseas. Aside 
from services, initiatives such as theLibrary of Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/23/library-of-things-peak-stuff-sharing-economy-consumerism-uber>
 share items across a neighbourhood.

This all suggests we’re finding far healthier ways to find fulfilment in life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/apr/26/less-bank-of-england-blogger-happier-and-fix-economic-stagnation>
, and that we’re spending our money in ways that are friendlier to the 
environment and more sustainable economically.

From Jesus <http://biblehub.com/niv/luke/12.htm> to John Lennon 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/johnlennon/imagine.html>, we have long been 
counselled about the dangers of owning lots of things. It seems like we’re 
finally listening, and that can surely give us some hope for a future in which 
we may stop talking about ourselves as atomised individual consumers, and think 
of ourselves as something altogether better: a nation of sharers.
 