
Ben Carson

Secretary of housing and urban development

Background

Despite having no political experience, Ben Carson mounted a run against Trump 
in the Republican presidential primary. His campaign was unsuccessful and he
dropped out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/04/ben-carson-ends-republican-presidential-campaign>
 in March.

The retired pediatric neurosurgeon, 65, had previously declined the offer to 
serve as Trump’s health and human services secretary, because he has “never run 
a federal agency” and didn’t want to “take a position that could cripple the 
presidency”,his friend 
<http://thehill.com/policy/healthcare/306045-carson-turned-down-offer-to-serve-in-trump-administration-report>
 said at the time.


Carson is the only black nominee in Trump’s cabinet and one of just three 
non-white nominees or appointments.

Carson’s mother, one of 24 children, raised him and a brother in poverty in 
Detroit and then in Boston, occasionally relying on food stamps and other 
programs. Carson, a critic of government welfare, has called for private 
charities to shoulder welfare needs.


Although an unconventional choice, Carson has not been identified by 
Democratic senators as one of the eightmost “troublesome” nominees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/democrats-prepare-for-confirmation-battle-over-troublesome-trump-cabinet-nominees>
. However, he has been the purveyor of bizarre conspiracy theories and a 
provocateur, claiming that the Egyptian pyramids were built by the biblical 
Joseph to store grain and were not, as archaeologists believe, tombs for 
pharaohs.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20held%20by%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ben%20Carson%3A%20five%20dangerous%20views%20held%20by%20the%20housing%20secretary%20nominee%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video&media=>
Ben Carson: five dangerous views held by the housing secretary nominee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nominee-video>
Key points to watch for

 * Personal story: Carson is expected to speak extensively about his own 
personal story, growing up in what he describes as “dire poverty” in Detroit 
and Boston.

 * Lack of government experience: Although Carson and his supporters have 
pointed to his personal story as evidence of credentials, he has never lived in 
public housing and has no government or other public policy experience. Neither 
Trump nor Carson has outlined a detailed vision of their plans for America’s 
cities. In his books and on the campaign trail, Carson has called for limited 
government involvement in citizens’ daily lives and an increased reliance on 
private charities. 
 * Outlandish beliefs and turns of phrase: Although it’s unclear how 
substantive Carson’s policy answers will be on Thursday, he is known for his 
belief in conspiracy theories and presenting absurd metaphors. He has compared 
abortion to slavery and same-sex marriage to pedophilia. In a television 
interview, Carson insisted that “poverty is really more of a choice than 
anything else”.  