
A fear of brown envelopes is now familiar to anyone unlucky enough to be 
acquainted with Britain’s benefit system. For Sharon Linford, who hasrapid 
cycling bipolar <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bipolar_disorder#Rapid_cycling>, 
as well as depression and borderline personality disorder, receiving a letter 
from the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) last month didn’t simply cause 
panic. It threw her into what she describes as a mental “spiral”.

The 48-year-old has had severe mental health problems since her early 20s 
when, as she was training to become an accountant, a nervous breakdown led her 
to spend three months in a psychiatric unit. Sharon’s made multiple suicide 
attempts over the years. Her wrists are covered in scars from self-harming.

“A single letter can have an impact on a person like Sharon,” her husband, 
Tony, says from their home just outside Great Yarmouth. “Whenever we see a 
brown envelope, my pulse literally quickens.”

It’s time for an open and honest conversation about the impact that benefit 
cuts have on people’s mental health

Tony – who himself is on antidepressants – tells me he tries to “protect 
Sharon” from correspondence from the DWP. That’s not easy. Both he and Sharon 
are too unwell to work (in 2013, Tony had a heart attack) and are on employment 
and support allowance, while Sharon’s been receiving disability living 
allowance (DLA) for almost 15 years. They use her benefits to help pay the rent.

When the latest letter from the department hit the doorstep five weeks ago, 
Tony, 58, read it for Sharon – all 12 pages – and summarised it out loud: she 
will soon no longer receive her DLA and instead have to apply for the 
government’s replacement, personal independence payments (PIP).

“When they say ‘we might take your benefits’, I can’t cope,” Sharon says, 
quietly. “I went into psychosis.”

She pauses. “Tony should tell you. I can’t remember when I’m like that.”

“It was as if she lost contact with me and the world,” he explains. “She was 
rocking. She was hyperventilating. She kept moving her thumb from her palm and 
back again, like she was soothing herself.”

The next few hours were a blur: Tony called 999, to ask for help, and then 
called Sharon’s sister to come to the house. Both of them stayed awake with 
Sharon until 2.30am the next morning. “She was inconsolable,” Tony says.

As an insight into how relentless the benefit system can be, when Tony 
explains to Sharon what her distress was like that night, she realises it 
reminds her of two years ago – when the DWP sent her to attend a work 
capability assessment in order to keep her out-of-work sickness benefit. “I was 
rocking back and forth then too,” she says. Over a month later and Sharon has 
stabilised but is still struggling. “I feel suicidal and Tony and my mum [have 
to watch me],” she says.

What’s particularly devastating for Sharon and Tony is that, before this 
letter, she was making progress. For the last 15 years, Sharon had been 
regularly seeing a psychiatrist, but in the new year she was discharged by the 
mental health services team to her GP. “Things were going smoothly,” she says. 
“But because of the PIP letter, I’ve been referred back,” she says.

“It’s an incredibly backwards move for her,” Tony says. “It saddens me … she 
felt she meant nothing, had no value. She says, ‘Maybe I’m not really ill. Why 
are people spending money on me?’”

He pauses. “It’s easy for [the DWP] to target people. All that official 
language. If they’d learned anything, they could word [these letters] in a 
different way.”

The Department for Work and Pensions needs fixing – here’s how to do it | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/24/department-work-pensions-stephen-crabb-iain-duncan-smith>
What exactly has the DWP learned? The department is aware of the concern over 
benefit cuts on people’s mental health – that’s why itsent guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/27/death-britains-benefits-system-fit-for-work-safety-net>
 to Jobcentre staff on how to deal with claimants who show a “suicidal 
intention” after losing their benefits. Mental health is complex but when it 
comes to the benefits system, increasingly, the need to not simplify a person’s 
distress is used not as a means to understand how to help them, but to overlook 
what’s really happening.

It’s been almost six months since researchers at the public health department 
at Liverpool Universitylinked disability benefit tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/16/fit-for-work-tests-serious-toll-mental-health-work-capability>
 to suicides and the prescription of antidepressants. The DWPsay the report is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/16/fit-for-work-tests-serious-toll-mental-health-work-capability>
 “wholly misleading” and “no conclusions can be drawn about cause and effect”. 
The DWP may soon be forced todisclose details 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/19/dwp-may-have-to-publish-details-of-benefit-claimant-deaths>
 of secret investigations into the suicides and other deaths of benefit 
claimants, after campaigners last week won their appeal against its refusal to 
publish the information.

We are past the point of burying this scandal. It’s time for an open and 
honest conversation about the impact that benefit cuts have on people’s mental 
health – and what the government must do to provide competent safeguards for 
citizens who are clearly at risk.

A few days after we talk, Sharon emails to say she’s had “another meltdown”. 
She’s been told it could take until late July for her to see a psychiatrist, 
because “there’s not enough money so they’re overstretched”. On Thursday, she 
has to attend an emergency appointment with the mental health crisis team.

“I get so frightened with what the future holds … that we’ll lose the house,” 
she says. “These horrendous cuts … it worries the life out of me.”
 