
Benefit sanctions, whereby social security claimants have their payments 
stopped for at least a month as a punishment for supposedly breaching strict 
jobcentre rules, are a key driver of hunger and food bank use, according to a 
study carried out by Oxford University academics.

The study, which mapped official sanctions data against food bank referral 
figures, concluded that a “robust link” existed between increases in the number 
of benefit sanctions handed out and rising numbers of adults receiving food 
parcels.

Ministers have persistently refused to accept that welfare reforms are 
connected to the explosion in food bank use 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/nov/19/cuts-benefit-changes-driving-up-use-food-banks-study>
 in recent years, despite a number of studies that link sanctions and benefit 
processing delays to financial crises which leave individuals and families 
reliant on food parcels.

But the Oxford study found that every three-month increase of 10 sanctions per 
100,000 of the population over a four-year period was associated with around 
five more instances of adults being referred for charity food parcels, 
suggesting a “strong, dynamic relationship” between the two.

“These findings show clear evidence of sanctions being linked to economic 
hardship and hunger, as we see a close relationship between sanctioning rates 
and rates of food bank usage across local authorities in the UK,” said the 
study’s lead author, Rachel Loopstra.

The study said its findings validated calls for an official review of 
sanctions and called on the government to “consider whether stopping basic 
income payments for vulnerable, out-of-work groups is a fair penalty, or 
whether the long shadow of the harms associated with this practice (eg food 
insecurity) outweigh any positive outcome of sanctioning”.

Although ministers claim that sanctions are effective in “incentivising” 
claimants to actively search for jobs, the evidence for this is mixed, and some 
studies have found that providingstructured support for jobseekers is more 
effective 
<https://blog.esrc.ac.uk/2016/10/20/welfare-conditionality-sanctions-support-and-behaviour-change/>
 as a way of preparing them to find work than stopping their benefits, which 
can trigger hunger, stress, anxiety, hardship and debt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F356d7260d4f94e3ae84816fa4312f46830bcd0b5%2F0_321_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benefit%20sanctions%20forcing%20people%20to%20use%20food%20banks%2C%20study%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benefit%20sanctions%20forcing%20people%20to%20use%20food%20banks%2C%20study%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F356d7260d4f94e3ae84816fa4312f46830bcd0b5%2F0_321_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘These findings show clear evidence of sanctions being linked to economic 
hardship and hunger,’ the report’s author said. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
The Trussell Trust, the UK’s largest food bank network, called for changes to 
the sanctions regime whereby claimants who breach jobcentre rules for the first 
time are given a formal warning, rather than seeing their benefits stopped.

Adrian Curtis, Trussell’s food bank network director, said: “The findings from 
this groundbreaking study by the University of Oxford tell us once and for all: 
the more people sanctioned, the more people need food banks.”

A Department for Work and Pensions spokesperson said: “The reasons for food 
bank use are complex, and it is misleading to link them to any one issue. We’re 
clear that work is the best route out of poverty, and the number of people in 
employment is at a record high, up by 2.7 million since 2010.

“We continue to spend £90bn on working-age benefits to ensure a strong safety 
net, providing hardship payments, benefit advances and budgeting loans for 
those who need them most.”

The Oxford study also highlights the possibility that some areas of the UK, 
where high levels of sanctions corresponded to relatively low levels of food 
bank use, are affected by “hidden hunger”. These areas typically had fewer 
Trussell Trust charity food distribution centres, suggesting that sanctioned 
individuals could struggle to buy food but be unable to access emergency food 
assistance.

The researchers, who examined data in 259 local authority areas between 2012 
and 2016, found that food bank usage continued at relatively high levels in an 
area even when sanction rates decreased. They suggest that this is because 
sanctioning often triggers a crisis that leavesclaimants unable to stabilise 
household finances for several months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/mar/02/food-banks-benefit-sanctions-leave-clients-hungry-for-months>
 after the initial penalty has finished.

Sanctions have became one of the most controversial elements of welfare 
reform, with claimants given notoriously dogmatic and capricious punishments 
for often trivial reasons. Claimants have reportedly been penalised after 
failing to keep a jobcentre appointment because they were five minutes late, 
had been taken to hospital in an emergency, or were attending a funeral.

The impact of financial sanctions on individuals already struggling in poverty 
has hit the headlines again recently after being vividlydramatised in Ken 
Loach’s award-winning film I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2016/may/26/poverty-six-steps-from-the-jobcentre-to-the-food-bank>
, which opened in UK cinemas last weekend. Loach has said his characters’ 
dismal experiences with the social security system are emblematic of a wider 
austerity-led policy of “conscious cruelty” towards the poor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650c0fe02a9e7db14f700480789c9e49b04654b5%2F0_39_2697_1756%2F2697.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Benefit%20sanctions%20forcing%20people%20to%20use%20food%20banks%2C%20study%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Benefit%20sanctions%20forcing%20people%20to%20use%20food%20banks%2C%20study%20confirms&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbenefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650c0fe02a9e7db14f700480789c9e49b04654b5%2F0_39_2697_1756%2F2697.jpg>
 Ken Loach’s film I, Daniel Blake recently tackled the issue of food poverty. 
Photograph: Films/Everett/Rex/Shutterstock 
Debbie Abrahams, the shadow secretary of state for work and pensions, said: 
“Oxford University’s report proves beyond all doubt the link between the 
Tories’ punitive sanctions regime and the shocking rise of food banks across 
the UK.

“While the Tories continue to look the other way, refusing to accept the 
evidence, I’ve announced that Labour would scrap their punitive sanctions 
regime.”

Changes introduced under the Welfare Reform Act 2012 saw sanctioned claimants’ 
benefits stopped for a minimum of four weeks with penalty periods for more 
serious offences extended to 13 weeks, 26 weeks or even 156 weeks.

Monthly sanction rates almost doubled under the coalition government, reaching 
a high point in 2013, when a tightening of the conditionality rules around 
claims for jobseeker’s allowance led to a record 1 million penalties imposed on 
claimants during the year. Rates dropped to 360,000 in 2015, partly because of 
a significant fall in the number of individuals claiming out-of-work benefits.

The latest set of Trussell Trust  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/reliance-food-banks-new-normal-trussell-trust-charity>
annual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/reliance-food-banks-new-normal-trussell-trust-charity>
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/15/reliance-food-banks-new-normal-trussell-trust-charity>
 showed that in 2015-16, its 424 food banks gave out enough emergency food to 
feed more than 1.1 million people, a year-on-year rise of 2% and up from 61,000 
in 2010-11. It warned that reliance on charity food was in danger of becoming 
“the new normal” for low income families in financial crisis.

The Oxford University study, which was funded by the Trussell Trust, with 
support from the Wellcome Foundation, admits that there are limitations in both 
official sanctions data and Trussell Trust food bank figures. It says it is 
vital the UK government begins to collect robust data on UK food insecurity.
 