
The UK is preparing for what could be its biggest Black Friday yet on 25 
November, as the US importbecomes a fixture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/black-friday> on this 
side of the Atlantic. So what deals have retailers got in store for shoppers? 
Here’s an A-Z round-up.

Amazon

What’s happening? Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday> began on the online 
retailer’s website on 14 November and Amazon has been launching deals every day 
since.

Where? Promotions are online only and can be found here 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/b?node=161428031>.

What? Deals include 76% off an Oral-B Pro rechargeable toothbrush and up to 
50% off selected Fitbit Flex activity trackers.

AO

What’s happening? The electricals website has been running Black Friday deals 
for several days and releasing new discounts every day.

Where? Promotions are online only and can be found here 
<http://ao.com/black-friday?WT.ac=BFWHP#/>.

What? Offers include a saving of 30% on a Samsung 40” 4K ultra HD TV at £349 
and a Morphy Richards steam generator iron for £79, down from £149.

Argos

What’s happening? The catalogue retailer kicked off 13 days of deals on 18 
November.

Where? Offers can be found online here 
<http://www.argos.co.uk/static/ArgosPromo3/includeName/black-friday.htm?cmpid=TWBFTUE&_$ja=tsid:22837|cid:1566490|cgid:156649029852990|crid:856752447>
. Most stores will open at 8am on Black Friday, an hour earlier than usual.

What? Deals include Philips wireless noise-cancelling headphones at £34.99, 
less than half price, and Dyson’s V6 Fluffy cordless vacuum cleaner down by 
£170 to £229.99.

Asda

What’s happening? Asda will not be participating in Black Friday after 
disruption in stores in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-fever-police-battle-shoppers>
.

Beware, Black Friday is spreading | Tim Dowling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/black-friday> 
Asos

What’s happening? Last year Asos <https://www.theguardian.com/business/asos> 
kicked off its deals early. This year it is directing shoppers to its Outlet 
discounts section and keeping its Black Friday plans under wraps until the day.

Where? Promotions are online and can be found here 
<http://www.asos.com/discover/black-friday-cyber-monday-deals/>.

B&M

What’s happening? The discounter is slashing all its store prices by 10% 
during Black Friday.

Where? In its 500 stores but you can get a flavour on the B&M site 
<http://www.bmstores.co.uk/products/black-friday>.
 <http://www.bmstores.co.uk/products/black-friday>

What? Offers include an Intempo blutooth jukebox for £62.99 and Bosch Tassimo 
machine for £31.49.

B&Q

What’s happening? The DIY chain is offering a fortnight of deals until 1 
December.

Where? In stores and online here <http://www.diy.com/black-friday/>.

What? Discounts include a mirrored wardrobe with sliding door for £100, down 
from £150, and, online only, a Vax bagless vacuum cleaner for £55, down from 
£72.

Boots

What’s happening? The health and beauty retailer has already kicked off its 
Black Friday deals online, but will be releasing more on the day.

Where? Online offers can be found here 
<http://www.boots.com/en/Black-Friday/All-Black-Friday-offers/> and stores will 
be opening as usual over the weekend.

What? Deals include a Remington Shine Therapy hair straightener for £36, down 
from £79.99, and Paco Rabanne’s Lady Million eau de parfum 50ml down to £32 
from £54.

Black Friday night’s all right for fighting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/black-friday-all-right-for-fighting-retail-industry>
Carphone Warehouse

What’s happening? The mobile phone store has launched its 10-day Black Tag 
event, which will end on 30 November. It is offering enhanced online delivery, 
so customers who order phones by 7pm will be guaranteed next-day delivery.

Where? Online discounts can be found here 
<https://www.carphonewarehouse.com/special-offers/black-friday.html> and stores 
will open from 8am on Friday.

What? Customers can get £200 off the upfront cost of an Apple iPhone 6s, down 
to £59.99 on a £28-a-month contract, or £100 off the upfront cost of an HTC One 
A9s, so it is now free with a £12.50-a-month agreement.

Currys PC World

What’s happening? The electrical goods chain kicked off its Black Tag event on 
20 November and will be going into Black Friday this year with 6% more stock 
than in 2015.

Where? Online deals can be found here <http://www.currys.co.uk/gbuk/index.html>
 and stores will open from 8am on Friday.

What? Offers include a Samsung Smart 4k Ultra HD HDR 50-inch LED television 
for £449, a saving of £200, and a Hotpoint washing machine for £199, down from 
£329.99.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7413966ed8a80b72e8a51f05ef2dbd5c8da76cb%2F0_71_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20discounts%20and%20deals%20on%20UK%20Black%20Friday%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20discounts%20and%20deals%20on%20UK%20Black%20Friday%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7413966ed8a80b72e8a51f05ef2dbd5c8da76cb%2F0_71_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Debenhams is drafting in thousands of extra staff to cope with increased 
sales. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
Debenhams

What’s happening? The department store is discounting 327,000 items and 
predicting six times the sales of a regular Friday, with a 500% surge in online 
sales.

Where? Deals can be found here <http://www.debenhams.com/content/black-friday> 
and stores will open with extended hours of 8am to 10pm.

What? Customers can get VAT-free prices on all fragrances including gift sets, 
plus 50% off cookware, electrical products and women’s designer knitwear.

eBay

What’s happening? The online auction site expects 20.7 million visitors over 
the Black Friday weekend and is offering 10 days of deals to the end of 29 
November.

Where? Deals are online here <http://www.ebay.co.uk/rpp/black-friday>.

What? Promotions include a PS4 Slim 500GB console with Lego Star Wars and Star 
Wars: The Force Awakens from ShopTo for £219.99.

Game

What’s happening? Gaming fans should register via the website here 
<http://www.game.co.uk/webapp/wcs/stores/servlet/ArticleView?articleId=1657252&catalogId=10201&langId=44&storeId=10151&merchname=earlyblackfriday-_-catheader-_-ChristmasDeals2016>
 for details of this year’s Black Friday deals.

Where? Early online deals are here 
<http://www.game.co.uk/en/games/black-friday/early-black-friday-deals/?inStockOnly=false&cm_re=home-_-eSpot1-_-EarlyBlackFriday>
. Stores will have Black Friday sales from 8pm on Thursday and then again from 
8am on Friday – check local stores to confirm details.

What? Offers include Call of Duty Infinite Warfare (legacy edition) for 
£49.99, a saving of £24, and Gears of War 4 for £29.99, a £15 saving.

Fatigued Black Friday delivery drivers 'could pose road safety risk'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/road-safety-risk-tired-black-friday-delivery-drivers-health-and-safety-executive>
Halfords

What’s happening? The cycling and motoring chain has already launched some 
early-bird deals ahead of its main event on Friday.

Where? Deals online are here 
<http://www.halfords.com/advice/cycling/brands/black-friday-2016>.

What? Discounts include a Garmin sat nav with UK and Ireland lifetime map for 
£69, down from £89.99, and a 14-inch Disney Frozen bike for £60, down from £100.

Hobbycraft

The arts and crafts superstore has launched its Black Friday deals online and 
claims some products have already sold out.

Where? In store and online here 
<http://www.hobbycraft.co.uk/black-friday-deals>.

What? Just in time to make your own Christmas card, A3 paper cutters are half 
price at £17.50. There’s also £20 off a Singer Promise 1408 sewing machine at 
£69.

House of Fraser

What’s happening? The department store has a six-day Black Friday event, which 
ends at midnight on Monday, one day longer than last year. Cyber Monday deals 
will launch online at 6am on 28 November.

Where? Online here 
<http://www.houseoffraser.co.uk/blackfriday/blackfriday,default,pg.html> and in 
stores, which have extended opening hours from 8am to 10pm this week.

What? Deals include 50% off a Clinique The Sweetest Thing set, reduced to £30, 
and 70% off a New & Lingwood men’s Chiswick suit, down to £124.50.

John Lewis

What’s happening? The department store’s “never knowingly undersold” policy 
means it is already price-matching deals from other retailers. It has more of 
its own Black Friday offers than ever before, including toys for the first time.

Where? All stores open at 8am on Friday and some stores will stay open late. 
The Oxford Street shop in central London will be open until 10pm. John Lewis’s 
Black Friday deals start onlinehere <http://www.johnlewis.com/> from midnight 
on Thursday.

What? A saving of £70 on a Ninja Compact Blender Duo, down to £99.99, plus a 
40-inch Samsung UE40KU6020 HDR 4K Ultra HD smart TV at £349, a saving of £250.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b8bee906700bc2d46ee3a84b544d62478debabf%2F0_144_2608_1565%2F2608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Best%20discounts%20and%20deals%20on%20UK%20Black%20Friday%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Best%20discounts%20and%20deals%20on%20UK%20Black%20Friday%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fall-you-need-to-know-black-friday-uk-retailers-deals-and-dates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b8bee906700bc2d46ee3a84b544d62478debabf%2F0_144_2608_1565%2F2608.jpg>
 London’s Oxford Street is expected to be very busy over Black Friday weekend. 
Photograph: Amer Ghazzal/Rex/Shutterstock 
Lakeland

What’s happening? The specialist retailer is offering Black Friday discounts 
on more than 100 kitchen gadgets and appliances.

Where? In store and online here 
<http://www.lakeland.co.uk/landing/black-friday-deals?pageSize=108&q=%3Arelevance#>
.

What? Its Black Friday deals include a Dyson V6 mattress handheld cordless vac 
for £149.99, saving £100 and half-price Dry:Soon heated towel warmers for 
£27.49.

Marks & Spencer

What’s happening? The high street giant has scaled back its Black Friday deals 
this year but is running a Gifting Weekend promotion. It is already offering 
50% discounts on some beauty products and a 3 for 2 offer on toys and Christmas 
decorations.

Where? Online here <http://www.marksandspencer.com/> from the “early hours” of 
Friday and in stores, which will open as usual.

What? Deals include 50% off pyjamas, dressing gowns, Christmas decorations and 
trees, and 40% off homewares and toys.

Morrisons

What’s happening? The supermarket kicked off its Black Friday activity on 16 
November and is releasing new deals every day up to Saturday.

Where? Online here 
<https://groceries.morrisons.com/webshop/getSeasonalCategories.do?tags=%7C164195&Abutton=2&fromLoggedOutHome=yes>
 and in stores across the country.

What? Discounts already include 10p off a litre of fuel with a £50 spend 
in-store and 3 litres of Jack Daniels for £50.

New Look

What’s happening? New Look is offering up to 50% off selected men and women’s 
wear fashions over its “Black Friday Weekend”. It is already running countdown 
deals, and fresh offers will launch online at 9am tomorrow.

Where? Deals are available here 
<http://daily.newlook.com/seasonal-offers?intcam=INT-2016-17-WK35-HOME-Bck-0034>
 online as well as in store.

What? Offers include half-price men’s and women’s winter coats and half-price 
knitwear.

Sainsbury’s

What’s happening? The supermarket is offering a limited number of deals in 
larger stores over the weekend of Black Friday, mainly on tech products.

Black Friday: a shopper’s guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/black-friday-shoppers-guide-best-deals>
Where? Stores will open at normal times, except the group’s three 24-hour 
stores – Harringay, Lincoln and London Colney – where deals will be on offer 
from 6am.

What? There are 12 discounts in stores only, including a Blaupunkt 40-inch HD 
Freeview TV for £150, down from £220; and a Dyson V6 cordless vacuum cleaner 
for £185, down from £300.

Superdrug

What’s happening? The health and beauty retailer is offering its biggest 
selection of Black Friday deals to date, focused on Christmas present-friendly 
products, such as gift sets and electricals.

Where? Deals are online here <http://www.superdrug.com> and in stores during 
normal shopping hours.

What? Tresemmé smooth control straighteners are half price at £23.99, as are 
Sarah Jessica Parker Lovely fragrance gift sets at £24.

Tesco

What’s happening? The supermarket has already launched deals online and the 
majority of its Extra stores will open early. It has suspended its promise of 
next-day collection for online orders and warned shoppers they will have to 
wait up to five days for click-and-collect purchases.

Where? Discounts are already available online here 
<http://www.tesco.com/direct/blackfriday16-shopall.event?icid=blackfriday_mainbanner_slot1#prevTile=pt-330-0111_330-0111>
. The largest Tesco Extra stores will open from 5am on Friday.

What? Deals include a 9.6-inch Samsung Galaxy Tab E 8GB tablet for £99, a 
saving of £52.99, and an Xbox One 1TB console for £199, a £20 saving
 