
Betsy DeVos

Secretary of education

Background

Rarely are nominees for education secretary controversial, but Donald Trump’s 
choice of theRepublican fundraiser and activist Betsy DeVos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/betsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools>
 has sounded alarm bells for more reasons than one.

DeVos, a conservative billionaire, will receive a confirmation hearing on 
Tuesday afternoon before the Senate health, education, labor and pensions 
committee. Her testimony was delayed by a week when Democrats raised concerns 
over what they dubbed DeVos’s “extensive financial entanglements and potential 
conflicts of interest”.

Her family’s cumulative wealth is estimated at $5.1bn, which, coupled with her 
extensive financial holdings,reportedly overwhelmed 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/democrats-seek-to-delay-confirmation-hearing-for-betsy-devos-citing-unfinished-ethics-review/2017/01/07/ddc640e8-d50b-11e6-9cb0-54ab630851e8_story.html?utm_term=.baeaf92b373f>
 the federal watchdog agency tasked with vetting cabinet nominees. DeVos has 
donated extensively to Republican candidates, Super Pacs and party committees, 
with an emphasis on expanding charter schools and taxpayer-funded vouchers for 
both private and religious schools.

Key points to watch for

Conflicts of interest: In advance of the hearing, Democrats penned a letter 
calling on DeVos to disclose more financial information surrounding her 
contributions to political advocacy and lobbying groups.

Trump's choice for education secretary raises fears in Detroit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/betsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools>
DeVos has said she will sever “all connections” with her current business if 
confirmed, as well as resign as the chairman of the investment firm she 
launched with her husband, the Windquest Group, which has donated heavily to 
education-related causes that include charter schools and school vouchers.

But Democrats have complained that DeVos has not sufficiently addressed 
questions of conflicts of interest. They have pointed to herprior comments 
<https://devosprize.wordpress.com/2009/08/28/soft-money-is-good-hard-earned-american-dollars-that-big-brother-has-yet-to-find-a-way-to-control/>
 that donors “expect a return on our investment” – remarks which are likely to 
prompt questions on her approach to independent governance.


School choice: DeVos has never served in public office, but her support for 
conservative education reforms in Michigan offers a blueprint for her agenda if 
she is confirmed to Trump’s cabinet.

She has aggressively pushed to redirect taxpayer funds towards vouchers for 
low-income families who school choice advocates say are being failed by public 
schools.

In 2000, she was a major proponent of a failed ballot initiative in Michigan 
that would have amended the state’s constitution to establish a voucher system 
for students to attend private and religious schools.

Critics have said school vouchers lead to an environment lacking in adequate 
oversight, in addition to paving the way for education profiteering.

Religious influence: DeVos and her family have donated significant money to 
Christian schools and evangelical causes, including Focus on the Family, a 
group that touted gay conversion therapy – a scientifically discredited attempt 
to alter an individual’s sexual orientation.

The founder of Focus on the Family, which has received hundreds of thousands 
of dollars from the DeVoses, has labelled public curricula as“godless and 
immoral” 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2017/01/betsy-devos-christian-schools-vouchers-charter-education-secretary>
 and suggested Christian teachers should leave public education.

 