
Betsy DeVos, nominated by Donald Trump to serve as the next education 
secretary, refused on Tuesday to state whether she would uphold the Obama 
administration’s guidance on how to handle campus sexual assault.

DeVos – a Republican megadonor, philanthropist and eager patron of charter 
schools – cast taking a position on the issue as “premature” during her 
confirmation hearing before the Senate committee on health, education, labor 
and pensions.

Under the Obama administration, the education department has interpreted Title 
IX – a federal law barring sex discrimination – to mean that the country’s 
schools must play a role in protecting trans students and combating sexual 
assault on campus.


Her comments came as senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, a Democrat, twice 
asked DeVos if she would commit to maintaining Barack Obama’s transformational 
policy aimed at curtailing sexual assault in K-12 schools and on college 
campuses.


“Assault in any form is never OK, I just want to be very clear on that,” DeVos 
said.

“If confirmed, I look forward to understanding the past actions and current 
situation better, and to ensuring that the intent of the law is actually 
carried out in a way that recognizes both the victim ... as well as those who 
are accused.”


Casey, who characterized campus sexual assault as “an epidemic”, said he was 
looking for a more firm commitment. But DeVos declined to weigh in 
specifically, hinting at the possibility that she might work to reverse the 
reforms under the Obama administration.


Senator Patty Murray of Washington, another Democrat on the committee, also 
voiced concerns with DeVos’ approach.

“I am very interested in your thoughts on Title IX and how we can do 
everything possible to stop the scourge of campus sexual assault,” Murray said, 
while adding she was disappointed with how DeVos addressed the subject when 
they met in Washington in advance of the hearing.

“I was not happy with how you talked about this issue when we met – but I am 
hopeful that you’ve learned more about it since then and are prepared to 
address it seriously.”


DeVos, who is a Republican megadonor, philanthropist, and eager patron of 
charter schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/betsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools>
, has not articulated her personal stance on the outgoing administration’s 
policies toward sexual assault on campus or transgender students.

But supporters of these policies are fretting over large 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/betsy-devos-education-secretary-civil-rights-gay-transgender-students-231837>
donations 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/betsy-devos-education-sexual-assault-233376>
 DeVos or her family have made to groups that are fighting for these rules’ 
reversal. The DeVos Urban Leadership Initiative, a family foundation, has 
donated generously to the far-right legal group Alliance Defending Freedom, 
which is challenging the Obama administration’s protections for trans students 
in court.

Related: Betsy DeVos confirmation hearing for education secretary: the key 
points 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/betsy-devos-confirmation-hearing-live-key-points>

Another organization, Focus on the Family, has received several hundred 
thousand dollars from DeVos and her husband. The group supports the discredited 
programs to change sexual orientation known as “conversion therapy”.

And DeVos has personally donated $10,000 to the Foundation for Individual 
Rights in Education (Fire), a group which has made the reversal of the Obama 
administration’s policies on campus sexual assault a central part of its 
mission.

Should DeVos be confirmed, it would be well within her power to rescind or 
weaken the education department’s policies on campus assault and transgender 
students. Under Obama, the department has issued guidance calling on schools to 
ensure that transgender students have access to facilities matching their 
gender identity.

Officials in the department have interpreted Title IX as protecting trans 
students’ right of access. The Obama administration has also urged 
anti-bullying action in schools to protect LGBT students.

On college campuses, the administration has enforced guidelines requiring 
colleges to more aggressively pursue accusations of sexual assault. It has done 
so by calling on colleges to use a lower standard of evidence for discipling 
students accused of sexual assault, and also byinvestigating 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/11/10/trump-and-gop-likely-try-scale-back-title-ix-enforcement-sexual-assault>
, through the Office of Civil Rights (OCR), more than 200 colleges that have 
ignored or mishandled rape accusations.


The Obama administration also created a new education department division 
dedicated solely to investigating violations of the Clery Act, a 1990 law that 
requires colleges to track and publicly disclose crimes that occur on campus or 
in the vicinity. That division recently levieda record fine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/penn-state-jerry-sandusky-department-of-education-fine>
 against Penn State University for its mishandling of rape accusations against 
Jerry Sandusky.


On issues of both sexual assault and accommodations for trans students, 
schools that do not adhere to the guidance can incur financial penalties.


Republicans in Congress have expressed some degree of opposition to 
practically all of these measures. Virginia Foxx of North Carolina, who chairs 
the House education committee,has said 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/virginia-foxx-obama-education-legacy-232084>
 the OCR “deserves some scrutiny, let me just put it that way”. Senator James 
Lankford, who said the lower standard of evidence “indisputably tips the 
playing field against the accused, making the disciplinary process anything but 
‘equitable’”, hasreportedly met with DeVos 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/betsy-devos-education-sexual-assault-233376>
 on that very subject.


In recent days, advocates urged students who have been protected by the Obama 
administration’s enforcement to share their stories under#DearBetsy 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/DearBetsy?src=hash>.


“Countless students have benefitted from Title IX,” said Sofie Karasek, 
director of education at End Rape on Campus, which organized the campaign. 
“Many survivors use it to get the accommodations needed to stay in school, 
while others used it to hold their institutions accountable for sweeping sexual 
assault under the rug.”


More than two dozen states are suing the Obama administration over its 
guidance on transgender students in an effort that is overwhelmingly led by 
Republican secretaries of state. The current administration is defending the 
guidance in court. If theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> were to pull out of 
the legal defense, the matter could be decided by lower courts, some of which 
have temporarily blocked the guidelines from taking effect.

Trump, like DeVos, has not broadcast any thoughts on these two policies, 
although he has indicated that he is not opposed to transgender individuals 
using restrooms that match their gender identity.


But advisers of the president elect have given signals that advocates of 
government intervention on these issues find worrisome.

Carl Paladino, the New York co-chair of Trump’s campaign before the election, 
called the OCR 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/education/wp/2016/10/22/trump-surrogate-gop-candidate-would-dismantle-corrupted-incompetent-urban-school-systems/?utm_term=.a6e88bad0a4e>
 “self-perpetuating absolute nonsense”. And in an interview with Inside Higher 
Ed, Sam Clovis, who served as the policy director for Trump’s campaign, 
suggestedmoving 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/05/13/trumps-campaign-co-chair-describes-higher-education-policies-being-developed>
 the OCR to the justice department.

The vice-president elect, Mike Pence, in a radio interview about the 
transgender guidance for schools, signalled that themeasures might not be 
enforced 
<http://www.christianpost.com/news/mike-pence-james-dobson-trump-birth-control-mandate-transgender-bathroom-170485/>
 under Trump. “Washington has no business intruding on the operation of our 
local schools,” he said. Instead, the choice to admit trans students to 
bathrooms and locker rooms matching their gender identity would be left up to 
individual schools.

DeVos’s connections to groups opposing aggressive Title IX intervention is not 
the only source of concern swirling around her potential confirmation. Her 
hearing will also beginbefore the Office for Government Ethics has finished its 
review 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/local/education/senators-to-scrutinize-betsy-devos-trumps-pick-for-education-secretary/2017/01/17/3a0e6168-da8f-11e6-9a36-1d296534b31e_story.html?utm_term=.c8eda1af8e2a>
 of her substantial fortune for possible conflicts of interest.
 