
To anyone listening, the idea that school funding should be based on the needs 
of pupils and not their postcodes sounds like sound judgment. It immediately 
appeals to our wish to protect the young from the arbitrary cruelties life can 
throw our way. On Wednesday, as the education secretary, Justine Greening, 
outlined a new national funding formula for schools, it was hard not to assume 
aninjustice was finally being righted 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-38301843>.

Historically, funding per pupil has varied across England and has been 
determined by local authorities. So a primary school in London’s Tower Hamlets 
could spend more than £7,007 per pupil while another located in Wokingham, 
Berkshire, spent £4,151. Now the government will even out the difference by 
setting funding per pupil at a national level using a new formula.Hackney will 
lose 1.4% 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/national-funding-formula-the-winners-and-losers-by-local-authority-area/>
 in the first year of the new formula, while Derby will gain 2.7%. TheTimes 
Educational Supplement reports 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/new-national-funding-formula-will-see-10740-schools-gain-and-9128>
 that, even though 9,128 schools will emerge as losers, funded at a lower level,
10,740 gain 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/answered-six-questions-about-new-schools-national-funding-formula>
.

Children deserve equality of opportunity. On the face of it, these changes 
seem to address just that. AsSchools Week notes 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/national-funding-formula-the-winners-and-losers-by-local-authority-area/>
, of the 20 local authorities facing the sharpest reduction in per-pupil 
spending, 11 can be found in London. Coastal and more rural authorities like 
Somerset, Barnsley and Torbay count as some of the biggest winners. But what 
does “winning” mean when school budgets arefacing real-term cuts of £3bn by 2020
 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/government-schools-budget-cuts-3bn-nao-a7473186.html>
? This is what the National Audit Office, rather annoyingly for Greening, 
announced on the same day she unveiled the new formula. All schools will need 
to reduce funding per pupil by 8% over the next four years as a result of 
teacher pay rises, pension contributions and national insurance. And we had 
been led to believe that under Theresa Mayausterity was no more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/no-more-welfare-cuts-under-theresa-may-says-minister-damian-green-end-to-austerity>
.

As a teacher and a parent, I agree that all communities should have access to 
good-quality, well-resourced schools. Who wouldn’t? Saying so, however, is not 
the same as believing funding for schools is a zero-sum game in which finite 
resources result in winners and losers. Robbing Peter to pay Paul does nothing 
to change the fundamental problem when a debt remains owed.

Between 2010-11 and 2014-15, local- authority-maintained schools and academies 
were spending more than their income rose. For the former,the proportion of 
schools that did so rose 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Financial-sustainability-of-schools-Summary.pdf>
 from 33.7% to 59.3%, and 38.8% to 60.6% of the latter. We can view these 
figures one of two ways. The first is to see it as supporting a pervasive 
narrative of public sector mismanagement and profligacy. The second would be a 
sober acceptance that “protecting the education budget” is double-speak for 
what is in effect a sharp cut. In other words, an overspend exists because the 
expectations of what can achieved with squeezed budgets are unrealistic.

Education needs investment. To not do so would be to ignore a gathering 
crisis. Schools, with balance books showing such a drastic rise in overspends, 
are telling us the government’s plans are unsustainable. So much so that the 
NAO can state that the Department of Education’s “savings estimates do not take 
account of the cost implications for schools of its policy changes”.

A moment that changed me: a teacher’s acceptance of my silence | Phoebe-Jane 
Boyd
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/moment-that-changed-me-teacher-selective-mutism>
Schools with stretched budgets will of course look to make savings from their 
biggest cost: staff. That is, redundancies of senior staff, fewer learning 
support assistants, and a recruitment freeze. It means larger class sizes and a 
profession already struggling with retention of skilled workers placing those 
who remain at the extremes of their capacity.

In the end, it is a generation of children that will suffer. With increased 
class sizes, poorer school infrastructure and an unstable workforce, they are 
being short-changed. The Tories have, since 2010, consistently drummed the beat 
of educational reform. They have told us that the system is failing and they 
alone can move us forward. Yet progress without investment belies the emptiness 
of such promises. London’s schools rank as the best in the country for myriad 
reasons, not least the fact that they have been well funded. To not see this as 
integral to the success story of these once struggling inner-city schools is to 
be blind to what is in front of your nose.

Hearing that money given to “rich” London schools will be taken and 
distributed elsewhere sounds like necessary rebalancing of a corrosive focus on 
the capital. Yet, this isn’t about the north versus south, city versus rural. 
Framing it as such merely obscures the sleight of hand the government is 
performing here. All are losers under the refusal to invest in education.
 