
A friend and fellow wood-owner has built a hide in his patch that’s sunk into 
the ground so that windows, which are fitted with one-way glass, look out at 
eye-level over a nearby pond. From its interior you have the most intimate 
ringside views of the wildlife – which, meanwhile, hasn’t any inkling of human 
presence.

Here for the dawn
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/15/here-dawn> 
As we settled in and waited for the sun to rise and illuminate the view, a 
dozenblackbirds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/21/country-diary-norfolk-heaven-blackbird-song>
 breakfasted on the trolley-load of apples encircling the pond. The birds 
hammered the fruits with gusto, then they would pause, hammer again, sending 
white-flesh fids flying in all directions.

Sometimes they sallied off completely, leaving a contrail of metallic sound 
ricocheting nervously among the trees. Silence descended; before all were 
suddenly back at once. They gulped more apple, head up, then down, and a pause 
for a personal squabble with more scraped-metal chiding; or more nerves and off 
they sailed.

This fruit-feeding alternated with other jerky, leaf-flicking stuff, the slate 
pin legs scratching mud in tandem with a downward stab and sideways flick of 
the lemon bill. Occasionally one would break off from the staccato rhythms of 
the group and position herself so close to the glass that as you leaned forward 
you felt sure she was looking at you as intently as you could see her.

Country diary: Wenlock Edge: Blackbird singing in the dead of night
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/05/blackbird-singing-in-the-dead-of-night>
Every detail was unmissable – the stained-oak eye, the sepia cup beneath her 
throat, her bird-track streaks running away down the chest into the fulsome 
shadow of her belly and then that spring-loaded legs-out, chest-up posture that 
looked one part gun’s cocked trigger, one part coiled-spring for flight. It was 
fabulous stuff.

As we sat and luxuriated in all this wild closeness we realised that we spend 
all our lives not so much in shelter but in a force field of fearsomeness that 
radiates from us into the world around. Our 4m-year-long heritage as top 
predatory ape has left us encircled by a dead penumbra of other creatures’ 
dread.JA Baker <http://jabaker.co.uk/>, the author of The Peregrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/may/21/featuresreviews.guardianreview35>
, called it a “hot hoop of fear”, and it was wonderful to escape it just for a 
day.

Follow Country diary on Twitter:@gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 