
On one shore there are snow-capped mountains. On the other side loom towering 
skyscrapers. These churning waters off the coast of Vancouver are marked by a 
constant flow of ferries and containers ships – but they are also home to 80 or 
so orcas.

Known as the southern resident killer whales 
<https://www.epa.gov/salish-sea/southern-resident-killer-whales> the group has 
long had a fraught relationship with the urban sprawl they live alongside, 
leaving them on the knife’s edge of extinction.

In the late 1960s and early 70s, dozens were captured and sold to aquariums 
and theme parks around the world. Those who remained were exposed to runoff 
chemicals used in local industry, making them some of theworld’s most 
contaminated marine mammals. 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/british-columbia/resident-orca-whales-suffer-triple-threat-of-pollution-noise-and-lack-of-food-u-s-study-1.2692785>

But now the orcas of the Salish sea face what conservationists say is their 
biggest threat to date: an expansion proposal for a pipeline thatwould snake 
from Alberta to the Pacific coast. <https://www.transmountain.com/map>

Spearheaded by Texas-based energy infrastructure company Kinder Morgan, the 
C$6.8bn ($5bn) Trans Mountain Expansion project is designed to transport 
Alberta’s landlocked bitumen to international markets.
Canada pipeline map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/11/canada-pipeline-map/> 
The proposal – which still needs the approval of the federal government, led 
by Justin Trudeau – would expand an existing pipeline to lay nearly 1,000km of 
new pipeline from Alberta to Vancouver’s coastline. Oil tanker and barge 
traffic in the region would soar nearly sevenfold,to as many as 408 tankers a 
year. <https://www.transmountain.com/marine-plans>

Conservationists warn that the spike in tanker traffic would be disastrous for 
the resident orca whales – a genetically unique population that is already 
classified as endangered in bothCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> and the US.

“The approval of the project is also the approval of the extinction of the 
population,” said Ross Dixon of the RaincoastConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Foundation. “No one is 
disputing it. Nobody is saying that’s not accurate. It’s been accepted.”

In May, Canada’s energy regulator wrapped up two years of review into the 
Trans Mountain proposal,recommending that the federal government approve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/canadas-trans-mountain-oil-pipeline-clears-hurdle-despite-fears-for-seaway>
 the project. The approval was conditional, subject to 157 conditions that 
include 49 environmental requirements.The regulator also noted  
<https://docs.neb-one.gc.ca/ll-eng/llisapi.dll/fetch/2000/90464/90552/548311/956726/2392873/2969696/2969867/National_Energy_Board_Report_-_OH-001-2014_-_A5A9H1.pdf?nodeid=2969681&vernum=-2>
the project “is likely to result in significant adverse effects to the southern 
resident killer whale”.

Trudeau’s cabinet has until 19 December to make its final decision. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92ae0ff464103228c1cdcb0eaa42b24281c2058d%2F0_143_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92ae0ff464103228c1cdcb0eaa42b24281c2058d%2F0_143_4000_2401%2F4000.jpg>
 Anti-pipeline signs are seen on the side of a road in the First Nations 
village of Old Massett, British Columbia. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via 
Getty Images 
Analysts have long speculated that the approval of the pipeline is imminent. 
“The choice between pipelines and wind turbines is a false one,”Trudeau told 
attendees at a Vancouver conference on clean technology 
<https://twitter.com/canadianpm/status/705083519341608960> in March. “We need 
both to reach our goal, and as we continue to ensure there is a market for our 
natural resources, our deepening commitment to a cleaner future will be a 
valuable advantage.”

Trudeau has faced immense pressure from Alberta – where sagging oil prices 
have sentunemployment soaring to around 8.5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/14/canada-oil-production-crisis-suicide-alberta>
 – to approve a pipeline, but promises by Donald Trump to resurrect plans for 
the Keystone XL pipeline could alleviate some of this pressure.

The approval of the project is also the approval of the extinction of the 
population. No one is disputing it
Ross Dixon, Raincoast Conservation Foundation 
Many are not taking any chances. The Raincoast Conservation Foundation has 
joined forces with several other organisations to launch a legal challenge 
against the energy regulator’s approval of the project,arguing that it failed 
to take into account 
<http://www.raincoast.org/2016/06/environmental-groups-launch-court-challenge-over-nebs-kinder-morgan-report/>
 the impact on the orca whales and their habitat. The groups are currently 
waiting to hear whether their application for judicial review, filed in June, 
will be given the go ahead by the court.

Shipping causes 'chronic stress' to whales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/feb/08/shipping-noises-chronic-stress-whales>
The anticipated increase in tanker traffic will heighten the physical and 
acoustic disturbances in the water, said Misty MacDuffee of Raincoast 
Conservation Foundation. “The noise of the propeller and the engine emits at a 
frequency that can mask the communication of the whales,” she said. “And the 
overall traffic combines to create sort of a din … so it reduces the actual 
space over which the whale can hear and be heard by other whales.”

The result could hamper the whales’ ability to catch food, she said. “They’ve 
got a unique diet, they’ve got a unique language in terms of their dialect and 
they’ve got a unique culture. And it’s that package that’s in jeopardy.”

Climate change has steadily diminished the availability of Chinook salmon, the 
whales’ main food source. Drone research has revealed whales with altered body 
shapes and lacking fat deposits, suggesting they are starving. “You can visibly 
actually see the ribs on some of these whales,” said MacDuffee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0a13d87d13f02ef0f5ec711c3ea156cc14c9fa%2F0_49_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f0a13d87d13f02ef0f5ec711c3ea156cc14c9fa%2F0_49_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 A pod of orcas in Johnstone Strait, British Columbia. Photograph: Alamy Stock 
Photo 
If tanker traffic increases, the whales will not simply move to another area. 
“That critical habitat is not just a space on the map. It has these acoustic 
components, food supply components and water quality components.”

The fate of the orcas is just one facet of the broad opposition the project is 
facing. More than 20 municipalities and 17 First Nations communities have come 
out against the proposal while hundreds of youth marched in Ottawa last month 
to urge the government to shelve the proposal. Thousands more are expected to 
turn out for a protest march in Vancouver this Saturday.

Proposed Canada pipeline project would threaten US tribal rights, lawyer says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/23/canada-pipeline-project-us-tribal-rights-kinder-morgan-trans-mountain>
The existing pipeline – which began operating in 1953 
<https://www.transmountain.com/proposed-expansion> – passes near several 
schools, at one site running under a school playground, said Karen Wristen of 
Living Oceans.

It was concerns over this trajectory that launched 92-year-old Elsie Dean into 
action. “It comes right through our community,” said Dean, pointing to the 
pipeline’s route through her home of Burnaby, a city of some 220,000 people in 
British Columbia.

Since 1961, the pipeline system being eyed for expansion has reported 
approximately 82 spills <https://www.transmountain.com/spill-history> to the 
country’s energy regulator, she noted. “It just seems rather insane to consider 
putting this amount of bitumen in a community of people.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c2e80df7137334be4bade8020318a313cb11318%2F0_124_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c2e80df7137334be4bade8020318a313cb11318%2F0_124_4000_2399%2F4000.jpg>
 Those opposed to the pipeline say increased oil tanker traffic will hamper the 
whales’ ability to catch food. Photograph: Bloomberg/Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Dean helped launch Broke, or Burnaby Residents Opposed to Kinder Morgan 
Expansion <http://brokepipelinewatch.ca/>, four years ago in an effort to steer 
Canada – whose greenhouse gas emissionsrank among the highest per capita in the 
OECD <https://stats.oecd.org/Index.aspx?DataSetCode=AIR_GHG> – away from fossil 
fuels and towards meaningful efforts to tackle climate change. “We know that if 
we don’t cut back on fossil fuels, the future generation or certainly my 
grandchildren will be affected adversely by climate change.”

One First Nations community has countered the proposal with a demonstration of 
the alternative. The Tsleil-Waututh Nation, which sits directly across an inlet 
from the existing Kinder Morgan tanker terminal, recentlylaunched a fundraising 
campaign 
<http://www.nwuujn.org/view/news/58100ab60cf2204d222d3889/?topic=569d6f870cf2c2f3bc835c61>
 to expand the community’s commitment to solar energy. “It’s a poetic way to 
illustrate the choices before us,” said Charlene Aleck, a councillor with the 
community.

One accident and the lives and livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of people 
would be destroyed forever
Charlene Aleck, councillor 
The Kinder Morgan project was analysed through the same lens as all others 
that come through the territory, said Aleck. “Is it feasible, is it something 
good for the water, land and air?” The community of 500 people was unanimous in 
its opposition. “It didn’t even pass the lowest entry form of how we would run 
business on our land.”

Chief among the community’s concerns was the possibility of an oil spill, she 
said. “One accident and the lives and livelihoods of hundreds of thousands of 
people, as well as salmon, dolphins, whales, seals and a multitude of other 
aquatic and hundreds of thousands of avian species, would be destroyed forever.”

Earlier this month, Trudeau announced C$1.5bn in funding  
<http://ca.reuters.com/article/domesticNews/idCAKBN1322JT>to improve response 
measures. The move was widely seen as an attempt to quell some of the 
opposition to the proposed pipeline.

Aleck welcomed the funding as a way to address the issues arising from the 
industry already in operation in the region. “But the best way to mitigate an 
oil spill is not to approve the Kinder Morgan expansion,” she added.

When queried on the opposition facing the proposal, Kinder Morgan pointed to a 
series of links on their website highlightingthe company’s funding of orca 
research 
<https://blog.transmountain.com/industry-collaboration-key-to-protecting-at-risk-whales/>
 and its efforts to engage communities affected by the pipeline.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92110d9eb58c4661737e92ed37bb86fe67954256%2F0_325_5400_3242%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Big%20oil%20v%20orcas%3A%20Canadians%20fight%20pipeline%20that%20threatens%20killer%20whales%20on%20the%20brink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fcanada-oil-pipeline-expansion-killer-whales-kinder-morgan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F92110d9eb58c4661737e92ed37bb86fe67954256%2F0_325_5400_3242%2F5400.jpg>
 Since 1961, the pipeline system being eyed for expansion has reported more 
than 80 spills. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
The project has received 41 letters of support from Aboriginal groups  
<https://blog.transmountain.com/your-top-5-questions-on-our-approach-to-aboriginal-engagement/>
located along the pipeline and marine corridor in Alberta and British Columbia, 
said the company. More than C$13m in funding had been provided to some 98 
communities who wanted to learn more about the project, it added.

The pipeline does not run under any buildings, the company noted. 
<https://www.transmountain.com/updates/pipelines-in-our-communities-safety-and-schools>
 “Living or being active near our pipeline does not pose any health risk.” 
Where the pipeline runs near schools, it said, “we are open to working with 
individual schools or districts to fully support their safety efforts and 
ensure their emergency response plans and ours are coordinated.”

If the project is approved, the company said it would invest more than C$150m 
in marine spill response 
<https://blog.transmountain.com/major-spill-response-investment-includes-new-vancouver-harbour-base/>
 in the region. “The investment will fund five new response bases, about 115 
new employees and approximately 26 new vessels at strategic locations along 
BC’s southern shipping lane,” the company said.

The millions in funding does little to address what seems to be a certainty of 
the project – the risk posed to the resident orca whales, said Dixon of the 
Raincoast Conservation Foundation. “If this population goes extinct, it’s gone 
for good,” he said. “They’re part of our identity, they’re part of the place in 
which we live. If we lose them, we lose a part of ourselves.”
 