
Banks and financial services companies have racked up more than £40bn in costs 
to handle the payment protection insurance scandal.

The costliest mis-selling bill in UK financial services history became even 
more expensive on Thursday after Barclaysset aside a further £600m to handle 
the cost of claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/barclays-ppi-costs-rise-with-600m-bill>
.
PPI atom 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=8173474a-08ab-48e5-9748-cdca37f88e0d>
Data compiled by the thinkthank New City Agenda shows 
<http://newcityagenda.co.uk/the-top-10-retail-banking-scandals-50-billion-reasons-why-shareholders-must-play-a-greater-role-in-changing-bank-culture/>
 that this top up for Barclays has pushed the total provisions incurred by the 
industry to £40.2bn. Lloyds Banking Group makes up £17bn of that total.

The size of the payouts have already been cited as a reason for booming car 
sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/07/uk-car-sales-five-year-high-smmt>
 and holidays. As one penny off income tax costs about £4bn, it could be 
regarded as a boost to household income.

Not all the money has gone straight into consumers’ pockets. The latest data 
from the Financial Conduct Authority shows that from January 2011 – when claims 
started to be made – until the end of Julyabout £25bn had been distributed by 
the banks and other firms which sold PPI 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/consumers/payment-protection-insurance/monthly-ppi-refunds-and-compensation>
.

Claims management companies have, according to the National Audit Office 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/press-release/financial-services-mis-selling-regulation-and-redress/>
, received up to £5bn of the payouts.

The banks have also incurred billions of pounds of costs in handling the 
claims. They have not used all the money they have set aside in anticipation of 
more applications for compensation.
ppi graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/10/ppi-provision/giv-1406pAOHytH0Cf83/>
More than 50m PPI policies were sold, according to the former City regulator 
the Financial Services Authority.Banks sold most of them  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/ppi-claims-all-you-need-to-know-about-the-mis-selling-scandal>
– around 45m policies, worth £40bn.

A consultation run by the FCA into setting a deadline for claims closed 
earlier this month and could result in a cut-off point of June 2019 for 
remaining customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
 to make their case. It will also herald an advertising campaign, expected to 
cost £40m, to encourage customers to come forward and beat the deadline.
 