
Is this a democracy or is it a plutocracy? Between people and power is a 
filter through which decisions are made, a filter made of money. In the 
European referendum, remain won 46% ofthe money given and lent to the two sides 
<http://www.electoralcommission.org.uk/i-am-a/journalist/electoral-commission-media-centre/news-releases-donations/fourth-and-final-pre-poll-donations-and-loans-report-for-the-eu-referendum-published>
 (£20.4m) and 48% of the vote; leave won 54% of the money and 52% of the vote. 
This fearful symmetry should worry anyone who values democracy. Did the vote 
follow the money? Had the spending been the other way round, would the result 
have reflected that? These should not be questions you need to ask in a 
democracy.

The Guardian view on paying for politics: stop this attempt to undermine 
democracy | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/20/the-guardian-view-on-paying-for-politics-stop-this-attempt-to-undermine-democracy>
If spending has no impact, no one told the people running the campaigns: both 
sides worked furiously at raising funds, sometimes from gruesome people. The 
top donor wasthe stockbroker Peter Hargreaves 
<http://search.electoralcommission.org.uk/Search/Donations?currentPage=1&rows=10&sort=Value&order=desc&tab=1&open=filter&et=perpar&date=Reported&from=2016-04-01&to=2016-07-05&prePoll=true&postPoll=false&optCols=AccountingUnitsAsCentralParty&optCols=IsSponsorship&optCols=RegulatedDoneeType&optCols=CompanyRegistrationNumber&optCols=Postcode&optCols=NatureOfDonation&optCols=PurposeOfVisit&optCols=DonationAction&optCols=ReportedDate&optCols=IsReportedPrePoll&optCols=ReportingPeriodName&optCols=IsBequest&optCols=IsAggregation>
, who gave £3.2m to Leave.eu. Heexplained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/billionaire-brexit-donor-leaving-eu-like-dunkirk>
 his enthusiasm for leaving the EU thus: “It would be the biggest stimulus to 
get our butts in gear that we have ever had … We will get out there and we will 
be become incredibly successful because we will be insecure again. And 
insecurity is fantastic.”

No one voted for such people, yet they are granted power over our lives. It is 
partly because the political system is widely perceived to be on sale that 
people have become so alienated. Paradoxically, political alienation appears 
to have boosted the leave vote. The leave campaign thrived on the public 
disgust generated by the system that helped it to win.

If politics in Britain no longer serves the people, our funding system has a 
lot to do with it. While in most other European nations, political parties and 
campaigns are largelyfinanced by the state 
<http://www.democraticaudit.com/?p=16419>, in Britain they are largely funded 
by millionaires, corporations and trade unions. Most people are not fools, and 
they rightly perceive that meaningful choices are being made in private, 
without democratic consent. Where there is meaning, there is no choice; where 
there is choice, there is no meaning.

Politicians insist that donors have no influence on policy, but you would have 
to be daft to believe it. The fear of losing money is a constant anxiety, and 
consciously or subconsciously people with an instinct for self-preservation 
will adapt their policies to suit those most likely to fund them. Nor does it 
matter whether policies follow the money or money follows the policies: those 
whose proposals appeal to the purse-holders will find it easier to raise funds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fbillionaires-bought-brexit-controlling-britains-political-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4955a15c3663a5a4705fe0c912a3655763dd0097%2F0_119_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Billionaires%20bought%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20they%20are%20controlling%20our%20venal%20political%20system%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fbillionaires-bought-brexit-controlling-britains-political-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Billionaires%20bought%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%20they%20are%20controlling%20our%20venal%20political%20system%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F13%2Fbillionaires-bought-brexit-controlling-britains-political-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4955a15c3663a5a4705fe0c912a3655763dd0097%2F0_119_3216_1930%2F3216.jpg>
 David Cameron with Ruby Wax at the Conservatives’ Black and White Ball, 2006. 
‘You get the access you pay for: £5,000 buys you the company of a junior 
minister; £15,000, a cabinet minister.’ Photograph: Richard Young / Rex Features
Sometimes the relationship appears to be immediate. Before the last general 
election, 27 of the 59 richest hedge fund managers in Britainsponsored the 
Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/05/conservatives-bankrolled-hedge-fund-managers>
. Perhaps these donations had nothing to do with the special exemption from 
stamp duty on stock market transactions the chancellor granted to hedge funds,
depriving the public sector  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/dec/13/tories-david-cameron-buy-election-campaign-spending>
of about £145m a year. But that doesn’t seem likely.

At the Conservatives’ annual Black and White Ball, you get the access you pay 
for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/09/conservative-donors-pay-up-to-15000-for-table-at-election-fundraiser>
: £5,000 buys you the company of a junior minister; £15,000, a cabinet 
minister. Politicians insist that there’s no relationship between donations and 
appointments to the House of Lords, but a study at Oxford Universityfound 
<http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Department-of-Economics-Discussion-Paper-Series/is-there-a-market-for-peerages-can-donations-buy-you-a-british-peerage-a-study-in-the-link-between-party-political-funding-and-peerage-nominations-2005>
 that the probability of this being true is “approximately equivalent to 
entering the national lottery and winning the jackpot five times in a row”.

We might not have had a say in the choice of the new prime minister, but I bet 
there was a lively conversation between Conservative MPs and their major 
funders.

Among the many reasons for the crisis in the Labour party is the desertion of 
its large private donors. One of them, the corporate lawyer Ian Rosenblatt,
complains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/05/labour-donor-exodus-struggling-fund-general-election-corbyn>
: “I don’t think Jeremy Corbyn or anyone around him is remotely interested in 
whether people like me support the party or not.” Why should the leader of the 
Labour party have to worry about the support of one person ahead of the votes 
of millions?

The former Labour adviser Ayesha Hazarika urged Corbyn to overcome his scruples
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/03/jeremy-corbyn-snubbing-donors-labour-money-funding>
: “Meeting rich people and asking for money is not exactly part of the brand 
that has been so successful among his party faithful. But … sometimes you just 
have to suck it up and do things you don’t like.”

Under our current system she might be right, not least because the 
Conservatives havecut Labour’s other sources of funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/18/conservatives-to-rebalance-cuts-to-opposition-party-funding>
: trade union fees and public money. But what an indictment of the system that 
is. During the five years before the last election, 41% of the 
private donations made to political partiescame from just 76 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/14/two-fifths-of-british-political-donations-made-by-just-76-people>
. This is what plutocracy looks like.

Stand back from this system and marvel at what we have come to accept. If we 
saw it anywhere else, we would immediately recognise it as corruption. Why 
should parties have to grovel to oligarchs to win elections? Or, for that 
matter, trade unions?

The political system should be owned by everyone, not by a subset. But the 
corruption at its heart has become so normalised that we can scarcely see it.

Two-fifths of British political donations made by just 76 people
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/14/two-fifths-of-british-political-donations-made-by-just-76-people>
Here is one way in which we could reform our politics. Each party would be 
allowed to charge the same fee for membership – a modest amount, perhaps £20. 
The state would then match this money, at a fixed ratio. And that would be it. 
There would be no other funding for political parties. The system would be 
simple, transparent and entirely dependent on the enthusiasm politicians could 
generate. They would have a powerful incentive to burst their bubbles and 
promote people’s re-engagement with politics. The funding of referendums would 
be even simpler: the state would provide an equal amount for each side.

The commonest argument against such arrangements is that we can’t afford them. 
Really? We can’t afford, say, £50m for a general election, but we can afford 
the crises caused by the corruption of politics? We could afford the financial 
crisis, which arose from politicians’ unwillingness to regulate their 
paymasters. We can afford the costs of Brexit, which might have been bought by 
a handful of millionaires.

Those who urged us to leave the EU promised that we would take back control. 
Well, this is where it should begin.

A fully linked version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com
 