
Every year in the name apparently of guarding our nation’s glorious morals, 
some creepy photographers go around taking upskirt shots of young women.Women 
who have got drunk and have collapsed 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4079616/Some-people-won-t-having-happy-new-year-Carnage-streets-Britain-revellers-2017-boozy-night-no-one-s-wrapping-warm.html>
 are the prize: lots of leg, sprawled in a doorway after “tottering” in high 
heels, tiny dresses hiked up, their knickers showing. This is what we want. The 
confirmation of the end of the world as we know it. Every year.

For it’s been a pretty regular occurrence for the past decade at least, this 
montage of the paralytic bad girls. It comes around just as often as the 
pictures of the good girls: theleaping blondes celebrating A-level results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/gallery/2009/aug/21/national-newspapers-newspapers>
.

The “news” 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2514930/bedlam-in-hull-as-boozy-revellers-cause-new-year-havoc-just-as-city-marks-becoming-uk-capital-of-culture/>
 is apparently that some people got drunk on New Year’s Eve. The horror is that 
some of these people were female. This has made Daily Mail columnist Sarah Vine 
want“to weep for today’s young women” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4080750/Pictures-make-weep-today-s-young-women-SARAH-VINE-British-society-grip-binge-drinking-culture.html>
. Don’t let me stop you, weep away. I could weep too. Their opportunities in 
life have certainly been curtailed by the work of Vine’s husband, Michael Gove, 
and his cronies.

Yes, it is a shame some people end up legless and ill, but according to Vine 
the worst of it is that they won’t even be ashamed of themselves. “They won’t 
be filled with remorse or self-loathing,” she laments. But really why should 
they waste the energy when they are publicly shamed by these nasty pictures and 
extended photo-captions parading as articles such as this? Generally, I find 
self-loathing is unnecessary for working-class women; there are middle-class 
people paid to loathe you anyway. You may as well spend the time getting your 
nails done or whatever cheap thrill comes your way.

This is not to defend drunkenness or indeed alcoholism, but let’s get some 
perspective here. For some, out-of-control drinking will mean ending up in A&E, 
it will mean unprotected sex, unwanted pregnancy andincreasing incidents of 
“domestic” violence 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/welfare/2015/12/it-s-hardest-time-year-why-domestic-violence-spikes-over-christmas>
 over the festive season because, guess what, young women don’t drink on their 
own. Some will wake up and share hangover stories on social media, some will be 
severely ill, some will become dependent and find alcohol is a life-long 
problem. I don’t minimise these issues.

But binge drinking is actually the preserve of the middle aged and middle 
class who sit at home with their fine wines destroying their livers while 
judging everyone else. The shaming of young working-class women is a staple of 
tabloid culture.The Sun <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sun> has a go, but 
strangely can never attain the heights of the Mail’s joyless voyeuristic 
morality policing. The former has a picture of a bloke captioned, “A man having 
a wee in a street in Leeds” which, let’s face it, isn’t as thrilling as the 
Mail’s photo of a woman slumped on a bench in Cardiff. According to paper, 
people didn’t used to pre-load drinks or intentionally get in this state. This 
is not my experience at all.

No, enjoying a gin and tonic does not make you a psychopath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/no-enjoying-a-gin-and-tonic-does-not-make-you-a-psychopath>
The actual story here and one that the tabloids are loth to tell is while 
there are many alcohol-related problems, overallyoung people are drinking less 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwjx5Oe0vaPRAhXpKcAKHd6VCvMQFggcMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ias.org.uk%2FDownloadDocument.aspx%3Ffilename%3DIAS%2520reports%2Frp22072016.pdf&usg=AFQjCNHnIt_Dh4dQAFh5fgu2Q2pSvA7aJA&sig2=TQuNbr1uiGscy5xSbIduYw>
. Alcohol consumption hasdeclined sharply since about 2004 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-12397254>. Many young adults are teetotal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/feb/13/teetotallers-on-rise-in-uk-one-in-five-dont-drink>
 (a growing Muslim population is part of this statistic) and most adults (about 
80%) are making an attempt to drink less.Pubs are closing down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/pricey-pints-blamed-as-21-british-pubs-a-week-call-time-at-the-bar>
 and young people report both that they want to be sharp at work and that as 
social lives are partly lived online they require less booze.

But why introduce some facts into a story when you can perv around judging 
women with fake pity, while simultaneously publicly shaming them? The end of 
civilisation will not come about because of some pixelated girls. Bingeing on 
booze is not good, but it happens. Binge moralising however is a problem. One 
tends to lose all contact with reality in a constant quest for the high of smug 
superiority. When you are getting your kicks from kicking an unconscious girl, 
perhaps it is time to look at yourself.
 