
OK, let’s take him.” Within seconds two officers grabbed me, each seizing an 
arm, and shoved me against the drinks machine that rested along the front wall 
of the McDonald’s where I had been eating and working on my report. As I 
released my clenched hands, my mobile phone and notebook fell to the tiled 
floor. Then came the sharp sting of the plastic cable tie as it was sealed, 
pinching tight at the corners of my wrists. I’d never been arrested before, and 
this wasn’t quite how I’d imagined it would go down.

Two days earlier, I’d been sent to Ferguson, Missouri, by the Washington Post, 
to cover the aftermath of thepolice shooting of Michael Brown, an unarmed black 
18-year-old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/ferguson-missouri-shooting-michael-brown-civil-rights-police-brutality>
. The fatal gunshots, fired by a white police officer, Darren Wilson, on 9 
August 2014, were followed by bursts of anger, in the form of protests and 
riots. Hundreds, and then thousands, of local residents had flooded the 
streets. For the Ferguson press corps – which would eventually swell from 
dozens of reporters for local St Louis outlets into hundreds of journalists 
from farther afield, including dozens of foreign countries – the McDonald’s on 
West Florissant Avenue became the newsroom.

Because the protests were largely, in those first days, organic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/16/ferguson-michael-brown-unrest-reality-segregated-society>
 and not called by any specific group or set of activists, they were also 
unpredictable. Some of the demonstrators came to demand an immediate indictment 
of the officer. Others wanted officials to explain what had happened that day, 
to tell them who this officer was and why this young man was dead. Scores more 
stood on pavements and street corners unable to articulate their exact demands 
– they just knew they wanted justice. Covering Ferguson directly after the 
killing of Mike Brown involved hours on the streets, with clusters of reporters 
staked out from the early afternoon into the early hours of the morning. At any 
point a resident or a group of them could begin a heated argument with the 
police or a reporter. A demonstration that had for hours consisted of a group 
of local women standing and chanting on a street corner would suddenly evolve 
into a chain of bodies blocking traffic, or an impromptu march to the other 
side of town.

It wasn’t much later that the riot-gear-clad officers entered the McDonald’s, 
suggesting we all leave because, with protests still simmering outside, things 
could get dangerous once the sun went down. Then, when it became clear that we 
were happy to wait and see how things developed outside, they changed their 
tune. Now the officers were demanding we leave. When I didn’t move fast enough, 
they grabbed me.

I was led out of the restaurant to wait for transport to police headquarters, 
with Ryan Reilly of the Huffington Post, who had also been arrested. We were 
driven across town in a police vehicle also containing a local minister, still 
in her clerical collar, who sang hymns for the entire journey.

The officer who arrested us had told us, smirking, that we’d be spending the 
night in the cells, but he was wrong. They locked us in a cell, but about half 
an hour later, we were turned loose. Inundated with phone calls from other 
reporters and media outlets,police chief Thomas Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/mar/11/ferguson-police-chief-thomas-jackson-resign>
 had given orders for us to be released. By the time we were given back our 
belongings – unlaced shoes, notebooks, phones – we’d become momentary media 
celebrities.

I’d arrived in Ferguson thinking I’d be there for just a couple of days. I’d 
write a feature or two, and then I’d go back to DC and get on with writing 
about politics. But it became clear that I wasn’t escapingFerguson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ferguson> any time soon.

More than 150 people were taken into custody by the Ferguson and St Louis 
County police departments in the week-and-a-half that followed Mike Brown’s 
death, the vast majority for “failure to disperse” charges that came as a 
result of acts of peaceful protest. I was the first journalist to end up in 
cuffs while covering the unrest.

Resident after resident had told stories of being profiled, of feeling 
harassed. These protests, they insisted, were not just about Mike Brown. What 
was clear, from the first day, was that residents of Ferguson, and all who had 
travelled there to join them, had no trust in, and virtually no relationship 
with, the police. The police, in turn, seemed to exhibit next to no humanity 
towards the residents they were charged with protecting.

What happened in Ferguson would give birth to a movement and set the nation on 
course for an ongoing public hearing on race that stretched far past the 
killing of unarmed residents – from daily policing toConfederate imagery 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-congress-flags-idUSKCN0XI2JY> to 
respectability politics tocultural appropriation 
<http://www.latimes.com/books/jacketcopy/la-ca-jc-appropriation-culture-20160926-snap-story.html>
. The social justice movement spawned from Mike Brown’s blood would force city 
after city to grapple with its own fraught histories of race and policing. As 
protests propelled by tweets and hashtags spread under the banner of Black 
Lives Matter and with mobile phone and body camera video shining new light on 
the way police interact with minority communities, America was forced to 
consider that not everyone marching in the streets could be wrong. Even if you 
believe Mike Brown’s own questionable choices sealed his fate, didEric Garner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2014/dec/04/i-cant-breathe-eric-garner-chokehold-death-video>
,John Crawford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/24/surveillance-video-walmart-shooting-john-crawford-police>
,Tamir Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/may/12/tamir-rice-police-killing-investigation-cleveland>
,Walter Scott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/12/walter-scott-shooting-officer-michael-slager-audio-recording>
,Freddie Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/apr/20/baltimore-man-died-spine-injury-video>
, andSandra Bland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/21/sandra-bland-dashcam-video-arrest-released>
 all deserve to die?

Ferguson would mark the arrival on the national stage of a new generation of 
black political activists – young leaders whose parents and grandparents had 
been born as recently as the 1970s and 1980s, an era many considered to be 
post-civil rights. Their parents’ parents had been largely focused on winning 
the opportunity to participate in the political process and gaining access to 
the protections promised them as citizens. Their parents focused on using the 
newfound opportunities and safeties provided by the Civil Rights and Voting 
Rights Acts to claim seats at the table, with political and activist strategies 
often focused on registering as many black voters and electing as many black 
leaders to public office as possible. For at least two decades, the days of 
taking the struggle to the streets had seemed, to many politically active black 
Americans, a thing of the past.

The shooting of Mike Brown had happened on a quiet side street, in a spot 
surrounded by four-storey apartment buildings. As the crowds gathered, others 
took to windows and porches, looking down at the chaos developing below. Within 
minutes of the shooting, word spread through the surrounding apartments, and 
beyond, that Brown’s hands were up in the air when he was shot. Darren Wilson 
had encountered Brown and his friend Dorian Johnson while responding to a call 
about two young men, matching their description, who had just been involved in 
the robbery of a nearby off-licence.

People in Ferguson did not know whether Brown was attempting to surrender or 
attempting to attack Wilson when the officer shot him. They did know that the 
police in Ferguson looked nothing like them: an almost all-white force charged 
with serving and protecting a majority black city. They knew all too well about 
the near-constant traffic tickets they were being given, and how often those 
tickets turned into warrants. And they knew that Mike Mike (as the family 
called him), the quiet kid who got his hair cut up the street on West 
Florissant and who was often seen walking around in this neighbourhood, was 
dead.

Mike Brown’s body remained on the hot August ground 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/08/24/us/michael-brown-a-bodys-timeline-4-hours-on-a-ferguson-street.html?_r=0>
 – a gruesome, dehumanising spectacle that further traumatised the residents of 
Canfield Drive and would later be cited by local police officials as among 
their major mistakes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9dd6d936d28c8300e550e0ab82c170b2f83917f%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9dd6d936d28c8300e550e0ab82c170b2f83917f%2F0_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Protesters in Ferguson, Missouri, mark the second anniversary of the shooting 
of Mike Brown. Photograph: JB Forbes/AP 
The Ferguson and St Louis County police had sent scores of officers, some in 
full riot gear and tactical vehicles, to deal with the growing crowds and to 
hold them back as they attempted to investigate the scene of the shooting for 
themselves. All of this is pretty standard for the scene of a police shooting – 
police, protesters, angered residents and families – but the scale of the 
immediate response from both the community and law enforcement signalled that 
Ferguson would be different.

And then, four-and-a-half hours after the shooting, officers finally removed 
Brown’s body from the asphalt. They did not address the crowds who needed 
answers after spending most of their Saturday hearing inflammatory rumours.

As the police began to leave, church groups started walking down Canfield 
Drive, following Brown’s mother, Lezley McSpadden, who was crying hysterically, 
to the spot where his blood stained the ground. When they arrived, the groups 
circled around McSpadden and her husband and began to pray, sing and hug. Some 
were older folks from the church up the road, others were younger residents who 
poured out of the Canfield apartments. What had been a rambunctious crowd had 
composed itself to create a vigil for a violent death.

'We know what it is to bury a child' – the black mothers turning mourning into 
a movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/22/mothers-of-the-movement-trayvon-martin-sandra-bland-eric-garner-amadou-diallo-sean-bell>
But the tranquillity didn’t last. As the prayer group began to break up, the 
residents of Canfield began to yell. Prayer wasn’t going to fix this. Neither 
was singing. The police had to answer for this. Why was Mike Brown dead? Why 
had his body been left out for so long? And when would we get answers? Amid the 
shouting, someone lit a skip on fire. While moments earlier prayers were being 
sent up, now it was the flash of flames floating into the night air.

The following day, the Ferguson police department still hadn’t explained what 
had happened or apologised for keeping Brown’s body out on the ground for so 
long. And church groups were calling for a march in the dead teen’s honour. 
After Sunday services concluded, local pastors and their congregations met at 
the spot where Brown was killed. Hundreds showed up, and started marching and 
chanting what they believed to be Michael Brown’s own words in his final 
moments.

“Hands up, don’t shoot!”

In city after city, I found officers whose actions were at worst criminal and 
at best lacked racial sensitivity

The cries rang into the air as the crowd, including many students set to begin 
school the following week, as well as middle-aged residents of the apartment 
complex, moved forward. As they hit West Florissant and turned left, they were 
met by a wall of police officers. What had begun as a peaceful march became a 
heated standoff, blocking traffic in both directions. The crowd continued 
shouting at the officers, who were shouting back. And as the church groups 
began to leave, young men emerged who seemed angrier and more determined to 
extract revenge for Mike Brown’s death.

That night, armed vandals took advantage of raging protests to break into the 
QuikTrip petrol station 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/ferguson-protesters-staging-ground-the-quiktrip-gas-station-is-now-silent/2014/08/19/a8e4382e-27db-11e4-958c-268a320a60ce_story.html?utm_term=.6b64911412dd>
 just a block away from where Brown was killed, grabbing bags of crisps and 
sodas, cigarettes and lighters, as others ripped the ATM machine from the wall. 
Before long, the store was ablaze.

Photos and videos from the day of Brown’s death had gone viral, but it was the 
destruction of the QuikTrip, not the police shooting of Mike Brown, that 
brought the national media’s focus to Ferguson. Unrest had now become a riot. 
Yet another police shooting in a working-class black neighbourhood, even the 
breaking of a young black body left on public display, didn’t catch the 
attention of the national media. It was the community’s enraged response – 
broken windows and shattered storefronts – that drew the eyes of the nation.

By the time a grand jury concluded on 24 November 2014 that there was not 
enough evidence to charge Ferguson police officer Darren Wilson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2014/nov/24/ferguson-police-darren-wilson-michael-brown-no-charges>
 with a crime in the killing of Mike Brown, I had been in that city for the 
better part of three months. I would spend the next eight months crisscrossing 
the country, visiting city after city to report on and understand the social 
movement that vowed to awaken a sleeping nation and insisted it begin to truly 
value black life. Each day, it seemed, there was another shooting. In city 
after city, I found officers whose actions were at worst criminal and at best 
lacked racial sensitivity, and black and brown bodies disproportionately gunned 
down by those sworn to serve and protect.

Meanwhile, the protests had created a countermovement of scepticism, anger and 
hate, driven by some who genuinely believed that the coverage of Ferguson was 
overblown and amplified by others with more sinister motivations. These legions 
of sceptics insisted that the entire story was a fraud, that Mike Brown had 
deserved his fate, and that tensions in Ferguson were completely stoked by the 
media – based not on historical injustice, but on real-time race-baiting. The 
photos and videos that we had posted from the protests had unnecessarily fanned 
the flames, these critics insisted. And by demanding answers of the Ferguson 
police department, by wanting to know why this young man had died, the critics 
declared, we were now responsible for the social unrest in the streets.

On the afternoon of 22 November 2014, two days before the grand jury’s 
decision not to prosecute the officer who shot Michael Brown, Cleveland police 
officer Timothy Loehmann and his partner, officer Frank Garmback, responded to 
a call about a man with a gun outside a recreation centre. The man who called 
the police told the dispatcher that the person was possibly a child playing 
with a toy, information that was never given to Loehmann and Garmback. The 
officers believed they were responding to an active shooter.

Loehmann and Garmback pulled up in their cruiser next to a park gazebo where 
for the last hour 12-year-oldTamir Rice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/tamir-rice> had been throwing snowballs 
and pretending to fire the toy weapon. Their cruiser slid on the snow-covered 
grass as Loehmann leaped out from the passenger-side door.

Loehmann claimed he yelled for the boy to show his hands, but that instead of 
complying, the boy lifted his shirt and reached into his waistband. Loehmann 
said that when he saw Tamir’s elbow moving upwards and the weapon coming up out 
of his pants, he fired two shots. Video of the shooting showed that less than 
two seconds passed after the officers arrived before one of them shot Tamir 
dead.

Less than two seconds passed after the officers arrived before one of them 
shot Tamir Rice dead

“At its core, Tamir’s death is a tale of stunning systemic police incompetence 
and indifference,”wrote Phillip Morris 
<http://www.cleveland.com/morris/index.ssf/2014/12/tamir_rices_death_is_far_more.html>
, the sole black metro columnist at the Cleveland Plain Dealer. It had been 
revealed that Cleveland police had hired Loehmann, the officer who shot Rice, 
without checking his references or running a serious background check. Had the 
city done that, they would have uncovered job reviews from his former 
supervisor which made it clear he would not recommend that Loehmann, the son of 
a police officer, be given a badge and a gun.

A few weeks later, I flew to Cleveland, and made it just in time to see the 
last of about 200 protesters storm into Cleveland city hall, their signs and 
T-shirts declaring JUSTICE FOR TAMIR as they marched up to the council chambers 
for the body’s final meeting of the year.

That night there was a stinging winter breeze blowing off Lake Erie and 
drifting through a largely empty downtown Cleveland. Typically, this section of 
the city would be quiet at this time of night, just after dinner on a weekday, 
with city employees gone from the public buildings – courthouse, administrative 
offices, city hall – that line these blocks. But on this night, there was a 
strong, steady sound of dissent.

“This is a movement, not a moment,” declared Lorenzo Norris, a local pastor, 
as he led the racially diverse if largely young group of protesters into the 
council chambers. The Cleveland protesters were incensed by a recent federal 
review that had concluded that their police officers regularly exerted 
excessive force during routine interactions and pulled their guns (and their 
triggers) inappropriately.

That investigation had been sparked by another shooting in November 2012, 
during which Cleveland police officers opened fire on a car that had led them 
on a chase, discharging 137 bullets into the vehicle, only to later discover 
that both of those killed had been unarmed. Like their protest brethren in 
Ferguson, the Clevelanders contended that local elected officials hadn’t done 
enough. “We want change,” Norris told me as I caught up with the group. “We 
must have change.”

After the protest, I drove over to see my old friend Colin. We weren’t exactly 
surprised by Tamir Rice’s death. We knew the Cleveland police weren’t known for 
their rigour or calculated decision-making – in fact, in the last decade, the 
Department of Justice had issued not just one but two sets of findings that 
concluded the department routinely violated the civil rights of the city’s 
residents. As young black men from the suburbs riding through the city in cars 
a little too nice to have either of us behind the wheel, we’d had our fair 
share of colourful interactions with Cleveland’s finest.

At some point in high school, my best friends and I all had a running joke 
about “the talk”, which most of them had been given by a father or mother or 
some other relative. The underlying theme of this set of warnings passed down 
from black parents to their children is one of self-awareness: the people you 
encounter, especially the police, are probably willing to break your body, if 
only because they subconsciously view you not only as less than, but also as a 
threat.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88251cbf7b7a22d884a2de888b8b711ae9baf21e%2F0_7_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F88251cbf7b7a22d884a2de888b8b711ae9baf21e%2F0_7_2992_1795%2F2992.jpg>
 Protesters against police shootings march in New York, July 2016. Photograph: 
Press/Sipa/Rex/Shutterstock 
Find almost any high school-age black male and ask him about “the talk”. 
Neither of my parents ever really gave it to me, but I heard “the talk” 
secondhand from the mothers of a few friends. Besides, when you grow up in a 
mixed-race home – my mother is white, my father black – no one has to tell you 
that one half of your family looks different than the other and that you need 
to pay attention. Close attention.

Say “yes sir” or “yes ma’am” to any officer you encounter. If you get pulled 
over, keep your hands on the wheel. As we drove around in Colin’s car listening 
to Cleveland rap, we’d keep our wallets in the centre console. That way, we 
wouldn’t have to reach into our pockets. Above all, we knew to never, ever run 
in the presence of a police officer. That’s just asking for trouble.

While “the movement” was born in Ferguson in the summer of 2014, it had been 
conceived in the hearts and minds of young black Americans at different points 
in the preceding years. One of these moments came in July 2013 with the Florida 
jury’s decision to find George Zimmerman, the neighbourhood watchman who shot 
and killedTrayvon Martin <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trayvon-martin>, 
not guilty.

That year was a major awakening point not just for me but also for other young 
black men and women across the country. Each story of a police shooting 
solidified the undeniable feeling in our hearts that their deaths and those of 
other young black men were not isolated. Peaceful black America was awakened by 
the Zimmerman verdict, which reminded them anew that their lives and their 
bodies could be abused and destroyed without consequence. Trayvon’s death 
epitomised the truth that the system black Americans had been told to trust was 
never structured to deliver justice to them. The “not guilty” verdict prompted 
the creation of a round of boisterous and determined protest groups, initially 
Florida-based, although they would eventually expand nationally.

Across the country, at a time when Twitter had yet to become the primary 
platform for news consumption, a 31-year-old activist in Oakland named Alicia 
Garza penned a Facebook status that soon went viral. She called the status “a 
love letter to black people”.

“The sad part is, there’s a section of America who is cheering and celebrating 
right now. and that makes me sick to my stomach. We GOTTA get it together 
y’all,” she wrote, “stop saying we are not surprised. that’s a damn shame in 
itself. I continue to be surprised at how little Black lives matter. And I will 
continue that. stop giving up on black life.
“Black people. I love you. I love us. Our lives matter,” she concluded. 

Her friend and fellow activist Patrisse Cullors found poetry in the post, 
extracting the phrase “black lives matter” and reposting the status. Soon the 
two women reached out to a third activist, Opal Tometi, who set up Tumblr and 
Twitter accounts under the slogan.

“Black Lives Matter is an ideological and political intervention in a world 
where Black lives are systematically and intentionally targeted for demise,” 
Garza wrote in the group’sofficial history of its founding 
<http://blacklivesmatter.com/guiding-principles/>. “It is an affirmation of 
Black folks’ contributions to this society, our humanity, and our resilience in 
the face of deadly oppression.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caccfd5867aa75e474d0ba16e30764d9528faa1%2F0_574_2457_3070%2F2457.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1caccfd5867aa75e474d0ba16e30764d9528faa1%2F0_574_2457_3070%2F2457.jpg>
 Activist Alicia Garza, one of the founders of Black Lives Matter. Photograph: 
Kristin Little Photography 
While the phrase is now the name of an organisation and is often used to 
describe the broader protest and social justice movement, Black Lives Matter is 
best thought of as an ideology. Its tenets have matured and expanded over time, 
and not all of its adherents subscribe to them in exactly the same manner – 
much the way an Episcopalian and a Baptist, or a religious conservative and a 
deficit hawk, could both be described as a Christian or a conservative, yet 
still hold disagreements over policy, tactics and lifestyle. For the young 
black men and women entering the adult world during the Obama presidency, the 
ideology of Black Lives Matter, not yet an organisation nor a movement, carried 
substance, even heft. It was a message that resonated with the young black men 
and women who had been so outraged and pained by the Zimmerman verdict. And the 
decision by Tometi to focus on Twitter and Tumblr, then second-tier social 
media outlets, instead of Facebook, proved a stroke of strategic genius.

Both networks allow for more organic, democratic growth. Unlike Facebook, in 
which virality is determined by algorithms, visibility on Twitter and Tumblr is 
determined directly by how compelling a given message, post, or dispatch is. A 
phrase like #blacklivesmatter, or #ferguson, or, later on, #BaltimoreUprising, 
can in a matter of moments transform from a singular sentence typed on an 
individual user’s iPhone into an internationally trending topic. 
#blacklivesmatter didn’t catch on immediately, but its time would soon come.

As writer and historian Jelani Cobb wrote in the New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2016/03/14/where-is-black-lives-matter-headed>
, in what remains one of the definitive profiles of the creation of the 
organisation: “Black Lives Matter didn’t reach a wider public until the 
following summer, when a police officer named Darren Wilson shot and killed 
18-year-old Michael Brown in Ferguson. Darnell Moore, a writer and an activist 
based in Brooklyn, who knew Patrice Cullors, coordinated ‘freedom rides’ to 
Missouri from New York, Chicago, Portland, Los Angeles, Philadelphia, and 
Boston. Within a few weeks of Brown’s death, hundreds of people who had never 
participated in organised protests took to the streets, and that campaign 
eventually exposed Ferguson as a case study of structural racism in America and 
a metaphor for all that had gone wrong since the end of the civil-rights 
movement.”

As of March 2016, the 10th anniversary of Twitter, the hashtag 
#blacklivesmatter had been used more than 12m times – the third most of any 
hashtag related to a social cause. At the top of the list, however, sits 
#ferguson, the most-used hashtag promoting a social cause in the history of 
Twitter, tweeted more than 27m times.

The Movement for Black Lives – as activists had begun calling the protest 
movement – and the national push for police reform, had faded from the national 
consciousness during the first months of 2016. There were bursts of attention, 
but in each instance Americans’ focus on race and justice landed like another 
strong wave, only to recede right back into the ocean. Six months into 2016, my 
colleagues and I were working on an analysis of the number of Americans killed 
to date, and had discovered that even after more than a year of protests and 
outrage, police nationwide were on track to take more lives in 2016 than they 
had in 2015. Yet none of the men and women killed by police in 2016 had 
received the same level of attention from the media or had galvanised activists 
as much as those killed just months earlier.

For racial justice activists, the presidential election was an opportunity to 
pressure candidates to adopt positions on policing and criminal justice reform, 
as well as to speak out on other issues of racial disparity.

“People know that the police are still killing people. What we’ve got to 
figure out now is what a victory looks like,” Kayla Reed, the Ferguson 
protester still working for the Organization for Black Struggle in St Louis, 
told me in early 2016. “There isn’t going to be a single bill passed that will 
suddenly encompass all of the ways the system marginalises black and brown 
people. We have to redo the whole damn thing.”

Many of the young activists who had been driven into the street by the police 
killings of 2014 and 2015 had begun to move away from daily protesting and 
organising work. Robust conversations circulated about viral videos of the 
deaths of individuals and the fetishising of black death. Perhaps, some argued, 
not every video needed to be shared and played on a constant loop.

In early July 2016, two killings reawakened the movement. Videos circulated on 
social media of the police shootings of two young men,Alton Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/alton-sterling-death-ive-been-sick-ever-since-they-murdered-him>
 andPhilando Castile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/07/facebook-live-video-appears-to-show-black-man-shot-police-minnesota-philando-castile>
. Among the cities that hosted major protests was Dallas, where the police had 
gone to great pains to support the protesters, cordoning off areas for 
demonstrators and posing for photos next to signs calling for reforms and 
justice. It was here that a single gunman attacked white officers in what he 
later told police negotiators was a targeted retribution for the police 
killings of black men.

As the list of names grew, so did the urgency of the uprising that would 
become a movement

A week later, another lone wolf attacked officers in Baton Rouge, killing 
three. The deaths and injury of the officers in these two cities again shook 
the nation, underscoring with renewed urgency the depth of the anger and 
distrust towards police still coursing through America.

The attacks on police officers enraged the law enforcement community. In a 
country with millions of easily accessible guns and an increasing national 
distrust of institutions – specifically the police – it wasn’t hard to imagine 
the ease with which someone determined to harm officers could carry out such an 
attack. “With the number of police shootings that have occurred that seem to be 
totally unjustified, somewhere in this country, someone was going to do such a 
thing,” John Creuzot, a former prosecutor and judge in Dallas, told me after 
the shooting.

After the Dallas attack, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> convened a 33-person 
conference at the White House, a conversation that ran for four-and-a-half 
hours – among the longest single-subject conferences of his presidency. The 
attendees were a mix – young activists such as DeRay Mckesson, civil rights 
stalwarts such as Al Sharpton, police chiefs and heads of several major police 
unions, and government officials including the attorney general, Loretta Lynch.

As he facilitated the conversation, Obama often glanced to his left, at 
Brittany Packnett, a 31-year-old Ferguson protester and co-founder of Campaign 
Zero – a policy-oriented activist arm that pledged to put forth recommendations 
for how “we can live in a world where the police don’t kill people”. This was 
at least the third time Packnett had met Obama, who after one meeting had been 
so struck by her command of the room that he pulled her aside to encourage her 
to one day run for office. She had applied for and was accepted to a spot on 
the Ferguson Commission, the taskforce convened by Missouri governor Jay Nixon 
after the unrest in 2014. Next, Obama invited Packnett to join his president’s 
taskforce on 21st-century policing.

I asked what had brought her from the barricades into the policy making rooms 
– by now, Packnett had joined street protests in more than half a dozen cities.

“Everyone has a role,” Packnett said. “There are some people who need to be 
the revolutionary, and there are some people who need to be at the table in the 
White House. And I knew it was my job to translate the pain I had seen and 
experienced in the streets and bring it into these halls of power.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e94308e8dfb68e7e72cd686295bff3342224590%2F0_22_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Black%20Lives%20Matter%3A%20birth%20of%20a%20movement%20%7C%20Wesley%20Lowery&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fblack-lives-matter-birth-of-a-movement%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e94308e8dfb68e7e72cd686295bff3342224590%2F0_22_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A protest on West Florissant Avenue in Ferguson, Missouri. Photograph: Michael 
B Thomas/AFP/Getty Images 
Packnett explains the protest movement as a series of escalating waves. Its 
conception came from the deaths ofOscar Grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/21/fruitvale-station-oscar-grant-trial-settlement>
, Trayvon Martin and Jordan Davis, which mobilised black Americans in a demand 
for justice. Its grand birth, first in Ferguson and then throughout the nation 
in the autumn of 2014, was prompted by the deaths of Eric Garner, John Crawford 
and Michael Brown, the cases that showed justice for those killed by the police 
was not forthcoming. As the list of names grew, so did the urgency of the 
uprising that would become a movement. 2015 brought a third wave of anger and 
pain: Walter Scott, Freddie Gray, Sandra Bland, Samuel DuBose – another round 
of death in which the pleas for police accountability became demands. As Obama 
prepares to leave the White House, it remains to be seen whether the movement 
birthed by the broken promise of his presidency will live on through the season 
of his successor.

“The protests will continue,” Packnett said confidently when I called her from 
Cleveland on the first night of the Republican national convention in July. 
“We’re going to work to continue this level of engagement with the next 
administration; there’s just too much at stake.” While the targeted killings of 
the officers in Dallas and Baton Rouge prompted some commentators to declare 
the movement dead, the activists have not gone quietly.

A few days later came the non-fatal shooting in North Miami of behavioural 
therapist Charles Kinsey. Kinsey was lying on the ground with his hands in the 
air, begging not to be shot as he tried to soothe his autistic patient, when an 
officer fired his gun three times. “I was thinking as long as I have my hands 
up ... they’re not going to shoot me,” Kinsey told a local television station 
from his hospital bed. “Wow, was I wrong.”

In the days after the deaths of Alton Sterling and Philando Castile, thousands 
of people used an online tool provided by Campaign Zero to petition their local 
elected officials to demand police reform. In mid-July, as the political media 
gathered in Cleveland for the GOP convention, thousands of demonstrators took 
to the streets in more than 30 cities.

“We have no choice but to keep going,” Packnett told me. “If one of the 
central demands of the movement is to stop killing us, and they’re still 
killing us, then we don’t get to stop, either.”

• They Can’t Kill Us All 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/they-can-t-kill-us-all.html?utm_source=editoriallink&utm_medium=merch&utm_campaign=article>
 by Wesley Lowery (Penguin, £9.99). To order a copy for £8.49, go to 
bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/@gdnlongread>, or sign up to the long read weekly email 
here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 