
Perhaps it’s just spin. Maybe Tony Blair’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/tony-blair-to-close-commercial-enterprises-to-focus-on-charity-work>
 that he is winding up his extravagantly lucrative business interests, so that 
he can concentrate on his charitable work, is just another bit of smooth news 
management from the master of the art.

Tony Blair to close commercial enterprises to focus on charity work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/tony-blair-to-close-commercial-enterprises-to-focus-on-charity-work>
There will certainly be no shortage of sceptics who will presume the worst, 
with the former prime minister’s statement offering plenty to feed their 
cynicism. He said that he will “retain a small number of personal consultancies 
for my income”, which means he could still be working for assorted human 
rights-abusing regimes and climate-destroying corporations – except now he’ll 
be doing it just 20% of the time. (His announcement promises that 80% of his 
work will be pro bono.)

Why is he doing it? He says it’s because he wants to take his activities “to 
the next level”. That might mean he feels he’s made enough hard cash and now 
wants, as he says, to focus on philanthropy. Or it could be an exercise in 
reputation management.

For Blair will know that two things have made his name toxic, in his home 
country at least. The first, and the one that will haunt him for ever, is the
Iraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> war. Blair has become the face of 
that catastrophe, to the point where the prime author of the 2003 invasion, 
George W Bush, is too often forgotten. At the time, Blair was lambasted for 
following Bush too slavishly, for being his lapdog. These days, in the national 
imagination, it’s as if those roles were reversed: it was Blair’s war, with 
Bush reduced to a secondary role.

But the other stain on him is the one that has spread since he left office in 
2007. It has come from the phenomenal sums he has made, circling the globe in 
private jets, advising authoritarian regimes or picking uptelephone-number 
speaking fees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/nov/08/china.tonyblair> 
in Kazakhstan, the Gulf and Asia. In Julythe Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/09/tony-blair-wanted--35m-to-build-uaes-brand-and-influence/>
 reported that Blair had offered to build the United Arab Emirates’ brand and 
influence – for the tidy sum of $35m over five years. All this has made him 
look both greedy and unprincipled, a mercenary to the ugliest elements of the 
global ruling class. It was a horror show, too easily dubbed the Blair Rich 
Project.

There is not much he can do about the first stain on his name. Britons have 
come to a settled view of his role in Iraq. You could see that whenthe Chilcot 
report was published 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/blairs-iraq-war-legacy-is-now-damned-for-all-time>
in July. Immediately after Chilcot presented his findings,Blair gave yet 
another long, impassioned defence of his role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
. But it made barely a dent. On Iraq, people have stopped listening.

Nor, perhaps, can he erase his image as a man willing to sell himself to the 
highest bidder. But he can at least stop making it worse. By heavily reducing 
his paid workload, he can stem the flow of stories in the papers that have, 
over a decade, linked him to some of the world’s most suspect regimes.

Whether that saves his reputation, allowing him to be heard as he makes 
contributions to the national conversation – andhis recent interventions on 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/01/our-nation-is-in-peril-tony-blair-urges-calm-in-brexit-talks>
and the like suggest he does indeed want to have a voice – is an open question. 
It may be too late.

But where it could have an impact is on the party he once led. Every day Blair 
does not add to the charge sheet against himself allowsLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> to look back at the Blair project 
– to separate Blair the man from Blair’s record and, within that, to separate 
what worked well from what went wrong.

Tony Blair sounded stricken – but his self-belief was unshaken | Anne Perkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/tony-blair-stricken-self-belief-unshaken-confidence-war>
For too long, the combination of Iraq and his post-prime ministership has 
blinded Labourites, preventing them from seeing thefull picture of the Blair 
years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/08/tony-blair-labour-pride-war-criminal-iraq>
. They can see the disasters clearly enough, but they miss not only the three 
consecutive election victories but also much of New Labour’s record in office. 
It means that too often Labour’s own supporters collude with the Tories in 
depicting the party’s years in government as a disaster demanding atonement, 
forgetting, say, the minimum wage, the pensioners lifted out of poverty, the 
civil partnerships, the Sure Start centres, devolution, the Good Friday 
agreement, the windfall tax, the rebuilding of broken schools and rundown 
hospitals.

I’ve written before that Labour needs to get over its Tony Blair problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/may/22/labour-party-tony-blair-problem-election>
 if it is ever to regain power, by which I mean learning to separate what was 
wrong about the Blair years, including what was morally wrong, from what was 
right. It means reminding voters of the concrete achievements but also 
recalling the insights that enabled Labour to win and keep winning. That need 
is all the greater now, when “Blairite” has become a sharper insult in the 
Labour lexicon even than “Tory”.

Blair’s latest decision won’t rescue his reputation, and certainly not 
overnight. But if it gets Labour even a small step closer to seeing Blairism 
through a lens less fogged by rage, then it has to be welcome.
 