
I have no tribe. I have no comfort blanket, no default button that enables me 
to join the prevailing hysteria and cry in unison, “Of course, it’s all the 
fault of X.” Meanwhile we everywhere see the familiar landscape clouding over. 
There are new partings of the ways, disoriented soldiers wandering the 
battlefield, licking wounds. The liberal centre cannot hold. It cries with 
Yeats, “What rough beast, its hour come round at last 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43290>, / 
Slouches towards Bethlehem to be born?”

I confess I find all this somehow exhilarating. Cliches of left and right have 
lost all meaning, and institutions their certainty. Even in France and Italy, 
European union is falling from grace. A rightwing US president wins an election 
by appealing to the left. In Britain, Ukip can plausiblyclaim to be supplanting 
Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-elected-as-ukip-leader>
. A Tory prime minister attacks capitalism, while Labour supports Trident. 
Small wonder Castro gave up and died.

Conventional wisdom holds that it is the “centre left” that has lost the plot. 
The howls that greeted Brexit, Donald Trump and Europe’s new right are those of 
liberals tossed from the moral high ground they thought they owned. Worse, 
their evictors were not the familiar bogeys of wealth and privilege, but an 
oppressed underclass that had the effrontery to refer to a “liberal 
establishment elite”.

Paul Krugman, field-marshal of an American left, stood last week on his 
battered tank, the New York Times, and wailed of Trump’s voters: “I don’t fully 
understand this resentment.” Why don’t the poor blame the conservatives? He had 
to assume the answer lay in the new Great Explanation,the politics of “identity 
liberalism” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/opinion/the-populism-perplex.html?_r=0>. He 
is right. It is 20 years since the philosopher Richard Rorty predicted that a
Trump-like “strong man” 
<https://uspoliticsinfo.com/2016/11/21/rise-of-trump-a-20-year-old-prophecy-is-coming-true/>
 would emerge to express how “badly educated Americans feel about having their 
manners dictated to them by college graduates”.

This prediction has now gone viral 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/21/books/richard-rortys-1998-book-suggested-election-2016-was-coming.html?smid=tw-nytimesarts&smtyp=cur&_r=1>
. Likewise, the historian Arthur Schlesinger warned that a rising campus 
intolerance, of “offence crimes” and “political correctness”, would endanger 
America’s national glue, its collective liberal consciousness.

The latest guru on the “what Trump means” circuit is the US political 
psychologist Jonathan Haidt.Conversing with Nick Clegg at an Intelligence 
Squared event in London last week, 
<http://www.intelligencesquared.com/events/the-rise-of-populism-and-the-backlash-against-the-elites-jonathan-haidt-nick-clegg/>
 he was asked over and again the Krugman question: “Why did poor people vote 
rightwing?” The answer was simple. There is no longer a “right wing”, or a 
left. There are nations and there are tribes within nations, both growing ever 
more assertive.

To Haidt, Trump’s appeal is to groups alienated by competing groups. Identity 
liberalism elevated the “sacred victim”, uncriticisable ethnic minorities, 
women, gay people and migrants, to whom Hillary Clinton explicitly deferred in 
every speech. Thus to favour one group is to exclude another, in this case the 
so-called “left-behinders”, identified as the “pale, stale, male – and failed”.

In America, as in Europe, older, white men are the only group that liberals 
can abuse and exclude with impunity. It is a group clearly dominant in small 
towns and rust belts, gazing out at far-off cities, globalised, digitised, 
college-educated and “correctly” liberal. The poorest place in America with a 
non-Hispanic white majority, Clay County in Kentucky, voted 87% for Trump. For 
Clinton’s liberals, ignoring these people was a category error, one that could 
change the course of western politics.

Last week, the US academic Mark Lilla joined the why-Trump? circuit with an 
analysis of identity liberalism as “a kind of moral panic about racial, gender 
and sexual identity”. It granted selective rights and privileges, but 
never duties. “Expressive, not persuasive … it distorted liberalism’s message 
and prevented it from becoming a unifying force.”

Lilla is scathing of the “whitelash” excuse, which licenses liberals to abuse 
those voting for Trump and Brexit as racists, and political correctness as yet 
another rightwing conspiracy. To him, these voters are poor people who fear for 
the integrity of their communities and see globalism as a mis-selling scam. 
They may be wrong, but they’re not evil.

Political correctness: how the right invented a phantom enemy | Moira Weigel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/political-correctness-how-the-right-invented-phantom-enemy-donald-trump>
Across the Atlantic, this onset of electoral realpolitik has created a 
discourse. Trump may indeed be a nightmare, but what shall we do about it? In 
Britain, liberalism shows no such intellectual robustness, rather a denial 
clothed in hysteria. The attempt by the remain tribe to undo June’s Brexit vote 
is ludicrous, a sign not of bad losers but of stupid ones. They should fight 
for soft-Brexit, not no-Brexit.

For myself, I cheer as people protest that it no longer “means” anything to be 
left or right, liberal or conservative. If the left is so lacking in confidence 
it needs to launder itself as “progressive”, that is fine by me. But I just 
want to kick over the tables, rip up the rule books, get on with the debate. I 
want to re-enact the glorious revolution of 1832.

As for the future, commentators such as Haidt and Lilla seek a “post-identity” 
liberalism, built round a restoration of the nation state as repository of 
agreed values. This may mean accepting such majority concerns as the pace of 
immigration. It is one thing to ask a small community to take in two Syrian 
families, but impose 200 and liberalism will have an eternally uphill struggle.

There is always a balance to be struck in any community, between its right to 
order its own identity and a wider obligation to welcome strangers, 
particularly refugees. EvenPoland’s Europhile Donald Tusk admitted this year  
<http://www.the-american-interest.com/2016/07/10/when-and-why-nationalism-beats-globalism/>
that the EU had been wrong to pursue an unqualified belief in “a utopia of a 
Europe without nation states”.

British liberals, of whatever party, have spent the past six months fleeing 
one trauma after another, hurling insults over their shoulders. But as John 
Stuart Mill said: “He who knows only his own side of a case, knows little of 
that.”

The apostles of identity liberalism have fallen into Mill’s trap. They see 
authoritarianism in others, but not in themselves. They see discrimination in 
others, but not their own. In guarding their chosen tribes, they fail 
democracy’s ultimate test, of tolerance for the concerns of those with whom 
they disagree. Someone else is always to blame.

Such tunnel vision has jeopardised the progress made by the cause of European 
liberalism over the past half-century. It has been given a bloody nose, and 
there are more on the way.

Disaffected rust belt voters embraced Trump. They had no other hope | Richard 
C Longworth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/disaffected-rust-belt-voters-embraced-donald-trump-midwestern-obama> 