
There are some things you might have expected to learn from the hacking of the 
Clinton campaign and Democratic party emails – party strategies, for example, 
and political indiscretions. And there are some things you probably wouldn’t 
have expected to discover – such as the fact that one of America’s most 
successful pop-punk singers had emailed the chairman of Clinton’s campaign 
about their mutual interest inUFOs <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ufos>.

Hillary Clinton's UFO investigation plans unlikely to achieve liftoff, experts 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/15/hillary-clinton-ufo-investigation>
The latest batch of emails posted by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> reveal that former Blink-182 
frontman Tom DeLonge had been emailing John Podesta, the chair of the campaign, 
about their mutual interest in life beyond this planet and UFOs. Podesta – a 
former chief of staff for former president Bill Clinton and counsellor to 
Barack Obama – has long been public about his belief the government should 
declassify information it holds about extraterrestrial life.

In 2015, DeLonge wrote to Podesta 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/2125> saying he wanted to 
introduce him to two “very ‘important’ people” to discuss their shared 
interest. “I think you will find them very interesting, as they were principal 
leadership relating to our sensitive topic,” he wrote. “Both were in charge of 
most fragile divisions, as it relates to classified science and DOD [Department 
of Defence] topics. In other words, these are A-Level officials. Worth our 
time, and as well the investment to bring all the way out to you.”

WikiLeaks releases what appear to be Clinton's paid Wall Street speeches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
In another email <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/3099>, sent 
this year, he tells Podesta he has been in touch with a former official 
involved in the Roswell incident – in which, it is claimed, the US government 
covered up the its recovery of an alien ship in New Mexico in 1947. The 
government said it was a weather balloon. DeLonge said he had been in 
discussions with Maj Gen William McCasland, who hada long career in the US air 
force 
<http://www.af.mil/AboutUs/Biographies/Display/tabid/225/Article/104776/major-general-william-n-mccasland.aspx>
, specialising in matters pertaining to space. “He mentioned he’s a ‘skeptic’, 
he’s not … He just has to say that out loud, but he is very, very aware – as he 
was in charge of all of the stuff,” DeLonge wrote. “When Roswell crashed, they 
shipped it to the laboratory at Wright Patterson air force base. Gen McCasland 
was in charge of that exact laboratory up to a couple years ago.”

It is unclear whether Podesto replied to the emails. However, his inbox 
contained oneacceptance of an invitation to an event 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/2635> called “DeLonge/Podesta 
meeting”. The acceptance came from from Susan McCasland Wilkerson, who appears 
to be aformer astronaut candidate 
<http://www.spacefacts.de/bios/candidates/nasa9/english/wilkerson_susan.htm>. 
It is unclear whether she is related to William McCasland.
 