
A bluefin tuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/05/sushi-boss-nets-bluefin-tuna-25k-tokyo-tsukiji-fish-market>
 has fetched 74.2m yen (£517,000) at the first auction of the year at Tsukiji 
market in Tokyo, amid warnings that decades of overfishing byJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> and other countries is taking the 
species to the brink of extinction.

The 212kg fish, caught off the coast of Oma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/nov/18/fishing-japan-conservation-tuna>
 in northern Japan, was bought by Kiyomura, the operator of the Sushi Zanmai 
restaurant chain, after its president, Kiyoshi Kimura, outbid rivals for the 
sixth year in a row.

Trouble at Tsukiji: world's biggest fish market caught in controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/trouble-at-tsukiji-worlds-biggest-fish-market-caught-in-controversy>
The first auction of the year at Tsukiji always attracts high bids from 
restaurants hoping to turn the publicity associated with the event into a 
marketing opportunity. Kimura’s bid, which works out at350,000 yen per kilogram 
<https://twitter.com/nikkan_toyosu/status/816759916094373888>, is the second 
highest since the market started keeping records in 1999. The 155.4m yen Kimura 
paid for a bluefin in 2013 is the highest bid ever recorded.

At the price he paid on Thursday, a single piece of fatty tuna sushi would 
cost about 25 times the 400 yen his dozens of restaurants usually charge for 
the same cut.

Kimura, whose bids have earned him the nickname “tuna king”, said the fish was 
“a bit expensive, but I am happy that I was able to successfully win at auction 
a tuna of good shape and size”.

Kimura added he was looking forward to serving it at his restaurants. “I want 
everyone to taste this delicious tuna,” he said as he posed with his prize 
bluefin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F869a3aa876e6096f9f1d2a5d02e4c53717d49a00%2F0_227_4589_2755%2F4589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluefin%20tuna%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3500%2C000%20at%20Japan%20auction%20amid%20overfishing%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluefin%20tuna%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3500%2C000%20at%20Japan%20auction%20amid%20overfishing%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F869a3aa876e6096f9f1d2a5d02e4c53717d49a00%2F0_227_4589_2755%2F4589.jpg>
 A tuna displayed at Tsukiji wholesale fish market on Thursday during the first 
auction of 2017. Photograph: Aflo / Barcroft Images 
Conservationists <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> said 
the publicity surrounding the auction risked overshadowing the plight of the
Pacific bluefin tuna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2008/nov/18/japan-fishing?picture=339760441>
. They have called for a two-year moratorium on fishing to rescue the Pacific 
bluefin population, which is estimated to have plummeted by 97% from its 
historic high due to decades of overfishing.

“People should be thinking about that when they see news about the auction,” 
Jamie Gibbon, officer for global tuna conservation at thePew Charitable Trusts 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/analysis/2016/12/27/annual-pacific-bluefin-tuna-auction-continues-despite-species-dire-status>
, told the Guardian.

Last month, 25 tuna-fishing nations plus the European Union agreed on the need 
for an urgent bluefin tuna recovery plan, butJapan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> is expected to resist drastic cuts in 
catch quotas or a moratorium to give stocks the opportunity to recover.

About 70% of Pacific bluefin are less than a year old when caught, according 
to Gibbon, and 95% are caught before they reach three years old – a practice 
that damages the species’ ability to reproduce.

The Western and Central Pacific Fisheries Commission tightened international 
limits in 2015 as the species remained under threat, halving the catch of 
bluefin tuna under 30 kilograms from the average caught between 2002 and 2004.

“If fishing continues at its current rate, then Pacific bluefin stocks will 
fall to levels that are commercially unsustainable, but Japanese officials 
continue to say that catch reductions will place too big a burden on 
fishermen,” Gibbon said. “Short-term profits are being put ahead of long-term 
conservation.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F844c5a6d0744531fa6bb42a1514787edadefb35e%2F0_152_4589_2755%2F4589.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bluefin%20tuna%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3500%2C000%20at%20Japan%20auction%20amid%20overfishing%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bluefin%20tuna%20sells%20for%20%C2%A3500%2C000%20at%20Japan%20auction%20amid%20overfishing%20concerns&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fbluefin-tuna-sells-for-500000-at-japan-auction-amid-overfishing-concerns%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F844c5a6d0744531fa6bb42a1514787edadefb35e%2F0_152_4589_2755%2F4589.jpg>
 Buyers inspect frozen tuna at Tsukiji wholesale fish market on Thursday. 
Photograph: Aflo / Barcroft Images 
About 80% of the global bluefin catch is consumed in Japan, where it is 
commonly served raw as sashimi and sushi. A piece ofotoro – a fatty cut from 
the fish’s underbelly – can cost several thousand yen at high-end restaurants 
in Tokyo.

The global popularity of Japanese food is fueling an appetite for bluefin in 
other countries, including China.

Thursday’s auction could be the last at Tsukiji 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/trouble-at-tsukiji-worlds-biggest-fish-market-caught-in-controversy>
, whose planned relocation to more spacious premises at the end of last year 
has been delayed by at least 12 month, and could be scrapped altogether. 
Tokyo’s governor,Yuriko Koike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/31/tokyo-elects-first-female-governor>
, delayed the move due to concerns over soil and air pollution at the new 
market, which stands on the former site of a gas plant.
 