
While bargain hunters across the country stand in queues and brace for 
crashing websites on Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/11/amazon-to-spread-black-friday-sales-over-two-weeks>
, independent bookstores are preparing for something a little milder. Pitched 
as the antidote to Black Friday, bookshops are preparing for Civilised 
Saturday, which returns on 26 November. Featuring in-store events and book 
signings, it follows asuccessful inaugural year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/20/bookshops-launch-civilised-saturday-as-antidote-to-black-friday>
 in which thousands of bibliophiles flocked to their local bookshop to support 
independent businesses.

The initiative is the brainchild of Books Are My Bag 
<http://www.booksaremybag.com/> (Bamb), a campaign launched by the Booksellers’ 
Association to celebrate bookshops. “The Bamb campaign is all about the 
relationship between books, bookshops and book-lovers – so it’s the opposite of 
discount frenzy,” says Alan Staton from Books Are My Bag.

“Civilised Saturday isn’t an alternative for Black Friday; it’s for people who 
would relish a restful, relaxing and different shopping experience on the 
Saturday – something that bookshops offer all year round, but which they really 
celebrate on Civilised Saturday,” says Staton. “We know that booksellers had 
really good [sales] days with the first Civilised Saturday last year.”

Bookshops launch Civilised Saturday as antidote to Black Friday
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/20/bookshops-launch-civilised-saturday-as-antidote-to-black-friday>
Alastair Lynn from Cambridge University Press Bookshops 
<http://www.cambridge.org/about-us/visit-bookshop> says the day “celebrates 
everything that bookshops do so well – a welcoming environment; knowledgeable 
staff; and a step back from the shopping frenzy that takes hold each Christmas”.

In this way, Civilised Saturday differs from Cyber Monday and other shopping 
days. It doesn’t claim to offer any special offers for customers, rather it is 
an appeal to a growing consumer base frustrated by Black Friday to revisit 
their bookstores.

Last year, Sheffield-based bookstore La Biblioteka 
<http://www.labiblioteka.co/> tried to participate in Black Friday. “It didn’t 
quite have the impact we hoped for,” says Alex Maxwell. “But I think small 
brands of all kinds can’t really compete with the sales culture of Black Friday 
and Cyber Monday – focusing on quality is all we can do.”

Meanwhile Sasha Drennan from Lindum Books 
<http://www.shoplincoln.co.uk/lindum-books>, a small independent bookshop in 
Lincoln, says it has never participated in Black Friday. “In fact, we don’t 
discount our stock at all, as we just can’t afford to do so.” However, the shop 
does participate in Civilised Saturday, “because we and our customers believe 
that there is more to buying than pure consumerism, and that there is value to 
be had in more than just the purchase price.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbookstores-shun-black-friday-civilised-saturday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0e0a0c2db18c643198a1294c2eaf842c1d4c70d%2F0_216_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bookstores%20shun%20Black%20Friday%20and%20embrace%20Civilised%20Saturday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbookstores-shun-black-friday-civilised-saturday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bookstores%20shun%20Black%20Friday%20and%20embrace%20Civilised%20Saturday&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fbookstores-shun-black-friday-civilised-saturday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0e0a0c2db18c643198a1294c2eaf842c1d4c70d%2F0_216_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Wenlock Books will have ahygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/18/hygge-a-soothing-balm-for-the-traumas-of-2016>
 theme with cake and warm blankets. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
In Shropshire, Wenlock Books <http://www.wenlockbooks.co.uk/> will be hosting a
hygge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/18/hygge-a-soothing-balm-for-the-traumas-of-2016>
-themed Civilised Saturday complete with cake and warm blankets, while in 
Herefordshire, Mary Berry will be signing copies of her new book, Mary Berry’s 
Family Sunday Lunches atthe Chorleywood Bookshop 
<http://chilternbookshops.co.uk/home/chorleywood-bookshop>. At Dulwich Books 
<http://dulwichbooks.co.uk/> in south London, children can hunt for their 
favourite book characters, while adults atMr B’s Emporium of Reading Delights 
<https://www.mrbsemporium.com/> in Bath can hunt for pressed flowers hidden in 
the pages of the books.


To many bookstore owners, Black Friday simply is a trend that is on the way 
out of favour. “Having seen the images of Black Friday from previous years, we 
wouldn’t chose to sell books that way, no matter the increase in sales,” says 
John Junk, director of Belfast Books.

“We’re a genteel people, preferring Homer to Homer Simpson,” Junk adds. “To 
show that independent booksellers are alive and can compete with the big boys, 
we’ve had labels printed and use the hashtag 
#cheaperthanthatsouthamericanriver.”

“Anecdotally I can tell you that fewer businesses local to us have said they 
are engaging in Black Friday this year,” says Lynn, “and while I doubt that 
Civilised Saturday will create many more regulars, hopefully it will remind 
people what’s good about bookshops.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 