
Rarely since the time of George Canning 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/George_Canning> in the 1820s has a British 
foreign secretary faced such potentially conflicted relations with an incoming 
US administration. And rarely has Britain’s foreign secretary, a post now 
occupied by Boris Johnson, been arguably so ill-equipped to deal with resulting 
tensions.

Like Johnson, Canning was a Eurosceptic. He was critical of the so-called 
“Concert of Europe” dominated by conservative regimes in Prussia, Austria,Russia
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and post-Napoleonic France. Canning 
famously declared that by opposing European colonialism in Latin America, “I 
called the New World into existence to redress the balance of the Old.”

Boris Johnson flies to New York for talks with Donald Trump's team
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/boris-johnson-flies-to-new-york-for-talks-with-donald-trumps-team>
But Canning’s stance was severely tested by the emerging power of the United 
States, symbolised by the 1823 Monroe Doctrine, promulgated on his watch. Not 
wholly unlike Donald Trump, President James Monroedeclared the US would go its 
own way <http://www.history.com/topics/monroe-doctrine>, and told Britain and 
the other great powers to keep out of its business and its hemisphere.

Johnson’s talks with senior Trump aides on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/boris-johnson-flies-to-new-york-for-talks-with-donald-trumps-team>
, and his meetings on Monday with Republican leaders in Congress, are likely to 
have illuminated starkly different approaches to major issues that even a more 
experienced minister would struggle to overcome. Insofar as its policies are 
known, the Trump administration poses serious challenges to British interests 
in key areas.

The most obvious divergence concerns Russia. Theresa May, Britain’s prime 
minister, has identified Vladimir Putin’s regime as international public enemy 
number one. Speaking in October, she called for a “robust and united European 
stance in the face of Russian aggression”and the “sickening atrocities 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-atrocities-syria-russian-warships-aleppo-putin-a7372446.html>
” for which Putin was responsible in Syria.

Britain’s anxieties extend to Russia’s military buildup on Europe’s eastern 
frontiers, its landgrab in Crimea and meddling in Ukraine and other “near 
abroad” former satellites, and its cyber attacks and information warfare. The 
murder in London of a former KGB agent, Alexander Litvinenko, continues to sour 
relations.Security chiefs have warned that Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/31/andrew-parker-increasingly-aggressive-russia-a-growing-threat-to-uk-says-mi5-head>
 could be targeted by Russia in the same way as the US during last year’s 
presidential election.

But Trump sees matters very differently. He continues to broadly reject the 
findings and advice of US intelligence agencies concerning Russian election 
meddling, and loses no opportunity to swap compliments with Putin.Any US-Russia 
rapprochement, 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/29/trump-could-reset-russia-ties-in-grand-bargain-with-putin.html>
 pursued independently of London, could impose extraordinary strains on 
Anglo-American ties.

Trump’s iconoclasm extends to Nato, which Britain regards as a vital defence 
against Russian expansionism. By suggesting the US might not militarily assist 
threatened Nato members, for example the Baltic states, Trump and his aides are 
recklessly encouraging Russian aggression – at least as Britain’s defence 
chiefs see it.

Any deal accepting Russia’s annexation of Crimea would likewise be seen as 
undermining international law and the authority of the UN, by which London sets 
great store.

Trump is hostile to another landmark international agreement close to 
Whitehall’s heart – the painstakingly negotiated, multilateral 2015 nuclear 
deal withIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>.

Unlike the US, Britain has since re-established full diplomatic relations with 
Tehran. Bringing the country in from the cold, and restoring its position as a 
regional partner for the west, is a long-cherished British objective. Trump 
threatens all that.

While reluctant to unilaterally disarm, successive British governments have 
strongly supported international nuclear nonproliferation efforts. Curbing the 
spread of weapons of mass destruction is seen as essential in dealing with 
unpredictable regimes such as North Korea.

Trump, in contrast, has spoken of the desirability of Japan, a close British 
ally, and South Korea acquiring nuclear weapons, principally to deter North 
Korea – although he may also have hadChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in mind.

When Kim Jong-un, North Korea’s dictator 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/donald-trump-japan-south-korea-might-need-nuclear-weapons/>
, recently boasted his long-range missiles would soon be able to carry nuclear 
warheads, thus theoretically threatening US territory, Trump’s response was 
crudely provocative. “It won’t happen,” he tweeted.Analysts are still trying to 
work out what he meant 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2017/01/trump-taunts-north-korea-twitter-chaos-ensues>
.

May’s government, like David Cameron’s before it, has gone to extraordinary 
lengths to woo the Chinese government, ignoring abuses in Hong Kong, Tibet and 
China’s Muslim west in an effort to attract inward investment. While Britain 
shares US concerns about China’s island-building in the South China Sea, 
Trump’s taunting of Beijing over this issue, as well as trade and Taiwan,
potentially undermines efforts to build a new “golden era” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37265915> in Sino-British ties – unless, of 
course, Britain disowns him first.

Other key areas of divergence include attitudes to the UN as the world’s 
premier rule-making body, upholding universal human rights, and the vital need, 
as London sees it, to build bridges rather than erect walls between the west 
and the Muslim world. Trump’s mooted racial and religious-based curbs on 
immigration could result in some British ministers and MPs being banned from 
travel to the US. His unquestioning pro-Israel, pro-settlements stance may 
bring more tensions,despite May’s recent trimming. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>

On other issues, Trump and Britain agree. One is the necessity of defeating 
Islamic State and similar jihadi terrorist groups. But Trump’s penchant for 
protectionism does not sit well with Johnson’s push, as Britain leaves the EU, 
for new free trade treaties, not least with the US. If, like Canning, Johnson 
hopes Trump’s New World will help rebalance Britain’s relations with the Old, 
he could soon be sorely disappointed.
 