
Boris Johnson has rejected calls to take disciplinary action against the 
Israeli embassy in London after one of its officials was caught on camera in an 
undercover stingplotting to “take down” UK MPs regarded as hostile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
, including the foreign office minister Sir Alan Duncan, who is an outspoken 
supporter of a Palestinian state.

 Speaking in the Commons on Tuesday, the British foreign secretary said the 
diplomat Shai Masot was no longer working in London, and that the Israeli 
embassy had issued a very full apology so he considered the matter closed.

Conservative MPs including Hugo Swire challenged Johnson to explain why the 
British ambassador to Israelhad been formally summoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/israel-summons-ambassadors-un-resolution-benjamin-netanyahu>
 when the UK backed a UN resolution condemning illegal Israeli settlements, but 
no comparable action had been taken when an Israeli embassy employee “is caught 
on film conspiring with a civil servant to take down a senior minister in his 
own department, the chairman of the foreign affairs select committee and other 
members of this house”.

 Swire asked for the thinking behind the UK’s decision to forgive and forget 
the incident on the basis that the Israeli ambassador “makes a couple of phone 
calls” .

Johnson replied: “The Israeli ambassador made a very full apology for what had 
taken place and the diplomat in question seems no longer to be a functionary of 
the embassy in London – so whatever he may exactly have been doing here his 
cover may well be said to have been and well truly blown – so the matter can be 
considered closed.”

Alex Salmond, the former Scottish first minister, said that if a UK diplomat 
were caught making such threats in Tel Aviv they would be booted out.

 Johnson also defended the UK’s decision to support the UN resolution 
condemning the Israeli settlements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
, saying the 20% extra settlements since 2009 were a threat to peace. He said 
the UK had been closely involved in drafting the language of the resolution, 
ensuring it contained words condemning “the infamy of terrorism that Israel 
suffered every day”.

He said it was too early to say exactly what the Trump administration’s policy 
on illegal settlements would become, but he promised the UK would continue to 
make its position clear.

He said it was a widespread view in Washington and across the UN security 
council that the Israeli settlements were illegal.
 