
Boris Johnson has flown to New York for the UK government’s first formal 
face-to-face meetings with Donald Trump’s administration, hours after theprime 
minister declared the president-elect’s remarks about women unacceptable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-trumps-groping-remarks-were-unacceptable>
.

The foreign secretary met Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, and the incoming 
White House chief strategist, Steve Bannon. The meeting marked the first formal 
contact between a UK government minister and the Trump transition team since 
his election in November.

On Monday, Johnson will meet congressional leaders including the speaker, Paul 
Ryan, the chairman of the foreign relations committee, Bob Corker, and the 
Senate Republican leader, Mitch McConnell.

Boris Johnson's US task would challenge even an experienced minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/boris-johnsons-us-task-would-challenge-even-an-experienced-minister>
He will not meet Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, as the 
protocol is to wait until after the confirmation process has been completed.

Johnson, a leading member of the campaign for Britain to leave the EU, is 
likely to discuss the status of the “special relationship” once the former 
property tycoon takes office, and after the UK leaves the bloc.

Theresa May used her first interview of 2017 on Sunday to give her clearest 
indication yet that theUK would leave the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/uks-brexit-approach-is-not-muddled-at-all-says-theresa-may>
, a move that will reinforce the importance of securing a trade deal with the 
US before Brexit.

The foreign secretary’s visit comes after two of the prime minister’s chiefs 
of staff, Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, went on a private visit to meetmembers 
of the Trump team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
.

“Following the successful meeting last month between the prime minister’s 
chiefs of staff and president-elect Donald Trump’s team,Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> is undertaking a short visit to 
the US for meetings with close advisers to the president-elect and senior 
congressional leaders,” a Foreign Office spokesman said. “The discussions will 
be focused on UK-US relations and other foreign policy matters.”

Before the US election, Johnson was extremely critical of Trump. Following the 
president-elect’s suggestion that he would back a ban on Muslims entering the 
US and that parts of London were no-go areas, the foreign secretary said Trump 
was “clearly out of his mind” and “betraying a quite stupefying ignorance that 
makes him unfit to hold the office of president of the United States.

May 'optimistic' on UK-US ties despite Trump's views on women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-to-meet-theresa-may-spring-talks>
Since Trump’s victory, however, Johnson has described the billionaire as a 
dealmaker and called for an end to the “whinge-o-rama” over his victory.

Trump tweeted on Saturday night that he was planning to meet May shortly, with 
March seen as the most likely month. He said he was very much looking forward 
to meeting May in the coming months and described Britain as a very special 
ally.

May was challenged about Trump’s previous comments during her first TV 
interview of the year.

His presidential campaign was plunged into crisis after a 2005 recording came 
to light of him bragging to the TV host Billy Bush about groping women, saying 
he could “grab them by the pussy” because of his celebrity status.Sophy Ridge 
asked May how the comments made her feel as a woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/how-sophy-ridge-got-her-money-shot-from-the-maybot>
 on her Sky News show.

“I think that’s unacceptable, but in fact Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> himself has said that and has 
apologised for it,” the prime minister said. “But the relationship that the UK 
has with the United States is about something much bigger than just the 
relationship between the two individuals as president and prime minister.

“That’s important, but actually we have a longstanding special relationship 
with the United States. It’s based on shared values and it is a relationship 
where, actually in the UK, we feel we can say to the US if we disagree with 
something that they are doing.”

The relationship between the Trump team and May has been complicated by the 
unlikely intervention ofNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, the former Ukip leader, 
who had enjoyed an inside track with the Republican leader before it seemed 
likely he would win.

Farage and his entourage won a high-profile meeting at Trump Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 days after Trump’s election, and he has since implied that the UK ambassador, 
Sir Kim Darroch, had no serious access to the Trump team’s thinking.

Trump's cabinet looks increasingly conventional but far from moderate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign>
May said on Sunday: “From the conversations I have already had – I have had 
two very good, positive conversations with Donald Trump already – I think we 
are going to look to build on that relationship for the benefit of both the US 
and the UK.

“I think that is something that is optimistic and positive for the UK for the 
future.”

Johnson, probably the best-known politician in the May cabinet, has been a 
political visitor to New York before as London mayor, but like many 
Conservative politicians admonished Trump for suggesting Muslims would be 
banned from coming to America.


Beyond Brexit, the foreign secretary will need to probe the coming US 
administration’s thinking on Iran, Syria, relations with Russia and Middle East 
peace talks.

It is Johnson’s second visit to New York as foreign secretary. His first was 
to the UN general assembly.

 