
Boris Johnson has claimed that the UK is “first in line” for a free trade deal 
with the US after theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> takes office on 20 
January. On a hastily arranged trip to the US to reinforce previously weak 
links with Donald Trump’s transition team, Johnson also declared on Monday that 
the incoming administration had “a very exciting agenda of change”.

Johnson’s claim about the UK’s future status as Washington’s preferred trading 
partner was a pointed reference to Barack Obama’s warning during the EU 
referendum campaign that Britain would be at the“back of the queue” for a trade 
deal if it chose Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
.


At the time, the US and EU were trying to complete a transatlantic trade and 
investment partnership (TTIP), but that appears to have no future under the 
presidency ofDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
who ran on a platform of opposition to multilateral trade deals.

After visits to see top aides in Trump Tower in New York and meet members of 
Congress in Washington, Johnson said: “Clearly, the Trump administration-to-be 
has a very exciting agenda of change. One thing that won’t change, though, is 
the closeness of the relationship between the US and the UK.

“We are the number two contributor to defence in Nato. We are America’s 
principal partner in working for global security and, of course, we are great 
campaigners for free trade. We hear that we are first in line to do a great 
free trade deal with the United States. So, it’s going to be a very exciting 
year for both our countries.”


The UK foreign secretary’s trip to the US before Trump’s inauguration on 20 
January was aimed at making up a deficit in relations with the new 
administration – due in some part to Johnson’s past disparaging remarks about 
the president-elect, who he once described as “unfit” to hold office in the 
White House.

'A revolting slug': what politicians said before Trump got elected
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/a-revolting-slug-what-politicians-said-before-trump-got-elected>
Following the president-elect’s suggestion that he would back a ban on Muslims 
entering the US and that parts of London were no-go areas, the foreign 
secretary said Trump was “clearly out of his mind” and “betraying a quite 
stupefying ignorance that makes him unfit to hold the office of president of 
the United States”. Since Trump’s victory, however, Johnson has described the 
billionaire as a dealmaker andcalled for an end to the “whinge-o-rama” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/boris-johnson-doom-and-gloom-donald-trump-nigel-farage-theresa-may>
 over his victory.

Confronted with Trump’s comments about sexually assaulting women, which 
surfaced in video footage during the election campaign, Theresa May said on 
Sunday: “I think that’s unacceptable, but in fact Donald Trump himself has said 
that and has apologised for it.”

 The British prime minister told Sky News there was more to relations between 
London and Washington than Trump’s character. “The relationship that the UK has 
with the United States is about something much bigger than just the 
relationship between the two individuals as president and prime minister.”

May was speaking as Trump tweeted: 
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
I look very much forward to meeting Prime Minister Theresa May in Washington 
in the Spring. Britain, a longtime U.S. ally, is very special!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> January 8, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/817915516018892805> 
In New York, Johnson met Steve Bannon, Trump’s chief strategist and the former 
executive chairman of Breitbart News, which Bannon once described as a platform 
for the “alt-right”, a group known for white nationalist and antisemitic views.


The foreign secretary also met Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law, who has been 
acting since the election as his chief foreign policy adviser and a gateway for 
foreign embassies and governments to Trump himself.

Having been late in identifying Kushner as the main diplomatic conduit to the 
president-elect, the UK is hoping that a pre-inauguration visit from the 
foreign secretary could solidify the link before the nominee for secretary of 
state, Rex Tillerson, is confirmed by the Senate.

Boris Johnson's US task would challenge even an experienced minister
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/boris-johnsons-us-task-would-challenge-even-an-experienced-minister>
A British official said the meetings at Trump Tower in New York were “warm and 
frank, and covered the full range of foreign policy issues”. “They acknowledged 
differences but said that they were ready to work together on those 
differences,” the official said.

On Monday morning, Johnson held an off-the-record discussion with US political 
pundits about the shape and likely policies of a Trump administration.

In the afternoon Johnson was due to meet Bob Corker, the Republican chair of 
the Senate foreign relations committee, and his Democratic counterpart, Ben 
Cardin, as well as the majority leader, Sen Mitch McConnell, and the Republican 
House speaker, Paul Ryan.

The foreign secretary is said to be trying to gauge how much support there is 
in the Republican majority in Congress for a major reorientation of US foreign 
policy towards Moscow, and any erosion of Washington’s commitment to Nato 
allies.

A number of senior Senate Republicans, including Corker, have broken with 
Trump over his rejection of findings by the US intelligence community that 
Russia actively interfered with the election.

Johnson is visiting Washington at a time when it is unclear what direction 
Trump’s foreign policy will take. According to protocol, he is not permitted to 
have formal contacts with Tillerson until Senate confirmation hearings, due to 
start on Wednesday, have been completed.
 