
Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> arrived at the Vote 
Leave headquarters the morning after the EU referendum hugging staff and 
“punching the air like Maradona after a great goal”, according to the man who 
led the winning campaign.

Dominic Cummings, a former adviser to Michael Gove who was appointed campaign 
director for the leave side, said it was nonsense that Johnson and Govedid not 
expect to triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/a-pyrrhic-victory-boris-johnson-wakes-up-to-the-costs-of-brexit>
 and were consequently regretful.

The pair seemed subdued at a press conference the day after the referendum as 
they liked David Cameron and “did not want to be seen as dancing on his grave”, 
Cummings wrote in along post about the campaign 
<https://dominiccummings.wordpress.com/2017/01/09/on-the-referendum-21-branching-histories-of-the-2016-referendum-and-the-frogs-before-the-storm-2/>
 on his personal blog.

“Some of the media created the psychologically compelling story that they were 
regretful/frightened about victory, but this was not at all their mood in HQ on 
the morning of 24 June,” he wrote. “Boris came in punching the air like 
Maradona after a great goal, hugging staff and clearly euphoric. It is 
completely wrong to portray him as regretful.”

The piece by Cummings, which runs to just under 20,000 words, credits the 
involvement of Gove and particularly Johnson for the leave victory, saying the 
vote would likely have gone the other way without the support of both.

Cummings said Gove was vital in honing Vote Leave’s message, and without 
Johnson, Nigel Farage “would have been a much more prominent face on TV during 
the crucial final weeks” – potentially scaring off middle-class support.

Cummings also said the hugely controversial pledge that leaving the EU would 
free up £350m a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
 to spend on the NHS was vital to swinging the referendum, as was themessage on 
reducing immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/voting-details-show-immigration-fears-were-paradoxical-but-decisive>
.

“Would we have won without immigration? No. Would we have won without 
£350m/NHS? All our research and the close result strongly suggests no,” he 
wrote.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-referendum-dominic-cummings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e2a38fd4e01e6f35c2cd1861398ddbc21df325a%2F105_40_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Boris%20Johnson%20'punched%20the%20air%20like%20Maradona'%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-referendum-dominic-cummings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Boris%20Johnson%20%27punched%20the%20air%20like%20Maradona%27%20after%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fboris-johnson-brexit-referendum-dominic-cummings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e2a38fd4e01e6f35c2cd1861398ddbc21df325a%2F105_40_2250_1350%2F2250.jpg>
 Cummings takes aim at Ukip and Westminster lobby correspondents in his 
near-20,000 word blogpost. Photograph: parliamentlive.tv 
Cummings also claimed that the NHS pledge, which he says was specifically to 
spend £100m more a week on health, was serious and would have been kept by 
Johnson or Gove, had either become prime minister.

However, the main thrust of Cummings’ wide-ranging and occasionally rambling 
thoughts – at one point he spends several paragraphs comparing Robert Peston 
and other pundits to a character from Anna Karenina – is to emphasise the 
complex reasons for the leave victory.

The post dismisses the idea that the Brexit vote was caused by an unstoppable 
tide of populist feeling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/how-did-uk-end-up-voting-leave-european-union>
, saying if only one of a series of very variable circumstances had gone 
differently, the result would have changed. Cummings wrote:

Leave won because 1) three big forces [the immigration crisis, the financial 
crisis and the euro crisis] created conditions in which the contest was 
competitive 2) Vote Leave exploited the situation imperfectly but effectively 
3) Cameron/Osborne made big mistakes. If just one of these had been different, 
it is very likely in [remain] would have won.

Overall, the now-mocked conventional wisdom that ‘the status quo almost always 
wins in referendums like this’ obviously has a lot of truth to it and it only 
proved false this time because of a combination of events that was improbable.

One advantage handed to Vote Leave, Cummings said, was a media “obsessed with 
process and the snakes and ladders of careers”, which thus heavily covered the 
involvement of Johnson and Gove.

There are liars and then there’s Boris Johnson and Michael Gove | Nick Cohen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/boris-johnson-michael-gove-eu-liars>
“We could not match No 10 in the golden currency of ‘names’,” he wrote. “But 
we could give the media an even more valuable currency – a leadership story.

“The media were understandably obsessed with this story, so we served it up to 
them in such a way that they also had to cover our message. For 10 days, we 
dominated the news with a set of stories on the Australian points system, VAT 
on fuel, Turkey, the NHS and so on, all based on ‘it’s safer to take back 
control’.”

As is perhaps expected for a man known for his rudeness while working for 
Gove, Cummings is blunt about his opponents and allies, and admits he is “not 
motivated by people in SW1 [Westminster] liking me”.

Addressing the charge that he dislikes David Cameron, with whom he had 
previously fallen out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jun/16/gove-cummings-david-cameron>, 
Cummings wrote:

Wrong. I do not hate Cameron. I do not respect him, which is different. I 
thought that he was in politics for bad reasons – essentially because he was 
someone who wanted ‘to be’, not someone who wanted ‘to do’ ... and his priority 
was himself and a small gang, not the public.

I also thought Cameron was mostly (not all) bad at the job, despite having 
some of the necessary temperamental characteristics, and was flattered by 
having Brown then Miliband as opponents.

Cummings described the most important part of his role in the campaign as 
“trying to suppress/divert/overcome internal coalition warfare to a level where 
about 10 crucial people were protected enough to do their jobs”.

He reserved some of his heaviest fire for the media, saying most political 
correspondents and commentators should be fired, and for Ukip, who were 
involved in the unofficial Leave.EU campaign.

Cummings wrote: 

Farage’s motley crew claim that I did this campaign in order to lose it 
deliberately, then get a job in No 10 with Cameron. It is pointless to discuss 
this theory, though the fact that they understood so little about the political 
environment, and struggled to use Google, was an important fact.
 