
This coming Monday is said to be the most depressing day of the year, dubbed 
“Blue Monday” as consumers battle not just the miserable weather but also their 
gloomy financial situation. Millions let their credit cards or overdrafts take 
the strain of Christmas overspending, and next week is the point when the 
financial chickens come home to roost.

Monday 18 January will see a surge in calls to debt charities as people who 
have limped through December and early January decide they need to seek help. 
It also marks the start of a week when millions of post-Christmas credit card 
bills will land on doormats.

Debt advice clinic: put your questions to our experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/15/debt-advice-clinic-ask-experts> 
“Last year the third Monday in January was our busiest day with 1,893 calls to 
the helpline,” Edward Ware atStepChange Debt Charity <http://www.stepchange.org>
 told Guardian Money. “On that day we dealt with nearly £50m of debt. January 
and February are always our busiest months.”

Worrying Bank of England figures issued a fortnight ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/04/rise-consumer-borrowing-fastest-pre-crisis-levels-bank-of-england-boe>
 show that consumer borrowing on credit cards, loans and overdrafts is growing 
at its fastest rate since before the financial crisis.

If you are in serious difficulty you should urgently seek help, but if your 
situation isn’t so precarious there may well be a tried and tested cure for the 
financial headache you are suffering.

Look for a 0% balance transfer deal

Many people with existing credit and store card debt could save hundreds or 
even thousands of pounds by transferring these balances to another provider 
offering a better rate.

The good news for consumers juggling debts built up before Christmas is that 
the UK credit card market is in the grip of an unprecedented balance transfer 
rate war, and you can now get deals offering 0% interest for three years or 
more.

Not surprisingly, the start of the year is usually the busiest time for 
switching card balances – almost 600,000 transfers took place in January 2015. 
The intense competition has pushed up the average interest-free balance 
transfer term to the highest on record, at 590 days compared with 468 a year 
ago, says financial data providerMoneyfacts.co.uk <http://moneyfacts.co.uk>. 
And many of the latest deals now charge very low balance transfer fees (usually 
a percentage of the amount of debt being moved over), which makes moving credit 
card balances far more cost-effective.

The main benefit of a 0% deal is that all of your monthly repayment goes 
towards clearing the outstanding balance, and therefore the debt can be cleared 
much more quickly. MBNA recently launched a deal offering 0% on balance 
transfers for up to 39 months, although the transfer fee is a 
higher-than-average 2.98%.

So what does all this mean in pounds and pence? Money asked Andrew Hagger at 
financial websiteMoneyComms.co.uk <http://moneycomms.co.uk> to crunch the 
numbers on the savings that someone with a fairly chunky amount of debt on 
their credit card – £5,000 – could potentially make by transferring it to 
another provider offering a 0% deal.

He says that if someone switched £5,000 to the MBNA card offering 0% for 39 
months, their only cost would be £149 – ie, 2.98% of £5,000 – provided they 
clear the balance within the 39-month period. If instead of moving the debt 
they kept it on their current credit card, which we will assume has a fairly 
typical interest rate of 18.9%, and paid it off in equal instalments over the 
same 39-month term, they would pay £1,586 in interest. So, by switching cards 
that individual has achieved a net saving (after the fee is taken into account) 
of £1,437.

Alternatively, our individual could switch his or her £5,000 to a Halifax 
credit card offering 0% for 23 months with no fee on balance transfers made in 
the first 90 days. That switch wouldn’t cost them a penny, provided they clear 
the balance within the promotional period. If the £5,000 stayed on a card 
charging 18.9% interest, and our individual paid it off in equal monthly 
instalments over 23 months, the interest would total £919.

Is Britain a nation of debt bingers? History tells a different story | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/12/britain-nation-debt-bingers-history-household-credit>
“The potential cost savings show that it is definitely worth making the 
effort,” Hagger says. He adds that the deals that last the longest give you 
greater flexibility and the ability to repay more slowly, though as a rule of 
thumb the longer the deal the higher the balance transfer fee.

If you sign up for one of these deals it is vital that you pay more than the 
minimum monthly repayment and clear the balance before the deal ends. This is 
because when the promotional period expires, quite a high rate of interest will 
apply – for example, it’s 20.9% in the case of the MBNA deal – which could well 
wipe out some of the gains, according to Moneyfacts.

Hagger adds: “Don’t forget to make your monthly repayments on time and to stay 
within your credit limit as, apart from the Co-operative Bank and Nationwide 
building society, card providers will terminate your 0% deal on the spot if you 
don’t adhere to the terms and conditions.”

The other thing that muddies the waters is that in order to access the best 
balance transfer deals you will often need to have a very good credit rating. 
MBNA’s small print warning is fairly typical: “Eligibility depends on your 
circumstances. The product, APR and promotional offer you could get may differ 
from the example.”

Get a better overdraft deal 

If you regularly use your overdraft, make sure you are getting a good deal If 
you are not, move. Some banks offer special deals on overdrafts to encourage 
you to switch to them.

Authorised overdraft costs vary hugely between banks – some charge daily fees, 
some monthly fees, and some charge interest – or it could be a combination of 
any of these. On top of this, some banks’ charging structures mean they will 
treat their customers very differently depending on how big or small their 
overdraft is.

Let’s take the example of someone who has an authorised overdraft of £2,500 
that they are fully utilising. If they hold Santander’s popular 123 account, 
the actual cost of that borrowing is £31 a month. This is because Santander 
charges a flat £1-a-day usage fee whatever the size of your arranged overdraft, 
and that’s it.

If our individual holds Nationwide’s FlexAccount, the cost of borrowing £2,500 
via an authorised overdraft is £37.02 for 31 days, while at Tesco Bank it’s 
£40.13. At NatWest and Lloyds it would be £44.81 and £44.51 respectively for 31 
days (these two both charge a £6 monthly usage fee plus interest).

Among the pricier banks based on this scenario are Halifax (£62 a month made 
up of 31 x £2 daily fees) and Barclays (a hefty £93 a month made up of 31 x £3 
daily fees).

However, it really all depends on how much you are borrowing. If your 
overdraft is smaller than in the example given above – say, £750 – then 
Barclays is cheaper than Santander, because the former charges a 75p daily fee 
up to £1,000, while the latter would still charge its flat £1 a day.

Needless to say, those who go into the red without permission will often be 
hit with hefty unauthorised overdraft costs. For example, the Santander 123 
account will charge people with a £6-per-day fee, though there is a cap of £95 
per month. Similarly, NatWest charges £6 per day capped at 15 charges a month 
(so a total of £90).

In terms of switching your account to another bank it’s worth being aware that 
some give you a small buffer overdraft for free, while others are more 
generous. For example, First Direct’s 1st Account gives customers an automatic 
£500-plus overdraft, the first £250 of which is interest-free. Similarly, M&S 
Bank’s no-fee current account comes with an automatic £500 overdraft, the first 
£100 of which is interest-free. In both cases the interest rate above these 
amounts is 15.9% EAR. Meanwhile, if you are switching to Santander there will 
be no authorised overdraft usage fee for the first four months.

But can you switch your current account if you are overdrawn? The short answer 
is: maybe. The banking industry says that, provided the new bank agrees,your 
overdraft will be transferred along with your direct debits and standing orders 
<http://www.simplerworld.co.uk/Pages/About.aspx>. A spokeswoman for the Bacs 
<http://www.bacs.co.uk/Bacs/Corporate/Pages/default.aspx> payment scheme says 
this is something that is very much decided on a case by case basis: “The 
facility is there to switch the overdraft across [but] it will come down to the 
individual bank.”

Most of the big high street banks say they may be able to provide facilities 
to help you pay off any overdraft, but if this isn’t the case then you will 
have to make separate arrangements to repay your old bank or building society 
what you owe.

Adding it to the mortgage

Mortgage interest rates are much cheaper than credit card APRs, so adding 
£10,000 to a 25-year home loan at an interest rate of 2.5% would cost just £45 
a month.

But lenders will run strict affordability checks against your income, says 
mortgage broker Aaron Strutt of Trinity Financial, and are unlikely to accept 
an applicant with less than 15% equity in their home. He says Halifax charges 
rates starting at 2.59% for debt consolidation, while Virgin Money wants you to 
pay its standard variable rate plus 1%, which adds up to 5.79%.

David Hollingworth of brokers London & Country says lenders are more 
restrictive on loan-to-value when it comes to debt consolidation compared with 
raising capital for something like home improvements. “For example, Santander 
will limit the maximum LTV to 75% for debt consolidation and has a maximum of 
£35,000 or 35% of the total lending, whichever is lower.”

Beware how much mortgage debt consolidation costs in the long term. If you 
take out a personal loan of £10,000 at 4.9% over five years the total interest 
will be £1,278, but stick it on a mortgage at 2.5% over 25 years and that 
interest increases to £3,460.

Help is at hand

If you are struggling with debts there are places you can turn for free advice.


StepChange Debt Charity <http://www.stepchange.org/> If you don’t want to 
speak to someone you can use the online Debt Remedy tool. 0800 138 1111


Citizens Advice Find your local bureau at Citizensadvice.org.uk 
<https://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/>


National Debtline <https://www.nationaldebtline.org/> A charity offering 
advice by phone and online. 0808 808 4000


PayPlan <https://www.payplan.com/> Financed by credit industries. 0800 280 2816


• From 1.30pm on Monday 18 January Guardian Money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/money> is hosting an online debt Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/15/debt-advice-clinic-ask-experts> 
for you to put your questions to experts.

 