
Dannii Minogue has admitted to using Botox 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-4100218/I-> at difficult times in 
her life in a subconscious attempt to mask her feelings. Not only might she 
literally have been disabling her capacity to frown, she may also have been 
acting things out on her body in order to fend off her own emotions.

Is America developing a ‘crack-like addiction’ to Botox beauty?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/08/botox-nation-america-addiction-crack-like-cosmetic-procedures>
It’s about time someone said it. As a working therapist I have occasionally 
noticed my female patients’ faces change quite noticeably from week to week, 
but no one has ever spoken to me about what was making this happen. Cosmetic 
treatments, and the difficult thoughts and feelings that might make someone 
undergo them, are apparently one of the hardest things to talk about.

On the one hand perhaps these treatments are so normalised that they do not 
seem worth discussing in therapy –a new study in the US shows that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2017/jan/08/botox-nation-america-addiction-crack-like-cosmetic-procedures>
 young women using Botox has risen by 41% since 2011 – but on the other you 
probably wouldn’t spend hundreds of pounds on something that carried serious 
health risks if you weren’t feeling pretty worried about your appearance. Doing 
stuff to your face is like the sunny side of self-harm; you might try it in 
order to short-circuit anxiety or sadness, but the end result is supposedly 
regeneration rather than damage. Still, nothing signals underlying unhappiness 
and self-loathing more than a pumped-up, frozen physiognomy. In that sense, 
it’s a socially acceptable form of wound.

It’s hardly surprising that people, especially women, are prone to feeling 
insecure about their looks. But Botox is perhaps a special kind of beauty 
treatment in that it inhibits the visible expression of emotion. It helps 
people hide the way they feel. That this should come as a bit of a surprise is 
interesting in itself – this has never been its explicit selling point. The 
idea has been more that youth is good and age is bad. By starting Botox in your 
20s you can supposedly pre-empt the signs of passing time. But what is facial 
ageing if not physical proof that you have smiled, frowned and been surprised? 
In other words, that you have let the outside world in on some of your feelings.

In Jane Austen’s great philosophical masterpiece Sense and Sensibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/16/sense-and-sensibility-jane-austen-elena-ferrante-anonymity>
, we see two sisters attempting a serious experiment in living. Marianne 
expresses emotion freely while Elinor buttons it up. Which of them will fare 
best in life and love? Austen’s ultra-humane answer is that both ways have 
their ups and downs. And anyhow, while you think you’ve made your choice about 
which is better, you may find yourself doing the other.

Women in particular have had to rely on their beauty and personal charm in 
order to secure economic stability

More than 200 years later we’re still struggling over the same question. From 
themisery memoir <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Misery_lit> to Instabrag 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=Instabrag> via Geordie Shore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2011/apr/27/geordie-shore-the-hunks-reality-tv>
, we’re trying to work out what will make us more lovable: free expression or 
self-control. Loosely speaking, some therapies work more towards the former, 
some towards the latter. As Austen wisely noted, there’s no clear answer as to 
which is best, although extremes in either direction do seem to cause trouble.

For humans, ensuring lovability is closely linked with survival. Babies very 
quickly learn how to endear themselves to their carers, and this habit 
continues into most people’s adult lives. If it doesn’t, modern psychiatry 
would even be inclined to brand you with a personality disorder. To generalise, 
becoming lovable seems to involve not crying and fussing too much, and learning 
to put your feelings aside for the sake of other people while still being 
affected enough by the world to experience empathy. You need to be able to 
control the release and expression of emotion, but not to the point of 
cold-bloodedness.

Historically, women in particular have had to rely on their beauty and 
personal charm in order to secure economic stability. Keeping your face nice 
and your character sweet in order tohang on to your TV job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/may/15/female-tv-presenters-ageism-sexism>
 is perhaps the contemporary equivalent of donning a corset and holding your 
tongue in the hope of keeping your husband. The problem is that everybody is 
pretty much aware of the painful tragicomedy of all this, and Botoxed women are 
a very visible enactment of it. It seems to be absolutely socially acceptable 
to blast an older woman for having a too-smooth face. Far more so than for 
having a baggy one. By trying so hard to hang on to our charms, we risk 
revealing how much we fear losing them. In hiding our feelings we give them 
away.

Although cynics might see Minogue’s admissions as yet another ruse by a 
celebrity who wants to reel us in, it’s probably time we started to speak more 
freely, and above all kindly, about facial injections and the different forms 
of pain they attempt to address.
 