
The UN special rapporteur on torture has formally accused the US government of 
cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment towards Bradley Manning, the US soldier 
who was held in solitary confinement for almost a year on suspicion of being 
the WikiLeaks source.

Juan Mendez has completed a 14-month investigation into the treatment of 
Manning since the soldier's arrest at a US military base in May 2010. He 
concludes that theUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> 
was at least culpable of cruel and inhumane treatment in keeping Manning locked 
up alone for 23 hours a day over an 11-month period in conditions that he also 
found might have constituted torture.

"The special rapporteur concludes that imposing seriously punitive conditions 
of detention on someone who has not been found guilty of any crime is a 
violation of his right to physical and psychological integrity as well as of 
his presumption of innocence," Mendez writes.

The findings of cruel and inhuman treatment are published as an addendum to 
the special rapporteur's report 
<http://image.theguardian.com/sys-files/Guardian/documents/2012/03/12/A_HRC_19_61_Add.4_EFSonly-2.pdf>
 to the UN general assembly on the promotion and protection of human rights. 
They are likely to reignite criticism of the US government's harsh treatment of 
Manning ahead of his court martial later this year.

Manning, 24, was arrested on May 29 2010 at the Forward Operating Base Hammer 
outside Baghdad, where he was working as an intelligence analyst. Manning has 
been charged with 22 counts, including aiding the enemy, relating to the 
leaking a massive trove of state secrets to the whistleblowing website 
WikiLeaks.

Mendez, who runs the UN office that investigates incidents of alleged torture 
around the world, told the Guardian: "I conclude that the 11 months under 
conditions of solitary confinement (regardless of the name given to his regime 
by the prison authorities) constitutes at a minimum cruel, inhuman and 
degrading treatment in violation of article 16 of the convention against 
torture. If the effects in regards to pain and suffering inflicted on Manning 
were more severe, they could constitute torture."

Manning was initially held for almost three months at Camp Arifjan in Kuwait, 
and then transferred in July 2010 to the Marine corps base at Quantico in 
Virginia. He was held there for another eight months in conditions that aroused
widespread condemnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/10/bradley-manning-legal-scholars-letter>
, including being held in solitary confinement for 23 hours a day and being 
made to strip naked at night.

In his opening letter to the US government 
<http://spcomms.ohchr.org/Docs/01ComRepSep2011/Com/2010_12/UA_USA_30.12.10_(20.2010).pdf>
 on December 30 2010, Mendez said that the prolonged period of isolated 
confinment was believed to have been imposed "in an effort to coerce him into 
'cooperation' with the authorities, allegedly for the purpose of persuading him 
to implicate others."

It is known that the US department of justice is conducting a grand jury in 
Virginia exploring the possibility of bringing charges against Julian Assange, 
the WikiLeaks founder.

The US mission to the UN in Geneva responded to Mendez 
<http://spcomms.ohchr.org/Docs/01ComRepSep2011/Rep/2010_12coms/PR_USA_27.01.11_(20.2010).pdf>
 on January 27 2011. It said that the US government "is committed to protecting 
human rights in our country and abroad, and we value the work of the special 
rapporteur".

In a later letter 
<http://spcomms.ohchr.org/Docs/01ComRepSep2011/Rep/2010_12coms/PR_USA_19.05.11_(20.2010).pdf>
, dated May 19 2011, the Pentagon's legal counsel told Mendez that it was 
satisfied that Manning's treatment at Quantico had been fine. "Though Private 
Manning was classified as a maximum custody detainee at Quantico, he occupied 
the very same type of single-occupancy cell that all other pretrial detainees 
occupied."

But the Pentagon's arguments did not impress the special rapporteur. He 
stressed in his final conclusions that "solitary confinement is a harsh measure 
which may cause serious psychological and physiological adverse effects on 
individuals regardless of their specific conditions." Moreover, "[d]epending on 
the specific reason for its application, conditions, length, effects and other 
circumstances, solitary confinement can amount to a breach of article seven of 
the international covenant on civil and political rights, and to an act defined 
in article one or article 16 of the convention against torture."

He also said that the US government had tried to justify Manning's solitary 
confinement by calling it "prevention of harm watch". Yet the military had 
offered no details as to what actual harm was being prevented.

Mendez told the Guardian that he could not reach a definitive conclusion on 
whether Manning had been tortured because he has consistently been denied 
permission by the US military to interview the prisoner under acceptable 
circumstances.

The Pentagon has refused to allow Mendez to see Manning in private, insisting 
that all conversations must be monitored. "You should have no expectation of 
privacy in your communications with Private Manning," the Pentagon wrote.

The lack of privacy is a violation of human rights procedures, the UN says, 
and considered unacceptable by the UN special rapporteur.

Manning's travails in solitary confinement came to an end on April 20 2011 
when he was transferred from Quantico to Fort Leavenworth in Kansas, where he 
was held in more open conditions. He is currently being held in a facility in 
Virginia so that he can make frequent pre-trial appearances at Fort Meade in 
Maryland ahead of his eventual court martial.
 