
The rhythm of breathing co-ordinates electrical activity across a network of 
brain regions associated with smell, memory, and emotions, and can enhance 
their functioning, according to a new study by researchers at Northwestern 
University. The findings, published in theJournal of Neuroscience, suggest that 
breathing does not merely supply oxygen to the brain and body, but may also 
organise the activity of populations of cells within multiple brain regions to 
help orchestrate complex behaviours.

Your nose knows death is imminent | Mo Costandi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/oct/01/your-nose-knows-death-is-imminent>
Nearly 75 years ago, the British physiologist Edgar Adrian used electrodes to 
recordbrain activity in hedgehogs 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1393326/pdf/jphysiol01518-0094.pdf>
, and found that brain waves in the olfactory system were closely coupled to 
breathing, with their size and frequency being directly related to the speed at 
which air moves through the nose. Since then, this same activity has been 
observed in theolfactory bulb 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00214/full> and 
other brain regions <http://www.jneurosci.org/content/34/17/5949.long> of rats, 
mice and other small animals, but until now it has not been investigated in 
humans.

In this new study, a research team led by Christina Zelano recorded electrical 
activity directly from the surface of the brain in seven patients being 
evaluated forsurgery to treat drug-resistant temporal lobe epilepsy 
<https://neurophilosophy.wordpress.com/2008/08/27/wilder_penfield_neural_cartographer/>
, focusing on three brain regions: the piriform cortex, which processes smell 
information from the olfactory bulbs, the hippocampus, which is critical for 
memory formation, and the amygdala, which plays an important role in emotional 
processing. At the same time, they monitored the patients’ respiratory rates 
with either pressure sensors or an abdominal breathing belt.


The researchers found that slow brain wave oscillations in the piriform 
cortex, and higher frequency brain waves in the hippocampus and amygdala, were 
synchronised with the rate of natural, spontaneous breathing. Importantly, 
though, the brain wave oscillations in all three regions were most highly 
synchronised immediately after the patients breathed in, but less so while they 
were breathing out. And when the patients were asked to divert breathing to 
their mouths, the researchers observed a significant decrease in brain wave 
coupling.

Thus, the air plumes that periodically enter the nose during natural breathing 
appear to synchronise the activity of neurons in the piriform cortex, and this 
synchrony is then propagated to the hippocampus and amygdala.

Given the well established respective roles of the hippocampus and amygdala in 
memory and emotions, the researchers conducted a series of behavioural tests to 
investigate whether breathing phase might influence thought processes. First, 
they recruited 21 healthy participants, and asked them to perform an emotion 
discrimination task. They were shown images of faces expressing either fear or 
surprise, in quick succession, and asked to identify the emotion in each one as 
quickly as they could. Another group of 75 healthy participants performed a 
visual memory task, in which they viewed a series of images and then identify 
the ones they had seen before from a second series presented to them 20 minutes 
later.

Participants in the emotion discrimination task identified the fearful faces, 
but not the surprised ones, more quickly when they saw them while breathing in 
compared to when breathing out. And those who performed the memory task were 
far better able to recall images that had been presented to them while 
breathing than those they saw while breathing out.

A cooler way to evaluate brain surgery patients
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/feb/26/a-cooler-way-to-evaluate-brain-surgery-patients>
Breathing therefore modulates emotional recognition and memory recall, with 
both processes being more accurate during breathing in compared to breathing 
out. Once again, the route of breathing was critically important – the effects 
were seen when the participants were asked to breath in through their noses, 
but their performance on both tasks declined markedly when they breathed 
through their mouths.

Breathing is controlled unconsciously by the brainstem, and humans alter their 
breathing pattern in response toemotional stimuli 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0301051198000258> and mental 
effort <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4445359/>, suggesting that 
our thought processes affect the rate of breathing. These new findings suggest 
that breathing can also impact our mental function. For example, breathing 
rapidly when we are scared or highly aroused may optimise information 
processing in the brain so that we can think and act appropriately and quickly.

“When you breathe in… you are stimulating neurons in the olfactory cortex, 
amygdala and hippocampus,”says 
<https://news.northwestern.edu/stories/2016/12/rhythm-of-breathing-affects-memory-and-fear/>
 Zelano. “In a panic state, your breathing rhythm becomes faster [and] as a 
result you’ll spend proportionally more time inhaling,” [This] could have a 
positive impact on brain function and result in faster response times to 
dangerous stimuli in the environment.”

Reference 

Zelano, C., et al. (2016). Nasal Respiration Entrains Human Limbic 
Oscillations and Modulates Cognitive Function.J. Neurosci., 6: 12448 –12467 [
Abstract <http://www.jneurosci.org/content/36/49/12448>]




Mo Costandi <https://neurophilosophy.wordpress.com/> trained as a 
developmental neurobiologist and now works as a freelance science writer. His 
work has appeared inNature 
<http://www.nature.com/search?exclude-collections=journals_palgrave%2Clab_animal&include-collections=journals_nature%2Ccrawled_content&journal=nature%2Cnews%2Cnnewsb&order=date_desc&q=costandi>
,Science 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=site%3Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencemag.org%2Fnews%20costandi>
, andNew Scientist <https://www.newscientist.com/search/?q=costandi>, among 
other publications. He is also the author ofNeuroplasticity 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/neuroplasticity.html> (MIT Press, 2016) and 
50 Human Brain Ideas You Really Need to Know 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/50-human-brain-ideas-you-really-need-to-know.html>
 (Quercus, 2013).
 