
The United States and China, the world’s biggest emitters of greenhouse gases, 
have announced they will formally ratify theParis climate change agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> in a move 
campaigners immediately hailed as a significant advance in the battle against 
global warming.

Speaking on Saturday, on the eve of the G20 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/g20> summit in Hangzhou, US president, 
Barack Obama, confirmed the long-awaited move, the result of weeks of intense 
negotiations by Chinese and American officials.

“Just as I believe the Paris agreement will ultimately prove to be a turning 
point for our planet, I believe that history will judge today’s efforts as 
pivotal,” said Obama, who was speaking in the presence of the Chinese 
president, Xi Jinping, and United Nations secretary general, Ban Ki-moon.

G20 summit: US and China ratify Paris agreement in major step for climate 
change fight - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/sep/03/g20-summit-obama-to-make-climate-change-announcement-as-may-heads-to-china-live>
“Where there is a will and there is a vision and where countries like China 
and the United States are prepared to show leadership and to lead by example, 
it is possible for us to create a world that is more secure, more prosperous 
and more free than the one that was left for us,” added Obama, for whom the 
commitment is part of a final push to securea green legacy for his presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/29/obama-climate-change-agenda-congress-republicans-environment>
.

Earlier China had announced it would formally ratify the Paris accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/china-ratifies-paris-climate-change-agreement>
 with President Xi vowing to “unwaveringly pursue sustainable development”.


“Our response to climate change bears on the future of our people and the 
well-being of mankind,” Xi said, according to the Associated Press.

Obama said the joint announcement showed how the world’s two largest economies 
were capable of coming together to fight climate change.


“Despite our differences on other issues we hope that our willingness to work 
together on this issue will inspire greater ambition and greater action around 
the world,” he said.


“We have a saying in America that you need to put your money where your mouth 
is,” Obama told an audience at Hangzhou’s West Lake state guesthouse. “And when 
it comes to combating climate change that is what we are doing … we are leading 
by example.”

If the Paris agreement comes into force this year as hoped, it means the 
nearly 200 governments party to it will become obliged to meet 
emissions-cutting pledges made before the deal last December. For example, the 
EU has a “national determined contribution” of cutting emissions by 40% by 2030 
on 1990 levels, and the US by up to 28% by 2025 compared with 2005.

The deal coming into force would also commit the countries to aspire to keep 
temperatures below 1.5C above pre-industrial levels – a tall ask and one that 
will require those country pledges to be ramped up – and for rich countries to 
continue giving climate aid to poorer countries beyond 2020.

Paris climate deal: key points at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
David Waskow, the international climate director of the World Resources 
Institute, a Washington-based thinktank, described the US-China announcement as 
a sign the world’s two largest economies had moved from “making commitments to 
delivering action”.

“When the two largest emitters lock arms to solve climate change, that is when 
you know we are on the right track,” Waskow said. “Never before have these two 
countries worked so closely together to address a global challenge. There’s no 
question that this historic partnership on climate change will be one of the 
defining legacies of Obama’s presidency.”

Ranping Song, the group’s China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
expert, called the announcement “a tremendous milestone” in the fight against 
climate change. “[This is] the two big countries coming together to acknowledge 
the challenges and then working together to tackle them,” Song said. “It’s good 
news.”

“The world finally has a global climate agreement with both the US and China 
as formal parties,” said Jennifer Morgan, the executive director of Greenpeace 
International. “This signals a new era in global efforts to address climate 
change.”

In Washington, the Republican-controlled Congress has questioned Obama’s legal 
right to ratify the accord by decree, noting that the constitution grants the 
Senate a role of “advice and consent 
<http://www.senate.gov/artandhistory/history/common/briefing/Treaties.htm>” in 
making treaties.

But the chamber does not ratify treaties, and the US also has increasingly 
relied on “executive agreements” since thesecond world war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/secondworldwar>. Those agreements are not 
submitted to the Senate but are also considered binding in international law.

The Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
, sealed last December after two weeks of frantic negotiations, must be 
ratified by 55 countries, representing 55% of global emissions, in order to 
come into force.

The news that the world’s top two emitters – who are together responsible for 
about 38% of emissions – would formally ratify the deal is therefore a major 
step towards achieving that.
Graphic – how Paris deal could come into force 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/04/climate_accord/giv-27167G6DxTWjhdAZ9/>
Before Saturday, only 24 countries – responsible for about 1% of global 
emissions – hadratified the agreement <http://cait.wri.org/indc/#/ratification>
, while 180 had signed it.

Shortly before Obama landed in Hangzhou, China became the 25th country to 
ratify the agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/china-ratifies-paris-climate-change-agreement>
. It said the move would “safeguard environmental security” and was “conducive 
to China’s development interests”.

Song said the move increased the likelihood that the Paris deal would be 
implemented by the end of this year, possibly even beforeNovember’s UN climate 
summit in Marrakesh 
<http://unfccc.int/meetings/marrakech_nov_2016/meeting/9567.php>. “This would 
not be happening without the US and China ratifying the agreement,” he said.

Climate campaigners now expected a ratification “surge” in September, with 
other major emitters such as Brazil, the world’s seventh largest emitter, 
following suit, Song added.

Li Shuo, Greenpeace’s China climate policy adviser, said that if the 
international community did succeed in bringing the Paris deal into effect by 
the end of 2016 it would have been achieved “at lightening speed” compared with 
most international treaties.

Under Obama and Xi, US-China relations have been blighted by friction over 
issues such as theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
,cyber espionage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/25/us-china-cyber-security-obama-xi-jinping-inconclusive-summit>
 and, more recently, a plannedmissile defense system in South Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/south-korea-and-us-agree-to-deploy-thaad-missile-defence-system>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fobama-paris-climate-deal-turning-point-for-the-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%3A%20Paris%20climate%20deal%20turning%20point%20for%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fobama-paris-climate-deal-turning-point-for-the-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%3A%20Paris%20climate%20deal%20turning%20point%20for%20the%20world%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fdec%2F13%2Fobama-paris-climate-deal-turning-point-for-the-world-video&media=>
Obama in 2015: Paris climate deal turning point for the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2015/dec/13/obama-paris-climate-deal-turning-point-for-the-world-video>
But Sam Geall, the executive editor of China Dialogue 
<https://www.chinadialogue.net/>, a bilingual website dedicated to 
environmental issues, said the announcement underscored how Beijing and 
Washington had managed to find common ground on climate change.


He said a breakthrough towards a UN deal on climate change had been on the 
cards since November 2014 when Obama and Xi jointly announced asecretly 
negotiated agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/12/us-china-climate-deal-boosts-global-talks-but-republicans-vow-to-resist>
 to slash greenhouse gas emissions. Geall said: “Certainly in terms of US-China 
relations, it is the one area where they have created a proper, active, 
cooperative relationship … [There are] a lot of flights back and forward, a lot 
of cooperative projects on coal, on renewables, on energy-efficient buildings, 
on innovation. There is a lot of substance beneath the announcements that come 
out.

Geall added: “I do think it is part of Obama’s legacy and it’s surprising that 
it hasn’t been talked about all that much in that context actually. He managed 
to help get something really constructive going after the failure of [the 2009 
climate summit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/dec/18/copenhagen-deal> in] 
Copenhagen.”

Geall said China’s leaders, who have vowed to cut coal consumption and draw 
20% of the country’s energy from non-fossil fuels by 2030, also deserved praise 
for their commitment to cleaning up. “Not only is it the one area where there 
is productive US-China cooperation, but it is the one area where China is 
actively behaving like a superpower and they are actually taking on the 
responsibility of having that immense weight in the emissions talks. They 
really have shown some leadership and that has been reflected through the UN 
climate process.”

Beijing’s resolve was the result of a growing awareness of the dangers of 
pollution and climate change and how “there is a national interest in China in 
the low carbon transition and in being the leading suppliers of the clean 
technologies that we will need in a carbon-constrained world”.

Jake Schmidt of the US-based Natural Resources Defense Council said: “Only a 
few short years ago, countries were trying to drag the US and China into the 
global climate agreements and now these two countries are among the first to 
join the new legal regime. That is an important shift in the dynamic.”

Nick Mabey of the UK-based environmental thinktank, E3G, said: “US and Chinese 
ratification sends a strong signal to investors and businesses that they can 
continue investing on the assumption that the Paris climate deal will be 
delivered.”

Bob Ward of the London School of Economics said the move would encourage other 
countries to move quickly and added: “Importantly, it should also make it more 
difficult for Donald Trump to renege on the Paris agreement if he becomes 
president of the US.”

Obama makes climate change personal with call for action in home state Hawaii
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/01/obama-climate-change-hawaii-nevada>
The announcement came on day one of what is likely to be Obama’s last visit to 
Asia as president. Nick Bisley, an international relations professor from La 
Trobe University in Melbourne, said the pre-G20 Obama-Xi summit was part of a 
final “love-in” between the two leaders.

The upbeat farewell was symptomatic of the “really complex relationship” that 
now existed between the two powers. “On the one hand, the geopolitics of it is 
really becoming fraught. And yet around economic areas and a few other policy 
sectors there is actually quite a reasonable amount of cooperation and positive 
connections going on,” Bisley said. “It’s not a simple: we’re either involved 
in an arm wrestle or we are not.”

Li, the Greenpeace activist, described the announcement as “an important 
political move [that] completes a cycle in the cooperation between these two 
countries”.

But with US elections on the horizon and the possibility of Donald Trump, who 
hasdismissed climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/12/donald-trump-climate-change-science-sierra-club>
 as a Chinese conspiracy, becoming president, Li said there were fears 
political change might undo the progress achieved by the US and China. “We 
simply can’t afford any backsliding,” he said, adding: “Here I think I worry 
definitely more about the US side.”
 