
A momentous constitutional decision was taken by the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
 of England and Wales this morning. A prime minister’s absolute power to do 
what they like, when they like, regardless of laws and treaties, was struck 
down. Theresa May cannot tear up our right to be EU citizens without the 
authority of parliament. Those rights were bestowed by parliamentary votes in a 
series of treaties. She can’t high-handedly abandon them and trigger our exit 
from the EU without parliament’s agreement.

Judges, wisely, do not generally want to usurp the power of elected 
governments to govern. Laws made by judges are a poor substitute for those made 
by elected MPs in parliament. But this is a matter of the profoundest 
constitutional importance, with deep implications, controversial whichever way 
they had decided. They rightly pronounced that parliament is sovereign – which 
is what theBrexiters claimed we were voting on 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/we-voted-brexit-keep-parliament-sovereign-wont-be-gagged>
, until it no longer suited them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20'this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20%27this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Victorious Gina Miller reacts to article 50 ruling: ‘this case was about 
process, not politics’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/victorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
What now? The government will appeal to the supreme court in December, though 
some suggest May should dash to the Commons immediately for a quick vote, 
before an as-yet hazy coalition of cross-party remainers has time to organise 
and solidify. If the appeal fails, will MPs galvanise? Leaving it to the 
unelected Lords is no answer.

Will the article 50 ruling stop Brexit? | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/will-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament>
There are times when MPs need to rise above their party interests, their own 
interests and the views of their constituents. That may risk being voted out, 
but they may earn more respect by standing up for the national interest as best 
they can determine: that’s what representative democracy is for. In times of 
war or national crisis, defending the country from grave error, at whatever 
personal cost, is their duty. Brexit is the greatest threat to national 
wellbeing since the war, and this will test the mettle not just of individual 
MPs, but of the nature and purpose of a representative democratic system.

How difficult and brave that is: Labour MPs are painfully mindful that 70% of 
their seats returned majorities in favour of Brexit 
<https://medium.com/@chrishanretty/most-labour-mps-represent-a-constituency-that-voted-leave-36f13210f5c6#.pbnipgjf2>
. Raucous anger against any parliamentary attempt to let the country pause for 
thought is bellowed out daily by the Tory pressdenouncing all 48% of remain 
voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/12/daily-mail-bremoaners-brexit-mps-cbi-bbc-paul-dacre>
 as an anti-democratic remoaning metropolitan elite.Stifling all experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/michael-gove-experts-academics-vote>
 just for being experts,intimidating even the Bank of England governor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/mark-carney-brexit-bolsheviks-new-target-chancellor>
, Mark Carney, is a bullying demagoguery that paralyses many who should speak 
out. A non-binding referendum, voted on amid a thicket of utterly cynicallies 
and promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/boris-johnson-michael-gove-eu-liars>
, cannot be a tombstone block to the judgment of MPs on this vital matter of 
national interest. It’s not anti-democratic to try to stop whatso many other 
countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/21/eu-referendum-how-europeans-see-the-brexit-vote>
 see as an incomprehensible act of economic suicide.

High court says parliament must vote on triggering article 50 - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/03/article-50-high-court-ruling-high-court-set-to-rule-on-whether-mps-should-vote-on-triggering-article-50-politics-live>
Why does the government fight so hard against what would almost certainly be a 
parliament that folded instantly on an article 50 vote? Because during such a 
debate they would have to bring forward some kind of plan for how they will 
negotiate Brexit. No such plan exists, because thesplit cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/17/philip-hammonds-brexit-worries-point-to-cabinet-tensions>
 could not possibly agree even a vague outline to satisfy both Liam Fox and 
Damian Green. Even a wishlist of impossibilities would be impossible, with the 
dementedJohn Redwood/Daily Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/716484/brexit-britain-nissan-european-union-theresa-may-john-redwood-sunderland-eu-brussels>
 faction calling daily for an immediate crashing out, with no deals and no 
treaties.

Best news of the day came from a BBC interview with Lord Kerr, former head of 
the foreign office and ambassador to the US and the EU. It was he who drafted 
Article 50 andhe says 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-37852628>: “It is not 
irrevocable. You can change your mind while the process is going on.”

The pound soared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-581b12d7e4b07ceadb3a1f9d#block-581b12d7e4b07ceadb3a1f9d>
 following today’s high court news because markets are idiotic, shaped by 
punters second-guessing one another’s idiocy. This doesn’t suggest, alas, that 
Brexit is much closer to being reconsidered. Reality will take the pound back 
down, predicted to sink further with each step towards to the exit gate. Next 
year’s prices will rise,NIESR reckons 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37838087>, by 4%, hitting those who are 
“just managing” even harder.

Every day another bad effect is revealed before anything has even happened. 
Today reveals an acute labour shortage in thefood processing industries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/worker-shortages-for-uk-food-industry-at-12-year-low>
, as east Europeans are reluctant to come here. The shrinking pound decreases 
the value of their pay, and they hear awful stories of racistattacks and abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/death-arkadiusz-jozwik-post-referendum-racism-xenophobes-brexit-vote>
. Without actually leaving, we are already keeping EU immigrants away. The 
damage is beginning already.

High court Brexit ruling: what does it all mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/high-court-brexit-ruling-what-does-it-all-mean>
The latest regreters are the £4bn curry house operators 
<https://www.ft.com/content/e72be378-a0ee-11e6-891e-abe238dee8e2?desktop=true>, 
who voted out. They were lied to outright, as Priti Patel and otherstold them  
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/minister-priti-patel-quit-eu-to-save-our-curry-houses-a3251071.html>
fewer EU migrants would open the door to the chefs they desperately need and 
promised a points-based system to let chefs in. This has now been reneged on. 
There will be massive closures, they say. How naive could they be? A public 
stirred byMail and Sun anti-migrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jun/21/why-should-we-vote-to-leave-the-eu-its-migration-stupid>
 horror stories were made even more fearful of Muslim refugees pouring than of 
Poles: of course the government now says the screw is tightening and there will 
be no more Asian visas. Others too will find how badly they were lied to.

There is time for people to change their mind, and polls suggest opinion is on 
the move. The vote was narrow. But MPs can’t wait for public opinion to shift 
by itself. They have a role to play - as leaders not as followers. Today’s 
judgment tells them exactly that.

Once in a while, by mistake, Boris Johnson tells a truth: “Brexit means Brexit 
and we are going to make a titanic success of it”,he said last night at the 
Spectator awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/brexit-will-be-titanic-success-says-boris-johnson>
. Yes, we are on the Titanic and he’s the captain. God help us. Can parliament 
help save us from him and the damage he has done before we sink?
 