
The Brexit blow to the pound coupled with commodity price hikes is squeezing 
Britons’Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> spending 
power this year.

A typical household spends an extra £500 in December but the pound’s dramatic 
tumble since the 23 June referendum means the festive fund is being stretched 
as the price of everything from Christmas puddings to selection boxes and the 
latest tech comes under pressure.

British firms are having to pay a lot more for imports, from food ingredients 
to fuel, with manufacturers’ costs up 13% over the last year – the steepest 
rise for five years. Some of those higher costs are already being passed on to 
consumers, and experts have warned households to expect a brisker pace of 
inflation next year.

Why is UK inflation rising so quickly? Blame Brexit and the oil price
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/why-is-uk-inflation-rising-quickly-blame-brexit-oil-price>
“Generally the drivers of food inflation are what’s happening in global 
commodity markets and recent movements in sterling,” said the RetailEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> analyst Richard Lim. “This 
side of Christmas retailers are holding back some of the inflationary pressure 
they are feeling from suppliers and manufacturers because it is a fiercely 
competitive environment. Next year we expect food inflation to rise fairly 
steeply because of sterling.”

For now it seems importers and retailers are taking a hit to their own margins 
rather than choosing to charge more in the shops, but according to the 
Guardian’s analysis Christmas will give shoppers a taste of higher inflation 
ahead.

Not everything is more expensive – official figures show food prices in shops 
are still lower overall than a year ago. A supermarket price war and the rise 
of discounters such as Lidl and Aldi have helped keep grocery prices low. There 
is also good news for those who like a Christmas tipple.Wine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/how-to-beat-post-brexit-wine-price-rises-fiona-beckett>
, beer and spirits are all cheaper than a year ago.

But shoppers should beware of hidden inflation. Manufacturers have been 
shrinking their products 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/06/maltesers-paralympics-ad-victoria-and-cold-feet>
 and charging the same price. In other words, you pay the same but get less – a
phenomenon known as shrinkflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/lighter-way-to-enjoy-maltesers-mars-shrinks-sharing-bags-by-15>
. A recent example was the storm over the new Toblerone, which hasbigger gaps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 between its chunky chocolate peaks after its manufacturer decided to cut the 
bar’s weight rather than increase its price.

The rising cost of Christmas

Christmas pudding: +21% compared with December 2015


Stir-up Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/19/stir-up-sunday-recipes-baking>
 got a lot more expensive this year as raisins, butter and flour all increased 
in price.

Artificial trees: +46% increase in steel price

You get more than one Christmas out of them but the price of artificial trees 
is being affected by a 46% increase in European steel prices after China 
slashed production.

Christmas jumper: +0.9%

Official figures showed clothing prices this November were up almost 1% from a 
year ago, making them one of the main factors behinda rise in the UK’s overall 
inflation rate to 1.2% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
.

Nip of whisky: +4%

While the headline price of spirits is down about 2% from a year ago, 
according to the Office for National Statistics, a breakdown of the official 
figures shows whisky has been getting pricier. A nip will cost you £2.73 this 
year, up from £2.62 a year ago.



Pigs in blankets: +21%

Analysts are reporting a 21% rise in the wholesale price of pork 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/brexit-vote-pushes-up-price-bacon-china-british-pork>
, with the surge expected to push up the price of bacon and sausages sold in 
supermarkets.

Toblerone: +13% per bite

Chocolate prices would be higher if the bars weren’t getting smaller as 
manufacturers shrink pack sizes rather than raise prices. Mondelēz International
reduced the size of the 170g Toblerone bars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/toblerone-gets-more-gappy-but-its-fans-are-not-happy>
 to 150g – equating to a 13% rise in the price per gram.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fbrexit-price-hikes-push-up-cost-christmas-britons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967ab25dbac82521d8e21e75a69f3695df15cd4a%2F0_306_4929_2957%2F4929.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20and%20price%20hikes%20push%20up%20the%20cost%20of%20Christmas%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fbrexit-price-hikes-push-up-cost-christmas-britons%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20and%20price%20hikes%20push%20up%20the%20cost%20of%20Christmas%20for%20Britons&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fbrexit-price-hikes-push-up-cost-christmas-britons%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F967ab25dbac82521d8e21e75a69f3695df15cd4a%2F0_306_4929_2957%2F4929.jpg>
 An iPad is 10% pricier than last Christmas. Photograph: Alamy 
iPad: +10%


The Brexit vote has pushed up the prices of laptops, desktop computers and 
tablets as technology companies seek to adjust to the weaker pound.Apple has 
hiked the prices of its products in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
, including Christmas list favourite the iPad. Price rises in September, for 
example, pushed up the 9.7-inch model of the iPad Pro to £549 from £499.

Furby: +43%

The Furby Connect has a recommended retail price of £99.99 versus the older 
Boom version’s £69.99 price tag. However, the Furby Connect is a jazzed up 
version of the furry critter with a Bluetooth connection and coloured LED eyes 
– and most retailers are discounting the toy anyway.

Lump of coal: +2%

A lump of coal in the Christmas stocking is now a more expensive way to scold 
a naughty child. A 50kg sack of coal now costs £17.62, 29p more than a year ago
 