
Cambridge University has said it faces significant risks from Britain’s exit 
from the EU, including an estimated two-thirds fall in the number of EU 
students it enrols each year.

In a written submission to MPs on the education select committee, the 
university indicated that it expects annual admission numbers for EU under- and 
postgraduates to fall from 1,100 to below 400.

“Assuming that EU students move to the unregulated international [tuition 
fees] rate, it is almost certain that application numbers will fall further. We 
are currently modelling a two-third reduction in admissions from the non-UK 
EU,” Cambridge said in its submission to the committee’s forthcoming hearing on 
theimpact of Brexit on higher education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/brexit-significant-risk-universities-income>
.

Neil Carmichael, the Conservative MP who chairs the committee, said: “This 
written evidence from university leaders, academics, businesses and others 
highlights the degree of concern about the fate of UK universities post-Brexit.

“It’s crucial that we don’t allow Brexit to become a catastrophe for our 
university sector.”

Cambridge also said its latest data for undergraduate admissions in 2017 had 
already revealed a drop in applications from the EU by 17%. Because 
applications to Cambridge close well ahead of most other institutions, it is 
the first solid evidence of a “Brexit effect” hitting university applications.

The fall comes despite the British government guaranteeing access to student 
loans toEU-based undergraduates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty>
 until the end of their course.

UK universities draw up plans for EU campuses ahead of Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty>
University College London told Carmichael’s committee that Brexit would cut 
its income from teaching if funding was not addressed. “If access to the 
student loan book is withdrawn, student numbers could drop substantially,” UCL 
said.

“We expect that the effects of such an announcement would be immediate and our 
evidence suggests that the greatest impact will fall upon our students from 
eastern Europe.”

The Russell Group of research-intensive universities told the committee that 
fewer EU students would not necessarily open more places for UK nationals.

“If the numbers of EU undergraduate and postgraduate students were to decrease 
as a result of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU, it is not necessarily the case 
that they could be replaced easily by UK nationals,” it said.

The group said “feedback from our members shows that some prospective staff 
[both from within and outside the EU] are now changing their minds about 
continuing with job applications or accepting work contracts because of the 
Brexit vote”.

That warning was supported by Cardiff University, which said: “We believe 
there is a risk that EU staff, and UK staff with EU spouses, will seek 
employment outside the UK if they no longer feel welcome or are uncertain over 
their right to remain. This could affect our ability to attract the best staff.”

Imperial College London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/imperialcollegelondon> said its ability 
to carry out world-beating science research could be tarnished by the loss of 
EU funding.

“The impact of the loss of EU research funding on the research productivity of 
the UK’s universities will be substantial, especially given that Imperial wins 
more than its pro-rata fair share of research funding,” it said.

Brexit a 'significant risk' to income of universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/brexit-significant-risk-universities-income>
UCL said that replacing EU funding “would require a significant increase in 
the proportion of GDP invested in higher education”. Its preferred solution 
“would be for no restrictions or visa requirements to be imposed on EU 
students, staff and researchers”.

Many universities also called for EU students to be taken out of the 
government’s immigration statistics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/20/students-could-be-left-out-of-immigration-figures-ministers-hint>
.

But Universities UK, the lobbying group representing the universities sector, 
said higher education could still thrive despite Brexit.

“Universities UK believes that, with the right support and investment from 
government – both now and in the future – universities can thrive outside the
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” it told the committee.

A government spokesperson said: “The UK is home to some of the world’s best 
universities and our investment of an additional £2bn per year by the end of 
this parliament for scientific research and development will ensure we continue 
to be a global leader in science.

“As we prepare to exit the EU we will maximise our potential by building on 
our achievements so we remain a leading destination for the brightest and best 
minds at all stages of their careers.

“We have already provided assurances for EU students applying for student 
funding in England for courses starting in the academic year 2017-18.”
 