
2016 will forever be remembered as the year of the Brexit vote and Donald 
Trump’s election as US president. Both events sent shock waves through 
financial markets and will have repercussions for businesses in the year ahead.


Even without the political turmoil, 2016 was a dramatic year for business 
leaders. Thecollapse of BHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-criticises-mps-report-bhs-collapse>
 led to intensepressure on Sir Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/sir-philip-green-bhs-mps-pension-schemes>
 and demands that he fill the £571m hole in the store chain’s pension fund, 
whileMike Ashley was summoned before MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
 to explain theworking practices the Guardian had exposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
 at Sport Direct’s Derbyshire warehouse.

MP hits back after Sir Philip Green calls BHS collapse report 'bizarre'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-criticises-mps-report-bhs-collapse>
The annual general meeting season started with a bang when two FTSE 100 
companies –BP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/14/bp-pledge-shareholder-anger-ceo-bob-dudleypay-deal>
 and Smith & Nephew – had their pay schemes voted down. There were also big 
events in industry, withNissan securing a post-Brexit deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/nissans-post-brexit-deal-could-lead-to-colossal-bills-for-taxpayers>
,approval for the Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
 nuclear power station and concerns over the commitment of Indian companyTata 
to its UK steel plants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/tata-steel-commits-to-keeping-port-talbot-open>
.

So as the year draws to close, who were the winners and losers in the business 
world in 2016 – and who has most at stake in the year ahead?

Losers

No sooner had 2016 begun, that Marc Bolland, the chief executive of Marks & 
Spencer,announced he was leaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/07/ms-boss-marc-bolland-to-step-down>
. His successor, M&S lifer Steve Rowe, scaled back the retailer’s international 
expansion and announced plans to close stores and convert 45 sites into 
food-only outlets. By the end of the year, Robert Swannell, the chairman, 
announced his retirement.

 It was not long before another chief executive, Katherine Garrett-Cox also 
left. She walked away fromthe investment trust firm Alliance Trust in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/15/alliance-trust-katherine-garrett-cox-to-leave-in-march>
 when her role became obsolete in a restructuring that followed a long-lasting 
tussle with activist investors. By the end of the year, the Dundee-based firm 
outlined a dramatic plan to outsource the management of its investment funds.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ee0984c799a13a79cb123ce859ae64f53c5cfd%2F138_157_3723_2237%2F3723.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F29ee0984c799a13a79cb123ce859ae64f53c5cfd%2F138_157_3723_2237%2F3723.jpg>
 Katherine Garrett-Cox. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Ruby McGregor-Smith stepped aside after a decade running outsourcing company 
Mitie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/mitie-profit-warning-brexit-vote-spending-eu-referendum>
. The company said she had doubled profits and revenues during her tenure – but 
the shine was taken off by a profit warning three weeks earlier that knocked 
25% of the share price. Phil Bentley, who used to run British Gas and Cable & 
Wireless Communications, took over.

Bosses at a string of companies faced revolts. Besides BP and Smith & Nephew, 
companies as diverse as engineering group Weir, Shire Pharmaceuticals, estate 
agent Foxtons and betting company Paddy Power Betfair were also subjected to 
pay rebellions.

 Ashley’s problems began at the end of 2015, when the Guardian revealed how 
his retail empire was effectively paying below the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
. He spent 2016 dealing with the consequences. The Newcastle United owner was 
hauled before MPs, and at an open day at his warehouse in Shirebrook, 
Derbyshire,he stunned observers by producing a wad of £50 notes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/sep/07/mike-ashley-pulls-out-wad-50-notes-during-sports-direct-security-check-video>
 from his pocket during a security check. The company’s shares have crumbled 
from about 570p to below 300p. There has been better news for Sports Direct 
workers, who have beenpromised back pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/sports-direct-staff-to-receive-back-pay-unite-hmrc>
.


For BHS workers, though, the news was dire. In August, BHS tores closed their 
doors for the last time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/28/frank-field-accuses-sir-philip-green-of-asset-stripping-bhs>
 after 88 years of trading. A parliamentary inquiry was looking into why the 
chain collapsed barely a year after being sold bySir Philip Green to the 
thrice-bankrupt entrepreneurDominic Chappell. A damning report by MPs  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-demise-sir-philip-green-reputation-torn-apart-in-damning-report>
concluded the business had been subjected to “systematic plunder” by former 
owners. MPs voted to strip Green of his knighthood, although the vote was 
purely symbolic and carried no official sanction.A deal to plug a £571m deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/philip-green-demands-dominic-chappell-pays-into-bhs-pension-deal>
 in the pension fund is yet to be secured.

Navinder Singh Sarao spent most of the year fighting extradition to face 
charges that he had been “spoofing” markets from his parents’ house in 
Hounslow, west London. Eventually extradited,Sarao appeared in a Chicago court 
and pleaded guilty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/british-trader-pleads-guilty-to-wire-after-us-extradition>
.Martyn Dodgson’s conviction for insider dealing was secured using evidence 
from bugged offices, CCTV images and a crucial password of “Lamborghini55” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/painstaking-investigation-deutsche-bank-insider-trading>
. The former Deutsche Bank managing director was jailed for four and half 
years. His friend Andrew Hind was jailed for three and half years for acting as 
his middleman. Three others were acquitted.

Four former Barclays bankers were sentenced to between 33 months and 
six-and-a-half years in jailfor conspiring to rig global benchmark interest 
rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/04/libor-rigging-scandal-three-former-barclays-traders-found-guilty>
. Just before Christmas, former BlackRock fund managerMark Lyttleton was jailed 
for a year after pleading guilty to insider dealing through a Panamanian 
company in the name of his wife.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81360c83e32e03022716cf78e44b459a86b72ddf%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Mike Ashley outside the Sports Direct headquarters in Shirebrook, Derbyshire. 
Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
The pound plunged after the vote to leave the EU and is down 15% against the 
dollar, a fall not helped byOctober’s “flash crash” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
 when the currency dived to new 31-year lows.

Winners

Andrew Bailey’s year started with his unexpected appointment as chief 
executive of the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/andrew-bailey-new-fca-boss-says-he-did-not-apply-for-role>
. Poached from the Bank of England, where he was one of the deputy governors, 
Bailey made a number of eye-catching moves after taking the helm in the summer. 
Crowdfunding, the fund management industry, high-cost consumer credit and the 
spread-betting industry are in his sights.

Executives enjoyed big pay days. Sir Martin Sorrell, chief executive of 
advertising company WPP,received £70.4m in cash and shares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/29/sir-martin-sorrell-70m-in-2015-pay-deal-wpp>
. It was one of the biggest pay deals in UK corporate history – and was opposed 
by a third of the company’s shareholders. Simon Segars and Mike Muller atARM 
Holdings shared a payout of £55m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/top-two-arm-executives-share-up-to-55m-payout-after-softbank-takeover>
 when the British microchip designer was sold to Japan’s SoftBank for £24bn. 
Angus Thirlwell and Peter Harris, the founders of luxury chocolate makerHotel 
Chocolat, received £43m when the business was floated on AIM 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/hotel-chocolat-founders-make-20m-each-from-stock-market-debut>
 in May. And after a difficult 2015,Ivan Glasenberg, boss of mining company 
Glencore, had a good end to 2016 as the share price in the natural resources 
group rallied from from 85p to about 270p, boosting the value of his personal 
shareholding from £1bn to £3.2bn.

Revealed: how Sports Direct effectively pays below minimum wage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
 Carmaker Nissan secured a deal from the government to seek tariff-free access 
to the single market when EU exit negotiations start. The Japanese company 
announced it wouldturn its Sunderland factory into one of the biggest car 
plants in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-decision-to-stay-in-sunderland-averts-catastrophic-consequences>
, saving more than 7,000 jobs.

While the news was good for Nissan workers, the prospects for workers at Tata 
Steel’s plants were mixed. The Scunthorpe works was saved by a rescue deal in 
June, led by Greybull, the family investment firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/01/tata-steel-sale-to-greybull-saving-jobs-and-bringing-back-british-steel>
. In Port Talbot, workers are still awaiting confirmation of a deal with the 
Pensions Regulator.

The on-off Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> nuclear power station was 
finally given the go-ahead after the government signed an £18bn contract with 
French utilities firms EdF and China to start construction at the site in 
Somerset.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e82cb4352c7d51debe78db1e258f42c9fb68ff8%2F0_73_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4e82cb4352c7d51debe78db1e258f42c9fb68ff8%2F0_73_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Steel works in Port Talbot, South Wales. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
The European commission fought back against complex tax arrangements by ruling 
asweetheart deal devised by the Irish government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 had allowed Apple to pay tax of just 0.005% in 2014 and an average rate of 1% 
over many years. However, the competition commissioner, Margrethe Vestager, 
later said the full amount may not be payable to Ireland.

In the empire-building stakes, supermarket chain Sainsbury’s won control of 
Argos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/sainsburys-gets-all-clear-to-buy-argos>
,Shire Pharmaceuticals took over Baxalta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/11/shire-clinches-32bn-takeover-of-baxalta>
,ABInBev, the world’s biggest brewer, completed its £79bn acquisition of SAB 
Miller 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/brewers-79bn-mega-merger-could-cost-uk-600-jobs>
 and as the year drew to a close,Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox lodged an 
£11.7bn bid totake full control of Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/14/formal-bid-for-sky-by-murdochs-21st-century-fox-thought-imminent>
. The London Stock Exchange and Deutsche Börsealso announced a merger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/london-stock-exchange-deutsche-borse-merger-brexit-vote-uk-german>
.

Ones to watch

Emma Walmsley
Even before she gets started as chief executive of GlaxoSmithKline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/20/glaxosmithkline-names-emma-walmsley-new-ceo-gsk>
, Walmsley is already being described as the most powerful woman in the FTSE 
100. When she takes charge in March, Walmsley faces shareholders pushing for a 
breakup of the pharmaceutical business. Her background is in the consumer arm: 
Sensodyne toothpaste, Horlicks malted drinks and Panadol painkillers.

Paula Nickolds
Nickolds is taking over as the first female chief executive of John Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/johnlewis>, replacing Andy Street, who 
has stepped down to run as the Tory candidate for mayor of Birmingham.

Nickolds, who once considered a teaching career, started as a graduate trainee 
at John Lewis in 1994 and climbed the ladder through buying roles in clothing 
and furniture, before becoming buying and brand director. In the latter role, 
Nickolds had responsibility for the all-important Christmas ad,including 2013’s 
bear and the hare animation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/nov/08/department-stores-christmas-advertising-campaigns>
. She was named commercial director last year, with responsibility for shops 
and product development.

It’s a big gig, running “middle England’s” favouite department store, but she 
is taking over at a tricky time:profits slumped 31% to £32m in the first half 
of this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
 as the chain struggled to adapt to the shift to online shopping.

John Lewis warns of steady reduction in staff as profits tumble
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/john-lewis-profits-fall-nearly-15-percent>
Bali Padda
The Indian-born Briton is the first non-Dane to lead Lego, which has survived 
in the computer game era by expanding into film franchise merchandise such as 
Star Wars and Harry Potter. Pricesin the UK will be going up 5% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/lego-to-raise-its-prices-in-uk-from-january-sterling>
 at the start of the year as a result of the Brexit-induced fluctuations in the 
pound. Padda joined in 2004 and has been promoted from chief operations officer.

Ross McEwan
The New Zealander who runs Royal Bank of Scotland will be hoping to reach a 
settlement with the Department of Justice over a bond mis-selling scandal and 
find a buyer for 300 branches that must be sold under state aid penalties 
imposed by Brussels. Until these are resolved, the Treasury will struggle to 
sell off its 73% stake in the bank. In February, RBS willannounce its ninth 
consecutive year of losses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/28/rbs-reports-469m-loss-for-the-third-quarter>
 – which have already topped £50bn since its bailout.

Sean Clarke
Already six months into his role running Asda, the UK arm of US retail giant 
Walmart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/13/asda-replaces-ceo-andy-clarke-walmart-china-chief-sean-clarke>
, Clarke has inherited a business that has dropped into third place out of four 
big UK supermarkets. A Briton who has had a global career, Clarke will need to 
use all the expertise of the Walmart empire to fight back against the German 
discounters Aldi and Lidl. Asda’s selling point has been price. Clarke will 
need to find another reason to get shoppers through the door.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc79e7b22cce207dcfb3811977886bab6a2c99818%2F0_62_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%2C%20strikes%20and%20pay%20revolts%3A%20the%20year%20in%20business&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fbrexit-strikes-and-pay-revolts-the-year-in-business%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc79e7b22cce207dcfb3811977886bab6a2c99818%2F0_62_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 An Asda supermarket. Photograph: Alamy 
Sharon White
The head of media regulator Ofcom could be asked to examine the offer by 21st 
Century Fox to buy Sky 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-pay-tv>
 andkeep BT honest as it separates its Openreach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission>
 unit, which controls the UK’s broadband infrastructure. Her profile is already 
rising: mobile operator Three is projecting an image of her as a cartoon 
superhero on to landmark buildings to encourage her to put a 30% cap on the 
amount of mobile spectrum that any operator can run.

Keith Hellawell
The clock is ticking on the former police officer’s tenure as chairman of 
Sports Direct. In September,53% of the embattled retailer’s independent 
shareholders voted against his re-election to the role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation>
. In January, another vote will be called. He is likely to survive it – as this 
time 55% shareholder Mike Ashley gets a say – but he has pledged to stand down 
if the majority of independent shareholders vote against him at the next AGM.

Andy Parker
The boss of Capita ended 2016 on a sour note 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/capita-robots-chair-powell-sports-direct-halliwell>
 after the outsourcing company issued two profit warnings in three months. The 
blame is being placed on Brexit and problems with IT for London’s congestion 
charging zone. The shares dived to 10-year lows, putting pressure on Parker, 
who has been running the outsourcing company since 2014 and will want to avoid 
taking the axe to the dividend.

Marco Gobbetti: the man tasked with putting Burberry back in fashion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/marco-gobbetti-the-man-tasked-with-putting-burberry-back-in-fashion>
Marco Gobbetti
The chief executive designate of Burberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/marco-gobbetti-the-man-tasked-with-putting-burberry-back-in-fashion>
 will not take the helm until the middle of the year – 12 months after his 
appointment was announced in a move that marked the end of Christopher Bailey’s 
unusual dual role as creative director and chief executive. Gobbetti won 
plaudits while running the French luxury brand Celine, and Bailey, who will 
become president and focus on his role as creative director, welcomed him with 
a promise of a “wonderfully collaborative relationship”. 2017 will be the test 
of that.

Jamie Dimon
As chief executive of America’s biggest bank, JP Morgan, Dimon’s words and 
actions will be of particular interest in the UK in 2017. In the run-up to the 
23 June referendum, Dimon hadwarned that 4,000 jobs were at risk if there was a 
vote for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/03/jp-morgan-boss-up-to-4000-jobs-could-be-cut-after-brexit>
. The bank employs 19,000 people across the UK in Canary Wharf, Bournemouth and 
Glasgow and any move by JP Morgan to start shifting jobs could set the tone for 
other banks.

Alex Cruz 
Six months into taking control of British Airways in a management reshuffle, 
Cruz ended 2016 having staved off strike action bybaggage handlers, check-in 
staff 
<http://om/world/2016/dec/20/unite-union-uk-airport-baggage-check-in-staff-strikes-called-off>
 and cabin crew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/18/talks-agreed-bid-avert-british-airways-christmas-strikes-unite>
. The new year brings new challenges: he has already outlined plans to squeeze 
more passengers on to planes from 2018 and from 11 January will start charging 
economy customers on short-haul and domestic flights from Heathrow and Gatwick 
for M&S food.
 