
As Donald Trump’s victory ricochets around the world, what does it do to us 
here in the UK? Never doubt that it will infect our political psyche. First to 
gloat was Nigel Farage, expecting Ukip to cash in. “Brexit plus, plus,” Trump
called his own message 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/07/trump-us-vote-will-be-brexit-plus-plus-plus/>
. Farage was the only UK political figure tostand beside Trump in the campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/nigel-farage-fights-donald-trumps-corner-in-post-debate-spin-room>
, and Ukip canexpect rewards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/nigel-farage-jokes-about-trumps-alleged-sexual-assaults>
. The party can claim to be the only real bridge in the special relationship 
between the UK and the US – although Trumpish Boris Johnson may ape some of 
that reflected glory.

The triumph of the unspeakable makes acceptable what before was publicly 
unsayable: on race, on women, on the poor. Roll back the cultural progress in 
all our race relations and anti-discrimination acts, and if we’re not careful 
it will be not only permissible but politically necessary to acknowledge the 
lowest of visceral racist, sexist and nationalist instincts as valid. They are 
not.

Nigel Farage jokes about Trump's alleged sexual assaults
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/nigel-farage-jokes-about-trumps-alleged-sexual-assaults>
The dark side of human nature always lurks in politics, the mean, hating, 
isolationist, me-and-mine-first selfishness. Watch out for Brexiteers’ 
my-country-against-the-world rhetoric, echoing Neville Chamberlain’s disdain in 
1938 for faraway people “of whom we know nothing”.

In the end, Chamberlain had to fight, as he wrote in a letter in 1939 about 
Germany: “No doubt the Jews aren’t a lovable people; I don’t care about them 
myself; but that is not sufficient to explain the pogrom.” Turn just a slightly 
forgiving eye to racism and it can always spill out.

The message Theresa May takes from Trumpism will be to redouble her already 
fearsome approach to migration. Shudders across Europe strengthen the arm of 
all its primitive, nativist movements, in Germany, Hungary, Poland, Holland and 
Finland, and power upMarine Le Pen’s presidential candidacy in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/marine-le-pen-says-trumps-victory-marks-great-movement-across-world>
. That may make the 27 countries in the EU besides us eager to seal a quick 
Brexit deal accepting our anti-migrant demand, or more determined to stamp on 
it. But for our politics at home, we should be afraid.

Watch out for the newly puffed-up I-told-you-so entitlement of the more 
extreme Brexiteers, upping their demands, threatening May and cabinet moderates 
at any sign of backsliding.

Rupert Murdoch and the Daily Mail bullies won Brexit, and now wield the whip 
more nakedly over the government than ever. The arrival of Fox News in the US 
and the Sun here were cultural game-changers, one repugnant man distorting 
whole nations with his greedy, dystopic vision. With a small majority and Ukip 
re-emboldened by Trump, this government will veer rightwards on those totemic 
“them and us” issues – race, migration, poverty and benefits.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20speech%20in%20full%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20speech%20in%20full%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s victory speech in full – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/donald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
The crushed social democratic cadres on Labour’s benches look across at the 
demolition of Hillary Clinton and the end of Obama’s legacy and see reflected 
their own demise. Weakly led, with France and Italy likely to lose social 
democratic leaders too, where do they turn for encouragement?

There is a real danger, in their despair, that they abandon deep values in the 
name of “realism”. The people have spoken, so knuckle under. Most Labour MPs 
are in Brexit seats, where white supremacism won the day, and now you can hear 
some of them humbly promising to “listen” to those voices. But when you have 
listened, what then? Build walls and more deportation camps?

There is a patronising pity in the idea that the poor left-behinders know no 
better. But the only way is to challenge this outlook at every turn, because if 
you give way, the demands of racism are relentless and insatiable. Labour should
listen to Margaret Hodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/mar/13/nick-griffin-margaret-hodge-barking-dagenham>
 on how she chased the BNP and Nick Griffin out of her Barking constituency – 
by outright challenge, not by bending towards them.

Both the Brexit and the Trump vote showed it was not just a bellow of pain 
from the poor and the uneducated, but shockingly high numbers of the 
comfortable and the educated too who joined the whitelash.

Why the surge of anti-establishment discontent? The great 1980s explosion of 
inequality, never since repaired, has blown apart communality. Why it throws up 
a billionaire freak or a privileged Farage is just a feature of the 
unpredictability of demagoguery. But once dark hatreds of “the other” are 
stirred, voters on the right can be pushed towards this extremism.

David Cameron, George Osborne and Iain Duncan Smith sowed the seeds, well 
knowing how to turn people with just a little against those with nothing, 
especially other nationalities or races, to distract them from megamillionaires 
buying up great empty luxury investment apartments instead of building homes 
for their children.

Britain’s biggest fear realised – an isolationist US president | Jonathan 
Powell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-britain-greatest-fear-isolationist-president>
Social democracy is not dead because it remains the only way to live in 
decent, peaceful, reasonably fair societies. The NHS, decent housing, 
infrastructure investment, good schools, good jobs and social security are 
essentials to be paid for from taxes, the best-off shouldering most. Climate 
change will fry us unless the world works together. These bedrock ideas proved 
the most economically effective as well as the most socially productive way 
forward. But in Britain, as in the US, the state is in retreat on every front, 
cutting and undermining the basics of civilisation.

Demagogues seize on voters’ myriad contradictions: people want Swedish public 
services on Trump-like low taxes. People want the cheap benefits of Primark and 
Lidl globalised trade, but to keep British jobs for British people.

Politics is about choosing – and, yes, the trade-offs are complicated. There 
are no magic solutions: not Brexit, not Trump. Labour needs to find the 
language to express these universal truths that most people know in their heart 
of hearts: you get what you pay for, and foreigners are not to blame for the 
failings of our shrinking state. Conviction, diligence and seriousness will win 
over fantasy politics that will self-destruct before long.

Don’t for one moment let the horror of the Trump election become normal, as he 
greets world leaders in the Rose Garden. Women, above all, learn the lesson: 
the battle is never won.
 