
First they were anomalies: the reports of European citizens legally living in 
the UK, but caught in some dystopian drama with the Home Office after the 
Brexit vote. Perhaps they were just administrative mix-ups, we might have 
reasoned: straightforward cases that ran into misinformed, computer-says-no 
immigration officials. Now the stories are becoming regular. We hear tales of 
Europeans – some of whom were even born in the UK and have lived here all their 
lives, or are married to British citizens and have children born in Britain – 
being forced to regularise their status, appealing to the Home Office for some 
stability and reassurance via naturalisation.

Assuring EU citizens of right to stay 'would lose UK negotiating capital'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/uk-eu-citizens-right-remain-brexit-negotiating-capital-home-office-letter>
What they face is not a machinery that seeks to understand their plight or has 
regard to the sensitivities. Instead, they are confronted by a dysfunctional 
instrument made blunt and crude by historically inconsistent government policy 
on immigration – and that, since the EU referendum, has been rendered even more 
incomprehensible and inhumane by the lack of any coherent government plan for 
Brexit.

Not only is the Home Office understaffed and under-resourced as the result of 
public sector cuts, it is also under pressure to deliver whatever results the 
government needs to stand any chance of meeting its immigration targets. The 
result is that, for up to3 million EU nationals 
<https://www.the3million.org.uk/> worried by the political hiatus, seeking 
reassurance from the Home Office is like running towards a cliff to flee a 
predator.

Hitherto, the focus has been on non-EU citizens: on efforts to keep their 
numbers down both in terms of the right to remain and naturalisation. That has 
been behind the spasmodic witch-hunts of certain groups regardless of how much 
they contribute to the British economy. NHS doctors one day,overseas students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/01/universities-suffer-brexit-britain-refugee-children>
 the next – anyone who is above the radar and good for a headline. The guiding 
Home Office principle seems to be reject first, ask questions later, and in the 
meantime hope the applicant does not have the connections or resources to 
appeal. Immigration lawyers have told me that officials were at one point being 
incentivised, on the basis of how many applications they rejected, with Marks & 
Spencer vouchers.

But immigration targets and Brexit are a toxic mix that changes everything: 
how else to explain yesterday’s baldly expressed admission from the Home Office 
that it now sees EU citizens in Britain, previously exempt from having to prove 
residency rights, as“negotiating capital” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/uk-eu-citizens-right-remain-brexit-negotiating-capital-home-office-letter>
?

The stories of how officials have already started to behave towards EU 
nationals speaks to a particular mindset, a bureaucracy infected perhaps by the 
same ill will, nastiness and recklessness that defined the referendum campaign.

But the Home Office in particular, and the immigration system in general, has 
long made decisions not on the basis of merit or reason, but as a way of 
filtering out as many applicants as possible – either via exhaustion of 
resources or impossibly high barriers. This is whyEU citizens who have lived 
here for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/home-office-reform-permanent-residency-application-process-eu-nationals>
, and are now applying for UK citizenship but neglect to include their 
passports (not actually a requirement, but a handy excuse familiar to anyone 
who has dealt with the Home Office), are not only having their applications 
rejected, they’re being told to prepare to leave the UK, despite already being 
entitled to permanent residency.

One such applicant likened her treatment to a Monty Python sketch. That is 
true in terms of farce, but not levity. If the waiting or the rejections or the 
appeals don’t exhaust the anxious applicant, the costs involved in protecting 
themselves from the relentless machine surely will.

Home Office urged to reform residency process by frustrated EU citizens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/home-office-reform-permanent-residency-application-process-eu-nationals>
Nothing demonstrates this absurdity more than the case of Dom Wolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/man-told-to-take-citizenship-test-despite-living-entire-life-in-uk>
, born to German parents in London, who applied for a British passport after 
the Brexit vote and now has to take the UK citizenship test because officials 
say he cannot prove his mother was legally in the UK when she gave birth. His 
incredulity echoes that of many shunted into a newly perilous position. 
“Holding a British birth certificate and having had my parents live, work and 
raise four boys in the UK for over 42 years, I made the devastating assumption 
that this would be an easy process,” he said in a letter to the prime minister. 
“Oh boy was I wrong.”

At this point it is really tempting, for those born outside Europe, to say: 
welcome to our lives. If your worst-case scenario isa strongly worded letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
 that is later apologised for, or the inconvenience of having to take a test, 
don’t expect too much surprise from those of us who have long battled with this 
mighty bureaucracy.

But Brexit lays bare the brutal way in which decisions about peoples’ lives 
and families are taken, and how facts they thought immutable – like nationality 
or the holding of a passport – can be withdrawn by a sudden change in public 
mood and a reckless government cowering in whatever direction the winds of 
xenophobia are blowing. Already there are reports of EU citizens being 
questioned about their right to use the NHS, and concerns about poor and 
elderly people who may struggle to fortify themselves against whatever ultimate 
decision will be made about their status.

Brexit has revealed the unpreparedness of politicians, and these deficiencies 
yield great consequences for ordinary people who suffer when a bureaucracy 
turns brutal. It has also revealed the extent to which immigration law is 
damaged by populist thinking and underfunding. The hysterical view that Britain 
is a soft touch for migrants helped deliver the leave vote. The new plight of 
EU citizens is exposing the disjuncture between the immigration system we have, 
and the one we think we have.

• You can comment on this article via our Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/farmers-fear-brexit-save-british-countryside-european-subsidy-wildlife-agriculture>
, which opens at 10am on Wednesday
 