
“Students, society and the economy” – in the government’s white paper 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/higher-education-success-as-a-knowledge-economy-white-paper>
, published in May, ministers were clear about where they believe universities’ 
responsibilities lie.

Since then the shockwaves of the EU referendum have reverberated through the 
sector, with calls foruniversities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/30/brexit-has-sparked-an-identity-crisis-in-uk-universities>
 and thescientific community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jul/07/brexit-is-also-a-vote-against-the-elitism-in-science>
 to help repair the divides – economic, cultural, social and regional – exposed 
by the result.


Brexit has sparked an identity crisis in UK universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/30/brexit-has-sparked-an-identity-crisis-in-uk-universities>
It is not new to suggest that there is an important link between institutions 
and the wider population. But this relationship hasn’t been without its 
tensions over the years. In medieval Cambridge, town v gown grievances led to a 
crowd of angry townspeople attacking the university, burning its documents and 
ransacking its buildings.


Even in the brave new world of the 1960s, the campuses of plate glass 
universities rose up on out-of-town sites which once were fields - away from 
the hubbub of the city, as though designed consciously to turn their backs on 
civic life.


Beyond the campus

Today, the role of higher education in supporting social progress is still 
often seen simply through the lens of access. But there is a huge amount that 
institutions are doing to support and empower communities beyond the campus, 
directly addressing some of the toughest challenges facing society, tackling 
the causes and consequences of inequality.

Take the refugee crisis. In Middlesbrough – which is home to the UK’s second 
largest community of refugee and asylum seekers outside of London – Teesside 
University is helping marginalised and vulnerable people participate in society.


This has meant genuinely opening up the university: giving refugees and asylum 
seekers access to English language classes and allowing them to attend lectures 
as guests. Those who fled their homes before being able to finish their 
degrees, or who simply want to learn new skills, have been able to continue 
engaging with study.


Significantly, this has involved students as well as staff: Teesside’s nursing 
students are working alongside refugee groups to support the community’s access 
to healthcare, while media and journalism students have documented their 
stories through films and interviews.


University innocence projects: where are they now?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/apr/27/university-innocence-projects-where-are-they-now>
And the learning goes both ways – a project starting later this year will 
involve native speakers from the refugee community teaching university staff 
words in Arabic and Farsi, recognising that the university, its staff and its 
students can benefit from the talents and expertise of refugees and asylum 
seekers too.

Citizen engagement

In its most recent annual predictions, innovation charity Nesta heralded the 
emergence ofchallenge-driven universities 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/2016-predictions/challenge-driven-universities>, 
focused on solving real-world problems. Sixpilot social innovation projects 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/funding/sifund/>, supported by the Higher Education 
Funding Council for England, demonstrate how this is already happening: 
universities directly collaborating with communities, addressing social issues 
through citizen engagement.

These include a group of five universities workingwith populations in six 
areas as part of theAppetite for Change 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/funding/sifund/Projects/appetite/> project. Seeking to 
gain a better understanding of food poverty, it identifies the challenges that 
need to be addressed and will develop new ways of building resilience, 
including through technology and alternative food systems.

Another project brings together Manchester Metropolitan and Edge Hill 
universities to focus onmental health in young men and boys 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/funding/sifund/Projects/boys/> in the Everton area, in 
light of evidence that 75 per cent of those committing suicide under the age of 
25 are male.

Using video booths installed in communal spaces in the neighbourhood, it 
encourages young men at risk of mental health problems to discuss their 
feelings more openly. In turn, the findings will inform the way local services 
are designed and delivered, working alongside the police, social care and 
mental health professionals.

Innovation and creativity

Along with using academic rigour and evidence to inform better social 
outcomes, universities can bring innovative thinking and creativity.

International student numbers have been plummeting for years. Now what?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/14/international-student-numbers-have-been-plummeting-for-years-now-what>
The University of Salford, for example, is supporting the transformation of 
Pendleton <https://www.pendletontogether.co.uk/>, a community on its doorstep. 
Research will be used to ensure the design of new homes and public spaces 
supports ecological sustainability and healthy living, and students from its 
School of Arts and Media will be helping residents make a documentary to create 
a living legacy, bringing the community together around a shared creative 
project.

Elsewhere, budding student entrepreneurs and innovators are putting their 
talents to work to assist local small firms with the challenges they face 
throughhackathons <https://bizboard.kingston.ac.uk/2015/10/>, creative projects 
<http://www.greenwichbright.net/> or placements with SMEs 
<http://www.d2n2lep.org/News/nottingham-trent-university-recognised-for-employability-efforts>
 – gaining new skills and experience and supporting the local community.

These examples demonstrate how universities’ impact in creating a better 
society goes beyond simply those who work and study within their walls. They 
provide models which institutions can – and must – build upon: acting as a 
platform, bringing local communities together with students, researchers, 
professionals and practitioners, providing the glue to maintain relationships 
over time.

For many institutions, this wider role has always been part of the university 
mission, but it deserves to be recognised and championed right across the 
sector. Universities must be active participants, not disinterested bystanders, 
with the aim of addressing inequality through actions as well as words being 
fundamental to the way they see themselves.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 