
Why should Brexit affect the UK’s internal arrangements?

The last week has seen a flurry of interventions by Scotland, Wales and 
Northern Ireland arguing for a greater say in how the UK government conducts 
negotiations to leave the European Union.

In the supreme court, Northern Ireland QCs and Scotland’s lord advocate argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/northern-ireland-assembly-consent-required-before-brexit-supreme-court-hearing>
 it was not only MPs and peers in Westminster who deserved consultation, but 
also devolved legislatures in Stormont and Edinburgh.

Supreme court Brexit hearing: 10 things we learned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/08/supreme-court-brexit-10-things-learned-royal-prerogative-henry-viii>
Meanwhile, Labour’s leader in Scotland, Kezia Dugdale, wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/uk-needs-new-act-union-stop-break-brexit-scotland>
 in the Guardian of the need for a “people’s constitutional convention” to 
re-establish the UK for a new age. She gave aspeech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/scottish-labour-new-federal-state-unite-uk-after-brexit-kezia-dugdale-nicola-sturgeon>
 calling for many EU powers to be repatriated to Edinburgh rather than 
Westminster.

Politically, this all reflects the referendum’s varying results up and down 
the country. “We are a united Kingdom in name only,” said the London Labour MP 
and remain campaigner Chuka Umunna.

Legally, Brexit has opened a constitutional can of worms. “Britain has two 
sovereignty problems: one relating to the internal sovereignty of Westminster 
over the regions of the United Kingdom, and the other external, the 
relationship between Westminster and the European institutions,” says Sir David 
Edward, a Scottish former judge at the European court of justice.

Shouldn’t it be called Ukexit?

Even the name is not agreed upon. Political scientist Brendan O’Leary has 
argued Brexit is a logically impossible misnomer since it is not Britain trying 
to leave the EU, but the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.

It is less catchy than Brexit – which caught on after Greece’s threatened 
departure from the EU became known as Grexit – but he calls for the term Ukexit 
to be used for more than just pedantic reasons.

“To use Brexit is to do verbal violence to the nature of the UK, which is a 
double union, not a British nation state,” wrote O’Leary in a provocativepaper 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=2&ved=0ahUKEwinqZX5kOXQAhWkI8AKHSI5AKsQFggkMAE&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.centreonconstitutionalchange.ac.uk%2Fsites%2Fdefault%2Ffiles%2Fpapers%2FThe%2520Dalriada%2520Document.pdf&usg=AFQjCNGL_3wo1FJ0fXG5s1jwL1ye5_3JrA&bvm=bv.140915558,d.d2s>
 discussing the unlikely option of Northern Ireland and Scotland possibly 
staying inside both the EU and UK.

Isn’t there a law about all this?

In the absence of a single written constitution, many of the answers to these 
questions lie in the interpretation of case law, some of it going back 
centuries. As Dominic Chambers QC told the supreme court on Wednesday, the 
doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty was “forged on the battlefields of the 
17th century in the [English civil war] between crown and parliament”.

But devolution that began under Tony Blair has established a growing body of 
more recent law, with significant consequences. A 2016 amendment to the 1998 
Scotland Act, for example, establishes that the Scottish parliament and 
government are a permanent part of the UK constitutional arrangement. The 
so-calledSewel convention <http://www.gov.scot/About/Government/Sewel/KeyFacts>
, which recognises that the UK shall not normally legislate with respect to 
devolved matters without consent of the Scottish parliament, is now statute as 
well as good manners.

 Richard Gordon QC, for the Welsh government, told the court: “The force of 
the Sewel convention is not its legal enforceability but that it’s a dialogue 
between legislatures.”

Similarly, in Northern Ireland, which lost devolution powers and gained EU 
membership at the same time in 1972-3, has since had much of its independent 
relationship with Brussels enshrined by referendums leading up to the Good 
Friday agreement, and by the UN-recognised British Irish agreement and the 
Northern Ireland Act of 1998.

“You can’t get away from the fact that the UK now has a partially written 
constitution in the form of statutes, and making it work requires respect on 
all sides,” explained Sir David Edward in apanel discussion 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/events/2016/december/brexit-implications-for-scotland-and-northern-ireland>
 at City University law school this week.

What is Westminster’s response?

So far, the Tory government in Westminster is showing limited patience for any 
notion of further complicating its already difficult negotiations with the EU.

The chancellor, Philip Hammond, a cabinet moderate, was recently dispatched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/scotland-will-not-get-special-brexit-concessions-says-philip-hammond>
 north from London to rule out any prospect of Scotland winning special 
concessions on trade or immigration in the Brexit deal.

“This is a United Kingdom issue and the will of the people of the United 
Kingdom was to leave,” he told reporters shortly before holding talks with the 
first minister, Nicola Sturgeon. “We’re clear that we can’t have a different 
deal or a different outcome for different parts of the United Kingdom.”

But with the possibility that the supreme court may add Edinburgh and Stormont 
to the list of parliaments that need to be consulted before article 50 is 
invoked, this may not be a sustainable position.

“The real problem is that cohesion of the United Kingdom is uncertain and 
treading softly on eggshells is what is required,” said Edward at City Law. 
“There is no point in making big, noisy declarations.”

Where is the rub?

As James Wolffe QC, Scotland’s lord advocate, told the supreme court, there is 
little realistic chance of wielding a veto over Brexit. It is more a question 
of being consulted.

Some see this as a chance to push for a “soft” Brexit where the UK remains in 
the single market, but another set of bargaining revolves around devolved 
powers that are currently shared between the EU, Westminster and national 
executives.

The Scottish government, for example, is responsible for agriculture, 
forestries and fisheries in conjunction with the EU, not London.

“The most interesting question concerns exclusive and shared EU competencies 
that will be repatriated by Brexit, but are they to be exercised by Scotland as 
devolved competencies?” asked Edward. “Does it mean that when powers are 
repatriated in relation to fisheries, that the Scottish government and 
parliament acquire exclusive competencies, because none of them are reserved, 
or will the UK be able to re-reserve some of the competencies that are coming 
back?”

A battle over fish may seem an anti-climactic end to the constitutional 
crisis, but it hints at new ways for Scotland to gain power over its own 
affairs without necessarily going down the route of a second independence 
referendum.
 