
Retailers are facing a tough close to the festive season amid signs that 
shoppers have ditched the traditional post-Christmas sales trip due to Brexit 
worries and the growing popularity of online stores.


Shopping centres had a particularly disappointing Boxing Day, suffering a 
19.9% year-on-year drop in footfall – a measure of shopper numbers. High 
streets saw footfall decline 2.2% compared with 2015, and for out of town 
retail parks footfall was down 4.2%, despite earlier optimism, according to 
retail analysts Springboard.

That left footfall across UK shops down by 7.3% on Boxing Day, one of the most 
important dates in the retail calendar. Springboard, which uses electronic 
sensors to count shopper numbers, predicts that for the rest of this week to 31 
December, footfall will be down 2.3% on the same period last year.

Experts linked the decline to several factors, including fragile consumer 
confidence following the referendum, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/uk-sees-biggest-fall-in-consumer-confidence-for-26-years-after-brexit-vote>
 the rise of online shopping and changing consumer trends, in particular the
growing tendency to spend on nights out, holidays and experiences rather than 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/06/the-way-we-shop-now-the-revolution-in-british-spending-habits>
physical goods. Underling the strength of internet shopping, Amazon said on 
Tuesday that it had posted its best-ever festive shopping performance, shipping 
more than one billion items worldwide through its Prime membership program.


Springboard noted that the drop in footfall came as the volume of online 
transactions on Boxing Day rose by 6.2% compared to theformerly record-breaking 
2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/27/online-christmas-sales-shoppers-new-record-store-frenzy>
, according to figures from e-commerce data company PCA Predict.

Diane Wehrle, Springboard’s insights director, noted people’s growing appetite 
for eating out, which is helping high streets to outperform shopping centres.

“Across 2016, shopping centres have been consistently experiencing the worst 
footfall and we expect to see this continue this week. Their reduced appeal is 
a result of the fact that most centres have a more limited hospitality offering 
than the high street equivalentwhich have been recording more favourable 
footfall in recent months,” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/uk-shops-record-increase-footfall-august-tourism-staycation-high-street>
 she said.

“We expect that most consumers who venture out this week will be doing so for 
leisure as opposed to shopping, thus giving the high street the edge as it able 
to service the consumer demand for bars, restaurants and coffee shops.”


She also highlighted signs that households are worrying about financial 
pressures, withthe pound’s fall since the referendum stoking inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 by making imports to the UK more expensive. There were also concerns about 
more economic upheaval when the UK formally starts the process of leaving the 
EU.

“There is a note of caution around spending at the moment ... as we get 
towards the period when we are going to invoke article 50 that will start to 
impact confidence,” said Wehrle.

The Boxing Day numbers compound a disappointing Christmas Eve for retailers 
when,instead of the expected last-minute rush of gift buyers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/boxing-day-shoppers-expected-splash-out-before-brexit-price-rises-kick-in>
 they saw footfall drop 5.9% on the year.

One expert said 2016 had brought “another challenging seasonal period for UK 
retailers”.

“The build-up in store footfall in the run-in to Christmas was slow and the 
last minute rush to the shops was not as intense as retailers would have hoped 
for. But there are enough sale days to make a difference to trading results, so 
there is still plenty to play for,” said Tim Denison at Ipsos Retail 
Performance.

Retailers themselves said Boxing Day had been busy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/uk-shoppers-brave-boxing-day-sales-westfield>
 with people braving the cold to queue up in the early hours for bargains. Some 
also noted a silver lining from the weak pound, which hasattracted tourists to 
the UK on luxury shopping sprees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/22/tourist-spending-uk-surges-following-pounds-brexit-slump>
 because their holiday money now stretches further.

The two Westfield shopping centres in London said international shoppers were 
making the most of the Boxing Day sales, having been big spenders over recent 
months.

“Tourist spend at Westfield London in November was up 14% year-on-year and 
luxury spend up 21%,” said Myf Ryan, chief marketing officer for Westfield UK 
and Europe.
 