
The British vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-brexit-live-europe-leave-remain-britain>
 has dealt an irreparableblow to the European project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/brexit-threat-europe-visionary-outcome-debate>
, and the shock is hard to exaggerate. Yet if there is one mistake EU leaders 
should avoid now, it would be to think that the forces at play represent a 
strictly British phenomenon. Twin dynamics have been brutally exposed: the 
breakdown of the link connecting British voters to elites and institutions – 
who all argued for remain – and the rapidly fading connection between citizens 
across the continent and EU institutions.

David Cameron thought victory was his at 10pm on Brexit eve
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-victory-his-10pm-brexit-eve>
It’s true that Britain is a special case in Europe. It joined belatedly, and 
purely for economic reasons. It has had all sorts of opt-outs. For years it 
fought for and won special statusfor a specific status and it got it in diverse 
ways. This was a product of Europe’s past – not just of British identity or 
domestic politics, or even the media environment. Unlikepostwar France and 
Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/brexit-make-britain-worlds-most-hated-nation>
, Britain – as Jean Monnet, the father of the EU, acknowledged in his memoirs – 
“felt no need to exorcise history”.

But this vote is not one that affects Britain alone, and for which just one 
country will bear the consequences. It puts the cohesion and strength of 
western liberal democracies at stake in a global environment plagued with 
uncertainties. Picking up the pieces of this wreckage will require clear-headed 
decisions and a new approach across Europe. Whether that will happen is now the 
big uncertainty.

The first thing to avoid is going into denial about the magnitude of what has 
happened. Now populist, far-right and anti-western forces will push forward in 
the belief that a precedent has been set for other “exits”. Look at the 
statements fromMarine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/24/european-far-right-hails-britains-brexit-vote-marine-le-pen>
, the head of France’s Front National, and the Dutch far-right leaderGeert 
Wilders <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-britain-eu-wilders-idUSKCN0ZA0HO> – 
and the messaging from the Kremlin’s propaganda machine.

The very survival of the EU is now in peril, and not just because a country 
representing its second largest economy and a key pillar of its security is set 
to withdraw. Surely, that much is clear to all. Yet some reactions are already 
baffling. Angela Merkel has solemnlycalled for calm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/europe-plunged-crisis-britain-votes-leave-eu-european-union>
. François Hollande has declared that there needs to be a “refoundation” of the 
EU. Donald Tusk, European council president,quotes Nietzsche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-result-what-we-know-so-far>
: “What doesn’t kill you makes you stronger.” Martin Schulz, president of the 
European parliament, believes “the chain reaction being celebrated everywhere 
now by Eurosceptics won’t happen”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-vote-wake-up-call-save-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d578eb526521565230933381ee1df2c368239fe%2F0_297_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20is%20a%20wake-up%20call%3A%20save%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-vote-wake-up-call-save-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20is%20a%20wake-up%20call%3A%20save%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F25%2Fbrexit-vote-wake-up-call-save-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d578eb526521565230933381ee1df2c368239fe%2F0_297_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Dutch Party for Freedom leader Geert Wilders. ‘Now populist, far-right and 
anti-western forces will push forward in the belief that a precedent has been 
set for other ‘exits’.’ Photograph: Laszlo Balogh/Reuters 
Stand by for more such delusional talk in the days and weeks to come. Most 
will betray the angst of damage limitation rather than a recognition that one 
era has ended and the new is not yet born.

But if there is one lesson, it is that the usual rituals of the EU simply 
won’t do. Diplomatic choreography won’t be enough to restore what has been 
shattered, and what the Brexit vote has starkly reflected: there is no longer 
confidence among European citizens that a collective endeavour of solidarity 
and values can deliver what they need and want.

The confidence of the lower and middle classes is now closer to zero than it 
ever has been. Remember recent surveys: only 38% of the French view the EU 
positively today (the same poll said it was 44% of the British).

The French historian Fernand Braudel 
<http://www.britannica.com/biography/Fernand-Braudel> once wrote that “history 
can be divided into three movements: that which moves rapidly, moves slowly and 
appears not to move at all”. History is now accelerating right before our eyes. 
It is moving swiftly in a bad direction, and for those who, as I did, witnessed 
the spread of democracy and the reunification of the continent that followed 
the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989, or who were brought up to think that 
Europe’s future lay in the coming together of its disparate parts, it is an 
ominous and painful moment.

The British divorce will be messy and drawn out. It will divert energy needed 
to address other challenges like security, unemployment, migration, and the 
geopolitical chaos in the EU’s neighbouring regions. It could make it even 
harder to address the gap that increasingly divides the political elites from 
the public mood across the continent. Pro-EU politicians are in denial if they 
think more European integration slogans are the solution. Citizens simply won’t 
buy it. For more than 10 years now, EU-related referendums have been a 
disaster. The federalist-minded European constitution project was rejected in 
2005, and this year the Netherlands voted against an EU association agreement 
with Ukraine. Hungary is due to hold a referendum on EU refugee quotas. Expect 
a no.

If something can be salvaged, the EU needs to rebuild itself from the ground 
up, not top down. It is a folly to think measures to fix eurozone governance 
will suffice, however needed those may be. Anyone who has regularly travelled 
across Europe in recent years and sounded out grassroots perceptions knows that 
something else is lacking: a sense of purpose, a belief that Europe stands for 
something positive and that it can act in people’s interest.

Brexit would make Britain the world’s most hated nation | Antony Beevor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/brexit-make-britain-worlds-most-hated-nation>
The European project was built by a small group of visionary politicians in 
the 1950s who believed that citizens would over time see its positive impact on 
their lives. For a long time that’s what happened. And many young people, 
including in the UK, do grasp the advantages. But for many reasons that link is 
in danger, and if it is further weakened Europe will unravel. This is the one 
priority that should obsess those who sit in Brussels and people everywhere who 
care about preserving fundamental values. If trust and hope are not restored in 
the notion that the EU can be democratic in its functioning and deliver 
concrete outcomes to citizens, the Pied Pipers of populism will continue to 
attract confused electorates. More illiberalism and toxic divisions will seep 
into the continent. This vote is a wake-up call: Europe needs saving.
 