
The volcanic eruption in Richmond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/ten-lessons-from-the-richmond-park-byelection-result>
 explodes with meaning: with hope for some, anger for others. Brexit is now 
Britain’s only political issue. It has ripped the country in two, rubbing out 
all other political lines, worn by both sides as a badge of identity beyond the 
reach of fact or balance. This byelection is a taste of how it threatens to 
overturn all old political certainties.

10 lessons from the Richmond Park byelection result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/ten-lessons-from-the-richmond-park-byelection-result>
There is a potentially dangerous whiff of civil war cordite in the air when 
large numbers of people are as angry as they get inQuestion Time 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b084nd22> audiences. Why aren’t we out 
already? Never mind the details, out now! The fury of Brexiters at anyone 
suggesting out doesn’t mean out of everything European is full of 
fingers-in-the-ears absolutism.

That’s why overturning a 23,000 majority is seismic. The Brexiters and 
Ukippers will try to foment maximum class rage at the arrogance of this soft, 
wealthy London seat gesturing two fingers of defiance at a referendum result 
they claim belongs to white working-class northerners. Never mind that it was 
the overwhelmingly Tory shire votes ofJacob Rees-Mogg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/jacob-rees-mogg-boris-johnson-ubiquity-toffs>
’s ilk that swung the referendum, while two thirds of Labour voters were 
remainers.

The great lesson for the left and centre-left was taught by Caroline Lucas, 
who deserves most praise for this result. The wisdom and foresight of her 
elegant decisionnot to run a Green candidate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/caroline-lucas-green-party-richmond-park-byelection-lib-dems>
 sent out exactly the right message to the voters of Richmond: Brexit and how 
we survive it is bigger than any one party. The votes she swung behind the Lib 
Dem Sarah Olney were vital, but less important than the message that 
anti-tribal alliances will be essential from now on.

Only a progressive alliance can overcome the dark forces being stirred on the 
other side. Richmond Park will be a useful red rag to Paul Nuttall’sbullish 
Ukippers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-replaces-nigel-farage-as-ukip-leader-video>
, who will milk the class grudge element from those relatively few places with 
a genuine grievance about sudden large-scale migration into their towns.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&media=>
Lib Dem Sarah Olney beats Zac Goldsmith to win Richmond Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/02/lib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
Labour were humiliated, and deserved to be. Despite an excellent candidate in 
Christian Wolmar <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/christianwolmar>, the 
Labour voters of Richmond Park were wiser than their party in going with the 
tactical alliance and voting Lib Dem. Will Labour learn their lesson? Not a 
chance. They wasted an opportunity to show the same grace as Caroline Lucas, by 
joining an alliance in a seat they would never win. Losing their deposit was a 
well-earned embarrassment.

Will it make Jeremy’s Corbyn team think again about their priorities? No. Will 
it make them take up the question of proportional representation so people 
never again have to vote tactically for parties they hate? Ed Miliband was for 
PR, along with Chuka Umunna and growing numbers ofLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs, but the Corbynites won’t 
touch it, for bad old tribal reasons.

Labour’s severe problem is not reflected in Richmond, but in some erstwhile 
heartland seats where the Brexit vote was strong, leaving many Remain MPs 
afraid to champion a soft Brexit loudly enough. Though safe as houses in 
Islington, Corbyn’s deep disinterest in Europe loses Labour’s chance to be the 
unequivocal champion of soft Brexit. Who and what is Labour for? It is 
rendering itself increasingly irrelevent – except in those many cities where it 
runs excellent local authorities, whose autonomous leaders detach themselves 
from the central party.

The soft Brexit mantle falls to the Lib Dems, whose heartfelt pro-Europeanism 
is about the only policy on which they never ratted in their shameful coalition 
years. After Richmond, many seats they used to hold look winnable again, as 
May’s split and directionless cabinet tumbles towards the EU exit gate with no 
ticket, no destination, no flight-plan and a pilot who dare not decide where to 
fly. This result should strengthen the arm of the majority on the Tory benches 
who want a sane Brexit. It should stiffen May’s backbone to resist the 70 
Brextremist MPs trying to hijack the plane and crash it anywhere, so long as 
it’s not in Europe.

Local Greens criticise Caroline Lucas over Richmond Park byelection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/caroline-lucas-green-party-richmond-park-byelection-lib-dems>
As for the despicable Zac Goldsmith, what a satisfactory comeuppance for this 
entitled, insignificant, Brexit trustafarian. How fitting he should not just 
inherit his father’s fortune but reap the whirlwind of theoriginal referendum 
campaign <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SSXdE8M-9Y4> launched by Sir James 
Goldsmith, an unsavoury tycoon who tried to bankrupt Private Eye. Labour’s 
Wolmar was quite right to use his post-vote speech to say many Richmond Park 
voters had swung against Goldsmith junior after his “ghastly, disgusting” 
mayoral campaign with its failed racial assaults on Sadiq Khan.

Some byelections move mountains, some are flashes in the pan. Yesterday’s 
looks set to give new heart to all who hope for the least damaging, softest 
landing possible from the Brexit vote. But it will leave many enraged Brexiters 
even more ferocious in their view that any discussion of the country’s future 
destination is some kind of betrayal of a referendum so badly designed that it 
had no X to mark the spot where we should land.
 