
The new chief inspector of schools in England has said in her first interview 
since taking over at Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/09/ofsted-chief-inspector-schools-amanda-spielman>
 that education risks slipping down the political agenda as a result of the 
national preoccupation with Brexit.

Speaking exclusively to the Guardian, Amanda Spielman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
 said the next few years were not going to be easy and that the political focus 
was likely to shift away from education as the government’s time and attention 
were consumed by the process of Britain leaving the EU.

Asked about the challenges facing the education sector, Spielman – who took 
over fromSir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/the-guardian-view-on-sir-michael-wilshaw-ruffling-the-right-feathers>
 last week – highlighted the anxiety in schools over tightening budgets at a 
time of considerable change.


New Ofsted chief: ‘I want everyone to see us as a force for improvement’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2017/jan/09/ofsted-chief-inspector-schools-amanda-spielman>
She also dismissed the government’s controversial plan to expand selective 
education by lifting the ban on new grammar schools as a distraction from 
Ofsted’s work, saying it had little to do with improving the education system.

In addition to being the schools watchdog, Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> is responsible for overseeing 
everything from council children’s services and safeguarding to prison 
education.

Spielman, whose appointment was initially criticised by some unions because 
she has never worked as a teacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/29/next-ofsted-chief-defends-lack-of-teaching-experience>
, said: “Brexit is obviously a huge, huge … national preoccupation. In terms of 
government thinking and government action, it’s something that’s going to be 
absorbing so much time and attention that it may be harder to get the focus 
sometimes that we need.”

Asked if she thought education would be neglected because of Brexit, she said: 
“Neglected may be putting it too strongly, but it may slide a bit further down 
the priority list.”

Pressed for her opinion, she refrained from passing judgement. “I think we are 
where we are. My job isn’t to have views. My job is make sure we do the right 
thing and make the very best of our responsibilities,” she said.

Spielman, who was one of the founders of the highly successful Ark academy 
chain and chair of the exams watchdog Ofqual, takes over from a chief who had 
views on most things and often expressed them publicly, to the irritation of 
ministers.

Wilshaw took every opportunity in the final weeks and months of his work at 
Ofsted to express vehement opposition to the prime minister’s aspirations to 
expand selective education. The government’s consultation,Schools that work for 
everyone 
<https://consult.education.gov.uk/school-frameworks/schools-that-work-for-everyone/supporting_documents/SCHOOLS%20THAT%20WORK%20FOR%20EVERYONE%20%20FINAL.PDF>
, closed last month, and it will publish its response later in the spring.

Asked for her thoughts on the grammar school plan, Spielman said: “For me it’s 
a distraction from our work. I don’t see it as something that has much to do 
with making the most of every school, of Ofsted making the most of its work and 
contributing to system improvement.”

She said she expected it to be a relatively small initiative, but acknowledged 
that it could have an impact on the development of multi-academy trusts, many 
of which will be considering whether or not to include a selective element.

Farewell, Sir Michael Wilshaw, the Dirty Harry of Ofsted | Laura McInerney
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/20/michael-wilshaw-ofsted-chief-inspector-schools>
“It’s certainly a complication. I hear stuff anecdotally about how they are 
going to react, but I don’t know what will happen in practice,” she said. “I 
hear that some are poised and ready to go, and others who say they won’t 
actually will, and others will keep themselves distant.”

“It’s not something I want to get involved with. I’m not sure, from what I 
hear it’s likely to be a relatively small programme, so my preference is just 
to proceed with our work.”

Asked about other challenges in the education sector, she said: “I see a 
phenomenal amount of change in every quarter, which has still got a lot of 
working its way through the system to do. Obviously I see pressures of budgets 
tightening, and school anxiety about that.”

Responding to Spielman’s comments, a Department for Education spokesman 
reiterated the government’s ambition to build a country that works for 
everyone, not just for the privileged few, and said education was at the heart 
of that ambition.

“We are building on our reforms, backed by record levels of school investment. 
We have already set out proposals to tackle the historic postcode lottery in 
school funding, and consulted on proposals to create even more good school 
places, for more parents in more parts of the country, by lifting the ban on 
new selective school places and harnessing the resources and expertise of 
universities, faith schools and independent schools.”

The National Audit Office recently raised concerns about the implementation of 
£3bn worth of cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
 in schools, which face an 8% real-terms reduction in funding per pupil by 
2019-20.

Spielman said she shared Wilshaw’s view that radicalisation of young people in 
schools remains a key issue for Ofsted. “It’s a very significant area for us. 
It’s something that’s clearly complicated, controversial, hard to deal with, 
hard to know properly about. For me it’s one of the most challenging areas of 
our work. It can’t be sidelined.”

Asked whether she thought sex and relationships education should be compulsory 
in all schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/30/pressure-mounts-on-ministers-to-make-sex-education-compulsory-in-schools>
, Spielman said she was looking forward to finding out how much already went on 
in schools and whether there really was a national problem. The education 
secretary, Justine Greening, has said she is looking at the issue.

“You spend a bit of time in education and you get used to people saying ‘this 
must be in the national curriculum’ and you see it all adds up to about five 
curricula in total.

“I have to be very clear about my role … there’s stuff where I may have 
personal views, but I have to be quite careful not to spray out views on 
everything.”
 