
Donald Trump may be assembling the world’s richest government 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/11/30/donald-trump-is-assembling-the-richest-administration-in-modern-american-history/?utm_term=.bc9b7658adbd>
 but he remains a few Boris Johnsons short of possessing the most arrogant and 
privileged one. Such a title surely belongs to the Tory government currently 
headed by Theresa May but which was begat by David Cameron. The real difference 
between Trump’s cabinet and May’s is that many of his high office holders have 
at least earned their fortunes. The UK Tory party, on the other hand, is the 
natural home of unearned wealth and privilege.

It has always been a curious anomaly of the UK Tories that they preach the 
virtues of honest and hard graft but in practice will always promote the 
interests of those at the top of society who rarely work and who will do 
anything to avoid contributing to the upkeep of the country that allows them to 
wallow in this lifestyle.

Another Tory anomaly is that while extolling the virtues of the free market 
and unfettered competition in all other areas, where their writ runs they 
encourage unfair advantage. They would rather award an important job to a 
buffoon who was considered the “right sort” than hand it to a competent person 
who, alas, attended the wrong school.

Underpinning everything that they do at home and abroad is the need to ensure 
that power is exercised by as small and exclusive a group as possible. The lord 
alone knows how many military disasters (including many that have been 
concealed from us) have been the result of an inbred officer class that 
included many who were given the safe haven of a regiment to stop them creating 
chaos at home. How many billions of pounds in government cock-ups could have 
been saved if the higher echelons of the civil service were confined only to 
the UK’s brightest and best rather than a private members club for the scions 
of a small group of families who have been running the show since Agincourt?

How many miscarriages of justice have occurred because we allow justice to be 
dispensed by a gratuitously and grotesquely unrepresentative temple of law 
lords? I did have a laugh last month at the faux outrage of people who were 
shocked that ourtop judges were being openly and savagely criticised over their 
Brexit verdict last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

Those gilded few who have ownership of the highest courts in the land are 
selected from a tiny tributary of society who attended the most exclusive and 
expensive schools before taking a place at Oxford or Cambridge that had been 
waiting for them since before they were born. Many of them would have struggled 
had they not had the benefit of a lopsided playing field. Why should we assume 
that all their verdicts are safe and that they dispense justice equitably when 
they are drawn from such a small pool?

The arrogance of the Tories in government rests upon this pattern of privilege 
and entitlement that has remained more or less intact since Magna Carta. All 
around this power structure is the thrum of thousands of common people who 
subjugate their personal dignity and sense of self in the delusion that, one 
day, they may be beckoned in. They are to be found in some national newspapers 
and in the high command of the BBC. Many of them have insinuated themselves 
into the parliamentary Labour party. They are disdained by genuine aristocrats 
but nevertheless retained and indulged as useful idiots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fbrexit-arrogance-exposes-ineptitude-tory-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1389369c06000f4adfa6c26a0ee65c9966e7eadb%2F0_0_3063_1838%2F3063.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brexit%20arrogance%20exposes%20ineptitude%20of%20Tory%20elite%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fbrexit-arrogance-exposes-ineptitude-tory-elite%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brexit%20arrogance%20exposes%20ineptitude%20of%20Tory%20elite%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fbrexit-arrogance-exposes-ineptitude-tory-elite%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1389369c06000f4adfa6c26a0ee65c9966e7eadb%2F0_0_3063_1838%2F3063.jpg>
 Brexit secretary David Davis, left, and foreign secretary Boris Johnson. 
Composite: Gareth Fuller, Daniel Leal-Olivas/PA/AFP/Getty Images 
It is why David Davis and Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> can stravaig around Europe 
insulting EU heads of state and demanding that they bow to their half-baked 
demands knowing full well that the ridiculousness of their position will never 
be properly examined at home.

Almost every senior EU official, foreign minister and premier is united in 
their post-Brexit message to Britain: you can’t get access to the single market 
if you don’t allow free movement of our peoples and if you believe otherwise 
then you are a fool who is misleading your own people.

Theresa May now appears to have grasped that the EU is not for budging, which 
is why this devout Christian is prepared to use millions ofEU citizens resident 
in the UK as human shields 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/eu-citizens-in-uk-home-office-residency-applications-right-to-remain-before-brexit-talks>
 in her negotiations with Europe. In Ms May’s church, they probably skipped 
over the feeding of the 5,000 lest any vulnerable person misinterpret it as a 
justification for socialism.

In Scotland, you wonder when the nation will finally have had its fill of the 
sound of Tories just saying “No!” On Thursday, we witnessed another one, 
Phillip Hammond, making a rare visit north to Edinburgh to tell the Scottish 
government that not only would a separateBrexit deal for Scotland not happen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/scotland-will-not-get-special-brexit-concessions-says-philip-hammond>
 but that the SNP were clutching at straws for asking for one. Effectively, he 
was telling Scotland: “Not only will your aspirations not be represented by the 
UK government but you don’t even have the right to ask in the first place.” 
This is from the man who tried todeflect criticism of the banks’ role 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/scotland-will-not-get-special-brexit-concessions-says-philip-hammond>
 in the 2008 credit crisis. “They had to lend to someone,” said Hammond, who 
has an estimated personal wealth of more than £10m.

The same dismissive and sneering attitude was evident less than three years 
ago when another chancellor, George Osborne, told the Scottish people that they 
couldn’t use sterling if they dared to vote for independence. This was despite 
the fact that the pound belonged toScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> as much as it did to the rest of the 
UK; that Scottish business taxes, oil and gas had contributed to the wealth of 
the UK and the traditional purchasing power of sterling. “You don’t even have 
the right to discuss this with us,” Osborne had effectively said.

Like Osborne and Cameron and Alistair Darling and Gordon Brown, Hammond had 
used membership of the EU as one of several bribes offered in exchange for a No 
vote in the independence referendum. “Tough luck, suckers,” he is now 
effectively saying. “Now keep your mouths shut and let us do all the talking.”
 