
The UK’s decision to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has fuelled an 80-fold 
increase in the number of British Sephardic Jews seeking Portuguese citizenship 
under a recent law intended to make amends for their ancestors’ expulsion from 
the Iberian peninsula more than 500 years ago.


Last year both Spain and Portugal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/portugal> 
brought in legislation to facilitate the return of the descendants of the 
thousands of Jews who were forced from the countries at the end of the 15th 
century.


The Spanish government said the offer of citizenship was intended to right the 
“historical wrong” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/11/spain-law-citizenship-jews> that 
saw the country’s Jewish community exiled, forced to convert to Catholicism or 
burned at the stake. Portugal said that while there was no way to make up for 
what had been done, the offer of citizenship represented“an attribution of a 
right” <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-31051223>.


In the wake of June’s Brexit vote, however, a rapidly increasing number of 
British Sephardic Jews have been applying for Portuguese citizenship as a way 
to deal with the uncertainty created by the leave victory.


According to the Jewish Community of Oporto 
<http://www.comunidade-israelita-porto.org/x#> – which, along with the Lisbon 
Jewish community, is certifying applicants – demand from the UK has soared 
since 23 June.


Dr Michael Rothwell, a delegate to the community, said it had received just 
five applications before Brexit compared with 400 in the two months following 
the vote.

“I think people are a bit nervous about this and therefore feel that having a 
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> passport would be an 
advantage even if they are not necessarily planning to move to Portugal,” he 
said. “Having citizenship of an EU country has its benefits.”

Rothwell said the community had not been surprised by the rush for Portuguese 
passports, adding that the number of individuals applying was greater that 400 
as many had applied in groups. Although there are no precise figures, the UK’s 
Sephardic population is estimated to be in the thousands.

Alison Rosen, executive director of the S&P Sephardi Community 
<http://www.sephardi.org.uk/> in London, said its archivists had also seen a 
rise in the number of people inquiring about their Sephardic ancestry.


“One hundred per cent, the minute Brexit happened, we definitely saw an 
increase in volume and I think it’s continuing,” she said. “In the past, we had 
a handful of people and it’s now a steady flow of people. In the past we might 
have got one a month and now it’s a couple a week or something.”

However, Spain’s Federation of Jewish Communities <http://www.fcje.org/> said 
it had not seen a similar rise in UK applications after Brexit, perhaps because
the language tests required by the Spanish government 
<http://www.mjusticia.gob.es/cs/Satellite/Portal/es/areas-tematicas/nacionalidad/concesion-nacionalidad>
 are pushing would-be applicants to try the Portuguese route, which makes no 
linguistic demands on applicants. The UK does not feature amongthe Spanish 
government’s top 10 countries for applications 
<http://politica.elpais.com/politica/2016/06/29/actualidad/1467197826_237344.html>
, a list led by Argentina, Israel, Venezuela, the US and Canada.

Gillie Traeger, a 45-year-old teaching assistant from Greater London, is one 
of those now seeking Portuguese nationality. For her, the offer of citizenship 
is a matter of recognising both her Sephardic roots and asserting her wider 
European identity in the aftermath of Brexit.


“There’s kind of a sense of pride from coming from this very old Jewish family 
in England,” she said. “[But] historically, I don’t feel like I’m just English. 
I feel I’m European and would like to stay that way. Having the opportunity to 
do this is rather nice, actually.”


Another British descendant of Sephardic Jews, who did not want to give his 
name, said his decision to apply for Portuguese citizenship had been political 
and pragmatic.


“The moment that I heard about the decree in Portugal, I said to my wife: ‘If 
we leave the European Union, I’m going to apply for Portuguese citizenship,’” 
he said.

“I’m literally in mourning about Brexit. I’m a European, a cosmopolitan and I 
think all forms of nationalism are pretty hateful. If you look at the 19th and 
20th century and see what nationalism does, it’s not a history to be 
particularly proud of.”

Particularly distasteful, he added, had been the rhetoric surrounding the 
debate with its familiar attacks on “the hated Johnny Foreigner”.


“My going for Portuguese citizenship is in part symbolic; it’s in part protest 
and in part the embracing of a particular cultural heritage. But it’s in part 
the practicality of being able to travel inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> without having to produce a 
non-European passport.”


Yoram Zara, an Israeli lawyer representing Sephardic Jews from all over the 
world, said the reasons for the rise in applications were self-evident.


“They are used to being a part of the European Union and enjoying all the 
privileges and rights of European citizens,” he said. “Now there’s some 
uncertainty about what will happen in the coming years, so it’s safe to have it 
if you intend to live, work or study in the EU or to retire there. Having a 
Portuguese, EU passport certainly shouldn’t harm you and might give you things 
that a British passport will no longer allow you to have.”


Zara and Rothwell said that while applications to Portugal from the UK were on 
the increase, there was also strong interest fromTurkey, which welcomed many 
Sephardic Jews following the expulsion from Spain and Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/nov/17/turkey.comment>. 

Five hundred years on, the dwindling community has found itself the target of 
terrorist atrocities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/nov/16/turkey.jasonburke>, and many 
feel increasingly unwelcome in Turkey’s shifting political climate 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/05/27/world/europe/sephardic-jews-feel-bigotrys-sting-in-turkey-and-a-pull-back-to-spain.html?_r=0>
.


“This law came out at a time when precisely Turkish Jews are feeling under 
stress from the political changes that are taking place in Turkey,” said 
Rothwell.

“Five hundred years ago, Spain and Portugal expelled the Jews and the Sultan 
of the Ottoman empire received them very happily – it was a very good deal – 
and they have been living in those areas very happily for 500 years, but now 
the circle is kind of closing because the Turkish Jews are not feeling very 
safe where they are, and so you have the inverse.”


Zara said that Sephardic Jews in Turkey were now applying in their “hundreds 
and thousands”.

He added: “They are concerned – and I think the last few months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt> have proved them right 
– because things are not stable in Turkey and maybe they will need to leave if 
things get worse.”

Despite the emollient words from Madrid and Lisbon, though, some of those 
whose ancestors were persecuted and chased from their homes are still left 
pondering the epic injustice of it all.

“To them it may be an offer of amends but to me it’s part of my cultural 
identity and heritage,” said Misty Kenney, who applied for Portuguese 
citizenship before the Brexit vote.

“I’m surprised they didn’t start doing this years ago. If it wasn’t for the 
inquisition maybe I would be in Portugal today.”
 