
Join me in a little thought experiment. Imagine, if you would, that the Brexit 
referendum had gone the other way, 48% voting to leave and 52% to remain. What 
do you think Nigel Farage would have said? Would he have nodded ruefully and 
declared: “The British people have spoken and this issue is now settled. Our 
side lost and we have to get over it. It’s time to move on.”

Lord Farage? Theresa May declines to rule out peerage for Ukip leader
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/lord-nigel-farage-theresa-may-declines-to-rule-out-peerage-for-ukip-leader>
Or would he have said: “We’ve given the establishment the fright of their 
lives! Despite everything they threw at us, they could only win by the skin of 
their teeth. It’s clear now that British support for the European project is 
dead: nearly half the people of this country want rid of it. Our fight goes on.”

I know which I’d bet on. Next, imagine what would have happened if, as a 
result of that narrow win for remain, a gaping hole in the public finances had 
opened up as the economy reeled, and even leading remainers admitted the 
machinery of state could barely cope. Farage and the rest would have denounced 
the chaos, boasting that this proved they had been right all along, that the 
voters had been misled and therefore must be given another say.

As we all know, reality did not work out this way. Next week the chancellor 
will deliver an autumn statement anchored in the admission that, as the 
Financial Timesput it 
<https://www.ft.com/content/acb33786-ac16-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122>, “the UK 
faces a £100bn bill for Brexit within five years”. Thanks to the 23 June vote, 
the forecast is for “slower growth and lower-than-expected investment”.

Meanwhile, the government will reportedly 
<https://twitter.com/Robert___Harris/status/798428202431549440> have to hire an 
extra 30,000 civil servants to implement Brexit – that’s 6,000 more than the 
total staff employed by the European Union. In other words, in order to escape 
a vast, hulking bureaucracy we’re going to have to build a vast, hulking 
bureaucracy. (But these bureaucrats will speak English and have blue, 
hard-cover passports, so it’ll be OK.) Even the leavers don’t deny the scale of 
the undertaking they have dumped in our collective lap. Dominic Cummings, the 
zealot who masterminded the Vote Leave campaign, this weektweeted 
<https://twitter.com/RobDotHutton/status/798421451829379072> a description of 
Brexit as “hardest job since beating Nazis”. Sadly, there was no room for that 
pithy phrase on Vote Leave posters back in the spring.

The government will reportedly have to hire an extra 30,000 civil servants for 
Brexit – 6,000 more than the EU's total

And yet you do not hear remainers howling – as the leavers would if the roles 
were reversed – that this is an outrage so appalling it surely voids 
the referendum result. “We never voted for this,” they’d be bellowing, through 
the megaphone provided to them by most of the national papers, as they read 
that Brussels is likely to demand Britaincough up €60bn (£51bn) 
<https://www.ft.com/content/480b4ae0-aa9e-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122> in alimony 
following our divorce.

Instead, the 48% exchange ironic, world-weary tweets, the electronic 
equivalent of a sigh, each time they read of some new hypocrisy or deception by 
the forces of leave. The single market is a perfect example. As a few, 
admirable voices have been noting, during the campaign the loudest Brexiteers 
were at pains to stress that leaving the EU did not mean leaving the single 
market. “Absolutely nobody is talking about threatening our place in the single 
market,”said Daniel Hannan <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0xGt3QmRSZY>. “Only 
a madman would actually leave the market,” said Owen Patterson. In the spring, 
Farage constantly urged us to be like Norway – which in fact pays through the 
nose and accepts free movement of people in order to remain in the single 
market. Yet now we are told that the vote to leave the EU was a clear 
mandate to leave the single market, and we’ve got to get on with it.

The correct response to this should be fury, along with a stubborn commitment 
to use every democratic tool at our disposal to stop it happening. We know 
that’s what the other side would do, if the boot were on the other foot. But 
just look at the state of the official opposition. Labour’s Keir Starmer is 
struggling valiantly to oppose the government on Brexit without appearing to 
defy the will of the people. He’s arguing for a bespoke arrangement, one that 
would give Britain full, tariff-free access to the single market, as well as 
highlighting the risks of leaving the customs union – and, above all making the 
case that saving the economy matters more than reducing immigration. (Theresa 
May clearly thinks it’s the other way around.)
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrumps-coming-the-new-social-media-challenge-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20coming!%20The%20new%20social%20media%20challenge%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrumps-coming-the-new-social-media-challenge-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20coming%21%20The%20new%20social%20media%20challenge%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Ftrumps-coming-the-new-social-media-challenge-video&media=>
Trump’s coming! The new social media challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/17/trumps-coming-the-new-social-media-challenge-video>
I’d prefer an even simpler message: the people voted to leave the EU, not the 
single market, and Labour should fight for Britain’s place in the latter. But 
at least Starmer’s message is coherent. The trouble is, it’s undermined from 
the very top. This week the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, far from 
opposing Brexit,urged Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/18/brexit-row-keir-starmer-john-mcdonnell-threatens-labour-truce?CMP=twt_gu>
 to “embrace the enormous opportunities to reshape our country that Brexit has 
opened for us”.

That’s not resistance. It’s surrender. And there has been similar weakness on 
the question of triggering article 50. MPs should withhold their vote until 
they know exactly what kind of Brexit the government intends. Yes, the 
government has the right to implement the people’s will. But the people voted 
to head for the exit; they were given no say over the destination once we’ve 
gone. Parliament can legitimately use its leverage to flush out some answers.

The point is, none of this is any more than the right would do. And this nods 
to a wider weakness, one that afflicts the centre-left, broadly defined, on 
both sides of the Atlantic. Too often, we play nice, sticking to the 
Queensberry rules – while the right takes the gloves off.

A prime example is unfolding right now. The final tallies of the election show 
that Hillary Clinton won at least a million more votes thanDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Oh well, shrug most 
Democrats: the electoral college is the system we have and, under those rules, 
we lost. True. But just imagine if Trump had won the popular vote by a 
seven-figure margin, only to be denied the presidency in the electoral college. 
Do we think he would have been a good sport and accepted it?

Happily, we don’t have to imagine. We can look at the tweets he posted in 
2012, when he briefly thought Mitt Romney had garnered more votes than Barack 
Obama. “This election is a total sham and a travesty. We are not a democracy!”
he said 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/266035509162303492?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
. He called for people to take to the streets and stage a “revolution”. As he 
put it, “phoney electoral college made a laughing stock out of our nation. The 
loser one [sic]!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fkanye-west-i-would-have-voted-for-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kanye%20West%3A%20I%20would%20have%20voted%20for%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fkanye-west-i-would-have-voted-for-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kanye%20West%3A%20I%20would%20have%20voted%20for%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fkanye-west-i-would-have-voted-for-donald-trump-video&media=>
Kanye West: I would have voted for Donald Trump – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/nov/18/kanye-west-i-would-have-voted-for-donald-trump-video>
We can laugh at the inconsistency, but the contrast is striking. Democrats 
grumble but abide by the rules; Republicans immediately dial up the rhetoric 
and denounce their opponents as illegitimate, eventually paralysing their 
ability to act. That was theadmitted strategy 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2010/10/the-gops-no-compromise-pledge-044311> of 
congressional Republicans in the first Obama term: a determined effort to 
prevent him governing at all.

Democrats don’t play that game. Obama constantly strove to be “bipartisan”, 
even appointing Republicans to key jobs. (The FBI director, James Comey, was a 
Republican appointee, yet Obama renewed his term – with fateful consequences. A 
Republican president would not have hesitated to install his own man.)

Again and again, one side bows to the rules and to what’s fair – while the 
other focuses on the ruthless exercise of power. We’reseeing it now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/18/donald-trump-cabinet-picks-live>
, as Trump stacks his team with a bunch of bigots. I know which approach is the 
more high-minded and public spirited. But the result is that today, in both 
Britain and America, the right has power and next to nothing standing in its 
way. No one wants the left to behave like the right – but it’s time we fought 
just as hard.
 