
British universities have been warned that Brexit presents a significant risk 
to their income, after a year in which a bumper crop of postgraduate students, 
campus construction and rising research income lifted their turnover to £30bn.

 The annual report by the Association of University Directors of Estates 
<http://www.aude.ac.uk/> found that while undergraduate numbers remained static 
in 2014-15, an influx of 10,000 postgraduate research students, higher research 
fees and a surge in building work pushed up turnover by £2bn in the space of a 
year.

With the consequences of Britain’s vote to leave the EU yet to be felt, the 
organisation said: “It is impossible to predict the level of impact, although 
opportunities are also likely to emerge.”

The recruitment of EU nationals as staff and students was identified as one of 
the major risks, along with rising construction costs and changes to EU funding.

“EU research funding generates more than 19,000 jobs across the UK and £1.86bn 
for the UK economy. This equates to 14% of all UK income from research grants,” 
AUDE said.

Staff numbers rose by 2,000; income from research rose by 12% and from 
teaching and tuition fees by 6%, with a slight fall in undergraduate numbers 
outweighed by the rise in postgraduates.

How universities went on a building spree as tuition fees pour in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-building-schemes-tuition-fees-new-students>
Trevor Humphreys, the director of estates and facilities at Surrey University 
and the AUDE chair, said: “Universities have been through a period of 
significant upheaval and the sector should be commended on its robust 
management and efficiency strategies, which continue to serve it well.

“However, the future remains uncertain as we try to plan for the impact of the 
higher education white paper <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/education> 
currently going through parliament. Brexit is also likely to affect our student 
demographic, our workforce, our costs, as well as research funding.”

The campus building boom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/may/05/campus-universities-building-projects>
 in Britain continues apace, with capital expenditure in excess of £2.75bn, up 
by 5% compared with the previous year.

The survey found that universities added 200,000 sq metres to their combined 
estates in 2014-15, for a total of more than 14m square metres. The 
universities of Manchester, Cambridge, Edinburgh, Oxford and Nottingham each 
have academic facilities bigger than 500,000 sq metres, not including student 
residences.

Universities have been keen to make the most from their properties. Examples 
include the University of Hertfordshire boosting income by renting office space 
to businesses such asOcado <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ocado> and 
signing leases with banks and the NHS.

The University of Sheffield has built laboratories and office space in a new 
business park near the M1, expected to generate 4,000 jobs and more than £200m 
a year to the region when fully developed.
 