
Britain’s vote to leave the EU is finally feeding through to the UK economy, 
according to a Guardian analysis that shows rising inflation is offsetting 
brisk trade for businesses.

Buoyant consumer spending, a low unemployment rate, rising house prices and 
continued growth for the country’s dominant services sector point to a strong 
finish to the year, defying earlier forecasts from the Bank of England and 
others thatthe economy would grind to a standstill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
.


But worries are growing over prospects for 2017 as signs emerge that the 
Brexit vote’s blow to the pound is stoking inflation and hitting people’s 
spending power.

As the starting date for negotiations over leaving the EU approaches, the 
pound has come under fresh pressure in recent weeks and been prone to further 
downward lurches with every political mention of Brexit – most recently from 
Scotland’s first minister Nicola Sturgeon raising the prospect of a new 
independence vote for Scotland.

How has the Brexit vote affected the UK economy? December verdict
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/brexit-vote-uk-economy-december-verdict>
To track the impact of the Brexit vote on a monthly basis, the Guardian has 
chosen eight economic indicators, along with the value of the pound and the 
performance of the FTSE.


The dashboard for December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/dec/21/brexit-vote-uk-economy-december-verdict>
 shows a better than expected performance in four of the eight categories. Two 
were as expected, one was worse andinflation was higher than economists had 
forecast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
, fanning fears that household budgets will be squeezed by higher prices next 
year.

Six months on from the vote to leave the EU, the latest batch of figures show 
wage growth remains solid, headline unemployment remains low,business activity 
continues to expand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/uk-economy-service-sector-smashes-forecasts>
 and house prices are still rising. The FTSE 100 leading share index is close 
to an all-time high hit in October and the more domestically focused FTSE 
midcap index is above its pre-referendum level.

But the pace of hiring has slowed, retail sales growth has eased off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/retail-sales-black-friday-november-ons-fuel>
 andinflation is at a two-year high 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 as the weak pound raises the cost of imports to the UK. Thepublic finances 
were in a worse state than forecast in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/21/uk-public-finances-deficit-brexit-stock-markets-dow-business-live?page=with:block-585a4b8ae4b0d460757eb1a2#block-585a4b8ae4b0d460757eb1a2>
 and, looking ahead, they are expected to be in deficit for far longer than had 
been predicted before the referendum.

Britain’s trading position improved more than expected in the latest monthly 
figures but substantial revisions to earlier data show the trade gap with the 
rest of the world ballooned to a near three-year high in the three months 
following the referendum.

Economists point to several indicators suggesting negative effects of the 
Brexit vote could be more keenly felt in 2017. Surveys and business investment 
figures suggest British-based firms are more reluctant to spend. Consumers have 
become more cautious and they expect inflation to quicken over the coming year.


Writing in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/experts-brexit-watch-data-bank-of-england-2017>
, a former member of the Bank’s monetary policy committee, David Blanchflower, 
said some of the data since the Brexit vote had come in better than he had 
feared but that there were signs this could be as good as it gets for the 
economy.

“Business confidence is low and there is evidence that optimism is falling 
among businesses and consumers. My suspicion is that the news is not going to 
get better,” said Blanchflower, professor of economics at Dartmouth College in 
the US.

“The consumer has held up pretty well and still seems to be spending and GDP 
growth at 0.5% is not to be sneezed at. But the fall in the pound and thesteady 
rise in inflation 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2016/dec/13/uk-inflation-november-petrol-clothing-ons>
 because of the rise in import prices was always going to have an impact,” he 
added.

A report from the Bank of England’s regional agents 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/agentssummary/2016/dec.aspx> 
on Wednesday flagged the impact of higher import prices on inflation. But the 
agents – the Bank’s eyes and ears on the ground – noted silver linings from the 
weaker pound. Tourist spending was rising and exports had also been helped by 
the currency’s fall, which makes UK goods more competitive overseas.

Since the last dashboard, the government’s independent forecasters at the 
Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR) have published a new outlook for the the 
economy. They predict weaker business spending and a squeeze on consumers from 
higher inflationwill dent the economy next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-will-hold-uk-gdp-growth-back-says-obr>
, but warnings for a post-referendum recession should prove unfounded.


'The news is not going to get better' - experts debate Brexit watch data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/experts-brexit-watch-data-bank-of-england-2017>
Publishing its forecasts alongside Philip Hammond’s autumn statement of tax 
and spending measures, the OBR said the economy would likely expand by just 
1.4% in 2017, compared with the 2.2% it had predicted before the referendum. 
Hammond,was quick to point out that even that lower growth would still leave 
Britain outperforming France and Italy next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
 and possibly Germany too.

Andrew Sentance, also a former member of the MPC, said the signs of weaker 
investment and employment and a squeeze on consumer spending pointed to slower 
growth for the UK economy next year. But much depended on the country’s key 
trading partners, the rest of the EU and the US, Sentance wrote in the Guardian.

“Current forecasts suggest that Europe and the US will continue to grow 
reasonably well in 2017, which will help temper the UK slowdown. Next year may 
not be so bad for the UK after all, but we will need a reasonably healthy 
global economy to keep us moving forward.”


Experts have warned that the potential Brexit blow to the economy, coupled 
with the government’s continued push to bring down spending will leave many 
households struggling with lower incomes next year.

Mark Carney, the governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, has warned that 
the UK is suffering its “first lost decade since the 1860s” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
 and highlighted a squeeze on household budgets that predates the referendum.

Respected thinktank the Institute for Fiscal Studies said workers in Britain 
facethe longest squeeze on their pay for 70 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/ifs-warnsf-biggest-squeeze-on-pay-for-70-years-autumn-statement>
. This week, the Resolution Foundation thinktank warnedthe UK faces the risk 
next year of a return to the squeeze in real pay suffered earlier in the decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/uk-pay-squeeze-resolution-foundation-rising-prices-jobs-growth>
. It said 2015-16 had been the fastest year of real wage growth since 2001 but 
said the combination of low inflation and strongly rising employment would not 
be repeated.

For the housing market, forecasters expect a slowdown next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/uk-house-price-growth-2017-surveyors-rics>
. A longstanding shortage of homes will mean prices keep rising but at a much 
more modest pace of 3%, predicts the the Royal Institution of Chartered 
Surveyors. Property firmSavills has suggested that prices will remain flat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/end-property-boom-uk-house-prices-flatline-savills-forecast>
 across the UK. The UK’s largest building society, Nationwide, expects the UK 
average price to increase by 2% over the year, below the rate of growth it has 
reported in 2016.
 