
Let’s sack the electorate and appoint a new one: this is the demand made by MPs
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/second-referendum-consequences-brexit-grave>
, lawyers and the 4 million people who have signedthe petition calling for a 
second referendum <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/131215>. It’s a cry 
of pain, and therefore understandable, but it’s also bad politics and bad 
democracy. Reduced to its essence, it amounts to graduates telling 
nongraduates: “We reject your democratic choice.”

Were this vote to be annulled (it won’t be), the result would be a full-scale 
class and culture war, riots and perhaps worse, pitching middle-class 
progressives against those on whose behalf they have claimed to speak, and 
permanently alienating people who have spent their lives feeling voiceless and 
powerless.

Yes, the Brexit vote has empowered the most gruesome collection of schemers, 
misfits, liars, extremists and puppets that British politics has produced in 
the modern era. It threatens to invoke a new age of demagoguery, a threat 
sharpened by the thought that if this can happen,so can Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/electing-donald-trump-would-be-like-brexit>
.

It has provoked a resurgence of racism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/racist-incidents-feared-to-be-linked-to-brexit-result-reported-in-england-and-wales>
 and an economic crisis whose dimensions remain unknown. It jeopardises the 
living world, the NHS,peace in Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/northern-irish-peace-sacrificed-english-nationalism>
 and the rest of the European Union. It promotes what the billionairePeter 
Hargreaves gleefully anticipated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/12/billionaire-brexit-donor-leaving-eu-like-dunkirk>
 as “fantastic insecurity”.

But we’re stuck with it. There isn’t another option, unless you favour the 
years of limbo and chaos that would ensue from a continued failure to trigger 
article 50. It’s not just that we have no choice but to accept the result; we 
should embrace it and make of it what we can.

We cannot succumb to inevitable disaster. It’s time to campaign to save our 
future | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/succumb-brexit-disaster-save-future-referendum-fallout>
It’s not as if the system that’s now crashing around us was functioning. The 
vote could be seen as a self-inflicted wound, or it could be seen as the 
eruption of an internal wound inflicted over many years by an economic 
oligarchy on the poor and the forgotten. The bogus theories on which our 
politics and economics are founded were going to collide with reality one day. 
The only questions were how and when.

Yes, the Brexit campaign was led by a political elite, funded by an economic 
elite and fuelled by a media elite. Yes, popular anger was channelled towards 
undeserving targets – migrants.

But the vote was also a howl of rage against exclusion, alienation and remote 
authority. That is why the slogan “take back control” resonated. If the left 
can’t work with this, what are we for?

So here is where we find ourselves. The economic system is not working, except 
for the likes of Philip Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/25/bhs-philip-green-family-millions-administration-arcadia>
.Neoliberalism has not delivered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/05/neoliberalism-mental-health-rich-poverty-economy>
 the meritocratic nirvana its theorists promised, but a rentiers’ paradise, 
offering staggering returns to whoever grabs the castle first while leaving 
productive workers on the wrong side of the moat.

The age of enterprise has become the age of unearned income, the age of the 
market the age of market failure, the age of opportunity a steel cage of 
zero-hours contracts, precarity and surveillance.

The political system is not working. Whoever you vote for, the same people 
win, because where power claims to be isnot where power is 
<http://www.polity.co.uk/book.asp?ref=0745633153>.

Parliaments and councils embody paralysed force, gesture without motion 
<https://allpoetry.com/The-Hollow-Men>, as the real decisions are taken 
elsewhere: by the money, for the money. Governments have actively conspired in 
this shift,negotiating fake trade treaties  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
behind their voters’ backs to prevent democracy from controlling 
corporate capital.

Unreformed political funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/09/conservative-donors-pay-up-to-15000-for-table-at-election-fundraiser>
 ensures that parties have to listen to the rustle of notes before the bustle 
of votes. In Britain these problems are compounded by an electoral system that 
ensures most votes don’t count. This is why a referendum is almost the only 
means by which people can be heard, and why attempting to override it is a 
terrible idea.

Culture is not working. A worldview that insists both people and place are 
fungible is inherently hostile to the need for belonging. For years now we have 
been told that we do not belong, that we should shift out without complaint 
while others are shifted in to take our place.

When the peculiarities of community and place are swept away by the tides of 
capital, all that’s left isa globalised shopping culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/09/materialism-system-eats-us-from-inside-out>
, in which we engage with glazed passivity. Man was born free, and he is 
everywhere in chainstores.

In all these crises are opportunities – opportunities to reject, connect and 
erect, to build from these ruins a system that works for the people of this 
country rather than for an offshore elite that preys on insecurity.

If it is true that Britain will have to renegotiate its trade treaties, is 
this not the best chance we’ve had in decades to contain corporate power – of 
insisting that companies that operate here must offer proper contracts, share 
their profits, cut their emissions and pay their taxes? Is it not a chance to 
regain control of the public services slipping from our grasp?

Farage is now Britain’s face at the EU: petty, unlovable, essentially 
terrified | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/28/nigel-farage-european-parliament-petty-rant-ukip>
How will politics in this sclerotic nation change without a maelstrom? In this 
chaos we can, if we are quick and clever, find a chance to strike a new 
contract: proportional representation, real devolution anda radical reform of 
campaign finance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/oct/29/capitalism-bankrolls-politics-pay-price>
 to ensure that millionaires can never again own our politics.

Remote authority has been rejected, so let’s use this moment to root our 
politics in a common celebration of place, to fightthe epidemic of loneliness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
 and rekindle common purpose, transcending the tensions between recent and less 
recent migrants (which means everyone else). In doing so, we might find a 
language in which liberal graduates can talk with the alienated people of 
Britain, rather than at them.

But most importantly, let’s address the task that the left and the centre have 
catastrophically neglected: developing a political and economic philosophy fit 
for the 21st century, rather than repeatedly microwaving the leftovers of the 
20th (neoliberalism and Keynesianism). If the history of the last 80 years 
tells us anything, it’s that little changes without a new and feracious 
framework of thought.

So yes, despair and rage and curse at what has happened: there are reasons 
enough to do so. But then raise your eyes to where hope lies.
 