
Parliament alone has the power to trigger Brexit by notifying Brussels of the 
UK’s intention to leave theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>
, the high court has ruled.

The judgment (pdf) 
<https://www.judiciary.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/summary-r-miller-v-secretary-of-state-for-exiting-the-eu-20161103.pdf>
, delivered by the lord chief justice, Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, is likely to 
slow the pace of Britain’s departure from the EU and is a huge setback for 
Theresa May, who had insisted the government alone would decide when to trigger 
the process.


The lord chief justice said that “the most fundamental rule of the UK 
constitution is that parliament is sovereign”.

Moving forward from the high court’s article 50 ruling | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/moving-forward-from-the-high-courts-article-50-ruling>
A government spokesman said ministers would appeal to the supreme court 
against the decision. The hearing will take place on 7-8 December.


High court set to rule on whether MPs should vote on triggering article 50 - 
Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/03/article-50-high-court-ruling-high-court-set-to-rule-on-whether-mps-should-vote-on-triggering-article-50-politics-live>
Thomas said: “The court does not accept the argument put forward by the 
government. There is nothing in the 1972 European Communities Act to support 
it. In the judgment of the court, the argument is contrary both to the language 
used by parliament in the 1972 act, and to the fundamental principles of the 
sovereignty of parliament and the absence of any entitlement on the part of the 
crown to change domestic law by the exercise of its prerogative powers.”

Unless overturned on appeal at the supreme court, the ruling threatens to 
plunge the government’s plans for Brexit into disarray as the process will have 
to be subject to full parliamentary control.


Government lawyers had argued that prerogative powers were a legitimate way to 
give effect “to the will of the people” who voted by a clear majority to leave 
the EU in the June referendum.


But Thomas declared: “The government does not have power under the crown’s 
prerogative to give notice pursuant to article 50 for the UK to withdraw from 
the European Union.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Liam%20Fox%3A%20government%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20with%20article%2050%20ruling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Liam%20Fox%3A%20government%20%E2%80%98disappointed%E2%80%99%20with%20article%2050%20ruling%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fliam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Liam Fox: government ‘disappointed’ with article 50 ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/liam-fox-government-disappointed-article-50-ruling-video>
The international trade secretary, Liam Fox, said the government was 
disappointed by the high court decision but added that “the government is 
determined to respect the result of the referendum”.


The Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, said he was angered by the decision. “I worry 
that a betrayal may be near at hand … I now fear that every attempt will be 
made to block or delay the triggering of article 50. If this is so, they have 
no idea of the level of public anger they will provoke.”

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, said: “This ruling underlines the need for 
the government to bring its negotiating terms to parliament without delay. 
Labour respects the decision of the British people to leave the European Union. 
But there must be transparency and accountability to parliament on the terms of 
Brexit.”

Will the article 50 ruling stop Brexit? | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/will-article-50-ruling-stop-brexit-high-court-parliament>
The Lib Dem leader, Tim Farron, said he was delighted by the ruling. “Given 
the strict two-year timetable of exiting the EU once article 50 is triggered, 
it is critical that the government now lay out their negotiating to parliament, 
before such a vote is held,” he said.

By handing responsibility for initiating Brexit over to MPs, the three senior 
judges – Thomas, the master of the rolls, Sir Terence Etherton, and Lord 
Justice Sales – have ventured on to constitutionally untested ground.

The legal dispute focused on article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> of the treaty on European 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, which says any member state may 
leave “in accordance with its own constitutional requirements” – an undefined 
term that has allowed both sides to pursue rival interpretations.

The decision may undermine the prime minister’s authority in conducting 
negotiations with other EU states in the run-up to the UK’s withdrawal.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20'this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Victorious%20Gina%20Miller%20reacts%20to%20article%2050%20ruling%3A%20%27this%20case%20was%20about%20process%2C%20not%20politics%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fvictorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video&media=>
Victorious Gina Miller reacts to article 50 ruling: ‘This case was about 
process, not politics’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/victorious-gina-miller-reacts-to-article-50-ruling-video>
Gina Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gina-miller>, the lead 
claimant in the case, said: “It was the right decision because we were dealing 
with the sovereignty of parliament. It was not about winning or losing. It was 
about what was right. Now we can move forward with legal certainty.”

Deir Dos Santos, a hairdresser and the other lead claimant, said: “Today’s 
judgment is a victory for everyone who believes in the supremacy of our 
parliament and the rule of law. I have never challenged the result of the 
referendum – in fact I voted for Brexit for the sole reason that I wanted power 
to be returned fromEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> to 
the British parliament. But I did not think it was right for the government 
then just to bypass parliament and try to take away my legal rights without 
consulting parliament first.”


High court Brexit ruling: what does it all mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/high-court-brexit-ruling-what-does-it-all-mean>
John Halford, the solicitor at Bindmans who represented the People’s Challenge 
<https://www.crowdjustice.org/case/peoples-challenge/> group, said: “The 
oversight, control and democratic accountability needed for decisions on Brexit 
have to match the consequences of those decisions for UK citizens. That is why 
our constitution empowers parliament, not the government, to take decisions.”

John Shaw, chair of the organisation Fair Deal for Expats 
<http://www.fairdealforexpats.com/home.html>, said: “This is superb news. We 
were convinced that our case was just. We’re delighted that the court agrees 
with us. There now needs to be a proper debate about how the rights of expats 
will be protected.”

The three judges’ ruling was unanimous. It stated: “By making and unmaking 
treaties the crown [ie the government] creates legal effects on the plane of 
international law, but in doing so it does not and cannot change domestic law. 
It cannot without the intervention of parliament confer rights on individuals 
or deprive individuals of rights.”

At one point the judgment dismisses arguments deployed by lawyers for the 
government – about whether rights within the EU were conferred by act of 
parliament or international treaty – as being “divorced from reality”.

The judges said: “The reality is that parliament knew and intended that 
enactment of the European Communities Act 1972 would provide the foundation 
acquisition by British citizens of rights under EU law which they could enforce 
in other member states.

They added that “the claimants are entitled to say that it would be surprising 
if they could be removed simply through action by the crown under its 
prerogative powers”.

They concluded: “In our judgment, the clear and necessary implication from 
these provisions taken separately and cumulatively is that parliament intended 
EU rights to have effect in domestic law and that this effect should not be 
capable of being undone or overridden by action taken by the crown in exercise 
of its prerogative powers.”

Part of the judges’ reasoning was based on legal precedents dating back to the 
13th century, in particular the Case of Proclamations. That case involved 
merchants who were prevented from working in London by proclamation of Henry IV 
which was found to be in breach of a parliamentary act dating back to 1297. 
Parliament triumphed and the crown had to withdraw its ban.

 * Producing in-depth, thoughtful, well-reported journalism is difficult and 
expensive - but supporting us isn’t. If you value the the Guardian’s coverage 
of Brexit, please help to fund our journalism bybecoming a Guardian Supporter 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/uk/supporter?INTCMP=gdnwb_copts_editorial_mem_brexitarticle50_footer> 