
The distinction between a journalist and a PR was neatly illustrated during a 
recent press conference at theGlasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> 
football club, Rangers.

The journalist, Mark Benstead of Sky Sports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports>, was asking questions of the 
club’s manager when he was interrupted by the club’s PR, Jim Traynor.

As Benstead persisted with his line of questioning, Traynor then called the 
briefing to a halt and ushered the manager, Mark Warburton, out of the room.


Benstead had been trying to get Warburton to comment on the suspension of a 
Rangers player,Joey Barton <https://www.theguardian.com/football/joey-barton>. 
But the manager would not be drawn. Which was fair enough.

Traynor’s intervention seemed unnecessary because Warburton, although 
stone-walling, was holding his own. It was a clear case by Traynor of 
attempting to manage the news.

How sad that Traynor, a sports journalist for 37 years, should have taken 
umbrage 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/watch-rangers-pr-chief-interrupt-9031539>
 at a working journalist doing his job. Then again, that transformation from 
poacher to gatekeeper has a been a familiar journalistic meme for generations.

After leaving the Daily Record in 2012, where he was associate editor, Traynor 
became communications director at Rangers for a short period. Now he handles 
the club’s press relations through his company,Level5PR 
<http://level5pr.co.uk/aboutus/>.

In his final column for the Record, incidentally, he wrote about the (alleged) 
demise of journalism inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and 
launched a scathing broadside at fellow journalists, calling them “despicable, 
pathetic little creatures”.

Traynor’s petty act of censorship was rightly described on Twitter by former 
Sunday Mirror journalist Brian McNally as “comedy gold”.

But there is another worrying aspect to this incident. After a 20-minute 
hiatus, the press conference was reconvened. Yet no reporter took the 
opportunity to pursue Warburton over the status of Barton.

It appears that Benstead had broken some kind of unspoken agreement among the 
rest of the pack. That’s the problem with journalists who get too close to 
sports they cover. They are what we called, in pre-computer days, “fans with 
typewriters”.


Sources and video clips: Daily Record 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/sport/football/football-news/watch-rangers-pr-chief-interrupt-9031539>
/SkySports 
<http://www.skysports.com/watch/video/sports/football/competitions/scottish-football/10614709/rangers-refuse-barton-questions>
/Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/sport/football/news/rangers-press-officer-stops-mark-9032992>
/Brian McNally on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/McNallyMirror/status/786208604781154304>

 