
Britain is preparing to move its research station in the Antarctic 23km 
further inland because it is under threat from a growing crack in the ice.


The British Antarctic Survey’s Halley VI research station has recorded data 
relevant to space weather, climate change, and atmospheric phenomena from its 
site on the Brunt Ice Shelf shelf since 2012.

Sea ice extent in Arctic and Antarctic reached record lows in November
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
However, due to a growing chasm about 7km (4.3 miles) away that risks cutting 
the station off from the rest of the shelf, officials have announced that base 
will have to be moved.

The new site, nicknamed Halley VI A, was identified during in-depth site 
surveys in the 2015-16 Antarctic summer. Now that winter has passed, the 
relocation team are preparing to tow the station 23km to its new home using 
large tractors.


Though the station has not been moved from its present location since it was 
taken there from its construction site in 2012, it was designed with potential 
relocation in mind to accommodate movement in the ice.

Tim Stockings, director of operations at British Antarctic Survey, said in a 
statement 
<https://www.bas.ac.uk/media-post/relocation-of-halley-research-station/> the 
team was “excited by the challenge”, and minimising disruption to science 
programmes was a priority.

“Antarctica can be a very hostile environment. Each summer season is very 
short, about nine weeks. And because the ice and the weather are unpredictable 
we have to be flexible in our approach.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbritish-antarctic-research-station-crack-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9200d46a3de1fbfd8eb2bca60140dc1ecda720ba%2F0_0_736_552%2Fmaster%2F736.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=British%20Antarctic%20research%20station%20to%20be%20moved%20due%20to%20deep%20crack%20in%20the%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbritish-antarctic-research-station-crack-ice%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=British%20Antarctic%20research%20station%20to%20be%20moved%20due%20to%20deep%20crack%20in%20the%20ice&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fbritish-antarctic-research-station-crack-ice%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9200d46a3de1fbfd8eb2bca60140dc1ecda720ba%2F0_0_736_552%2Fmaster%2F736.jpg>
 Map of the Halley IV Research Station Photograph: British Antarctic Survey 
In 2012, satellite monitoring revealed the first signs of movement in a chasm 
in the ice shelf that had lain dormant for at least 35 years. Glaciologists 
have since determined the most likely path and speed of the crack, and 
monitoring is ongoing.

Parts of the ice shelf irregularly cleave off from the ice sheet, creating 
icebergs. It is not known if the growth of the crack is related to global 
warming.

In October, a second crack emerged in the ice about 17km north of the station, 
across a route sometimes used to resupply the base. Alternative paths have been 
used since.


Halley VI and other Antarctic research stations – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2013/feb/09/halley-vi-antarctica-research-stations-pictures>
The planned move will be completed in stages over a period of three years, 
allowing scientific research to continue in temporary facilities at Halley at 
the existing site.

The station’s eight modules will eventually be unattached and moved inland 
across the ice by tractor. Operations will then be moved to the new location 
next season.

The relocation should be completed by 6 April 2018.

Ozone measurements have been recorded continuously at Halley since 1956, and 
led to the discovery of the Antarctic ozone hole in 1985. Space weather data is 
also captured there daily.
 