
British shoppers should brace themselves for higher prices following the steep 
fall in the pound since the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/pound-completes-worst-four-day-performance-since-brexit-vote>
, the former boss of Sainsbury’s has said.

Justin King <https://www.theguardian.com/business/justin-king> said 
supermarkets would be unable to absorb the recent rise in the cost of importing 
goods caused by the falling value of the pound against the dollar and euro. 
Instead, said King, they would soon pass on the costs to consumers in higher 
prices.


Mike Rake, the chairman of BT, speaking at the same conference as King in 
London on Wednesday, said imported mobile phones and broadband home hubs were 
already 10% more expensive and the cost would have to be passed on to consumers 
in the near future.

Sterling has come under intense pressure over the past week on signals from 
Theresa May’s government that it willgo for a hard Brexit deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/may-on-collision-course-with-backbenchers-seeking-soft-brexit>
 that sacrifices single market access in favour of stricter immigration 
controls.


Since the vote to leave the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> the pound has fallen 20% against the 
dollar and 22% against the euro. It was trading at just under $1.22 on 
Wednesday afternoon, after a further plunge in value on Tuesday.
Pound v dollar since 23 June 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/oct/2016-10-11T17:01:25/embed.html>
Business lobby groups have previously said consumers will face a steep rise  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/retailers-warn-weak-pound-blows-consumer-confidence-british-retail-consortium>
in import costs on a range of goods from cars to clothes as a result of the 
currency drop.

But the UK’s annual inflation rate stayed at 0.6% last month, 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/releases/ukconsumerpriceindicesaug2016> confounding 
City forecasts of a small rise in the cost of living due to imports becoming 
more expensive.


Who are the winners and losers in sterling’s plunge?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/winners-losers-sterling-plunge-brexit>
King, who is now a vice-chairman of private equity firm Terra Firma, said: 
“Retailers’ margins are already squeezed. So there is no room to absorb input 
price pressures and costs will need to be passed on.


“But no one wants to be the first to break cover. No business wants to be the 
first to blame Brexit for a rise in prices. But once someone does, there will 
be a flood of companies because they will all be suffering.”

Rake, a former chairman of the accountancy firm KPMG, said: “We have already 
had a 10% increase in mobile phone handsets and home hubs, and that will need 
to be passed on at some point.”

It is believed that many high street retailers and consumer goods importers 
have hedged their currency risks for at least the rest of the year. But that 
only means increases in the cost of some imported goods being delayed until 
next year.
 