
After the double shock produced by Brexit and the Chilcot report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/chilcot-report-crushing-verdict-tony-blair-iraq-war>
, we are faced with the wider question of how Britain will redefine its role in 
the world – and how that role may still depend on the cooperation it can 
maintain with its European neighbours.

Will Nato’s warmer words prevent a new cold war? | Mary Dejevsky
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/nato-new-cold-war-russia>
Last week Nato held a summit in Warsaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/11/nato-new-cold-war-russia>
, cast as a welcome show of western solidarity at a time when Brexit has placed 
a huge question mark over transatlantic relations. Nato will remain a pillar of 
European security, but as Britain starts pulling out of the EU there will be 
consequences. Historically, Britain has been pivotal to the transatlantic link. 
Now pressure is mounting for the EU to take more responsibility for its own 
security, to prevent chaos spilling into its territory from the east and south.

Britain will be faced with stark choices. Cut off from the EU but still inside 
Nato <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato>, it risks becoming an ever more 
junior partner to the United States. That is a gamble given the current mood of 
US isolationism, and the possibility of Donald Trump being elected president. 
Yet engaging with the EU from outside on foreign policy and security issues 
will require a considerable amount of goodwill on both sides – and there is 
little on display right now.

Asked how a European framework might have saved Britain from its Iraqi 
adventure, Robert Cooper, an experienced British diplomat who in 2003 worked 
with the EU, says: “It’s very healthy for any government to hear different 
views, and in terms of getting a challenge to your policy, the EU is not a bad 
place to be.”

Government is essentially introspective. And civil servants aren’t 
particularly good at telling the truth to their political bosses. As excerpts 
from the Chilcot report show, Tony Blair was locked in a highly personal 
relationship with George W Bush (illustrated by the “I will be with you, 
whatever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/with-you-whatever-tony-blair-letters-george-w-bush-chilcot>
” note). In 2002-03 Blair never found himself in a room with a group of EU 
leaders – who would have thoroughly challenged him about how, and why, he 
planned to resolve the Saddam Hussein problem.

Europe was of course deeply divided over Iraq. The two largest continental 
powers, France and Germany, werestaunchly opposed to the war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2003/jan/22/germany.france>. Jacques Chirac, 
then French president, threatened to veto any UN resolution that might 
authorise an intervention. Gerhard Schröder, the German chancellor, made 
opposition to the war a key theme of his re-election campaign in autumn 2002.

When the EU forges a common position on a tricky foreign policy issue, it can 
fine-tune its choices and get things right

This reinforces Cooper’s point. When the EU does try to forge a common 
position on a tricky foreign policy issue, it can fine-tune its choices and get 
things right. Take the case of Myanmar: years ago a balance was struck among EU 
states between tough, US-backed sanctions (which the UK also supported), and 
the views of those countries, such as Italy, that didn’t want any sanctions at 
all. In the end, Europe exerted pressure by discouraging investments in 
Myanmar, butwithout closing the door to dialogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/apr/19/eu-to-suspend-burma-sanctions>.

One thing Britain will lose once it is out of the EU is the sustained 
interaction that comes from taking part in a constant stream of EU meetings: 
the often tiresome but indispensable routine of trying to find common solutions 
to common problems. That common diplomatic culture existed for 40 years – with 
ups and downs – but is about to be dismantled entirely.

Of course, working out a European policy on Myanmar is not the same thing as 
finding a compromise between war or no war in the Middle East. Iraq set in 
motion a much deeper clash of interests among Europeans: Britain’s “special 
relationship” with the US was a key item in that diplomatic battle.

The Iran agreement is a disaster for Isis | Federica Mogherini
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/iran-agreement-isis-vienna-eu>
But now, with global US power having become more relative, post-Brexit Britain 
will have to think hard about what it may still want to do with European 
partners on foreign and security policy – if anything at all. There is talk of 
strengtheningEU-Nato cooperation 
<https://europa.eu/globalstrategy/en/global-strategy-foreign-and-security-policy-european-union>
.Nathalie Tocci 
<http://www.bipr.eu/eventprofile.cfm/idevent=42BAA802-E852-1BE3-087F5BDC19175D26/Nathalie-Tocci-Towards-an-EU-Global-Strategy&zdyx=1>
, an adviser toFederica Mogherini 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2014/aug/30/portrait-federica-mogherini-eu-foreign-policy-chief>
, the EU high representative for foreign affairs and security policy, believes 
Brexit will ultimatelyencourage such a rapprochement 
<http://carnegieeurope.eu/strategiceurope/?fa=64045> – and that would arguably 
be the only positive outcome of the referendum. Others such as George 
Robertson, a former Nato secretary-general, are less certain, because the UK’s 
EU membership has been so central to links between the two organisations.

The EU may not be seen as a heavyweight in foreign policy, but it played an 
important role in the Iran nuclear deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/iran-agreement-isis-vienna-eu>
, and inpressuring Russia with sanctions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/21/eu-to-extend-sanctions-against-russia>
. The US has repeatedly indicated it wants Europeans to shoulder more of a 
security role, and not just through Nato. Britain will be out of the EU club 
but, from terrorism to climate change and migration, none of the international 
challenges it faces are in any way different from those of its continental 
neighbours.

The danger is that Britain will now find itself so embroiled in the 
complexities of its divorce from the EU that it will end up in a hazardous 
position on the international stage: delusional about its influence on the US, 
and cut off from the wider European discussions.
 