
It wasn’t supposed to be like this. Four decades after the winter of 
discontent, after Margaret Thatcher’s government and its successors gave 
Britain some of the most draconian anti-union laws in the world, and long after 
unions were further weakened by self-employment, individualism and political 
apathy, it is still surprisingly easy to find yourself on the receiving end of 
industrial action.

I’m a cleaner on GWR trains. We’re striking because we’re treated unfairly | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/cleaner-gwr-great-western-railway-agency-staff-pay-conditions-striking>
If you have children at school, or use public transport, or state services 
from hospitals to universities to libraries, then the austerity years since 
2010 have been sporadically punctuated by clusters of strikes. Last monthPost 
Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/theresa-may-ordinary-person-striking-post-office>
 workers andSouthern rail  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/30/southern-rail-passengers-face-new-year-disruption-as-strikes-bite>
drivers stopped work. This week there has already been a strike byLondon 
Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/08/london-underground-tube-strike-southern-ba-walkouts>
 station staff, and others are scheduled byBritish Airways cabin crew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/british-airways-cabin-crew-to-go-on-strike-next-week-in-pay-dispute>
, and again by the drivers of Southern rail.

For the rightwing press, after the Brexit vote and 2015’s Conservative 
election win even more accustomed than usual to getting its way, the strikes 
are an affront. “Swaggering union bully boys must be brought to heel,”fumed the 
Daily Express 
<http://www.express.co.uk/comment/columnists/leo-mckinstry/745007/Southern-rail-strike-union-bully-boys-stopped-Leo-McKinstry>
 last month. The same day, a spokesman forTheresa May said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/no-10-accuses-striking-workers-of-contempt-for-ordinary-people>
: “The strikes are wrong and they are causing untold misery to hundreds of 
thousands.” The strikers were showing “contempt for ordinary people trying to 
go about their daily lives” – as if the strikers were not themselves ordinary 
people, whose lives were sometimes disrupted by strikes, and who might 
therefore understand the wider implications.

But anti-union rhetoric generally has little interest in facts. Comparing the 
current strikes to those of the 70s, as the tabloids often do, is absurd, and 
all but the most excitable or ignorant journalists and politicians know it. In 
1979, more than 29m working days were lost to industrial action. Over the first 
10 months of last year – the most recent period for which records are available 
– the figure was 281,000.

In the 70s, the annual number of days lost regularly exceeded 10m. Since 
Thatcher left office in 1990, it has rarely reached 1m, despite a growing 
working population. Of all the indicators of the right’s ascendancy in modern 
Britain, thelong-term decline in employee rebellions 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/timeseries/bbfw/lms>
 against employers is one of the starkest. The anachronistic use of the word 
“industrial” to describe these disputes is revealing: in most of the UK private 
sector,union membership 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/525938/Trade_Union_Membership_2015_-_Statistical_Bulletin.pdf>
 has slipped below 14% of employees, according to the department for business, 
making it seem as much a relic of the past as manufacturing.

The real motive behind the rightwing hyperbole about strikes is to make them 
nearly or actually impossible. This ambition has a long history. In January 
1979, when UK union membership was close to its peak of 56% of all employees, 
and trade unionism pervaded everyday life – from enduring pop anthems such as 
theStrawbs’ Part of the Union <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KdOCWUgwiWs> to 
a lavishnew holiday centre for Transport and General Workers’ Union members in 
Tory Eastbourne 
<http://www.eastbourne.gov.uk/_resources/assets/inline/full/0/205020.pdf> – 
Margaret Thatchersaid in a TV interview 
<http://www.margaretthatcher.org/document/103807> that if she came to power she 
might outlaw strikes in “essential services”.

She never did; such services were difficult to define, and public opinion did 
not support a ban sufficiently. Yet since the Conservatives returned to office 
in 2010, the tabloids and even relative Tory liberals such as Boris Johnsonhave 
shown renewed interest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/feb/05/david-cameron-essential-services-impact-london-tube-strikes>
in a selectivelyauthoritarian approach 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4093270/Ban-strikes-public-services-Harold-Wilson-s-press-secretary-saw-bolshie-unions-cripple-country-JOE-HAINES-trenchant-message-Mrs-May.html>
 to industrial relations.

Meanwhile, even more sweeping anti-strike measures have been hinted at: in 
July 2015, the then skills ministerNick Boles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/reality-check/2015/jul/15/strikes-tory-crackdown-minister-claim>
 suggested that tube strikes in London lacked legitimacy because tube users 
were “not represented” in strike ballots. By this logic, any disruptive – in 
other words, effective – strike would require a public consent so wide as to be 
virtually unachievable.

In 1983, Thatcher’s employment secretary Norman Tebbit, who devised the modern 
legislative ratchet against unions, told TUC general secretary Len Murray that 
the “prime role” of unions “should be to help improve the performance of their 
firms which provided their members with jobs”. This subservient trade unionism 
is a dream still shared by many Tories, and many employers. But the persistence 
of the strike impulse where employees are still relatively powerful and hard to 
replace – the public sector, in the drivers’ cabs of trains – suggests that the 
less biddable side of trade unionism will probably never be eradicated.

Don’t complain about the strikers – they’re only doing what we all should in 
2017 | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/dont-complain-about-the-strikers-theyre-only-doing-what-we-all-should-in-2017>
Yet if the strike is going to be a political tactic that delivers gains not 
just for narrow groups of workers but for millions, as it sometimes did in the 
70s (many of those participating in the winter of discontent were low-paid 
women), then unions will have to get better at recruiting and politicising 
young, insecure, often freelance workers. Even more than public sector 
employees, they have been squeezed by the UK’s ever more unequal austerity 
economy. Their lot will probably worsen further this year, as rising inflation 
eats into their flimsy incomes.

A strike, or the threat of one, ought to be more than a ritual confrontation, 
or a rearguard action. It ought to be a way for employees to be empowered, to 
pressure their employers, and win concessions – just as modern businesses 
pressure employees and win concessions almost every day.

In recent years, there have been small signs of militancy 
<https://iwgb.org.uk/> in new places: campaigns for cleaners, cycle couriers 
and Deliveroo riders, often successfully coordinated by anirreverent new union 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v37/n20/andy-beckett/vuvuzelas-unite>, the Independent 
Workers Union of Great Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/19/jason-moyer-lee-gig-economy-threat-independent-workers-union>
. But for most Britons under the age of 50, a strike is just faded TV archive 
footage or an inconvenience, rather than something they understand or might 
occasionally take part in. That needs to change.
 