
Millions of commuters could face travel disruption on their return to work on 
Tuesday, with icy conditions forecast for London and large swaths of England 
and Wales.

Forecasters warned that roads may be treacherous after subzero temperatures 
overnight on Monday across most of Britain, with up to 5cm of snow on high 
ground.

A Met Office severe weather warning for ice is in place for east Wales and a 
large stretch of England, from Manchester to the west Midlands and south-east 
to the capital.


Frank Saunders, the Met Office’s chief meteorologist, said: “We are advising 
commuters to pay particular attention to the potential for ice and frost to 
affect journeys tomorrow morning.

“Although most gritted surfaces will stay ice-free, there is a particular for 
risk that pavements and untreated roads, especially minor ones, could be very 
slippery.

“A very cold night is in store for many and, as moister air comes in to 
contact with cold surfaces later, there is the potential for a lot of frost to 
form, rendering some surfaces hazardous.”

Large areas of Scotland, Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the north of England were 
worst hit by the cold snap on Monday, with a severe weather warning for ice in 
place from the Scottish Highlands down to Yorkshire.

But it is the south of England that will start the new year with the coldest 
temperatures. The mercury will fall to -6C in the Oxfordshire village of Benson 
on Monday and into Tuesday, while temperatures will reach -3C in Reading and 
-2C in Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire.

In its severe weather warning for central England and east Wales, the Met 
Office said: “Please be aware that untreated surfaces, such as pavements and 
some minor roads, are likely to turn very slippery later Monday night and on 
Tuesday morning. A few freezing fog patches are also possible.”

The yellow weather warning – meaning be aware – was in force until 10am on 
Tuesday, although the hazardous driving conditions may persist into Tuesday in 
the worst-affected areas.

Millions of commuters will return to work on Tuesday after the Christmas break 
and bank holiday Monday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbritain-faces-icy-return-to-work-at-start-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ebfcbc90ae74d4826ed79a3c3ce6307598f75f%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Britain%20faces%20icy%20return%20to%20work%20at%20beginning%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbritain-faces-icy-return-to-work-at-start-of-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Britain%20faces%20icy%20return%20to%20work%20at%20beginning%20of%202017&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fbritain-faces-icy-return-to-work-at-start-of-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4ebfcbc90ae74d4826ed79a3c3ce6307598f75f%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Ice clings to plants in Clapham Common in south London. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty 
Rod Dennis, a spokesman for the RAC, urged motorists to stick to major routes, 
which were more likely to be gritted.

He said: “Drivers are facing a mix of hazards, notably much colder conditions. 
Any lingering fog calls for drivers to adjust their speed and maintain longer 
stopping distances and to use dipped headlights. Only use your car’s fog lights 
if visibility is badly reduced, as using them when it’s not means you risk 
dazzling other drivers.

“Motorists should remember that if their car thermometer records a temperature 
of 4C (39F) or lower, there is a good chance the road temperature is near or 
even below freezing, meaning a very real risk of ice and slippery roads.”

The AA said Tuesday was typically the busiest of the year for breakdowns as 
many vehicles were left unused over the festive period.

Its spokesman, Max Holdstock, said: “The first working day back in January is 
traditionally one of the busiest days of the year for breakdowns, with flat 
batteries the main culprit. The issue is that many cars get left unused for up 
to a fortnight in often cold conditions, which causes the power output of the 
battery to drop.

“If your car has been left sitting idle or has been used for mostly short, 
stop-start journeys, ideally trickle charge the battery. Or, if weather 
conditions permit, take it out before Monday for at least half an hour to boost 
the battery.”
 