
A British man will plunge into sub-zero waters in the Antarctic on Tuesday to 
campaign for the creation of three huge marine parks to stop overfishing.

Lewis Pugh is credited with playing an important role in the agreement earlier 
this year to create the world’s largest marine protected area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/worlds-largest-marine-park-created-in-ross-sea-in-antarctica-in-landmark-deal>
 (MPA) and make fishing off limits in much of the Ross Sea, a bay in the 
Southern Ocean.

The endurance swimmer last year took to the region’s freezing waters to fly 
the flag for the MPA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/mar/02/lewis-pughs-antarctic-swim-in-pictures>
, and met and lobbied the Russian government, which had previously blocked the 
plan. He calls this mix of extreme swimming and hobnobbing with officials 
“Speedo diplomacy”.

“The main significance is the precedent it sets,” Pugh said of the Ross Sea 
marine park, which was agreed by 24 nations and the EU in October.

Lewis Pugh's Antarctic swim – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2015/mar/02/lewis-pughs-antarctic-swim-in-pictures>
Now he wants to create three more similar sanctuaries for marine life – in East
Antarctica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>, the Weddell Sea and 
Antarctic peninsula – which together with the Ross Sea MPA would collectively 
cover around 7m sq km, an area around the size of Australia. As part of his 
campaigning, he plans to swim on Tuesday for 5km in -1C waters in the 
Bellingshausen Sea, which is along the west side of the Antarctic peninsula.

That will be followed by a 3km swim in the “whale graveyard” around South 
Georgia, the British Overseas Territory where British sailors killed more than 
a million whales in the late 19th and early 20th century.

Bad weather and the freezing water will be the main challenges for Pugh, who 
has previously swum across the north pole and in Himalayan glacial lakes. When 
scientists studied him, they found his core temperature naturally rises by 
nearly 2C ahead of a swim, to cope with the cold.
Ross Sea MPA map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/ross_ice-zip/giv-3902N3dxnnn5SI5e>
The 47-year-old has already undertaken one “warm-up” swim for his current 
expedition, around Cape Horn <http://lewispugh.com/capehorn/> in relatively 
balmy 7C waters. But after a first swim there he came up short at 850 metres 
and he had to redo the entire thing, swimming another 1km. He said the 
nutrients in the water there meant it was “bubbling with life” and he was 
watched by barking leopard seals.

Can ‘Speedo diplomacy’ save one of the world's last pristine oceans?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/09/can-speedo-diplomacy-save-one-worlds-last-pristine-oceans>
Conservationists think that the East Antarctic MPA is likely to be the next 
one to be agreed by nations when they meet under the aegis of the CCAMLR treaty 
set up to protect Antarctic marine life.


“We hope to see the East Antarctic MPA go through in 2017. We think it’s 
realistic, that’s been on the table as long as the Ross Sea,” said Andrea 
Kavanagh, director of Southern Ocean Sanctuaries at Pew Charitable Trusts.

Pugh thinks the creation of four marine parks in Antarctica would be hugely 
valuable to science. “I think it’s very, very significant. How can we 
understand to properly protect ecosystems if we don’t even know what a healthy 
one looks like?”
 