
It’s a “further wave” of investment, says BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/bt-roll-out-superfast-broadband-4g-6bn-investment>
, conjuring visions of Britain surfing to a fast-speed broadband future while 
other nations splash in the shallows. Don’t believe the hype: £6bn is a large 
sum, but not quite as it seems.

About a third probably covers newly arrived EE’s expansion of its 4G mobile 
network, which is spending that would have happened anyway. The Openreach 
broadband element – call it £4bn – equates to £1.33bn a year since this is a 
three-year programme. That’s an upgrade from a current rate of £1bn a year, but 
we’re not talking tsunamis.

BT to spend £6bn on superfast broadband and 4G rollout
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/bt-roll-out-superfast-broadband-4g-6bn-investment>
Nor does the spending represent a technological revolution. BT aims to deploy 
“ultrafast” broadband to 12m premises but the tally includes only 2m sites with 
fibre-optic, or fibre to the premises (FTTP), lines, which purists regard as 
the only kit worthy of the “ultra” superlative. For its partBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> counters that its G fast system, 
which uses copper wires for the last leg, is sufficiently speedy and more 
affordable for most punters’ purposes.

The argument would be almost academic if Ofcom wasn’t so keen on promoting 
FTTP for the national digital health. In its last review, the regulator spoke 
about a “good outcome in the long term” being 40% of households with FTTP. BT’s 
plan – even when added to Virgin Media’s investment in equivalent technology – 
won’t get the UK to that level.

It’s hard, though, to see how Ofcom would vent any frustration with BT. Forced 
separation is off the agenda (at least for the time being) for the strong 
reason that an independent Openreach might have fewer incentives to invest. 
Thus plan A is to encourage competition by allowing rivals to use BT’s ducts 
and poles to build their own fibre networks.

From a regulatory perspective, the approach is coherent but it relies on 
competitors to BT actually risking their capital. BT’s shareholders don’t seem 
remotely troubled by the prospect. They can see their company doesn’t have to 
break sweat with its £6bn programme and they lapped up the promise of 10%-plus 
dividend growth in each of the next two years. The shares were the biggest 
gainer in the FTSE 100.

The market’s reaction is fair. But it’s impossible to shake the sense that 
life for BT is just too comfortable at present. The £6bn wave is underwhelming.

Centrica’s empty boast angers investors

The first shock Iain Conn delivered to Centrica’s shareholders didn’t really 
meet the description. By the time the chief executive arrived from BP at the 
start of last year, cutting the dividend by 30% was the prudent course. But 
Thursday’s surprise –a share placing to raise £700m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/05/centrica-upsets-investors-750m-sale-new-shares>
 – definitely moved the dial. Nobody saw it coming, thus the violent 10% share 
price fall.

Strictly speaking, Conn has not diverted from the strategy he outlined last 
summer. After too many years chasing exploration and production assets that 
turned out to be overpriced,Centrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica> would be a customer-facing 
“energy and services company”. It sounded commendably dull, as the owner of 
British Gas should be.

It’s just that investors had assumed Conn’s intention to display “capital 
discipline” meant the new adventure could be funded by internal cashflows. 
Instead, a couple of small acquisitions – one of £200m, one of £150m - has sent 
Centrica into a panic about a possible downgrade of its credit rating.

The worry is legitimate since borrowings stood at £4.7bn at the last count. 
But Conn was also banging on about being “on track to deliver against our 2016 
targets” only three weeks ago. You can’t blame investors for being furious: if 
capital discipline means tapping shareholders for the odd £700m so soon after a 
dividend cut, what’s the boast worth?

Donald Trump should stop yelling at Yellen

How bad would a Donald Trump presidential victory be for financial markets? 
Whatever your guess, add a few percentage points after the presumptive 
Republican nominee said he would probably ditch Janet Yellen as chair of the US
Federal Reserve <https://www.theguardian.com/business/federal-reserve> when her 
first term finishes in 2018.

Fed chairs normally have to screw up monumentally not to be granted a second 
term whoever is president (Ben Bernanke even survived the banking crisis). 
Yellen’s crime, as Trump sees things, is that she is not a Republican. Maybe 
you’d expect him to take that line. But investors would also expect 
presidential candidates to stay quiet and not undermine the Fed chair until the 
moment of replacement arrives.

Rolls-Royce puts a high value on Singer

After all the fuss (at least in this column), Rolls-Royce’s shareholders 
ushered Bradley Singer, the man from activist US hedge fund ValueAct Capital, 
into the boardroom with a 94% vote in favour.

It’s their lookout, but that majority is astonishing. Singer may be a fine 
fellow but ValueAct has a supporting role in the horror show that isCanadian 
pharmaceutical firm Valeant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/valeant-ceo-michael-pearson-resigns-financial-conduct>
, a demonstration of how financial engineering can go seriously wrong when 
applied to an industry that runs on long-term investment.
 