
Ofcom has increased pressure on BT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> to table stronger plans to 
legally separate from Openreach, which controls the UK’s broadband 
infrastructure, by threatening to call in European regulators after months of 
negotiations over a voluntary deal.

The UK media regulator wants to strengthen the independence of Openreach to 
promote competition and boost the roll-out of superfast broadband but has 
failed to reach agreement with BT.

In July, Ofcom said a full sell-off of Openreach was not necessary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/bt-avoids-openreach-breakup-ofcom-orders-more-investment>
 but ordered BT togive the division more independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/bt-avoids-openreach-breakup-ofcom-orders-more-investment>
 by making it a legally separate company, although it would still sit within BT 
Group.


BT has tabled what it says are “fair and sustainable” proposals to address 
concerns, but Ofcom has rejected them saying they do not go far enough to 
guarantee improvement in the UK broadband and telephone network.

More than £1bn for faster UK broadband in autumn statement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/21/more-than-1bn-faster-uk-broadband-autumn-statement>
Since then talks have reached a stalemate, prompting Ofcom to say it is now 
proceeding with formal notification to the European commission to force through 
a legal separation of Openreach, a tactic designed to turn the heat up on BT to 
get a voluntary deal done.

San Dhillon, the executive director at Exane BNP Paribas, saidBT has been 
“reticent and hesitant” to offer remedies that would truly make Openreach 
independent.


“I suspect that BT has been caught by surprise thinking that negotiations 
would be ongoing [in private],” he said. “The aim here is to hurry along what 
has been a protracted process by going public and filing to Europe while also 
pursuing the joint track of negotiations with BT. I expect that the endgame 
won’t be a unilateral move by Ofcom, it will be worked out with BT.”

Rivals – which include Sky, TalkTalk and Vodafone – argue that BT has 
deliberately dragged its heels in opening up the network to their engineers, 
which has hampered their ability to offer homes superfast broadband access.

Ofcom said it was “disappointed” that BT had “failed to offer voluntary 
proposals that address our competition concerns”.

“We are disappointed that BT has not yet come forward with proposals that meet 
our competition concerns,” said Ofcom. “Some progress has been made, but this 
has not been enough, and action is required now to deliver better outcomes for 
phone and broadband users.”

The move is only a partial victory for BT’s rivals, which have to access to 
the network to provide their own services to customers, who have lobbied 
heavily for a full breakup of Openreach.


“We welcome the fact that the regulator has finally made a decision,” said 
Dido Harding, the chief executive at TalkTalk. “While we do not think legal 
separation goes far enough to deliver the broadband consumers deserve, it is at 
least a step in the right direction.”

Under the new proposals, Openreach will become a “distinct company” with its 
own board and will be “guaranteed greater independence” on decisions on 
strategic investments.




 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9daa174f367dc5b650ad50741bb531592f94a676%2F0_177_3535_2122%2F3535.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=BT%20under%20increasing%20pressure%20from%20Ofcom%20to%20split%20from%20Openreach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=BT%20under%20increasing%20pressure%20from%20Ofcom%20to%20split%20from%20Openreach&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fbt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9daa174f367dc5b650ad50741bb531592f94a676%2F0_177_3535_2122%2F3535.jpg>
 A BT Openreach engineer working on telephone lines. Photograph: Steve 
Parsons/PA 
A BT spokesman said: “We put forward proposals in July that we believe are 
fair and sustainable, and that meet Ofcom’s objectives without disproportionate 
costs. We are implementing these proposals … [and] we are in discussions with 
Ofcom on two outstanding issues, the reporting line of the Openreach chief 
executive and the form of legal incorporation.”

Hours before Ofcom’s announcement on Tuesday, BT said Mike McTighe 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/bt-group-plc/bt-a/mike-mctighe-to-be-first-openreach-chairman/201611290700133600Q/?fe=1&utm_source=FE%20Investegate%20Alerts&utm_medium=Email&utm_content=Announcement%20Alert%20Mail&utm_campaign=BT%20Group%20PLC%20Alert>
, the former Ofcom director and City veteran, would be Openreach’s first 
independent chairman.




“We have continued to discuss with BT potential changes to its voluntary 
proposal,” said Ofcom. “We are now preparing tonotify the European commission 
<http://ofcomnewsreleasesnew.cmail20.com/t/i-l-ulpkyt-okjbws-b/> of our 
intention to implement these plans, requiring the legal separation of Openreach 
to make it more independent. Throughout this process, we remain open to BT 
bridging the gap between its proposal and what is required to address our 
strong competition concerns.”


The regulator wants Openreach to have a board made up of a majority of 
directors who are independent of BT, and remains concerned at the “level of 
influence” that BT Group executives could exert on its subsidiary’s management.


Ofcom also moved to explain why it had rejected rivals’ calls for a complete 
structural separation of Openreach and BT that would have made them two 
entirely separate companies.


“Our current view is still that an effective and robust form of legal 
separation, with Openreach as a wholly owned subsidiary of BT, is likely to 
achieve the greatest improvements for everyone in the shortest amount of time,” 
said Ofcom.


Ofcom said its model for Openreach includes proposals to “publicly scrutinise 
and monitor its effectiveness” with the most direct method looking at whether 
its decisions are taken independently “without undue influence from BT”.


“If Ofcom’s monitoring suggests that legal separation is not delivering 
sufficient benefits for the wider telecoms industry and its customers, we will 
return to the question of structural separation – fully breaking up the 
companies,” the regulator said.


BT has repeatedly warned that separating Openreach from its business could 
have a major impact on its pension scheme, which has a deficit of £9.5bn, a 
concern echoed by the scheme’s trustees.


“Most stakeholders who responded to our consultation took the view that the 
concerns raised by BT, the unions and trustees relating to the BT pension 
scheme have been overstated,” said Ofcom.












 