
The routine for the Benedictine monks of Buckfast Abbey 
<https://www.buckfast.org.uk/> in Devon is plain and strict: a bell rings at 
5.25am to wake them and thereafter the day is divided into periods ofprayer, 
work and study <https://www.buckfast.org.uk/dayinthelife>. Meals are simple 
and, except on very special occasions, taken in silence.

Yet there is nothing austere about the finances of the Buckfast Abbey trust, 
which supports the community. Newfigures from the Charity Commission 
<http://apps.charitycommission.gov.uk/Showcharity/RegisterOfCharities/CharityWithPartB.aspx?RegisteredCharityNumber=232497&SubsidiaryNumber=0>
 reveal that – in large part thanks to the success of the abbey’s tonic wine – 
the trust’s annual income totalled a cool £8.8m.

 The success is not without controversy. Buckfast tonic wine, which contains 
caffeine, is often blamed for drink-fuelled thuggery in Scotland. Only last 
week a sheriff in Dundee said he believed there was a“very definite association 
between Buckfast and violence” 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/buckfast-breeds-violence-sheriff-blasts-9403289>
 as he sentenced a young man who smashed a bottle of the drink over a boy’s 
head at a child’s 15th birthday party.

Abbey life: inside Britain's Benedictine monasteries – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/nov/02/ashley-bourne-benedictine-monasteries-downside-buckfast-in-pictures>
 Such trouble does not tend to happen in Buckfastleigh. “I don’t know anyone 
who really drinks it here, actually, and certainly not as apparently as some do 
in Strathclyde,” said Neil Smith, a town councillor and economics lecturer. 
“Although it does actually make quite a nice alternative to Pimm’s if you 
dilute it with lemonade rather than down it in one from the bottle.”

 Smith does not feel the drink’s reputation is bad for the town’s image. “On 
the contrary, it generates interest in the town and the long history of the 
abbey here. The abbey is a huge tourist attraction, bringing people from all 
over the world. It employs local people; it is a beautiful environment with 
free entry, providing a space to walk and contemplate. I go there often myself, 
despite not being religious.”

The postmaster, Lorraine Lee, is also a fan of the abbey. When the post office 
relocated last year, the trust paid for the refurbishment. “They do very good 
work in the town,” said Lee. Did she like the tonic wine? “I’ve tasted it but 
it’s not my cup of tea.”

It is clear from the townspeople – and the financial accounts – that the monks 
do not hoard the money. As well as investing in the post office, they have 
recently ploughed funds into a play park. They also support religious ventures 
such as a Catholic theological school.

 The recipe for the tonic wine is attributed to the original French monks who 
settled at the abbey <https://www.buckfast.org.uk/tonic-wine> in the 1880s. 
They imported base wines from Spain, added ingredients according to a secret, 
age-old recipe and created a medicinal pick-me-up.

 By the 1920s, 1,400 bottles were being sold annually and the distribution and 
sale was taken over by a company called J Chandler, based in Hampshire. To 
broaden its appeal, Buckfast was made less severe and turned into what the 
abbey describes as a “smoother, more mature medicated wine”.

It used to be advertised as a cure for insomnia and was said to have 
“wonderful restorative and health-giving properties”. In more modern times, the 
label has been adapted to include the proviso: “The name tonic wine does not 
imply health-giving or medicinal properties.”

 But it is still selling well. Today Buckfast is exported to Australia, the 
Bahamas, Spain, Greece, Ireland and to parts of west Africa.

 The monks have expanded the operation, recently building a new tonic factory 
– a low-lying building with a grass roof – with four vats each with a capacity 
of 130,000 litres of wine.

Despite its worldwide sales, Buckfast is not available at all outlets in 
Buckfastleigh. The Abbey Inn, a pub on the bank of the Dart, does not stock the 
wine. “It’s an acquired taste – very sweet,” said the landlord, Richard 
Jacobsen. “I think they export most of it up toGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>. We don’t get asked for it. Cider is 
more what we do here.”

The monks seem a little reluctant to discuss either the trust’s comfortable 
financial position or the alleged problems the drink causes. This week Chalk & 
Ward, a PR company based in Exeter, was tasked with getting the abbey’s message 
across.

It explained in a statement that selling tonic wine was not about making a 
stack of cash. “Buckfast Abbey’s charitable trust exists to support the 
religious community at Buckfast Abbey and those engaged in charitable works,” 
it said. “The trustees work hard to ensure the trust generates a healthy level 
of income so it can continue to provide this support. As such, the trust makes 
money in a number of ways.”

As well as selling wine, the abbey offers hotel rooms for visitors who wish to 
have a taste of the tranquillity that monastic life offers without the 
obligatory early starts and prayers. A double room in the Northgate House Hotel 
<http://buckfastaccommodation.org.uk/northgate-house> is advertised at £119 for 
double occupancy.

The abbey also has a state-of-the-art conference centre 
<http://www.buckfastconferences.org.uk/> where delegates can enjoy a welcome 
drink of “Buckfast’s Fizz” – tonic wine, fruit, mint, orange juice, soda water 
and crushed ice.

“Whilst the tonic wine does generate an income, the new hotel-style 
accommodation at Buckfast Abbey and the recently renovated conference centre 
have also contributed to the increase in income that the trust received,” the 
PR statement said.

The abbot, David Charlesworth, would not discuss the problems associated with 
the drink this week. In a rare BBC interview on the subject in 2013, he said it 
was unfair to blame the wine, arguing: “We don’t make a product for it to be 
abused. That’s not the idea. We make a product which is a tonic wine … I’m not 
producing drugs, which I know are going to be used abusively.”

It was left to Chalk & Ward to come to the drink’s defence this week after the 
criticism in Dundee from Sheriff Alastair Brown. “We are saddened to hear that, 
in the sheriff’s opinion, a small number of people inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> are not enjoying Buckfast tonic wine 
in a responsible way,” it said.

 “Buckfast Abbey’s charitable trust is a minority shareholder in the company 
that sells the wine, J Chandler & Co. The trust strives to work with J Chandler 
& Co to ensure that the tonic wine is marketed and distributed responsibly. The 
majority of people who drink the tonic wine do so responsibly. We fully support 
the efforts of charities such as Drinkaware who work to reduce alcohol misuse 
and harm in the UK.”

 Despite the concerns, Buckfast will be part of many festive celebrations. A 
stall at the Christmas market in Belfast has been selling“Buckie burgers” 
<http://www.belfastlive.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/buckfast-prosecco-burgers-sale-belfast-12294864>
, while a Glasgow bar is warming customers up withBuckfast mulled wine 
<http://www.glasgowlive.co.uk/whats-on/food-drink-news/buckfast-mulled-wine-ideal-christmas-12250771>
.

A couple from Clydebank, West Dunbartonshire, have been both celebrated and 
reviled on social media forcreating a Christmas tree from 98 empty bottle of 
Buckfast 
<https://www.thescottishsun.co.uk/news/237585/scots-couple-build-a-christmas-tree-using-98-empty-bottles-of-buckfast/>
.
PictureThis Scotland (@74frankfurt) 
Mark Watson of Clydebank builds a Buckfast Christmas tree from 98 bottles and 
200 fairy lights. (2016)pic.twitter.com/TwwxW2XzWc <https://t.co/TwwxW2XzWc>
 <https://twitter.com/74frankfurt/status/805491253861371906> December 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/74frankfurt/status/805491253861371906> 
Whether the monks will be cracking open the Buckfast this Christmas remains a 
mystery. Asked about the monks’ drinking habits, Chalk & Ward made it clear 
that nobody would be commenting.
 