
The outward manifestation of a housing crisis is right before our eyes, on a 
street near you, tucked anonymously in a doorway or lying on a park bench. 
Rough sleeping, according to theHouse of Commons library, 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN02007> has 
probably risen by 100% since 2010.

The government’s own figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/statutory-homelessness-and-homelessness-prevention-and-relief-england-april-to-june-2016>
 to the end of June show homelessness up by 10% in a year – 15,170 households 
at the last estimate – while another 73,000 languish in temporary 
accommodation, a rise of more than 50% in six years. The knock-on effect of the 
crisis hits home ownership, the cornerstone of the Thatcherite revolution, 
which is at its lowest level in 30 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
. And that’s in spite of the hundreds of millions diverted by the 
Cameron-Osborne government into subsidising the mortgages of the privileged few 
who can afford a deposit, rather than the majority who are unable to get a 
foothold on the housing ladder, let alone find a property to rent.

Britain’s housing crisis is so serious that it must be tackled now
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/20/britains-housing-crisis-must-be-tackled-now>
Theresa May could turn her welcome rhetoric of serving the many, rather than 
the few, into reality by addressing a chaotic housing market in which an 
affordable homes programme will get a paltry £2bn up to 2020 from a total 
housing package of £44bn. On Wednesday the PM has her chance, through her 
chancellor’s autumn statement. Whether she takes it is a moot question. 
Certainly the newish housing minister, Gavin Barwell,has signalled a welcome 
change of course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/sep/23/affordable-social-housing-crisis-gavin-barwell-government-policy-change>
 by acknowledging that social housing, as well as more homes for private 
renting, is vital to address the crisis alongside support for home ownership.

The scale of the challenge has been underlined by government figures showing 
that thenumber of new homes classed as “affordable” has fallen to the lowest 
level for 24 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/17/number-of-affordable-homes-built-in-england-slumps-24-year-low>
. And of the 32,000 in this category – some at 80% of the full market rate – a 
miserable 6,550 were for social renting, a fall of 52% on the previous year. 
Homeless charity Shelter said the “shocking” figures highlighted the level of 
homelessness and people living in temporary accommodation 50 years after Ken 
Loach’s film Cathy Come Home alerted the nation to a (then) housing crisis. As 
a nation, we made great strides to improve housing and the squalid conditions 
in which too many people lived. Then we regressed. Shockingly, we seem to have 
learned little. Today, amid such paltry government support for renting – the 
tenure of necessity for millions of mainly young people – non-profit housing 
associations, originally founded on social principles, have been forced to 
build commercial homes, many for sale and shared ownership, with the virtual 
disappearance of government funding to allow them to house the neediest and 
those on low-to-average incomes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faffordable-homes-for-rent-more-imortant-than-new-roads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a80330efa6cd45c34ed80939fbe9d3c89d69fad%2F0_233_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Building%20affordable%20homes%20for%20rent%20is%20more%20vital%20than%20new%20roads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faffordable-homes-for-rent-more-imortant-than-new-roads%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Building%20affordable%20homes%20for%20rent%20is%20more%20vital%20than%20new%20roads&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Faffordable-homes-for-rent-more-imortant-than-new-roads%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8a80330efa6cd45c34ed80939fbe9d3c89d69fad%2F0_233_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 The delivery of social and affordable housing for rent should be the 
government’s highest priority. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
What passes for a housing strategy is broken. The government will doubtless 
respond today by repeating that it will publish a housing white paper in the 
coming weeks apparently aimed at detailing how it plans to hit the target of 
building 1m new homes by 2020.

This should be a golden opportunity for a change of course to distance the May 
administration from its predecessor’s wasteful, indirect subsidies to the big 
six private housebuilders through mortgage subsidy. It should mark a 
fundamental reassessment of policy, a recognition that the state has a wider 
role beyond largesse to the private sector.

Support for home ownership should be just one element in a programme to give 
the delivery of social and affordable housing for rent the highest priority. 
That could be achieved by updating new town legislation to coordinate the 
assembly of large sites in regenerated and expanding areas on the edge of 
cities and towns. And housing delivery should be classed as infrastructure and 
of equal if not greater importance than, for example, road building, with 
government guarantees to both underwrite development and support modern methods 
of manufacturing modular housing in factories – of which there are a few – for 
final fast-track assembly on prepared sites. Is that such a big ask?
 