
Business borrowing dropped for the first time in 2016 last month, as UK 
companies delayed investment decisions because of uncertainty created by theEU 
referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>.

Mortgage borrowing also fell between May and June, in a sign that consumers 
were feeling less confident as the vote approached at the end of last month.

Borrowing by British companies outside the financial sectors fell by £526m 
last month to £262.4m, according to the latest monthly survey of high street 
lending by the BritishBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Authority.


Net mortgage borrowing fell to £1.4bn in June from £1.7bn in May. The number 
of mortgages approved for house purchase – excluding remortgages – fell by 
about 1,700 to 40,103.

Rebecca Harding, chief economist at the British Bankers’ Association (BBA), 
said: “Business borrowing in June dropped for the first time in 2016, 
signalling that investment decisions were being delayed until after the vote.

“Mortgage lending and approvals also fell back in June but remain above the 
low levels seen in April following the introduction of the stamp duty 
surcharge.”


Harding said it was still too early to assess what impact the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 would have on bank lending and the wider UK economy.

“Overall, business confidence was clearly fragile in anticipation of the 
outcome of the vote, but these results are not a verdict on the health of the 
economy post-Brexit. We won’t start to see that data come through until the 
autumn and any trends before then should not be over-interpreted.”


Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the latest 
survey evidence on house price expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/14/housing-sales-forecast-to-fall-sharply-this-summer-after-brexit-vote>
, as well as profit warnings issued by estate agents since the vote, suggested 
mortgage demand had fallen further in recent weeks.

He said that although the Bank of England was expected to cut interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/uk-business-must-wait-longer-for-post-brexit-bank-of-england-boost>
 at its policy meeting next week, the lower cost of borrowing was unlikely to 
be fully passed on by high street banks.

“Although the monetary policy committee likely will cut interest rates next 
week, probably to 0.25% from 0.50% currently, banks likely will increase 
lending spreads to account for the higher risk of borrower default, due to the 
much weaker economic outlook.”



 