
Business leaders have urged the government to tackle the housing shortage by 
expanding the rental sector and creating incentives forolder homeowners to 
vacate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/21/older-homeowners-unlocked-393m-from-properties-in-early-2016>
 large properties.

The CBI set out 10 recommendations to get more people into suitable housing 
ahead of the publication of a white paper by the Department forCommunities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government on 
tackling the housing crisis.

Teachers priced out of house market as property prices soar to 11 times 
earnings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/01/teachers-house-market-property-prices>
Warning that the status quo is “clearly unsustainable”, the employers’ lobby 
group called for a “step change” in housebuilding, including the creation of 
more rental homes, if the government is to meet its ambition of a million new 
homes by 2020.

“Home ownership will remain an aspiration for many, but is not the only 
answer. While there is great value in giving those who aspire to buy their own 
home the opportunity to do so, it is important that government is also 
encouraging a wide range of new housing tenures to be delivered that will be of 
benefit for all,” the CBI said.

The UK population is to increase by 10 million in the next 25 years, leading 
to an even greater scramble for homes as thegovernment fails to meet a target  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/jul/12/government-failing-target-sell-public-land-new-homes>
of 250,000 properties built a year.


“Furthermore, the nation’s vote to leave the European Union could serve to 
reinforce the sense of urgency with which this significant challenge must be 
met,” the CBI said in its report. The Brexit vote “shone a light on the 
divisions within our society and left us facing an uncertain economic future” 
and provided an opportunity to “get Britain building in order to drive economic 
growth and create a housing market that works for all parts of society and the 
country”.

Buy-to-let rents rise to all-time high as demand for homes outstrips supply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/09/home-rents-rose-to-an-all-time-high-in-july>
“With the new administration now settled into place, both government and 
business must join forces in redoubling efforts to make this vision a reality,” 
the CBI said.

It called on Theresa May’s government to set out “a clear and credible plan 
which is strategic, integrated and joined-up” not only to help buyers get on to 
to the housing ladder but also renters find suitable properties.


Last month the chancellor, Philip Hammond, said a £3bn package would be 
available to speed up homebuilding by using surplus public land and brownfield 
sites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/philip-hammond-to-set-out-his-stall-for-balanced-budget-at-tory-conference>
 and employing builders who can develop properties more quickly than 
traditional firms.

Josh Hardie, deputy director general of the CBI, said the private sector was 
ready to match the political will to tackle the shortage of properties.

 “If we are going to more than double the number of homes built each year, we 
need a step-change – not just in delivery, but in mindset. Business as usual 
isn’t an option,” said Hardie.

London housing: why Hong Kong cash in Colindale is not all bad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/05/london-housing-why-hong-kong-cash-in-colindale-is-not-all-bad>
The private rented sector is one area highlighted by the CBI, as is helping 
“empty nesters” move into smaller properties or retirement homes, which make up 
only 3% of new builds. The CBI said there could be stamp duty exemptions for 
these properties.


The aim is to build 250,000 properties a year, but the latest data shows that 
while the number of new homes rose 7% in 2015 to 156,000, the rate of building 
is still below target. The CBI said the freeing up of smaller parcels of land 
could help accelerate the process.
 