
Every June on Exmoor and in woods near Canterbury, a fragile-looking golden 
butterfly called theheath fritillary 
<http://www.ukbutterflies.co.uk/species.php?species=athalia> flutters in the 
sunshine.


It would probably not grace summer woodlands and moors were it not for the 
efforts ofDr Martin Warren <https://twitter.com/martinswarren>, a scientist and 
conservationist who has been awarded an OBE in the New Year honours list.

Most conservationists would take pride in saving one species from extinction, 
but fellow scientists estimate that thefamously modest Warren, who recently 
retired as chief executive of the Butterfly Conservation charity 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/3114-11256/dr-martin-warren---23-years-of-saving-butterflies-and-moths-.html>
, has rescued at least three of Britain’s 59 native butterfly species from 
terminal decline.

“It’s not an exaggeration to say he saved the heath fritillary,” said Nigel 
Bourn, Butterfly Conservation’s director of science. “His work pulled apart 
exactly what made it tick and what was needed to conserve it. It set a template 
for the conservation of other species.”

Saving butterflies might seem a minor achievement against the environmental 
challenges of climate change and mass extinctions, but colleagues point out 
that Warren’s scientific work – cited more than 6,500 times in other papers – 
has influenced climate change policy and laid the foundations for today’s 
landscape-scale conservation, in which wide swaths of countryside are protected 
for plants, birds, mammals and insects.

Warren has also overseen the rapid expansion of Butterfly Conservation 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/>, which in 1993 he ran from the living room 
of his small cottage in Dorset. Under his guidance, its membership grew from 
10,000 to more 30,000, with 70 staff working across the UK.

Always a practical scientist and chief executive, Warren spends his summers 
forcing his way through neck-high bracken on the steep slopes of Dartmoor in 
pursuit of the most endangered butterfly in Britain, thehigh brown fritillary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/02/uks-most-endangered-butterfly-high-brown-fritillary-makes-comeback>
. In winter, he joins volunteers counting the microscopic eggs of the rare 
brown hairstreak, unglamorous work but the best way to monitor the elusive 
butterfly.

The internationally renowned climate change researcher Camille Parmesan 
<https://www.plymouth.ac.uk/staff/camille-parmesan>, a professor at Plymouth 
University, said Warren had inspired her and had also improved theUK butterfly 
monitoring scheme <http://www.ukbms.org/>, a 40-year-old dataset of Britain’s 
butterfly population which is “of magnitude better than any other country”. The 
data, which charts the impact of climate change on butterflies, has been used 
in research that has informed the findings of theIntergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ipcc>.

As well as identifying the woodland management required to halt the decline of 
thewood white butterfly 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/50-603/wood-white.html>, Warren discovered 
that the rapidly-decliningmarsh fritillary 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/679-862/marsh-fritillary.html> exists in 
“metapopulations”. Colonies naturally disappear from one site but reappear in 
another and so whole landscapes, rather than isolated nature reserves, have to 
be protected.

“He led the way in developing empirical data to show that landscape-scale 
conservation works,” said Bourn. “He’s helped us and other conservation 
organisations develop a whole approach to conservation which is 21st century – 
beyond nature reserves, beyond single sites and across taxa, not just 
butterflies.”

Sir David Attenborough, who is the president of Butterfly Conservation 
<http://butterfly-conservation.org/1757/our-president---sir-david-attenborough.html>
, has praised Warren’s enlightened and dedicated leadership.

Julie Williams, the charity’s acting chief executive, said: “His unstinting 
dedication in standing up for our beleaguered butterflies and moths has long 
been an inspiration to BC staff and the wider wildlife conservation community.”

Warren welcomed his honour by emphasising the work of his colleagues.

“During my career I have tried to shine a spotlight on the plight of 
butterflies and moths, and understand what this means to the future of our 
planet,” he said.

“I am deeply honoured to receive this award, but it is as much a tribute to my 
colleagues at ButterflyConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> who have done so much to 
help reverse the fortunes of these beautiful insects and improve the 
environment for future generations.”
 