
Why did BuzzFeed <https://www.theguardian.com/media/buzzfeed> publish an 
“unverified” dossier on Donald Trump’s ties with Moscow? It wasn’t for 
clickbait or financial gain, according to the editor-in-chief, Ben Smith, but 
because “it reflected how we see the job of reporters in 2017”, which is 
possibly the most worrying reason of all.

After admitting that he wasn’t entirely sure whether the dossier was dodgy or 
not in hisnote to staff, 
<https://twitter.com/BuzzFeedBen/status/818978955965464580> Smith predictably 
earned the ire of Trump, who called BuzzFeed a “disgrace” and the website “a 
failing pile of garbage”. The next US president then resorted to the modern 
version of the playground chant of “liar, liar, pants of fire” when he said of 
the report: “It’s all fake news.”

The widespread media condemnation of BuzzFeed’s actions was less predictable. 
CNN, the network which first reported that security forces had given Trump and 
President Obama a summary of the dossier, distanced itself from BuzzFeed’s 
“decision to publish unsubstantiated memos” in the form of the unexpurgated 
35-page document, arguing that it had allowed Trump to tar all reporting on the 
issue as “fake”. CNN reporter Jake Tapper called the site “irresponsible”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump called the unverified documents ‘fake news’ leaked by ‘sick people’ 
during his first press conference as President-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Other news organisations, including the Guardian, had seen the dossier but 
were unable to verify its claims. In suggesting that the role of journalists is 
simply to put the information out there and allow readers to “make up their own 
minds”, Smith put himself at the centre of a huge battle being waged in the 
media.

For the media is currently at war, an information war in which no one really 
knows who or what to trust, and the nature of truth itself is in danger. 
Careless talk in any battle costs lives, which is one way to explain the furore 
over BuzzFeed’s decision.

The much-respected media columnist and former public editor of the New York 
TimesMargaret Sullivan accused Buzzfeed of breaking the golden journalistic 
rule that “it’s never been acceptable to publish rumour and innuendo”. 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/how-buzzfeed-crossed-the-line-in-publishing-salacious-dossier-on-trump/2017/01/11/957b59f6-d801-11e6-9a36-1d296534b31e_story.html?utm_term=.dadf23ed5d16#comments>

“In an era when trust in the media is already in the gutter, this does 
absolutely nothing to help,” she added.



BuzzFeed’s defence – both in Smith’s note and in comments made by Jim 
Waterson, its UK political editor, at an event about fake news in London on 
Wednesday – was essentially that the site’s readers deserve to read what the 
media and political elite were reading and talking about, even if not all the 
claims were true. Waterson, at the ITN-hosted event, said the dossier was 
“being discussed across media circles and across security circles”.

News organisations make difficult editorial decisions all the time, and we all 
make mistakes, but such thinking would have once been welcomed as a sign that 
the web was part of greater democratic openness. That was before post-truth
became the word of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
 in 2016.

The wisdom of crowds, which once promised open democracy and truth for all, is 
now looking like a mob that stamps on the facts because scurrilous lies are not 
only easier to produce but can be just as popular online.

If journalism is about publishing stuff that everyone is talking about, what 
makes it different to the sort of unproven nonsense written and published about 
Obama being the founder of Isis oreven that David Cameron had sex with a pig’s 
head 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/12/how-technology-disrupted-the-truth>
? Hence Sullivan calling out BuzzFeed’s actions as “plunging down a slippery 
ethical slope from which there is no return”.

Publishing something someone doesn’t like to hear is pretty much the essence 
of journalism, at least the kind that believes itself deserving of a special 
status, the sort of status that grants audiences with pope or president and the 
ability to hold the powerful to account. Or, as is often said: “Journalism is 
printing what someone else does not want printed: everything else is public 
relations.”

But such works, especially investigating the misdeeds of the rich and 
powerful, costs money, time and effort to check the facts and ensure that 
something, to the best of the writer’s knowledge, really did happen.

The economics of the news business today sees online media platforms such as 
Facebook put essentially the same value on an outlandish story created by a 
teenager in the Balkans as a fully verified investigation such as the Panama 
Papers.

Not that the economic crisis in the media business explains BuzzFeed’s 
decision entirely: the irony in some ways is that the site was not publishing 
the story for financial gain as, unlike much of the old media, which depends on 
display advertising, BuzzFeed is funded by sponsored content. So its news 
division is all about prestige.

Prestige, trust, truth: flimsy and amorphous but essential for the survival of 
good journalism, as opposed to rumour and lies. In these dangerous times - both 
for journalism and the world - “newsworthy” is not enough. It is wrong for any 
respected news organisation to publish information it knows may not be true.
 