
As the east coast of the US shivered and hundreds fled their homes on the west 
coast to escape flooding, it emerged that a giant sequoia tree known for a huge 
tunnel carved through it had been brought down in California’s weekend storms.

Icy winter storm causes accidents and deaths in south and eastern US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/winter-storm-accidents-deaths-eastern-us-new-england-south>
The San Francisco Chronicle reported <http://bit.ly/2i8THu8> that the historic 
Pioneer Cabin in Calaveras Big Trees state park near Yosemite national park 
came down during heavy rains on Sunday.

The tree was hollowed out in the 1880s to allow tourists to pass through it. 
Cars later used the massive tunnel, but more recently it has hosted only hikers.

Park volunteer Jim Allday of Arnold said the tree shattered as it hit the 
ground. There was no immediate word on what caused the tee to fall, but the 
Chronicle reports that it probably had to do with the tree’s shallow root 
system and the inundation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48b261f459bb7e519fd7812c6cf455f84ca6d86e%2F0_307_4836_2902%2F4836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%20storms%20destroy%20drive-through%20tree%20as%20east%20coast%20thaws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%20storms%20destroy%20drive-through%20tree%20as%20east%20coast%20thaws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F48b261f459bb7e519fd7812c6cf455f84ca6d86e%2F0_307_4836_2902%2F4836.jpg>
 California state parks ranger Tony Tealdi pauses by the roots of the fallen 
Pioneer Cabin tree on Monday, 9 January. Photograph: Rich Pedroncelli/AP 
Hundreds of people fled homes elsewhere in northern California 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california> and in Nevada as a massive 
winter storm packing heavy rain, strong winds and lightning caused mudslides 
and widespread flooding.

The Russian river in California’s Sonoma County and the Truckee river near 
Reno,Nevada <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nevada>, overflowed their 
banks late on Sunday and officials said both waterways could stay at the flood 
stage for days.

Schools were canceled on Monday in hard-hit Sonoma County, where thousands are 
without power and many roads are unpassable. Mudslides caused road closures 
across the region, including along major highways.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcalifornians-swap-cars-for-canoes-in-latest-flooding-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Californians%20swap%20cars%20for%20canoes%20in%20latest%20flooding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcalifornians-swap-cars-for-canoes-in-latest-flooding-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Californians%20swap%20cars%20for%20canoes%20in%20latest%20flooding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcalifornians-swap-cars-for-canoes-in-latest-flooding-video&media=>
Californians swap cars for canoes in latest flooding – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/10/californians-swap-cars-for-canoes-in-latest-flooding-video>
Fears of avalanches were growing in the northern Sierra Nevada as rain soaks 
the snowpack. Heavy rain also moved into southern California, where commuters 
were warned of flooding along Los Angeles-area highways.

Four deaths were blamed on the east coast storm, which dropped more than a 
foot of snow in southern New England, caused a former governor to fall on his 
icy driveway in Mississippi and could bring the first below-zero weather to 
parts ofNorth Carolina <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/northcarolina> in 
more than 20 years.

The worst, lingering problems were expected in North Carolina where up to 10in 
of snow and sleet fell in places on Saturday. The deep freeze followed.


Forecasters predict temperatures will not get above freezing in much of the 
state before Tuesday afternoon, a big problem in a place where officials depend 
on usually mild weather to melt away the ice and snow on less traveled routes. 
One person died in Montgomery County when a car slid off icy Interstate 73/74 
into a tree on Sunday morning, Governor Roy Cooper said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ba4b8afbebb7af915f2d20807b760529ba721c%2F0_152_2282_1369%2F2282.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=California%20storms%20destroy%20drive-through%20tree%20as%20east%20coast%20thaws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=California%20storms%20destroy%20drive-through%20tree%20as%20east%20coast%20thaws&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Feast-coast-thaws-west-coast-floods-popular-tree%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8ba4b8afbebb7af915f2d20807b760529ba721c%2F0_152_2282_1369%2F2282.jpg>
 Vehicles submerged in flood waters during a winter storm in Petaluma, 
California Sunday. Photograph: Stephen Lam/Reuters 
There was one happy ending. Two hikers missing for more than a day in the 
frigid North Carolina mountains without food and water and only a small fire 
for warmth were rescued from waist-high snow.

A helicopter using a tool that can detect heat found the hikers around 5pm on 
Saturday in the Shining Rock Wilderness area about 25 miles south-west of 
Asheville. Cooper said rescuers got to the men about two hours later, in the 
nick of time.

Several die in Poland as icy weather continues to sweep across Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/several-die-poland-european-cold-weather-snow-continues>
School systems across North Carolina canceled Monday’s classes in part because 
of icy roads, but also because of bitter cold temperatures making it dangerous 
for children without proper clothes to wait for buses and difficult to keep 
buildings warm.

The National Weather Service predicted lows around zero or below on Monday 
morning in Greensboro, North Carolina – only the 15th time in 113 years of 
records it has gotten to zero or negative numbers. Forecasters said the snow 
cover would lead to the unusually cold readings.

When the thaw comes, it will be quick. Highs in the south are forecast in the 
70s on Friday.

The icy weather also prompted an increase in emergency room visits from falls. 
InMississippi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/mississippi>, a family 
spokesman said 93-year-old former governor William Winter was expected to 
recover and was in fair condition after suffering a concussion when he fell on 
the steep, icy driveway of his Jackson home.
 