
A Cameroonian ranger was ambushed and killed by ivory poachers on Wednesday 
while patrolling to protect elephants and gorillas. During the last morning of 
a 10-day patrol in Lobéké National Park, Bruce Danny Ngongo was shot three 
times, once in the thigh and twice in the hip.

“[Ngongo fell after] an ambush by a gang of poachers heavily armed with 
Kalachnikov [sic] who immediately opened fire on the surveillance staff,” said 
Lobéké National Park director Achille Mengamenya Goue, in a letter sent on the 
evening of the incident to Cameroon’s forestry and wildlife minister, Philip 
Ngole Ngwese.

Why the Guardian is spending a year reporting on the plight of elephants
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/why-the-guardian-is-spending-a-year-reporting-on-the-plight-of-the-worlds-elephant-population>
“The ranger lost an enormous amount of blood, he could not hold and succumbed 
to his wounds in the forest,” said Goue. “Such is, Mr Minister, the current 
situation in the conservation service of the Lobéké National Park.”

The Guardian understands Ngongo leaves behind a family, although it was 
unclear how many children he had.

Ngongo was with three other park rangers and two soldiers from Cameroon’s 
132nd motorised infantry unit of Moloundou, which has been mobilised to defend 
the park from poachers.

Ngongo’s colleagues fought off the attack. Private Martin Ngozo was also 
wounded. At the time of writing, Ngozo was being stabilised at a nearby 
hospital before being airlifted to a larger population centre.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3300fc33fab4f3b94bcd0582955c315aae8a4908%2F51_0_1530_918%2F1530.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameroonian%20ranger%20killed%20by%20wildlife%20poachers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameroonian%20ranger%20killed%20by%20wildlife%20poachers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fcameroonian-ranger-killed-wildlife-poachers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3300fc33fab4f3b94bcd0582955c315aae8a4908%2F51_0_1530_918%2F1530.jpg>
 Cameroonian park ranger Bruce Danny Ngongo was shot dead during a 
confrontation with poachers. Photograph: Cameroon wildlife service 
The unit captured the poachers’ loot – nine elephant tusks – and arrested a 
local trapper thought to be associated with the gang.

Lobéké National Park is home to some of the last forest elephant herds in 
Cameroon. The smaller of Africa’s two elephant species isperched closer to 
extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/african-forest-elephants-extinction-study>
 than its larger savannah cousin. The park is also home to lowland gorillas.

The park is close to the border of the Central African Republic and Republic 
of the Congo, allowing gangs to slip in and out of the country after raiding 
the wildlife. In 2011,a ranger and two gorillas 
<https://www.newscientist.com/article/dn21038-gorilla-poachers-kill-forest-ranger-in-cameroon/>
 were shot and killed by poachers hunting for bushmeat.

In an opinion piece for the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/10/protect-wildlife-rangers-murder>
 , the president of the International Ranger Federation, Sean Willmore, said 
that two to three wildlife rangers die each week in the line of duty, the 
majority at the hands of poachers.

“These tireless warriors put their lives on the line to defend this planet 
every day. It is about time that we stood with them and gave them the full 
support, recognition and respect that they deserve. They fight on behalf of us 
all,” he said.

Last week, a Thai wildlife ranger survived 
<https://www.khaosod.co.th/view_newsonline.php?newsid=1448890776> after being 
shot in the stomach by a poacher using a home-made muzzle loading rifle. The 
poacher was caught.

To support rangers and their families, visit the Thin Green Line Foundation 
website <https://www.thingreenline.org.au/donate/>.
 