
In opposition, David Cameron battered Gordon Brown with two words: Broken 
Britain <https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/dec/26/brokenbritain>. 
It was his Murdoch-inspired catchphrase for hoodies scrapping in gangs,Neets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2012/oct/22/not-in-education-employment-training-europe-neet>
 necking alcopops, teenagers ending up pregnant. It set the framework forIain 
Duncan Smith’s welfare reforms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/aug/12/iain-duncan-smith-welfare-reform-benefits>
. Broken Britain summed up the dark side of the New Labour era: a busted social 
contract and a class wantonly sponging off the rest of society.

In business, Britain is a nation of pirates | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/in-business-britain-is-a-nation-of-pirates>
It always struck me as the right phrase for the wrong target. The real Broken 
Britain is the one revealed over the past four days in two reports from MPs. It 
is workers urinating into bottles at the “Victorian workhouse”of Sports Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
, because their toilet breaks are restricted. It is women being offered
permanent jobs in return for sexual favours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/21/gig-economy-workers-sports-direct>
. It is BHS, a high-street chain nearly as old as the Queen,effectively killed 
by two “plundering” owners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/25/bhs-collapse-key-players-mps-report-sir-philip-green>
. It is 10,000 shop workers who will shortly be out on the streets, and 20,000 
pension-scheme members who must now worry overhow much they’ll have to live on 
in their old age 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/13/sir-philip-green-bhs-pension-scheme>
.

The riots of 2011 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-riots> were taken by 
Cameron as proof he’d been right all along: “Irresponsibility. Selfishness. 
Behaving as if your choices have no consequences … Reward without effort. Crime 
without punishment. Rights without responsibilities.” This is Philip Green and 
Mike Ashley summed up – along with all the well-heeled consultants, directors 
and credulous politicians (including Cameron) who applauded and subsidised them 
on their way, bought off with fat fees and cheap photo-ops.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw7j2tvt4gHw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw7j2tvt4gHw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dw7j2tvt4gHw&media=>
 David Cameron speaks in the aftermath of the riots of 2011 
The rioting kids who stole bottles of water and robbed tellies from their 
local Argos were given prison sentences worth a total of 1,200 years. By 
contrast,Green 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/15/sir-philip-green-questioned-by-mps-over-bhs-collapse-live-updates>
 andAshley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/21/sports-direct-founder-mike-ashley-snubs-call-mps-parliamentary-select-committee>
 weren’t even going to bother facing MPs. Only after five months of back and 
forth did Sports Direct’s Ashley get in the chauffeured car down to Westminster.

Green went one better, demanding that Frank Field resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/11/philip-green-calls-for-frank-field-resign-bhs-topshop>
 from the BHS inquiry – then rocking up to parliament and telling MPs to stop 
looking at him. Such prickliness from a multibillionaire would have been funny 
had it not been for the thousands of families whose lives he’d just ruined.

Two things stand out from the Commons reports. First, while they rightly make 
Ashley and Sir Philip Greed (as he surely must now be called) responsible for 
their malpractices, they make clear that they were supported and sustained by 
large corporate networks.

The staff filling Sports Direct’s giant Shirebrook warehouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
 came from two temp agencies, Transline and Best Connection. These are not 
two-bit operations, but industry leaders: a multinational, Transline was 
awarded Temporary Recruitment Agency of the Year in 2014. Yet MPs discovered it 
had broken the gangmaster licensing law, while a Channel 4 investigation 
accused the company in 2015 of paying below the minimum wage to workers at 
other businesses (Transline say itssoftware prevents this happening 
<http://www.channel4.com/info/press/news/low-pay-britain-channel-4-dispatches>
). Staffing Shirebrook alone was worth £50m a year to these two companies, 
estimate the MPs. Some people were making a lot of money from the degradation 
of others.

'The City leads the way not in innovation, but in being the no-questions-asked 
SpivZone of financial markets'

The collapse of BHS involved an even more stellar cast. There was the 
“complacent” Lord Grabiner, for whose “veneer of establishment credibility” and 
shocking apparent docility, Green paid a lot of money. The equally handsomely 
rewarded auditors at PwC signed off BHS as a going concern in March 2015 – just
months before it finally collapsed 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/4c3965f2-3c4e-11e6-9f2c-36b487ebd80a.html#axzz4FMocGzw4>
. PwC was of course the auditor to Tesco, which admitted toexaggerating its 
profits by £250m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/29/tesco-accountants-auditors]>
. Green told MPs thatDominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/23/dominic-chappell-accused-treating-bhs-money-as-own-allegations-mps-darren-topp>
, whom he sold BHS to, had been given the all-clear by the world’s most famous 
investment bank, Goldman Sachs – despite being a serial bankrupt and a 
world-class fantasist. On Chappell’s side, Grant Thornton and law firm Olswang 
were paid “generous fees” to drive through a deal that killed an entire 
business.

Britain is the finance capital of the world, and these are some of the biggest 
names in the industry. Yet Monday’s report finds them “culpable” of cashing the 
cheques and being conveniently blind to massive corporate failure. In that 
respect, what Field and his colleagues have done is torn down one of the 
delusions about post-industrial Britain. From theLondon Whale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/may/11/jp-morgan-trader-london-whale>
 tothe Libor scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/02/barclays-libor-scandal-change-banking-culture>
 to BHS, what the City really leads the way in is not ingenuity or innovation, 
but in being the no-questions-asked SpivZone of financial markets.

Libor-rigging trial: ex-Barclays traders jailed for two to six years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/07/libor-rigging-trial-ex-barclays-traders-jailed-merchant-pabon-mathew-johnson>
The second striking thing about the MPs’ reports is that there is a giant hole 
where politics should be. Green and Ashley might have acted as if they were 
above Westminster, but they couldn’t have prospered without its 
parliamentarians. This is directly true of Green, who wasknighted by Tony Blair 
then given a government appointment by Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/26/philip-green-blair-gave-him-a-knighthood-cameron-gave-him-a-job>
. Blair bestowed that honour despite Green having engineered the payment of a 
£1.3bn dividend to his wife, Tina, in the tax haven of Monaco – a historic 
handout that avoided around £300m in taxes. The tax savings on that one payout 
were worth 10 large secondary schools – or would plug half BHS’s pensions 
blackhole. For such financial ingenuity, Green was invited by Cameron to advise 
on where government spending could be cut, including which parts of social 
security could be axed.

If Green does walk away from the BHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>
 pensions deficit, it will be savers at other company pension schemes who will 
ultimately have to make good his shortfall. Just as when Ashley let a business 
in Scotland collapse and stuck taxpayers with the £700,000 bill. Or when both 
men run business models that rely on poverty pay and the state picking up the 
tab.

In Brexit Britain, one of the most important contracts between businesses and 
the public has been broken. Companies increasingly rely on the public to pay 
their way: to top up wages with benefits and public services, and billions in 
subsidies and grants and tax reliefs. What goes with that is another broken 
contract: the one that says work always pays. From Norman Tebbit to Brown to 
IDS, that idea has been central to employment and welfare policy. It is now 
dead. As the Institute for Fiscal Studies said last week: “The new poor tend to 
live in households where there is someone in work.” This is a fact that those 
at the bottom of the labour market have known for years, but is only now 
working its way into the minds of policymakers.

Sir Philip Green must pay for the BHS scandal – starting with the pension fund 
| Frank Field
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/25/sir-philip-green-must-pay-for-bhs-scandal-starting-with-pension-fund>
Cameron warned of “the slow-motion moral collapse that has taken place in 
parts of our country these past few generations”. He was right. It’s just that 
it’s been led by those at the top – the ones at the boardroom tables, their 
expensive helpers – and their mates and supporters in politics using taxpayer 
money to wave them on.
 