
David Cameron's weekend promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2010/jan/11/david-cameron-limit-immigration> 
that the Conservative cap on immigration will bring net migration to Britain 
down to "the tens of thousands rather than the hundreds of thousands" is 
beginning to look like thedance of the seven veils 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dance_of_the_seven_veils>.

Once again the Tory leader has garnered widespread tabloid coverage for his 
policies on curbing immigration without spelling out how his fixed cap or quota 
would actually in practice.

He also made clear once again that he didn't "support the population going to 
70 million" as though it was some kind of clear aim or manifesto commitment 
being promised by either Labour or the Liberal Democrats to be achieved within 
the next parliament.

But both the immigration cap and the 70 million population figure are based on 
will-o'-the-wisp calculations that appear to have more to do with a hangover 
from the "dog-whistle" politics of Michael Howard's Tory party than serious 
migration policy.

The idea of a cap or a limit on immigration sounds straightforward as a 
soundbite but gets complicated as soon as you look at the detail.

The first point is that Cameron can't limit the number of people who come to 
live and work in Britain from the rest of the EU without tearing up the basic 
commitment to the free movement of labour and putting in question the UK's 
continued membership. At most all he can do is promise to impose restrictions 
on any new members of the EU – Turkey, Ukraine and Belarus would all like to 
join – but they could only last a maximum of seven years.

Second, as far as immigration from outside Europe is concerned a blanket cap 
would also have to exclude the 39,000 people a year who come to the UK on 
spousal visas after marrying British citizens abroad. Or are they to be subject 
to an arbitrary quota and told to wait until next year?

The third category which would also have to be excluded is the number of 
British citizens who have been living abroad who come back to live in the UK.
This category has been growing rapidly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/nov/26/migration-asylum-statistics> and 
the 85,000 figure for 2008 includes those went to retire in the Spanish costas 
and now find that the NHS is a more attractive proposition than the Spanish 
medical system. It also includes those coming from recession-hit Dubai and 
other places.

Indeed back in 2008 the Home Office estimated that only 20% of possible 
migrants to Britain would be covered by a cap as it could only be applied to 
those who came from outside the EU under the points-based system. The vast bulk 
of those covered would be the highly skilled migrants and overseas students 
whose presence has been crucial to the economy and the expansion of higher 
education.

The Conservatives have yet to spell out exactly how it would work. At a recent 
all-party debate on immigration, when a leading city firm, KPMG, asked the 
shadow home secretary, Chris Grayling, if a cap would mean they have tocut 
their global recruitment 
<http://www.politics.co.uk/news/communities-and-local-government/grayling-under-pressure-for-immigration-cap-$1346418.htm>
 for specialist posts in London, he confirmed that it could mean that some 
recruits would be told they have to wait until another year.

Net annual migration – the numbers coming to live in Britain minus those who 
move abroad – is already falling sharply down from 233,000 in 2007 to 163,000 
in 2008 and is believed to have fallen even further in 2009 as many Poles went 
home and the numbers emigrating from Britain continue to rise to a 17-year high 
of more than 400,000.

The magic "70 million" is based upon a projection by the Office for National 
Statistics of whatwould happen by 2029 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/21/uk-population-growth-claim-disputed>
 if the peak of migration to Britain between 2005 and 2008 were sustained every 
year for the next 20 years. It is not going to happen. Even if it were – and 
that would mean a new Poland joining the EU every three years – then 
immigration is not the only factor that determines the UK's population. The 
birth rate is actually currently more crucial than net migration in determining 
population growth.

So what is David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> 
going to do next to avoid the population hitting 70 million? Impose a 
Chinese-style policy of one child per family as Alan Johnson has mockingly 
suggested?
 