
“At 5pm we get the switchboard,” said the man inducting me on to the night 
shift. If I’d heard right, his name was Trifle. “Anyone can phone up, so you’ve 
got to keep it polite. Lecturers, press, overseas placement students wanting to 
know their exam time…”

There was a light on the desk. “There you go,” said Trifle. “Your first call.”

I checked my watch – it was still before midnight – then swallowed. “Good 
evening, university switchboard.”

Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security guard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>
“Yes,” squeaked a voice. “This is Mr Pratt at 88 Livermore Court, opposite the 
campus...” I was scribbling down everything he said. “I want to make a 
complaint about your students being dirty…” The handset was lifted from my 
fingers.

“Fuck off,” said Trifle, down the phone. “Ring the council, dickhead.” He hung 
up.

 I stared at him. Trifle was pointing at what I’d transcribed: PRAT 88 L’MORE.

“He’s a nutcase. Phones all the time. He walks through the campus every night 
at 2am, perving. When he comes tonight, I’ll introduce you.”

It turned out Pratt had been perving for over a decade (the university had 
gates before that).

One night, Trifle heard a scream, stuck his head over and saw Pratt sprinting 
nude up the road, a woman lashing his arse with an extension lead. The police 
later told us she was his sister.

Trifle – who got his name through being a trifle OTT – began whistling the 
Chariots of Fire theme. A few locked-out students joined in.

There’s no such thing as locked-out students these days. The old campus 
superintendent’s rule of “Be in your halls by 1 or hedge it” has wisely been 
discontinued; unwisely, nothing has been put in its place. All we’ve got is the 
eyeball test: if you’re looking straight ahead, you’re probably legit. If your 
eyes are like typewriters, sliding left to right over everything, you’re 
probably a toe-rag.

Bike thefts are the number one casualty of open campus policy. So many frames 
have vanished over the years that I can only assume ET is overhead with an army 
of peddling kids behind him.

Share your ideas: how to write for the Higher Education Network
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
Then there are the villains who try to merge with the students. These range 
from fraudsters with Think Yourself Thin pamphlets to armed smack dealers who 
think we’reArlington House 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arlington_House_(London)>. And because these 
interlopers aren’t acknowledged in the open-door policy, guards have to find 
their own ways of dealing with them. One poor new starter assumed the best when 
he helped a man push a wheelie bin through campus. If he’d looked inside, he’d 
have seen it was full of still-warm DVD players.

At the other end of the scale is Gandhi, the parking attendant, who used to 
carry two reactivated pistols, one on his ankle in case the first didn’t fire. 
He’s left now, but still keeps a key to the gym. No one says anything.

The management stirs occasionally, and we’re ordered to go Stasi over 
something trivial. The former head of security once announced that there was 
going to be a demo on campus and flooded the grounds with black-suited 
bouncers, only to find a strike made up of two humanities tutors and a placard. 
The same manager insisted there had been a gas attack during a royal visit: on 
investigation, it was revealed to be a year-old pile of seagull shit.

I don’t know what the middle ground is for keeping an open campus safe. Should 
we make everyone show ID? Should we get turnstiles and better CCTV? “We’ll 
never get the funding,” say the campus facilities coordinators, three of them, 
on £32K a head.

They are not out of the tower long enough to confront the fallout; the 
students being stalked, the staff with violent ex-husbands, or the time a 
teenager in a cagoule started choking someone outside the computing block. The 
guard running to that one was only halted by the teenager flashing his police 
ID: the “kid” was undercover, tailing a dealer, and was now trying to stop him 
swallowing the evidence.

The only restriction we’ve ever managed was with Mr Pratt, in an incident now 
known as Trifle Fire. One night, he was loitering by the bins, close to an 
agency guard. Trifle spotted him on CCTV, and knowing that agency staff always 
keep their radios cranked – a force of habit through door work – he pushed 
transmit.

“Tango to Alpha Golf?

The agency bloke answered. On the screen, Trifle saw Pratt cock his ear in the 
direction of his walkie-talkie. “Go ahead, Tango.”

How do you spot a student extremist in a university?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/21/how-do-you-spot-a-student-extremist-in-a-university>
“You anywhere near 88 Livermore Court?” Even on a low-res monitor, Trifle saw 
Pratt visibly straighten.

“No. Why’s that?”

“It’s alight.”

By the time Pratt had finished sprinting across the campus he was breathless 
and black from the two flowerbeds he’d fallen in. He arrived to find his house 
unscathed, and a group of security guards laughing. He’s never been back since.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 