
Ever wondered what your favourite beer sounds like? If you have a sweet tooth 
it might be a soprano’s ballad, if you prefer sour tastes a baritone could be 
the better match.

Such connections between our experience of flavour and sound have been 
revealed through a growing area of research in which neuroscientists, 
businesses and artists are working together.


“Our senses are connected in some surprising ways,” says Charles Spence 
<https://www.psy.ox.ac.uk/team/charles-spence>, professor of experimental 
psychology at the University of Oxford. Research has shown that we associate 
higher sounds with sweet tastes and lower sounds with sour tastes, he explains. 
“No one is sure why it happens. One idea is that when you [study] newborns in 
any animal species, they all stick their tongues out and upwards to taste 
something sweet, whereas they stick their tongues downwards and away from a 
sour taste. Our brain may be picking up on that correspondence [linking high 
with sweet and low with sour] later in life.”


In May, the Brussels Beer Project <http://www.beerproject.be/en>, a 
crowdfunded brewer that conducts regular experiments with beer, met with indie 
band Editors to concoct a new brew that suited the band’s sound.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb606e36857f70ed6cfdcf686f1dcbe09c4f8ed%2F0_367_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20music%20make%20food%20and%20drink%20taste%20better%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20music%20make%20food%20and%20drink%20taste%20better%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbb606e36857f70ed6cfdcf686f1dcbe09c4f8ed%2F0_367_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 The Editors at a Brussels Beer Project session. Photograph: Brusells Beer 
Project 
Yves Leboeuf, head brewer at the Brussels Beer Project met the musicians for 
sound-taste pairing sessions. They focused on two songs from the band’s latest 
album, Ocean of Night and Salvation (after which the beer was named).


Leboeuf decided that, through the flavour of the brew, he’d seek to express 
two main aspects of the Editors’ sound – their Britishness and the dark 
emotions that the band associated with the chosen songs. This influenced a 
number of choices including settling on a UKporter 
<http://www.camra.org.uk/search?p_p_id=101&p_p_lifecycle=0&p_p_state=maximized&p_p_mode=view&_101_struts_action=%2Fasset_publisher%2Fview_content&_101_returnToFullPageURL=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.camra.org.uk%2Fsearch%3Fp_auth%3DThLZVL7k%26p_p_id%3D3%26p_p_lifecycle%3D1%26p_p_state%3Dnormal%26p_p_state_rcv%3D1&_101_assetEntryId=18949&_101_type=content&_101_urlTitle=porter-stout&inheritRedirect=false&redirect=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.camra.org.uk%2Fsearch%3Fp_p_id%3D3%26p_p_lifecycle%3D0%26p_p_state%3Dmaximized%26p_p_mode%3Dview%26_3_entryClassName%3D%26_3_modifiedselection%3D0%26_3_documentsSearchContainerPrimaryKeys%3D15_PORTLET_25561%252C15_PORTLET_25674%252C15_PORTLET_236090%252C15_PORTLET_21485%252C15_PORTLET_365350%252C15_PORTLET_351001%252C15_PORTLET_35094%252C15_PORTLET_363868%252C15_PORTLET_28481%252C15_PORTLET_371913%252C15_PORTLET_370214%252C15_PORTLET_370233%252C15_PORTLET_17778%252C15_PORTLET_358458%252C15_PORTLET_371963%252C15_PORTLET_354723%252C15_PORTLET_370142%252C15_PORTLET_372516%252C15_PORTLET_28592%252C15_PORTLET_369455%26_3_keywords%3Dporter%2Bbeer%26_3_search.x%3D0%26_3_search.y%3D0%26_3_format%3D%26_3_modifiedfrom%3D%26_3_formDate%3D1476699386524%26_3_folderId%3D%26_3_modified%3D%26_3_groupId%3D0%26_3_modifiedto%3D%26_3_assetCategoryIds%3D%26_3_userId%3D%26_3_cur%3D1%26_3_struts_action%3D%252Fsearch%252Fsearch%26_3_assetTagNames%3D>
 style of beer (porter beers are brewed from dark malts and are usually 
described as tasting dry and bitter), and also the design of the label.


A team of researchers then explored the influence of background music on taste 
perception. They recruited 231 participants and split them into three groups. 
The first acted as a control; they were given an unlabelled beer and drank with 
no background music. The second tasted a labelled beer also without music. And 
the third drank a labelled beer while listening to one of the two songs by 
Editors.


The innovators: fruitful idea turns waste food into a tasty snack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/innovators-turn-waste-food-tasty-snack-snact-fruit-veg>
Before sampling the beer, the groups were asked how tasty they expected it to 
be. Then, after drinking, they were asked how much they liked the beer’s taste. 
Those that only saw the label enjoyed it far less than those who also listened 
to the music. The label, which references the two songs used in the experiment, 
is still used on the beer, named Salvation, as it is sold today. Meanwhile, 
Felipe Reinoso, a PHD student who put together the experiment with the Brussels 
Beer Project and Editors (and is supervised by Charles Spence), is working on a 
longer report on the findings of the experiment.

Spence, although not directly involved in the research, was one of the 
co-authors of anarticle 
<http://journal.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.00636/full> that 
outlines its findings. Multisensory marketing is one of his areas of interest. 
In 2014, he published an abstract arguing thatsound is the forgotten flavour 
sense <http://flavourjournal.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/2044-7248-4-3>. 
In this he mentions several studies that show the connection, such as one in 
which crispier bacon was rated tastier by participants and another in which 
crunchier crisps were seen as fresher.

Spence says that food and drinks businesses could use the connection between 
sound and taste to their advantage. They could, for example, play high music to 
bring out sweet tastes and low music to emphasise sour tastes.


Jesse Dunford Wood, owner of Parlour <http://parlourkensal.com/> restaurant in 
Kensal Green, London, created a theatrical dining experience, partly inspired 
by Spence’s research. At each of Dunford Wood’sChef’s Table 
<https://trulyexperiences.com/uk/chefs-table-at-parlour.html> events , which he 
runs every Tuesday to Sunday evening at Parlour, he serves six guests 10 or 
more seasonal meals. Then comes the musical finale: for the last course, each 
guest is fitted with wireless headphones while Dunford Wood constructs an 
elaborate 20 piece dessert in front of them.


“It’s like a silent disco,” says Dunford Wood. “Music is very carefully 
considered in order to enhance the taste experience.” Wood begins by squirting 
sauces on to a long strip of foil that acts as a communal substitute for 
plates, while guests listen to classical music including Rimsky-Korsakov’s 
Flight of the Bumblebee and Strauss’s Also Sprach Zarathustra, used in the film 
2001: A Space Odyssey.


The playlist then moves on to well-known hits, chosen to fit with the 
ingredients being used, for example, Dunford Wood times a spoonful of sugar to 
land in front of the guests while Julie Andrews’s classic hit is played. “It’s 
a journey of music playing on different emotions to build suspense,” he says. 
While Gene Wilder sings Pure Imagination smoke rises around the puddings.


Parlour has 30 staff, but Dunford Wood tries to do most of the serving himself 
at the Chef’s Table. This gives him the chance to get to know who he’s serving. 
He sometimes tailors the music to suit different groups of customers as he 
learns more about them.


Once Dunford Wood has finished, the headphone’s are taken away from the 
guests. By this point the playlist should have built anticipation for what they 
are about to eat. “It’s a performance,” he explains.


At the Edinburgh Beer Factory <http://edinburghbeerfactory.co.uk/>, a brewer 
with a cafe-bar that also offers brewery tours, music is essential to brand 
identity. The business’s name is a nod to Manchester’s Factory Records, which 
released albums by bands such as Joy Division and New Order. Music videos from 
these artists are played in the cafe-bar.


Kirsty Dunsmore, co-founder, says: “We’re trying to get people to rethink 
lager [the Factory’s main product]; see it as more stylish. We’ve found its 
visual representation and musical context can help reframe that and make the 
customer enjoy it more.” One artist whose music Dunsmore thinks goes really 
well with the beer is David Bowie. “We see ourselves as embracing the best 
elements from the old and new, big and small brewing. David Bowie is in that 
mould. He embraced influences and reinvented music,” says Dunsmore.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F245de4dbe773ffad7dcc9f8944436cd4f188fef1%2F0_193_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20music%20make%20food%20and%20drink%20taste%20better%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20music%20make%20food%20and%20drink%20taste%20better%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fmusic-make-food-drink-taste-better-sensory-businesses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F245de4dbe773ffad7dcc9f8944436cd4f188fef1%2F0_193_4032_2419%2F4032.jpg>
 The Edinburgh Beer Factory. 
She adds that the Edinburgh Beer Factory targets consumers who are most likely 
to buy into its brand. “We target them in three ways: through our social media 
activity [by selecting favourite bands when posting a tailored Facebook ad, for 
instance], partnerships and sponsorship and content.” David Bowie, Joy Division 
and New Order are often mentioned in the business’s social media posts, for 
example.


“We also plan to host music, poetry and film performances at the brewery next 
year, when we open a larger visitor centre. Music is a great proxy for our 
brand philosophy.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 