
A multi-million dollar research group co-founded by the confectionery company 
Mars isset to publish the genetic maps to five traditional African crops 
<http://www.mars.com/global/science-and-innovation/science/health-and-wellness> 
as part of an ambitious project that it sayscould help end malnutrition on the 
continent 
<http://www.caes.ucdavis.edu/news/articles/2014/12/improving-african-plant-breeding>
.

The project is applying modern biotechnology to African “orphan crops 
<http://www.greenfacts.org/glossary/mno/orphan-crops.htm>” – including finger 
millet and the “superfood”moringa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/dec/26/haiti-miracle-moringa-tree-malnutrition>
 – with the goal of breeding new versions that are more productive or more 
tolerant to drought or disease.

It is one of several new initiatives to develop improved varieties of crops 
that have been grown by small-scale farmers for generations but long-overlooked 
by international researchers and industry focused on globally traded staples 
like wheat and maize.

Kenya's smart greenhouse texts when your tomatoes need watering | Murithi 
Mutiga
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jan/05/kenya-smart-greenhouse-tomatoes-watering-farming>
The researchers say they will publish the crops’ genome sequences online for 
anyone to download for free; they are also training hundreds of African plant 
breeders on how to use the data.

At UN food talks in Rome last month, Howard-Yana Shapiro, chief agricultural 
officer Mars, one of the world’s largest food companies withrevenues in 2015 of 
$33bn <http://www.adbrands.net/us/mars_us.htm> (£26.5bn), said the project will 
“significantly improve the nutrition of an entire continent”.

Critics of the project say efforts to map the genetic data of crops are more 
likely to help private companies moving into new African seed markets rather 
than smallholder farmers.

Mariam Mayet, director of the African Centre for Biodiversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/biodiversity>, said: “What are farmers 
going to do with gene sequences? … These top-down, techno-fix solutions sound 
good, and sound like we’re entering the 21st century, but they’re not what 
small farmers need.”

Patrick Mulvaney, at the UK Food <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food>
 Group, said that even if genetic data is freely available online, “the only 
ones that can really make use of it are the big companies”. He suggested 
corporations “want orphan crops too, to consolidate their control” of global 
food systems.

“It won’t be too long before you can’t grow maize in southern France, because 
of climate change. Sorghum, cassava, yams – these are also backups if you’re in 
trouble,” added Pat Mooney, at the ETC Group, who also questioned corporate 
motives for work on these crops.

Chikelu Mba, from the UN’s Food and Agriculture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/agriculture> Organisation, said advanced 
biotechnology tools like genome sequencing could help develop “new, superior, 
more nutritious, drought tolerant varieties of these crops that very poor 
people need to survive”.

 But he stressed they are not a magic bullet. Small-scale farmers also need 
infrastructure and access to “quality seeds and planting materials at 
affordable prices”, he added.

New index ranks Monsanto, Dupont and Syngenta on efforts to help smallholders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/feb/27/new-seeds-index-monsanto-dupont-syngenta-farmers-food-security>
 “It needs to be in people’s minds that downstream, some of the products may 
be restricted by intellectual property rights … which are supposed to encourage 
and reward innovation but can also be misused and/or abused,” Mba added.

African countries, he said, must also support public sector crop development 
rather than leaving it to private initiative alone. “It is a worthwhile use of 
taxpayer resources to encourage work on these for the simple reason that they 
are food security crops.”

The African Orphan Crops Consortium <http://africanorphancrops.org/about/> 
(AOCC), founded in 2011, has partners including Mars and Google, a Chinese 
research group, a Nairobi laboratory, and biotech firms. It calls itself a “
public-private partnership 
<http://africanorphancrops.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/AOCC-2015-Progress-Report-Version-2-compressed-version.pdf>
” led by the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD) arm of the 
African Union.

 The UN children’s agency, Unicef, is also listed as a partner 
<http://africanorphancrops.org/partners-and-networks/> to advocate and “raise 
support” for the project.

Allen Van Deynze, a scientist at the University of California-Davis who is 
involved in the project, said it is worth about $40m-50m, but that most of this 
has come in-kind from the group’s partners contributing their own in-house 
staff time and facilities.

The project has listed 101 focus crops including some that already have more 
obvious commercial value like coconut, avocado and oil palm along with others 
including spiderplant and breadfruit.

The first major data release, expected within the next two months, will be 
genetic maps to finger millet, African eggplant, acacia, andmoringa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/poverty-matters/2013/dec/26/haiti-miracle-moringa-tree-malnutrition>
 – a tree with leaves unusually rich in iron, protein and vitamins.

“Making nutritious crops productive – that’s the mission, and then getting 
them to the people who need them,” said Van Deynze. “For me, that’s the way out 
of poverty – feed people properly … Give everyone the resources that they need, 
mentally and physically.”

But the science behind using genomics to develop crops is complex and it’s not 
expected that small farmers will use this data themselves – seed companies are 
likely to be involved.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcan-mars-bid-to-publish-genetic-maps-of-historic-african-crops-boost-nutrition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c0c902dfb6fd1909ab48c3562edf1a345e1d12%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Mars'%20bid%20to%20publish%20genetic%20maps%20of%20historic%20African%20crops%20boost%20nutrition%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcan-mars-bid-to-publish-genetic-maps-of-historic-african-crops-boost-nutrition%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Mars%27%20bid%20to%20publish%20genetic%20maps%20of%20historic%20African%20crops%20boost%20nutrition%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcan-mars-bid-to-publish-genetic-maps-of-historic-african-crops-boost-nutrition%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62c0c902dfb6fd1909ab48c3562edf1a345e1d12%2F0_139_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 A fruit from a baobab tree – another orphan crop – hangs from a branch in 
Thiawe Thiawe, Senegal. Photograph: Georges Gobet/AFP/Getty Images 
Most seeds in Africa are saved and traded by farmers themselves in informal 
systems, though several countries have adopted controversial new laws and 
policies to encourage commercial investment, protect intellectual property and 
develop regional seed markets.

Elizabeth Mpofu, general coordinator of the global peasants’ movement La Vía 
Campesina, said this is not what small farmers like her need. “We really need 
to protect our own indigenous seeds.”

A switch to ecological farming will benefit health and environment – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/a-switch-to-ecological-farming-will-benefit-health-and-environment-report>
Mpofu, who grows groundnut and sorghum in Zimbabwe, said she is concerned 
about increasing corporate interest in “crops that we farmers have grown for 
ages and ages … These are perfect organic crops. Why should we tamper with 
these?”

The AOCC is making its data free online to users who agree not to patent the 
genome sequences. But companies can still use this information to develop 
improved commercial varieties to sell.

“We’re saying our information is free. We’re not saying [that] you have to 
give your varieties away for free – that’s very different. If we were to say 
that, we would be doomed,” said Van Deynze. “There has to be a business model 
around everything.”

The project is itself focusing on speeding up conventional crop breeding but 
it also leaves the door open to more controversial techniques where genes are 
cut, spliced or moved between species.

“All DNA technology could be used for synthetic biology, transgenics, 
conventional breeding, gene editing, so it’s open,” said Van Deynze.

He said he doubts companies will develop genetically modified crops using the 
data because of regulatory issues and consumer opposition.

But earlier this year, the African Biodiversity Centre 
<http://acbio.org.za/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/GM-Orphan-Crops-Report.pdf> 
found field trials of GM crops werealready under way in seven African countries 
<http://acbio.org.za/manipulate-and-mislead-how-gmos-are-infiltrating-africa/>. 
It said these “will undoubtedly be accompanied by intellectual property laws, 
seed regulations, and other products and practices amenable to agribusiness”.

“The GM <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gm> industry appears to be 
expanding its grasp over traditional subsistence crops which had, until 
recently, been disregarded,” it said.

Farming mega-mergers threaten food security, say campaigners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/26/farming-mega-mergers-threaten-food-security-say-campaigners>
Agrochemical giant Monsanto is involved in work 
<http://www.monsanto.com/improvingagriculture/pages/bt-cowpea-partnership.aspx> 
to genetically engineer new versions of cowpea with theAfrican Agricultural 
Technology Foundation 
<http://www.aatf-africa.org/about-us/governance/our-donors>, set up in part 
with US and UK aid money. DuPont Pioneer is a partner in a“biofortified” sorghum
 
<http://precision.agwired.com/2016/10/12/dupont-pioneer-advances-biofortification-of-sorghum/>
 project supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation.

The Syngenta Foundation is backing research on tef 
<http://www.syngentafoundation.org/index.cfm?pageID=529>, a gluten-free 
“ancient grain” grown in Ethiopia.

An international project called DivSeek 
<http://www.divseek.org/mission-and-goals/>, meanwhile, aims to sequence and 
publish genetic data on crops with samples in the world’s seed banks.

Sean Mayes, a British geneticist involved in the separate Crops for the Future 
initiative, said concern over climate change, the need to feed a growing global 
population, and rising demand in rich countries for more varied foods are 
fuelling new interest in these plants.

All of these crops, he said, have “potential to increase yields, nutrition … 
but the work hasn’t been done, because there hasn’t been that commercial drive”.
 