
Anxiety about losing your job to technology is both a rational and growing 
fear. Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank of England, recently 
estimated that15m jobs in the UK were threatened by automation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/12/robots-threaten-low-paid-jobs-says-bank-of-england-chief-economist>
. Technology is reaching such levels of sophistication that it is capable not 
only of manual tasks but cognitive ones too, putting a wide range of jobs are 
at risk. The areas most vulnerable include driving and administrative work. But 
according to areport from Oxford University 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=0ahUKEwid9oacy9_QAhVjJMAKHWf6AiMQFggaMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk%2Fdownloads%2Facademic%2FThe_Future_of_Employment.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFujcxMopCcadhq7bdkRjZoy0qCYg&sig2=49l2BzjU3rxzs9iTzPb1gQ&bvm=bv.139782543,d.ZGg>
 that looked at over 700 areas of work, teaching at all levels across the 
educational spectrum is a safe bet.

Stop blaming teachers for falling results and give them the trust and time to 
actually teach | Ned Manning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/stop-blaming-teachers-for-falling-results-and-give-them-the-trust-and-time-to-actually-teach>
Yet the apparent safety of teaching as a profession doesn’t quite square with 
the boom in online courses. From the comfort of my sofa I can watch lectures 
from prestigiousuniversities around the world 
<https://www.edx.org/course/justice-harvardx-er22-1x-0>, join the hundreds of 
millions of people who have enrolled on a Khan Academy course, enrol in aMooc – 
a massive online open course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/dec/03/massive-online-open-courses-universities>
 – or upskill and change my career with a course fromLynda 
<https://www.lynda.com/> and many other education providers.

A lot of these courses are free, but those with accreditation attached tend to 
charge. The appeal for educational institutions is simple: you can pay a 
teacher once to deliver a lecture to an unlimited amount of students without 
having to pay for all the overheads it takes to run a building. Students are 
offered flexibility and can learn at a time and location that suits them. 
However, drop-out rates for these courses are extremely high and they present 
no real threat to education as we know it. It seems students still prefer a 
real classroom.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346070b21e9729dfdd3cfb1cd8ce60fea8fe3d97%2F0_244_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20technology%20replace%20teachers%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Harpreet%20Purewal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20technology%20replace%20teachers%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Harpreet%20Purewal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F346070b21e9729dfdd3cfb1cd8ce60fea8fe3d97%2F0_244_5616_3371%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘The act of teaching isn’t just imparting what’s in your head to a captive 
audience.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
So why not replace teachers in classroom with technology? To understand why 
teachers’ careers are safe we need to ask two questions: what do teachers do 
all day and where does technology fall short?

A quick survey of teacher friends answers the first question: teachers provide 
pastoral care, direct the Christmas play, recognise and assist vulnerable 
pupils, cover break-time duty, mentor new teachers, collate data about pupils’ 
attendance and behaviour, mark homework, rig lights and dress sets for school 
performances, order resources such as textbooks and classroom equipment, write 
newsletters, take school trips, assess pupil attainment, meet parents, spot 
potential terrorists (ahem) in accordance with the government’sPrevent 
guidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/prevent-hate-muslims-schools-terrorism-teachers-reject>
, lead assemblies, make endless photocopies, and appraise other members of 
staff. This list is incomplete and already sounds like a lot for a piece of 
technology to cover. But if you’re looking for an easy and long-term job, this 
isn’t it: almost a third of teachers quitwithin five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/24/almost-third-of-teachers-quit-within-five-years-of-qualifying-figures>
.

It’s likely that some of the administrative tasks that teachers do will be 
conducted by technology in the future, just as in other sectors, but what about 
the actual teaching? The act of teaching isn’t just imparting what’s in your 
head to a captive audience.Teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> is a performance, it’s reading 
the room and working it. This is where technology really falls short. Empathy 
is a key area of difficulty for technology and automation. Are the kids at the 
back of the classroom bored because you’re talking about something they find 
too difficult, because they know it already, or because you’re not presenting 
the information in a meaningful way? Human beings are able to pick up on a 
multitude of contextual clues to determine and respond to the emotional states 
of others. Technology can’t detect emotional states, let alone adapt its 
behaviour to cater accordingly.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c3785a489dfa278900d7627620a66ab5f82049%2F0_190_4339_2604%2F4339.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20technology%20replace%20teachers%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Harpreet%20Purewal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20technology%20replace%20teachers%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Harpreet%20Purewal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fcan-technology-replace-teachers-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0c3785a489dfa278900d7627620a66ab5f82049%2F0_190_4339_2604%2F4339.jpg>
 ‘The best teachers will use technology in the classroom as part of an 
expanding toolkit.’ Photograph: Paul Miller/AAP 
Another area of difficulty for technology that is key to teaching is quick 
thinking. Any number of things can and do go wrong on a school day: a guest 
speaker cancels, the whiteboard freezes, buses are delayed or – the ultimate 
horror – the photocopier breaks. Human beings are able to think on their feet 
and reformulate their plans to adapt to new circumstances. Machines aren’t able 
to do this. Thinking on the spot is a key skill of teachers, and many cite the 
variety of the job as areason for entering the profession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jan/27/five-top-reasons-teachers-join-and-quit>
 in the first place.

We know what technology can’t do for students and teachers, but there are some 
reasons to be optimistic about the role of technology in education. Teachers in 
the UK often complain about the administration workload interfering with the 
actual work of teaching. Technology could aid data-gathering significantly, 
freeing up teachers’ time and allowing them to focus on more important aspects 
of their work. And internationally, technology has the potential to reach those 
who don’t have access to a classroom. In 2015 the British Council used Skype to 
deliver teacher training in Libya; and as far back as 1999 Sugata Mitra created 
“Hole in the Wall” schools by placingcomputers in slums in Delhi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/07/sugata-mitra-professor-school-in-cloud>
.

The best teachers will use technology in the classroom as part of an expanding 
toolkit, and hopefully they’ll see the benefits of smarter technology in the 
form of reduced clerical work. Classrooms will continue to change shape, but 
it’s safe to assume that there will be a human teacher at the front of them for 
a long time yet.
 