
“Further turmoil at troubled academy chain as Cedar Mount’s GCSE results 
plummet,” reported theManchester Evening News 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/further-turmoil-troubled-academy-chain-11845940>
 in September. Under the headline was a striking story with a message for 
ministers as they seek, controversially, to encourage grammar schools to get 
involved in running non-selective institutions as part of Theresa May’s plan to 
expand selection.

The article was about an academy chain set up by the highly successful 
Altrincham grammar school for girls, which has faced a challenge in trying to 
turn around a comprehensive in a much tougher part ofManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester>.

Cedar Mount academy has been in special measures for 18 months, despite being 
in the Bright Futures chain – praised astransformational <http://bit.ly/2fCFzKo>
 five years ago by then education secretary Michael Gove. The school has seen 
the proportion of pupils passing English and maths GCSEs drop for four years in 
a row.

Grammar schools cannot help 90% of children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
Does this carry ominous messages for England’s education system as a whole? 
Ministers, in moving to allow more selection, seek to mollify critics by 
suggesting an upside: that grammar schools will be forced to work with 
non-selectives to improve them. But the Cedar Mount experience offers a 
cautionary tale.

Meanwhile, Education Guardian can reveal, an analysis of official data on the 
Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> results of schools 
already in academy trusts – including a selective school – suggests grammars 
have yet to pass on their impressive record of inspection success to other 
institutions.

The government’s green paper 
<https://consult.education.gov.uk/school-frameworks/schools-that-work-for-everyone/supporting_documents/SCHOOLS%20THAT%20WORK%20FOR%20EVERYONE%20%20FINAL.pdf>
 (pdf), which proposes lifting the 1998 ban on the establishment of new 
grammars, and whoseconsultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/schools-that-work-for-everyone> 
(pdf) ends next Monday, seems to concede that grammar schools may create a 
problem for non-selective schools nearby.

It says: “Under the current model of grammar schools … there is some evidence 
that children who attend non-selective schools in selective areas may not fare 
as well academically – both compared to local selective schools and 
comprehensives in non-selective areas.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806cbf07a06b843c82799f0d60fbbd3c94134abc%2F0_1036_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20grammar%20schools%20really%20sprinkle%20fairy%20dust%20on%20struggling%20secondaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20grammar%20schools%20really%20sprinkle%20fairy%20dust%20on%20struggling%20secondaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F806cbf07a06b843c82799f0d60fbbd3c94134abc%2F0_1036_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Lucy Powell, the former shadow education scecretary and a Manchester MP, wants 
Cedar Mount taken away from the Bright Futures academy chain. Photograph: David 
Levene 
The paper suggests solutions. Grammars could be made to establish a new 
non-selective secondary school; to go into partnership with an existing 
non-selective school within a multi-academy trust (Mat); or to set up primary 
“feeder” schools. Grammars failing to “deliver” good Ofsted ratings for 
non-selective schools could face “sanctions”, including the loss of their own 
ability to select, warns the paper.

Grammars have excellent Ofsted ratings – 82% are “outstanding”, though nearly 
half have not been fully inspected for at least seven years – and the 
government’s argument seems to be that they can pass on that success.

‘Tutor-proof’ 11-plus professor admits grammar school test doesn’t work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/12/tutor-11plus-test-grammar-schools-disadvantaged-pupils>
But Cedar Mount, located in a campus called Gorton Education Village and 
serving a deprived area of east Manchester, has a record under Bright Futures 
(set up by Altrincham girls’ grammar in more prosperous Trafford) that seems 
unlikely to make a good advert for the policy.

It joined Bright Futures as a “requires improvement” school in June 2012. Two 
years later, it was rated “requires improvement” again; then, in April last 
year, it was placed in special measures. Although a more recent monitoring 
inspection has indicated some progress, provisional data for 2016 reveals that 
only 28% of pupils gained A*-C grades in English and maths, down from 41% in 
2012.

Manchester MP Lucy Powell <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lucy-powell>, 
the former shadow education secretary, has been calling on the government to 
take the school away from Bright Futures. “What this case shows is that the 
experience people have running grammar schools is not necessarily transferable 
to running very different schools,” she says. “[Altrincham girls’] is full of 
highly able, well motivated girls who are financially and socially secure. You 
cannot assume that it follows that you are somehow well qualified to run a 
challenging school with a difficult history in a different part of the city. 
It’s a very different scenario.”

Alongside Altrincham, which is rated “outstanding” by Ofsted, Bright Futures 
sponsors one other secondary, South Shore in Blackpool, which is also in 
special measures. It also runs three primaries, two of which are rated “good”, 
while the other has not been inspected.

Dear Theresa May, here’s what grammar schools did to my family | John O’Farrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/12/theresa-may-grammar-schools-maidenhead>
The trust also includes a special school which was rated “outstanding” in 
2013, and was already “outstanding” when it joined the trust. Bright Futures 
also runs two colleges, one rated “good” and the other “requires improvement”.

Powell, keen to put ministers on the spot about the record of grammars in 
sponsoring other schools, has asked a series of parliamentary questions. As we 
went to press, she had not received answers. So Education Guardian decided to 
investigate. We found that Bright Futures has not been alone in failing to 
spread the success of grammar schools into other schools.

Our analysis shows there are 16 Mats in England where at least one grammar 
school is partnered with non-selective secondaries or primaries. Within these 
trusts, are 13 non-selective secondary schools. One – Valley Park in Maidstone, 
Kent, which has a well established partnership with neighbouring Invicta 
grammar – is rated “outstanding”. A further seven are “good”. But Ofsted judges 
three as “requires improvement” and the remaining two – Cedar Mount and South 
Shore – as “inadequate”. Three of these ratings are an improvement over the 
previous inspection; one, Cedar Mount, has fallen. Overall, the Ofsted record 
for these schools is worse than the national average.

Among the 13 primary schools involved in Mats with grammars, only seven have 
so far been inspected. Six are rated good and one is “requires improvement”. 
The rate is roughly in line with national norms. As yet there are none of the 
“outstandings” that are more or less routine in the grammar sector.

Five academy trusts involving grammar schools are based in England’s largest 
selective local authority, Kent. They generally follow the same pattern as 
nationally, with the grammar school rated outstanding but its partner schools 
not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0136a40266e588b029142e09aa9492d1b8d67be1%2F0_169_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20grammar%20schools%20really%20sprinkle%20fairy%20dust%20on%20struggling%20secondaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20grammar%20schools%20really%20sprinkle%20fairy%20dust%20on%20struggling%20secondaries%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fgrammar-schools-secondaries-selective-improve%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0136a40266e588b029142e09aa9492d1b8d67be1%2F0_169_6570_3942%2F6570.jpg>
 Bright Futures says that it has responded decisively to Oftsed’s findings at 
Cedar Mount. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
For Peter Read, a former grammar school headteacher, now a consultant and 
blogger <http://bit.ly/2gY08B4>, the reason is simple. “The government’s green 
paper argument is nonsense,” he says. “Selective schools do well because they 
take the brightest children. Some grammar schools have done a very good job in 
leading Mats; others have been disastrous. The idea that you simply sprinkle 
some magic dust from grammars to other schools and the latter will 
automatically improve is crazy.”

‘Why would a Tory object?’: crusader for grammar schools is having his moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/tory-grammar-schools-graham-brady-selection>
Melissa Benn, chair of Comprehensive Future, which campaigns against 
selection, says: “The government seems to recognise the flaws in the design of 
previous selection systems, but they try to suggest that these problems can be 
alleviated by selective schools helping non-selectives. “The evidence is that 
this does not work. Selection creates a two-tier system, and those in the lower 
tier are not helped by the selection operating in the other.”

Asked to comment, the Department for Education said: “Our proposals ask some 
of the best educational institutions, including both selective and 
non-selective schools, to play a key role in improving the quality of education 
provision. Some grammar schools are already showing this can be done 
successfully by sponsoring non-selective schools and helping improve outcomes.”

Bright Futures says progress at Cedar Mount and South Shore was recognised by 
Ofsted in recent visits. “The latest visit to Cedar Mount recognised that the 
trust had responded decisively to the findings of the last monitoring 
inspection.” While Altrincham girls’ had contributed much support to other 
schools, it said, the partnership was not one way, with schools working 
together. “This is the aim for all our academies – not knee-jerk reactions or 
quick fixes, but long term, sustainable solutions.”

Graham Brady 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/tory-grammar-schools-graham-brady-selection>
, chair of the Tory backbench 1922 Committee and a campaigner for more 
grammars, says selective schools in his Trafford constituency, which includes 
Altrincham girls’, have long worked well with both non-selective secondaries 
and primaries. He adds: “The green paper raises interesting ideas [on 
partnership] but this is not really my territory.” His focus is simply on 
providing more access to grammar schools where there is demand, he says.

There may be lessons to be learnt, however, from the evidence on how grammar 
schools are interacting with others in Mats. Critics are likely to wonder about 
the extent to which ministers will want to look at that evidence.
 