
As a Berliner travelling from London to Edinburgh and strolling along the 
streets of the old and new towns one feels unexpectedly at home in a way one 
never feels at home in London. Why is this? The realisation comes suddenly. It 
is the dominance of tenements.

Instead of living next to each other – a tremendous waste of land in Berlin 
eyes – the inhabitants of Edinburgh live mostly one on top of the other like 
people in mainland European cities do.

According to Robert Hodgart, an urban geographer and retired lecturer at the 
University of Edinburgh, this phenomenon is a “visibly conspicuous facet of 
Scotland’s distinctiveness, which gives it a stronger affinity with continental 
Europe”.

It’s not only the architecture that contributes to the impression that 
crossing the invisible border from England toScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is like crossing the border between 
two separate states – one on an island, the other on the continent.

The federal states in Germany have their own governments and parliaments and 
even their own school systems like Scotland. And some, such as Bavaria or 
Saxony, which call themselves “Freistaat”, are highly aware of their own 
cultural identity highlighted by dialect, dishes and customs.

But still no federal state in Germany prints its own money like the Scottish 
do or has its own “national museum” with the Declaration of Arbroath taking up 
a whole wall. The Germans having formed a common nation only in 1871 are not 
struggling against it while the Scottish who joined the Union in 1707 still do.

And after the EU referendum the union is called into question again. The 
majority of Scottish people voted for remain. Scots seem to feel at least as 
close to the EU as they feel to the UK. Do they have to take a decision now to 
which side they belong?

Part of the reason the referendum for independence launched in 2014 by the SNP 
failed was because a lot of Scots were convinced they would enjoy the benefits 
from the UK and the EU by voting no. However, that argument ceased on 23 June.

Barbara Flynn, a community developer who lives with her Spanish husband in 
Glasgow, says she voted for Scottish independence even though there was a 
common fear at the time that Scotland would have to leave the EU after becoming 
independent. In light of the EU referendum result, she says, many people regret 
their decision to vote no. “They say: I wish I had voted yes two years ago,” 
she says.


Both Diane Stewart and Kallum Corke, who are in their 20s and work in 
Edinburgh also voted for “Better together” two years ago. The Brexit vote felt 
like a “punch in the face”. They hope the Scottish government can persuade 
Downing Street “to leave us in”.

Flynn is more determined. “The government should now push another independence 
referendum,” she says.

I met all of them at the end of October attending a conference in Edinburgh on 
the issue: Scotland after Brexit.

Can Scotland be a member of Brexit-Britain and the EU at the same time or have 
the Scots to leave the Union? That is the question and there is no evident 
answer.

Dominic Hinde, a journalist based in Edinburgh who lived and worked also in 
Berlin, Stockholm and the US, is convinced. “The option for Scotland is now to 
become independent or to stay in the UK and leave the EU and the single market.”


He is also clear that the second option is the more probable at the moment: 
“Although the majority of the Scottish support the EU they are reluctant about 
the idea of independence. And a failure of a second referendum would kill the 
idea of Scottish independence for a long time.”

Immediately after the Brexit vote, the first minister of the Scoland, Nicola 
Sturgeon, said a second Scottish independence vote was highly likely.

Five months later she does not sound so resolute. 

Although the government published a new independence bill in October, Fiona 
Hyslop, the cabinet secretary for culture, tourism and external affairs, is 
reluctant about a second independence referendum happening so soon. “It’s not 
our starting point,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fcan-scotland-be-part-of-brexit-britain-and-the-eu-at-the-same-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4a30889b7d44a204a018f09636afa3e7270db%2F0_273_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Scotland%20be%20part%20of%20Brexit-Britain%20and%20the%20EU%20at%20the%20same%20time%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fcan-scotland-be-part-of-brexit-britain-and-the-eu-at-the-same-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Scotland%20be%20part%20of%20Brexit-Britain%20and%20the%20EU%20at%20the%20same%20time%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F03%2Fcan-scotland-be-part-of-brexit-britain-and-the-eu-at-the-same-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4a30889b7d44a204a018f09636afa3e7270db%2F0_273_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 Tenements in Edinburgh. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
“The first is trying to persuade the UK as a whole to take a position as close 
to the EU as possible. From our perspective that means remaining a member of 
the single market as a whole. If that’s not possible we will be setting out in 
a few weeks time the mechanism by which Scotland could have a different model 
within the United Kingdom where we might retain membership of the single 
market. If these two are not possible then independence is not off the table.”

Another independence referendum is the least desired option and looking at 
recent polls it is easy to tell why: a new poll published by YouGov this week 
finds that the support for a yes campaign was dwindling.

Ask Hyslop how probable a special deal for Scotland is and she appears 
optimistic. “A flexible Brexit is possible,” she says and refers to the case of 
Germany after 1990. “We have seen how flexible the EU was particularly to East 
Germany in the view of the reunification and the challenges there. So we know 
the EU can be flexible if there is the political will to do that.”

Does Hyslop, who was recently in London to meet the ambassadors of the 27 
remaining EU members, see the political will? “Well, we will not only be 
engaging with the EU 27 but also with the institutions in Brussels. As we 
understood there is a great deal of support and sympathy for the position 
Scotland finds itself in,” Hyslop says.

But there is still the British government which has to concede special rights 
to Scotland. “There has been a lot of activity between the UK, Scottish and 
other devolved administrations”, the Scottish government states in its 
newsletter on Friday.

The conference in Edinburgh in October heard from academics and politicians 
from six northern European countries including the Faroe Islands and Greenland, 
who told of their experiences of dealing with the EU as well as with bigger 
nations.

While Denmark is an EU member, Greenland as an autonomous realm left the EU in 
1979. This was possible as Greenland was awarded the status of an overseas 
territory.


“The EU isn’t legally rigid but flexible and pragmatic,” said Ulrik Pram Gad a 
Greenland-born adviser to the Danish government. He proposed the opposite case 
for Scotland: England and Wales could leave the EU whereas Scotland and Ireland 
could remain. Gad named his idea “Engwaxid”.

Although not very likely, this is at least a new idea. And fresh ideas are 
highly welcomed by the Scottish government. “Leaving the EU is uncharted 
territory. And because it is uncharted territory we have to be creative and 
flexible”, says Hyslop.

At the moment nobody can tell how the Scotland-British border will look like 
after 2020. Whether it remains merely cultural or will become a factual one 
will depend on how much will and creativity the UK andEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> can summon up to avoid a hard 
Brexit.


 * This article was corrected on 5 December 2016. Barbara Flynn voted for, not 
against, Scottish independence in the referendum.
 