
Alastair Campbell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alastaircampbell>: It 
takes balls to go so far out of your comfort zone

It is not to boast that I was a few years ahead of him on their hit list, but 
it is to signal a sneaking admiration for Ed Balls to reveal that I have 
several times said no to strictures to appear onStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/10/strictly-come-dancing-ed-balls-itv-x-factor-bbc>
. It takes, dare I say it, real balls to go on national telly and do something 
so far out of your comfort zone. One reason for my refusal is that I am not a 
good dancer. You might say that nor is Balls, but Strictly is as much about 
personality as footwork and he is showing a side that few knew to exist.

Strictly Come Dancing hits series high as Ed Balls goes green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/10/strictly-come-dancing-ed-balls-itv-x-factor-bbc>
But the real worry I have about the post-politics reality TV or light 
entertainment route is that far from reviving New Labour – though he did well 
to remind viewers that we won three elections – it puts us very much as 
political figures of the past, not the present or the future. I am equally 
guilty of this. While Balls struts his stuff in clothes he surely never 
imagined he would wear, I hit the road to promote volume five of my diaries, 
2003-05, with a horrible feeling that the election win in the closing pages of
Outside, Inside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/alastair-campbell-new-labour-tony-blair-immigration-brexit>
 is looking unlikely to be repeated any time soon.

Flicking through the many references to Balls, then still an adviser to Gordon 
Brown and later a Labour candidate, I look for the slightest sign that within 
just over a decade he’d be swapping being shadow chancellor forthe charleston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/ed-balls-faces-strictly-public-vote-with-turbo-charged-charleston>
.

There is just one, when we are having lunch and I tell him about the curt note 
I received from Brown’s secretary on the day I resigned from Downing Street 
“thanking you for all your work”. I record Balls laughing and adding “he’s not 
great at the touchy-feely, is he?” No, indeed. But Balls is making up for lost 
time for both of them on that front.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fed-balls-strictly-new-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad22a60dbc6bf1b60bf6972d2c8dc8fd8d0044ba%2F0_78_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Ed%20Balls%E2%80%99s%20Strictly%20stint%20reinvigorate%20New%20Labour%3F%20%7C%20The%20panel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fed-balls-strictly-new-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Ed%20Balls%E2%80%99s%20Strictly%20stint%20reinvigorate%20New%20Labour%3F%20%7C%20The%20panel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fed-balls-strictly-new-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fad22a60dbc6bf1b60bf6972d2c8dc8fd8d0044ba%2F0_78_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Balls swapped being shadow chancellor for the charleston. Photograph: Guy 
Levy/BBC/PA 
Ashley Banjo: This could introduce young people to politics


I didn’t have high hopes when I first saw that Balls was going to be taking 
part inStrictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/strictly-come-dancing>. But when I 
first saw him dancing around in that red shirt the other day, it did actually 
make me sit up and take notice.

I’ve taught a fair few amateur dancers both on and off screen, and in my 
opinion he did brilliantly, bearing in mind that he doesn’t have any background 
in dance. He may not be the best dancer in the Strictly line-up but there’s no 
doubt that he’s really fun to watch.

After Diversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/dec/20/faces-2009-diversity-perri-kiely>
 first appeared on Britain’s Got Talent, we were inundated with messages from 
kids who wanted to dance like us, and since then dance has really had a 
comeback. If Balls’s dancing can both entertain and inspire a new generation of 
young people, that’s no bad thing, especially if it introduces them to politics.

What the effect will have on the public’s view of the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party as a whole remains to be 
seen. But the mix of all that political experience and the ability to pull out 
a credible samba at any moment, means Balls might just be the man to turn 
things around for the party.

• Ashley Banjo is a dancer, choreographer and leader of dance troupe Diversity

John Snelson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-snelson>: Politicians 
should learn the art of non-verbal communication

Inside all of us is a great dancer. But as the dad dancing of Balls confirmed, 
it doesn’t always know how to get out. That’s where the skill of the dancer 
comes in. Politicians pay attention to the words and image (anystylists 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3724040/Cameron-s-OFFICIAL-resignation-honours-reveal-knighthood-spinner-gong-losing-Remain-campaign-chief-peerages-staff.html>
 get a New Labour gong?) – but what about movement? Dance is the ultimate art 
of subtle non-verbal communication. And the non-verbal counts for more than we 
tend to allow. Professional dancers know this. Learn how to do exactly the 
right gesture in the perfect way at the right moment, and your message is 
subliminally strengthened. So, perhaps there’s a lesson for all politicians 
there.

'Listen to us. Send Ed Balls home' – the Strictly judges bare their teeth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/10/strictly-come-dancing-send-ed-balls-home-the-judges-bare-their-teeth>
But behind the scenes, how about dance in place of those tetchy meetings about 
policy. Working through a waltz, the classic dance through which to seduce your 
opponent. Feeling a little more adversarial? Then maybe a paso doble can work 
out a bit of that aggression. Ultimately it will be show time, and all that 
behind-the-scenes prep gets channelled into convincing your audience that what 
they see is really what they will get.

Did New Labour start out intending to be the smart new gang on the block, with 
snappyJerome Robbins moves 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1984/05/04/arts/ballet-moves-by-jerome-robbins.html>? 
Was it an edgy, optimistic and energetic takeover of the streets as N1 Story? 
But ultimately is New Labour now seen a bit like the end of A Chorus Line: a 
fabulous and impressive glamour display of beautifully drilled dancers – with 
not a single individual thought on view. Perhaps the Corbynistas are lining up 
for a revival of Fiddler on the Roof ...

Diane Abbott <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/dianeabbott>: He shows us 
that politicians are real, sweaty people

Balls is one of those people, one of those politicians who will always be box 
office. He is doing brilliantly on this year’s Strictly and is probably one of 
the biggest reasons for this season’s strong viewer ratings. For me,it is 
must-watch TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/live/2016/oct/08/strictly-come-dancing-week-three-liveblog>
.

Unfortunately, we live in an era where machine politicians have disillusioned 
a large number of voters. But seeing Balls strut his stuff shows us all that 
politicians are real people. They live and breathe, and sometimes sweat 
profusely just like everyone else. As Shakespeare almost said, if you mark us 
down, do we not wince?

Does it matter that he is not the best dancer in the competition? Of course 
not. Just as there is more to life than off-the-record briefings, there is more 
to life than a rhythmic samba.

We can all learn from him. He is not a quitter and he rebounds from every 
setback. I’m sure that if he wanted to he could find his way back into 
parliament. His own rehabilitation is well under way and he is even in danger 
of becoming a national treasure. However, rehabilitating the New Labour brand 
in the process may be a task beyond even our Ed.

Balls is also bound to learn from his time on Strictly, however long it lasts. 
His superb partner Katya Jones is from Russia. The whole show is a brilliant 
showcase of our multicultural society with dancers and panellists from all over 
the world. Welcome to the best of multicultural Britain.

Jonathan Freedland <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathanfreedland>: 
The patron saint of dad dancers

Let’s get the disclaimer out of the way. It’s only a TV show; we shouldn’t 
overthink it. That’s true. But it’s also true that Balls is a politician – 
maybe a former politician – and, while he will mainly be approaching his 
current, eye-popping run on Strictly as a bit of a laugh, he will also have 
given at least half a thought to the political fallout. Not least because he is 
the husband of a still-serving politician.

The most obvious impact is on him. Long described as a bruiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jan/21/ed-balls-bruiser-confront-tory-lies>
, and depicted in his early days as either a backroom boffin or heavyweight 
enforcer, dancing the samba in a lurid yellow suit, wearing a bucket-full of 
green facepaint, has given Balls a chance to reintroduce himself to the British 
public. Strictly is rebranding him from political hardman to the patron saint 
of dad dancers, a good sport, as the only true novice with the gumption to 
compete against a field of athletes, gymnasts and stage school veterans.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fed-balls-being-on-strictly-come-dancing-is-a-dream-come-true-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Balls%20says%20being%20on%20Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%20is%20a%20%E2%80%98dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fed-balls-being-on-strictly-come-dancing-is-a-dream-come-true-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Balls%20says%20being%20on%20Strictly%20Come%20Dancing%20is%20a%20%E2%80%98dream%20come%20true%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F31%2Fed-balls-being-on-strictly-come-dancing-is-a-dream-come-true-video&media=>
Ed Balls says being on Strictly Come Dancing is a ‘dream come true’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/aug/31/ed-balls-being-on-strictly-come-dancing-is-a-dream-come-true-video>
So it’s doing Balls himself the world of good. He’s showing, in Denis Healey’s 
classic formulation, that he has a hinterland. As the underdog on Strictly, 
he’s on his way to becoming a national treasure.

But it won’t affect just him. For one thing, those cutaway shots of Yvette 
Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/ed-balls-interview-speaking-out-memoir-labour-blair-brown>
 – looking simultaneously proud and mortified – will be worth two dozen 
appearances on Question Time. She’s getting to be seen by a mass audience that 
would never tune into politics. And seen in a wholly positive light. Not as a 
politician locked in an argument, but as a partner unsure whether to wince or 
cheer.

It helps Labour too, by giving the audience a glimpse of the party doing 
something other than fighting itself. But that help probably benefits most the 
wing of the party associated with Balls and Cooper. When Labour’s public face 
these days is Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell , Balls’s Strictly run is a 
weekly reminder that Labour used to look very different.

Usually New Labour jogs itself back into the memory with an intervention by 
Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/tony-blair-says-his-return-to-british-politics-is-an-open-question>
, whose associations are – shall we say – not entirely positive in the public 
mind. But there is nothing contentious about the resurfacing of Ed Balls. He’s 
a reminder that, in its heyday, New Labour was very good at presenting its 
leading figures as normal people, in touch with popular culture and the 
national mood. Indeed, the fact that Balls is still on the show – despite 
regularly scoring the lowest marks from the judges – is a weekly reminder of 
New Labour’s greatest selling point: its uncanny knack of winning votes.

Lyndsey Winship <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lyndseywinship>: He is 
the Brexit of the Strictly world

Dance is a powerful art form. It can bring you joy and move you to tears, it 
canchange lives <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2007/may/18/dance>, reach 
out to marginalised youth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2010/feb/24/dance-training-young-offenders-project>
 andtransform our perception of the disabled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2009/jan/06/dance-candoco>. But political 
redemption? That might be too big an ask.

Yet with Balls’s continuing success, you have to wonder. He went all out on a 
Mask-themed samba routine this week, green facepaint and banana-hued suit only 
adding to the rather camp and slightly terrifying effect. And despite only 
scraping 24 points to sit at the bottom of the leaderboard, he sailed through 
to the next round on the public vote.

Strictly hopeful Ed Balls puts on his dancing shoes – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gallery/2016/aug/31/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-in-pictures>
Balls is the Brexit of the Strictly world. The panel of expert judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/25/like-ed-balls-jeremy-corbyn-is-struggling-to-impress-the-judges>
 may say: “Down with Balls!” But who needs experts, right? The great British 
public know what they want. Which is what, exactly? On Saturday night telly 
it’s pure entertainment, and enjoying laughing at someone’s poor attempt at a 
paso doble is not the same as thinking them fit for office. Despite what the 
unfathomable success of Donald Trump, Boris Johnson and Nigel Farage might 
suggest, I still don’t think we want cartoon characters for leaders. But you 
could argue the voting public seems to be warming to people who remind them of 
their own imperfect selves.

And there is something strangely compelling about watching Balls dance. This 
is not someone who has given up the fight. He really goes for it, with maximum 
gusto. And for all the graceless execution, he’s mostly on top of the steps. 
He’s actually not as bad a dancer as he looks. Perhaps where the real gains are 
is in showing that he can laugh at himself. For someone with a reputation as a 
political bruiser and bully, that could be a clever move. A little bit of 
humility could go a long way. Whether it could waltz him back to Westminster, 
though, is moot.
 