
Heather Nicholas, headteacher of Ferndale community school, is matter of fact 
about the difficulties her pupils face growing up in a deprived part ofWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>. “I think every child should own a 
book,” she says. One book may not sound like much but it is in Maerdy, a former 
coalmining village along the main road that snakes up the Rhondda Fach valley, 
where a good house can be had for less than £30,000.

Ferndale has a lot riding on it. Local government spending cuts saw the school 
take over running the local library and swimming pool, to keep them open. And 
Nicholas is about to meet officials to discuss what more the school can do when 
the area’s generous EU funding disappears, post-Brexit.

But right now Ferndale carries even more weight for Wales’s educational 
reputation, as one of the schools chosen to take part in the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development’s triennialProgramme for International 
Student Assessment <https://www.oecd.org/pisa/aboutpisa/> (Pisa), which tests 
core skills in maths, literacy and science.

UK students stuck in educational doldrums, OECD study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/03/uk-students-education-oecd-pisa-report>
Last year Ferndale’s 15-year-olds sat the Pisa exams alongside half a million 
of their peers in 72 countries. The results will be published on 6 December.

Governments worldwide use Pisa as the litmus test for their schools. It was 
Pisa that highlighted Finland’s remarkable success within Europe, and then 
Shanghai’s table-topping performance as a sign of China’s development.

In Wales there is concern about the latest set of results. While England’s and 
Scotland’s scores have beenlargely static 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/03/uk-students-education-oecd-pisa-report>
, although slipping down international rankings because of new participants, 
Wales has seen itsscores decline 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/pisa-results-alarming-declines-core-6364784>
 over the past decade, compounded by poor recent A-level results.

Philip Dixon, a former director of the ATL Cymru teaching union, says Wales’s 
poor Pisa results upended many assumptions about the world-class quality of its 
education system since devolution. “Pisa isn’t perfect, but for all its faults 
it gives a reality check to governments. Being a small country, and not having 
a lot of checks and balances, we were a bit cocooned,” Dixon says. “When the 
first lot of Pisa results landed in 2007, there was consternation. And then 
when the second set arrived in 2010, which showed not only that we still 
weren’t remotely near the best but that we were actually going backwards, that 
caused a tremendous shock.”

According to Dixon – who has just published a book on the subject entitled 
Testing Times <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/school-for-scandal-441869.html> 
– the cause was a “lost decade”, in which Wales failed to upgrade its teaching 
or introduce prescriptive strategies for teaching such as those seen in 
Scotland or England.

Wales A-level results raise concerns pupils falling behind rest of UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/18/wales-a-level-results-raise-concerns-pupils-falling-behind-rest-of-uk>
The successive poor Pisa results set off alarms among policymakers in Cardiff, 
spearheaded by Leighton Andrews, Wales’s minister for education from 2009 to 
2013. “There were two options really,” says Andrews. “One was to go into 
denial; the other was to say: this has got to be a turning point. And we 
obviously took the latter course.” He recalls the Pisa results published in 
2010: “It became the trigger for our school improvement programme, which kicked 
off in early 2011.”

First came banding, ranking schools into five levels of effectiveness, 
followed by new numeracy and literacy tests and frameworks, a new master’s 
degree for newly qualified teachers, and efforts to amalgamate the 22 disparate 
and sometimes tiny local authorities responsible for school improvement.

The 2013 results, published in 2014, saw Wales again lose ground in science 
and, in particular, maths, where its Pisa score fell further behind Scotland 
and England and slipped to 43rd in the international standings.

But Andrews says the reforms introduced since 2011 have not yet had time to 
take hold, and so won’t be reflected in the latest set of results. “The key 
question is whether you allow the policies you’ve introduced to continue and to 
embed, or whether you twist and turn every time there is a problem,” he says.

Kirsty Williams, Wales’s current education minister, has been in the job only 
since May, and is the loneLiberal Democrat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/19/lib-dem-kirsty-williams-appointed-to-welsh-labour-led-cabinet>
 in Cardiff’s Labour-dominated government. But she agrees that the earlier 
reforms need more time to take effect – including the introduction of the pupil 
deprivation grant she championed, which funds schools directly for 
disadvantaged children, similar to the pupil premium in England.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a3695a465f937bb3ef50ed4af14d9528d335e3c%2F0_178_4472_2684%2F4472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Welsh%20schools%20make%20up%20for%20%E2%80%98lost%20decade%E2%80%99%20to%20climb%20in%20Pisa%20league%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Welsh%20schools%20make%20up%20for%20%E2%80%98lost%20decade%E2%80%99%20to%20climb%20in%20Pisa%20league%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6a3695a465f937bb3ef50ed4af14d9528d335e3c%2F0_178_4472_2684%2F4472.jpg>
 Ferndale’s head, Heather Nicholas, says Pisa has spurred Welsh schools to 
improve. Photograph: Dimitris Legakis/Athena Pictures 
Whatever this year’s Pisa results, Williams argues there is widespread support 
in Wales for reforming its education system, and points out the improvement in 
GCSE results seen this year. “I believe we are in a better position than we 
have been in a long time. I think things are on the up in Wales – I detect an 
absolute commitment from parents, from educators, from our higher education 
institutions. It’s a national mission.

“There’s a recognition that after all these years of devolution there’s a 
disappointment that Welsh education isn’t where we would want it to be. But 
there is a new sense of purpose, a collective understanding of what we need to 
do to move forward. There are some outstanding teachers, but we need make sure 
that quality is consistent no matter where you live in Wales, or what your 
background is.”

Williams’s sense of a national mission is shared by Heather Nicholas at 
Ferndale. “The honest truth is, we’ve not been doing well in Pisa. But I think 
it’s generated a surge of support for improving the education process, and I 
think Kirsty Williams will find life a bit easier than Leighton Andrews when he 
first started, in that she’s pushing at an open door now.

“I liaise with a lot of heads, and there are gripes and groans because it is 
quite high pressure and it’s long hours. But there is a feeling that everyone 
is in it together,” says Nicholas.

In Maerdy, where the town’s terraced houses can hide the deprivation behind 
their doors, that support often comes through the school. Nicholas talks of 
home visits, “with loving parents and a loving family but really deprived. 
Concrete floors, no white goods, no heating, children topping and tailing in 
beds. It’s like the 1940s. It’s much more commonplace than you would know.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46cc4b896f84ac2eb6d2cdafde56ed259240b54d%2F0_237_5497_3298%2F5497.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Welsh%20schools%20make%20up%20for%20%E2%80%98lost%20decade%E2%80%99%20to%20climb%20in%20Pisa%20league%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Welsh%20schools%20make%20up%20for%20%E2%80%98lost%20decade%E2%80%99%20to%20climb%20in%20Pisa%20league%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fwelsh-schools-pisa-league-international-scores%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46cc4b896f84ac2eb6d2cdafde56ed259240b54d%2F0_237_5497_3298%2F5497.jpg>
 Ferndale is in a former coalmining village, where unemployment is high. 
Photograph: Dimitris Legakis/Athena Pictures 
The foyer of the school has a large photo of a coalmine. The caption reads: 
“Mardy Colliery – the last pit in the Rhondda (sunk 1875, closed 21 December 
1990)”. It’s a grim reminder for a school in an area with high long-term 
unemployment, where 40% of its pupils receive free school meals and a 
substantial number have been in care.

But while the mines are long gone, Ferndale has set to work polishing 
diamonds. Elsewhere in the foyer are happier news clippings that speak of 
record-breaking exam results and new achievements.

Since Nicholas took over as head five years ago, she and her staff have taken 
Ferndale from the bottom of the Welsh government’s five bandsto the top 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/local-news/ferndale-community-school-gets-top-6413969>
. In summer 2016 the school celebrated 55% of its pupils getting five good GCSE 
passes, including English or Welsh and maths, compared with just 22% in 2010. A 
new system of discipline has seen exclusions fall and attendance rise, year on 
year.

Now the school is buzzing thanks to a partnership with Google, bringing 
Silicon Valley technology to the Rhondda valleys, and it is soon to be the 
subject of a BBC documentary.

Global school tests under attack as OECD accused of killing 'joy of learning'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/06/oecd-pisa-tests-education-joy-of-learning>
One of Nicholas’s innovations has been a “Ferndale promise”: no matter what a 
child’s background, says Nicholas, “by the time they have left this school, 
they will have had a residential visit, they will have travelled abroad, if 
they want to”. In return, pupils are expected to raise funds through 
sponsorship, or take part in tasks around school such as collecting litter. The 
promise extends to making sure every pupil has school uniform, and if they 
don’t have a book, the school makes sure they are given one. It also runs two 
children’s centres, engages parents and holds classes for adult learners.

One overlooked detail from the last Pisa report was that pupils in Wales 
reported being happier than other parts of the UK. “If you picked any child out 
here and asked: ‘what’s the best thing about this school?’, even the most 
grumpy, most truculent, if pressed, would say it’s the sense of family, of 
care,” Nicholas says.

What is Pisa? (No, not that Pisa)


The Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) is a set of test 
results published every three years by theOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd>, with the aim of evaluating 
different education systems. Students aged 15 in randomly selected schools are 
tested on reading, maths and science. The results are widely reported and pored 
over across the world. The last Pisa results, assessing students in 65 
countries, were published in2013 
<https://www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results.htm> and focused on 
maths. This year’sresults <https://www.oecd.org/pisa/>, expected on 6 December, 
will focus on science.

The tests have become increasingly controversial. Some experts argue they 
encourage countries to engage in short-term fixes and to focus on a narrow 
curriculum and more standardised testing to climb the rankings. “Lack of 
progress on Pisa has led to declarations of crisis and ‘Pisa shock’ in many 
countries,” wrote a panel of academics from around the world in anopen letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/may/06/oecd-pisa-tests-damaging-education-academics>
 to Andreas Schleicher, director of education for the OECD, in 2014.

Others have complained it is not right to compare systems using average scores 
from random schools, and also thatcultural differences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/01/dont-let-pisa-league-tables-dictate-schooling>
 make the tests unfair. French students, for example, are reportedly reluctant 
to guess multiple choice responses, preferring to leave a question blank – even 
though by guessing they would have had a 25% chance of being right.

In addition, questions translated into different languages can be easily 
misinterpreted. There has also been criticism of Pisa, along with other 
international comparisons, forexcluding children 
<http://citation.allacademic.com/meta/p_mla_apa_research_citation/5/4/7/2/6/p547266_index.html?phpsessid=1c6743b9af0b1825d74bb67ab299a871>
 with disabilities.

The Pisa methodology: do its education claims stack up?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2013/dec/03/pisa-methodology-education-oecd-student-performance>
Top performers in the last Pisa tables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/03/uk-students-education-oecd-pisa-report>
 were Shanghai, Hong Kong and Singapore. Finland has been a consistent high 
performer since the tests began, though it slipped in the last round.

The UK’s results have been less than stellar. In the last round (tested in 
2012 and reported in 2013) 
<https://fullfact.org/education/what-you-dont-find-out-about-englands-educational-performance-pisa-league-table/>
 England was 21st out of 65 for science, 23rd for reading and 26th for maths. 
The UK as a whole came 26th in maths, 20th in science and 23rd in reading. In 
maths, Scotland ranked slightly higher than England. Northern Ireland was seven 
places further down the table and Wales was 12th from the bottom, 17 places 
behind England. In 2013, the then education secretary,Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/dec/03/michael-gove-pisa-education-oecd-league-tables>
, blamed the previous Labour governments.
 