
With two billion internet users in developing countries, internet pornography 
has become the predominant channel through which young people learn about sex, 
not only in the developed world but increasingly in low- and middle-income 
countries too.


A survey of 5,000 18- to 24-year-olds in India by sex education provider Love 
Matters <https://lovematters.in/en>, found 92% had watched porn online. And if 
the long-standing assumption that consumers of pornography – offline and online 
– are overwhelmingly male were ever true, it no longer is. The same survey 
found that 84% of young women had watched porn online, compared to 97% of young 
men. Half of the young men and women said they had “sexted” and about 28% had 
sent or received a “dick pic”, showing that in India, like the UK,porn is 
everywhere 
<http://www.mdx.ac.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0026/48545/BasicallyporniseverywhereReport.pdf>
.

The 'Avon ladies' of Pakistan selling contraception door to door
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/jun/01/the-avon-ladies-of-pakistan-selling-contraception-door-to-door>
Understanding and negotiating sex and relationships is important to young 
people all over the world, and the internet is providing them with a channel to 
search for information about sex in the absence of finding it readily available 
elsewhere. It could be argued thatporn is becoming the new sex education. 
<http://www.ids.ac.uk/publication/is-porn-the-new-sex-education>

Modern formal sex education has been restricted in many countries and 
traditionally information on sexuality and relationships has been passed 
between generations through forms of indigenous cultural institutions. In 
Sierra Leone, women’s secret societies passed on sexual knowledge and norms to 
adolescent girls. In Uganda, extended family members such asssenga (paternal 
aunts) andkoja (maternal uncles) performed the same function in group chats 
with boys and girls. But such institutions have weakened or disappeared 
altogether.

The benefits of comprehensive sex education 
<http://www.borgenmagazine.com/benefits-sexuality-education-developing-world/> 
in reducing maternal and child mortality, reducing sexually transmitted 
infections and improving sexual health is evident. However, many governments 
have been unable or unwilling to implement statutory sex education in public 
schools or other formal settings, including in the UK wherePSHE 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/personal-social-health-and-economic-education-pshe>
 is still not compulsory.

In response to this gap, and to increased access to online porn, international 
organisations trying to reach young people with comprehensive sex education 
have moved online too. Love Matters is present in Kenya, India, Egypt, China 
and Mexico. Argentina has#ChauTabú <https://chautabu.buenosaires.gob.ar/> 
(#ByeTaboo). Bangladesh hasMaya Apa, <http://www.maya.com.bd/#/> a 24/7 web and 
mobile app help service.

Each aims to provide evidence-based sex education, including anatomy, disease 
prevention and family planning, and engage with millions of young people – a 
scale that was never feasible for traditional sex educators.

However, these organisations are minnows of the internet world compared to the 
big fish like PornHub. PornHub, for example, has 1.3 billion visits per month – 
650 times more visits than the 2 million visits per month to the number one sex 
education siteScarleteen.com <http://www.scarleteen.com/> (based in the US).



Vasectomies: turning an 'act of love' into a global movement
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/22/family-planning-falling-behind-men-missing-piece-vasectomy>
So, is it not time that sex educators worked together with porn providers to 
see if and how they can use the power of porn to communicate comprehensive sex 
education? This includes sex educators and policymakers examining how 
responsible porn, promoting respectful, equal and pleasurable roles for all 
genders could be produced for the benefit of young people.

There are of course risks and in the current climate of declining development 
funding, donors might be wary of entering into these debates. But not entering 
these debates risks leaving the difficult decision making to emotions or 
algorithms and depriving millions of young people from accessing information 
that is vital for their sexual and reproductive health. And there is a growing 
awareness of theurgency of confronting children’s exposure to pornography. 
<http://www.womensequality.org.uk/we_need_mandatory_sre_now> 

It’s also vital to work with young people to develop new types of realistic, 
evidence-based and non-judgmental digital sex education environments, 
harnessing the creative energy going into developing ways tohide online activity
 
<http://gs4.wonderhowto.com/how-to/innocent-calculator-is-really-secret-app-safe-for-android-0156959/>
, such as disguising apps on the home screen.

Comprehensive sex education strategies from policymakers, taking an inclusive 
approach – that includes the realities of sex and pleasure – is urgently needed 
to improve sexual health, prevent unwanted pregnancies and reduce maternal 
deaths.

Pauline Oosterhoff is a research fellow at the Institute of Development Studies
 <http://www.ids.ac.uk/>

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 