
Cutting carbon emissions

Scores of rich countries made pledges over the past year to cut their 
greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/feb/02/55-countries-greenhouse-emissions-pledge>
 under theCopenhagen accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/dec/21/copenhagen-accord-climate-change>
 but they were not incorporated in the official UN process. Cancún now formally 
puts those pledges into UN documentation, although they may increase or 
decrease in future. For the first time, developing countries also agreed to 
look at how they can cut emissions in the future – but did not make specific 
pledges.

Crucially however, none of the cuts are legally binding, and analysis suggests 
<http://www.climateactiontracker.org/briefing_paper_cancun.pdf> the pledges 
would lead to a 3.2C rise in temperatures – far higher than the 2C generally 
considered to be a level of "safe" warming.

Climate aid

A new climate green fund was agreed at Cancún to transfer money from the 
developed to developing world to tackle the impacts of climate change. Poorer 
countries saw this as a success because they will outnumber rich countries on a 
'transitional committee' for the fund, which is due to be set up in 2011. But 
no figure was put on how much money will go into it.

Separately, ministers repeated their political promise made last year at 
Copenhagen to raise $100bn (£63bn) in climate aid by 2020, starting with $30bn 
(£19bn) by 2012 for "fast track" financing. This headline-grabbing promise, 
however, is not part of the UN process and is merely an aspiration of rich 
countries.

Forests

Formal backing was given for the UN's deforestation scheme, Redd (reducing 
emissions from deforestation and degradation) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/sep/24/redd-reducing-emissions-from-deforestation>
, under which rich countries pay poorer nations not to chop down forests and so 
lock away carbon emissions. But details on when and exactly what form the 
scheme will take – particularly whether developed countries will be able to use 
it to "offset" their emissions rather than make cuts at home – are still vague.

Kyoto protocol

Decisions on the future of the Kyoto protocol, the current international 
treaty binding rich countries to cut emissions, were effectively deferred until 
South Africa next year. Whether countries will sign up for a second "commitment 
period" to cuts beyond 2012 remains to be seen.

In addition, decisions on the role that the protocol will play in an ultimate 
future legal document that binds the world's countries to emissions cuts – the 
"holy grail" of the UN negotiations - were delayed.

Technology transfer

The idea of transferring knowledge of clean technology between countries was 
backed at Cancún. A technology executive committee and a climate technology 
centre and network are to be set up, but there are no details on the money, 
where they will be based, when or by whom.

Inspections

Countries agreed to the principle of having their emissions cuts inspected. 
Such "monitoring, reporting and verification" will depend on the size of the 
country's economy, though who will carry out the inspections – the country 
itself, the UN or another body – was not specified.
 