
Government proposals to deal with the care funding crisis in the local 
government finance settlement by allowing a small increase in council tax will 
not be nearly enough to plug the gap, and we are very clear that full reform of 
funding is needed (Council tax rise ‘not enough to fill funding gap in social 
care’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
, 16 December).

The 2% increase in council tax this year brought in about £360m nationally, 
and still leaves a predicted gap of £2.2bn by 2020. This would suggest that 
council tax would need to increase by about 14% to deal with this problem, 
ignoring any other inflationary problems faced by any provider of services.

If council tax was a fair tax then this might be acceptable, but council tax 
is an inherently unfair tax. People who own a small terrace house in 
Liverpool already pay as much as the owner of a mansion flat in Westminster 
because of the way that the system works. Poor people pay a much higher 
proportion of their income in council tax than rich people.

In some parts of the country the needs of the extremely poor will be paid by 
the relatively poor if council tax is the only route for dealing with this 
problem. This is why theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> support a root and 
branch review of the entire funding programme for health and social care.

We need a national debate about these issues if we are to stop such panicked 
measures like the one the government took in the finance settlement.
Cllr Richard Kemp
LGA Liberal Democrat spokesperson on health and social care
Norman Lamb MP
Liberal Democrat spokesman for health

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 