
If Britain were tasked with finding its deepest wound from Conservative cuts, 
we would not be short of options. Thinkfood banks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/benefit-sanctions-food-banks-oxford-university-study>
,evictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/may/14/tenant-evictions-reach-six-year-high-rising-rents-benefit-cuts>
, anddestitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/27/million-people-uk-living-destitution-joseph-rowntree-foundation>
. But it’s social care – gutted by £4.6bn worth of cuts since 2010 with another
billion to be cut this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/04/1bn-further-cuts-to-social-care-will-hit-tens-of-thousands-say-experts>
 – that is emerging as the greatest crisis. Over one million disabled people 
are now living without social care, according toresearch 
<http://www.leonardcheshire.org/socialcarecampaign> by the charity Leonard 
Cheshire Disability, published today. Almost half the disabled people in 
Britain who say they need support aren’t receiving any at all.

As the report shows 
<https://www.leonardcheshire.org/get-involved/campaigns/social-care>, the 
reality of that is truly distressing: disabled people without sufficient care 
who have become physically sicker as a result, or sliding into depression due 
to isolation. Healthy disabled people left in hospitals because the council 
hasn’t set up help at home, while others, at the mercy of care workers’ slots, 
are regularly forced into bed at 5 or 6pm.

Potential Paralympic star forced to pull out due to cuts in disability support 
| Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/31/paralympic-star-disability-support-cuts>
Cuts have consequences. In England, 400,000 fewer people now receive social 
care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/04/1bn-further-cuts-to-social-care-will-hit-tens-of-thousands-say-experts>
 than before the coalition government came to power. That isn’t because the 
need has suddenly disappeared. It’s grown – 1.4 million more working age adults 
live with a disability compared to 2010 – but the government shrinks funding 
anyway.

Behind the statistics sit human beings. Wendy Tiffin, who uses a wheelchair 
after brain tumours left her unable to walk and affected her memory, lives in a 
residential care home in Dorset. Her social care package used to enable her to 
go out with a support worker once a week for a couple of hours but six months 
ago even this was cut. Tiffin, 49, now goes out for two hours once a fortnight 
– and that’s only because her family pay for it. “If they didn’t do that, I’d 
be cut off completely,” she says.

In West Yorkshire, Julie Sharp, 30, and her husband, Sam, both rely on social 
care to prepare food, get dressed, and leave the house – Julie has mobility, 
breathing, and digestive problems and Sam has severe depression – but funding 
cuts mean their local council has stopped providing emergency care. Often, 
transport services turn up to take Julie to a hospital appointment but as 
there’s no one there to help her get dressed, she has to go out in her pyjamas.

This isn’t rare, but it is sickening. I’m not sure when politicians decided a 
human being’s dignity was expendable, or why that suddenly becomes easier if 
that person happens to be disabled.Social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care> is often discussed in terms 
of basic needs: being clean, dressed, and fed. I’m guilty of it at times. I do 
it because, as things stand, the state is not even managing to give disabled 
people this. When hundreds of thousands of people are literally left in their 
own dirt, it seems almost minor to think about help to get to work or see 
friends.

But this is half the problem: the belief – embraced by rightwing governments 
keen to hack at the state – that disabled people aren’t quite the same as 
everybody else. “Normal people” go on first dates, have jobs, and laugh with 
friends in the pub, but disabled people can make do with being fed, watered, 
and cleaned.

Will the autumn statement offer any hope for social care?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/31/autumn-statement-social-care-paul-burstow>
Believe this and it’s less troubling to cut the services disabled people rely 
on. For an insight into how the strings of disabled people’s independence are 
being pulled at once, consider that as Julie sees her social care cut, she’s 
also been turned down for the wheelchair she needs. Instead, she’s been given a 
non-powered one. She hasn’t got the strength to propel it so she’s stuck, 
unable to move.

I don’t know how we are not angry, how what is happening now is not a national 
scandal. No government has the right to waste a person’s life away, to take 
more than a million people with hopes, dreams, and fears and discard them as if 
they mean nothing. Until theConservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> start to believe that all 
lives are equal, disabled people in this country will be abandoned to stare at 
four walls.
 