
Caroline Aherne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne-actor-comedian-dies-52-royle-family>
, who has died aged 52 of cancer, was responsible for some of the most 
distinctive and memorable comedy creations of the 1990s. From Mrs Merton to The 
Royle Family, her characters were waspish but warmly observed, and gave 
audiences an all-too-rare taste of comedy that reflected their relationship 
with television and love-hate feelings about celebrity. She was one of the few 
members of the British comedy pantheon not to be male, metropolitan and 
privileged, and her work often drew on her background.

Aherne made her name with The Mrs Merton Show, a chatshow featuring the 
eponymous horn-rimmed, chintzy-sleeved northern housewife who fired faux-naive 
questions at her hapless celebrity guests: “What first attracted you to the 
millionaire Paul Daniels?” she once asked his wife, Debbie McGee.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024d39802f24997d88d66801bd8e4b3f089185a2%2F305_37_2133_1280%2F2133.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caroline%20Aherne%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caroline%20Aherne%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F024d39802f24997d88d66801bd8e4b3f089185a2%2F305_37_2133_1280%2F2133.jpg>
 The Mrs Merton Show, with Kriss Akabusi, Debbie McGee and Caroline Aherne. 
Photograph: ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Royle Family, the sitcom she co-wrote with Craig Cash, was groundbreaking 
in its portrayal of a working-classManchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> family watching TV in their front 
room. It was a sitcom that drew on the British tradition of 1950s kitchen sink 
dramas and the films of Mike Leigh, but it was more compassionate than either. 
The writer Jimmy McGovern said of it: “There is great love in that family, but 
it is never stated. That’s so true to life.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcomedian-actor-caroline-aherne-dies-aged-52-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Comedian%20and%20actor%20Caroline%20Aherne%20dies%20aged%2052%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcomedian-actor-caroline-aherne-dies-aged-52-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Comedian%20and%20actor%20Caroline%20Aherne%20dies%20aged%2052%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F03%2Fcomedian-actor-caroline-aherne-dies-aged-52-video&media=>
Comedian and actor Caroline Aherne dies aged 52 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/video/2016/jul/03/comedian-actor-caroline-aherne-dies-aged-52-video>
Though the sitcom cannot be said to have ushered in a new era of comedy 
drawing on working-class experience – British TV comedy remains, with a few 
exceptions, as dominated by ex-public schoolboys as it ever was – it did pave 
the way for at least two subsequent TV series. Paul Abbott, creator of 
Shameless, the Channel 4 comedy drama set in a low-income northern milieu, said 
he owed his show’s success to The Royle Family. More recently, Gogglebox, 
Channel 4’s documentary series observing viewers watching television – narrated 
by Aherne – owed an obvious debt to its sitcom precursor.

Caroline Aherne's life and career – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/gallery/2016/jul/02/caroline-aherne-life-career-pictures-royle-family-mrs-merton>
There was more to her comic armoury than Mrs Merton and Denise Royle, though 
they were her best-known characters. In the 1990s sketch programme The Fast 
Show, Aherne played the Mediterranean weather girl Paola Fisch (catchphrase 
“scorchio!”), and a cheeky checkout girl who insulted customers. The comedy 
series Dossa and Joe, which she wrote and directed in the early 2000s while in 
self-imposed exile in Australia, focused on a couple who had been happily 
married for 40 years yet found their marriage floundering after retirement. The 
show was a critical success but a ratings flop.

Aherne was born in London to Irish immigrants, Bert, a labourer on the 
railways, and Maureen, a school dinner lady. When she was two, the family moved 
to Wythenshawe, Manchester. The Royle Family may well have been inspired by the 
Aherne family, with her father serving as unwitting prototype for 
sharp-tongued, moaning Jim Royle. She recalled later: “My dad was always going 
on about the immersion, and about lights being left on. ‘It’s like feckin’ 
Blackpool illuminations,’ he used to say.”

Both she and her older brother Patrick were born with a rare cancer of the 
retina, retinoblastoma, that caused Patrick to lose an eye, and left Caroline 
almost unsighted in one eye. She became the family joker, impersonating TV 
characters like Margot and Barbara from The Good Life and celebrities such as 
Marti Caine and Cilla Black. “Nobody else in the family was like that,” Patrick 
said. “But she was funny from the time she was really little.” As a teenager, 
Caroline watched Mike Leigh’s television play Abigail’s Party (1977) and 
resolved she would become a writer like him.

Caroline Aherne: reclusive comic superstar with a big heart | Observer profile
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2014/may/18/caroline-aherne-return-of-reclusive-comic-superstar>
Precociously intelligent, she scored 176 in an IQ test and received nine As in 
her O-levels at the Hollies Convent grammar school. She studied drama at 
Liverpool Polytechnic, and in the late 1980s took a job at BBC Manchester as 
secretary to Janet Street-Porter. During this time she began to develop an act 
on the Manchester comedy circuit, with characters including Mitzi Goldberg, 
lead singer of the comedy country and western act the Mitzi Goldberg 
Experience, and a nun called Sister Mary Immaculate, whose ambition was to kiss 
the pope’s ring.

Mrs Merton was developed in collaboration with Henry Normal, then a 
performance poet in Manchester, Craig Cash, with whom she presented a show on 
the Manchester radio station KFM, and the comedian Dave Gorman. But it was the 
lateChris Sievey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/jun/22/frank-sidebottom-chris-sievey-obituary>
, the man behind the outsize-masked comic character Frank Sidebottom, who 
ensured that their creation made it to the big time. Sievey asked Aherne, a 
friend of his brother-in-law, to voice the part of Frank’s neighbour Mrs Merton 
on his album 5:9:88 (1988), and later on his Piccadilly Radio show in 
Manchester.

The following year, Sievey invited her to reprise the character in Frank 
Sidebottom’s Fantastic Shed Show (1992) on ITV. She was supposed to be 
Sidebottom’s sidekick, but Mrs Merton overshadowed him and was so well received 
that Granada TV commissioned her to make her own comedy vehicle.

The result was The Mrs Merton Show, which ran from 1995 to 1998 on the BBC. It 
had an audience composed of real-life pensioners and an in-house band, Hooky 
and the Boys, led by her first husband, Joy Division and New Order bassist 
Peter Hook, whom she married in 1994. The couple divorced in 1997. The Royle 
Family ran for three seasons from 1998 to 2000, followed by specials until 
2012. Mrs Merton and Malcolm, with Cash as a 37-year-old son still living at 
home, had a single series in 1999.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b0b79fc4067db97ddef167c28f66e44855edcda%2F0_0_1936_1162%2F1936.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Caroline%20Aherne%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Caroline%20Aherne%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fjul%2F02%2Fcaroline-aherne%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b0b79fc4067db97ddef167c28f66e44855edcda%2F0_0_1936_1162%2F1936.jpg>
 Craig Cash and Caroline Aherne in The Royle Family. Photograph: 
ITV/Rex/Shutterstock 
For all that she was feted by critics and garlanded with awards, Aherne 
struggled with fame and with her health. In 1998, at her mews home in Notting 
Hill, west London, she tried to take her own life. She was treated for 
depression and alcoholism at the Priory clinic in 1998, and was also treated 
there in 2002. In addition, she suffered bladder cancer related to her eye 
condition. In 2014, as part of a charity drive to raise money to treat other 
patients suffering from the disease, she announced she was suffering from lung 
cancer.

In 2001, she announced she was quitting showbusiness, because she no longer 
wanted to be famous. She moved for a while to Australia, returning in 2002 to 
collaborate with Cash one last time, on Early Doors, a fondly observed sitcom 
about the regulars of a Manchester pub, but she quit, leaving Cash to write and 
star in the hit show that some critics misguidedly called the British Cheers.

In later years, Aherne never equalled her earlier successes, still less the 
celebrity that came from writing and performing in two hit TV shows. She 
eschewed the media spotlight and lived quietly at a house in Manchester not far 
from her mother’s home.

She wrote such dramas as The Fattest Man in Britain (2009) and The Security 
Men (2013), as well as taking minor roles, such as a barmaid in a comedy called 
Sunshine (2008) with Steve Coogan. She also narrated programmes including Pound 
Shop Wars (2014), a BBC1 documentary, and voiced some of the characters in 
CBBC’s animated series Strange Hill High (2013-14). Perhaps fittingly, one of 
her last TV roles was to narrate Gogglebox, the weekly Channel 4 documentary 
series in which TV viewers watch other TV viewers watching TV.

She is survived by her mother and brother.

Caroline Mary Aherne, comedy actor and writer, born 24 December 1963; died 2 
July 2016
 