
The government’s defeat in the high court last week was devastating – but I’m 
not talking about theBrexit judgment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
. The environmental lawyersClientEarth <http://www.clientearth.org/> sued it 
over air pollution for the second time, and for thesecond time they won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/high-court-rules-uk-government-plans-to-tackle-air-pollution-are-illegal>
. After trying every trick in the book to continue poisoning the British 
population, the government will now have to take action.

This will mostly consist of designating more clean-air zones, in which diesel 
engines will be restricted.After 18 years of promoting diesel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/26/uk-tried-to-block-tougher-eu-car-emissions-tests>
, that’s quite a reversal. In several city centres, we will be entitled to 
inhale the attar of roses and essence of orange blossom that wafts out of 
petrol engines. Outside the clean air zones, you are politely requested to die 
quietly.

I’m not dissing the judgment – far from it. Air pollution has been described 
by the World Health Organisationas a public health emergency 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/environment/air-pollution-public-health-emergency-who-world-health-organisation-a6821256.html>
. Yet it’s treated in most countries as a public health afterthought. Pollution 
is linked to heart attacks, strokes,lung and bladder cancers 
<http://www.cancer.org/cancer/news/world-health-organization-outdoor-air-pollution-causes-cancer>
,low birth weight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/28/air-pollution-causes-low-birth-weight-beijing-study-shows>
,poor memory and attention in children 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1001792>,
low verbal IQ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/apr/01/pollution-health-risks-epa-supreme-court-free-radicals>
,faster cognitive decline 
<http://stroke.ahajournals.org/content/46/5/1161.abstract> among elderly 
people, andearlier onset of dementia 
<https://www.alzinfo.org/articles/air-pollution-raise-dementia-risk/>. In the 
UK it is believed to cause between40,000 and 50,000 deaths a year 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmenvfru/479/479.pdf>
; in London it may be killingmore people than smoking does 
<http://www.healthyair.org.uk/twice-as-many-deaths-caused-by-air-pollution-in-london/>
.

This court judgment will force the government to pay attention, but its 
response will be piecemeal and faint

If as many servicemen and women were killed in Britain’s wars, politicians and 
newspaper editors of every hue would be outraged. But preventing these deaths 
means confronting both the car industry and the sacred freedoms of the 
motorist, so those with power treat them as sad but unavoidable collateral 
damage.

Let me give you an idea of how seriously the government takes this issue. A 
car from which a diesel particulate filter (DPF) has been removedcannot be 
legally driven 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/263018/diesel-particulate-filters-guidance.pdf>
, but some people resent them, believing they affect performance. On eBay 
around 190 British traders areselling DPF delete kits 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/sch/i.html?_odkw=DPF+delete+kits&_osacat=0&_from=R40&_trksid=p2045573.m570.l1313.TR0.TRC0.H0.XDPF+delete.TRS0&_nkw=DPF+delete&_sacat=0>
, whose purpose is to thwart, bypass or remove the filters. That these kits are 
on open sale suggests there has been no meaningful effort to stop this practice.

When governments take an issue seriously, they seek to quantify it; w§hen they 
couldn’t give a tinker’s cuss, they scarcely bother to collect data. Assessing 
the health risks of pollution means measuring the level of exposure. This 
varies from one street to the next. One estimate suggests that 3,000 schools in 
Britain are likely tosuffer pollution levels above the legal limit 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/Health/article1618132.ece>. 
Yet the government lists just155 monitoring sites across the country 
<https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/networks/find-sites>. In the West Midlands, where 
5 million people live, there are six. There are 10 in London and one apiece in 
Edinburgh, Bristol, Doncaster and several other places. In most British towns, 
there are none.

But while the judgment will force the government to pay more attention, its 
response is certain to be both piecemeal and faint. There is no sustained 
political pressure for anything better.The report on air quality 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmenvfru/479/479.pdf>
 published by a House of Commons committee earlier this year is remarkable for 
the contrast between the ferocity of its criticism and the feebleness of the 
changes it proposes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fcars-choke-communities-pollution-diesel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba32cb09ecea789275bd6f8c42e9b544e86962be%2F0_0_2835_1883%2F2835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cars%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20choke%20our%20children%20%E2%80%93%20they%20tear%20a%20hole%20in%20our%20communities%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fcars-choke-communities-pollution-diesel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cars%20don%E2%80%99t%20just%20choke%20our%20children%20%E2%80%93%20they%20tear%20a%20hole%20in%20our%20communities%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fcars-choke-communities-pollution-diesel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba32cb09ecea789275bd6f8c42e9b544e86962be%2F0_0_2835_1883%2F2835.jpg>
 Exhaust smoke from an Arriva in Luton. Photograph: Barcroft Media/Tony 
Margiocchi 
For example, it proposes a car scrappage scheme, but only for people who want 
to swap their old bangers for new bangers. Yet the same report points out that 
75% of the particulate emissions that vehicles produce come from their tyres 
and brakes, and erosion of the road surface. In other words, every motor 
vehicle, including electric cars, can damage your health. So why not pay people 
to replace their old cars with no car, by issuing the incentive in the form of 
public transport tokens?

Bicycles are mentioned only in passing. But given that over half the car 
journeys in this country areless than five miles 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/514912/road-use-statistics.pdf>
, that cycle provision is cheap by comparison to other transport options, and 
that Britain suffers from an epidemic of unfitness, why not aim to make the 
bicycle our primary means of transport? Sorry – this is a one-way street. 
Significantly reducing the cars on the road appears to be unthinkable.

It’s not as if local pollution is the only harm that cars inflict. The 
materials required to build them ensure that all vehicles contribute to climate 
change and wider environmental damage. The noise they produce is a major cause 
of stress. While the police are quick to respond to complaints about antisocial 
neighbours and loud music, most forces are utterly useless at enforcing vehicle 
noise limits. YouTube is awash with videos explaininghow to make your car louder
 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3DoarJAf55k> or how to remove the buffers 
from your Harley-Davidson exhaust <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=m7eoFXeUJsQ>
, some of which have been watched hundreds of thousands of times. On eBay you 
can buy“loud pipes” for your Harley 
<http://www.ebay.co.uk/sch/i.html?_from=R40&_trksid=p2050601.m570.l1313.TR0.TRC0.H0.XHarley+loud+pipes.TRS0&_nkw=Harley+loud+pipes&_sacat=0>
, which canbring the roar up to 100 decibels 
<http://www.todayifoundout.com/index.php/2015/11/harley-davidson-motorcycles-loud/>
 – enough to damage hearing.

Make central London diesel-free to solve air pollution crisis – report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/make-central-london-diesel-free-to-solve-air-pollution-crisis-report>
In some parts of the country – as I found when I lived in mid-Wales – 
doctoring your car’s exhaust appears almost to be a test of manhood. On the 
rare occasions when police have sought to enforce noise limits, they’ve 
discovered thatmodified exhausts can produce 107dB 
<http://www.walesonline.co.uk/news/wales-news/police-crackdown-deafening-car-exhausts-1905480>
 – which is equivalent to a pneumatic drill. I can testify that a convoy of 
these cars speeding past your house 20 times in one night is not a formula for 
peace of mind.

A study in Bristol 
<http://eprints.uwe.ac.uk/15513/1/WTPP_Hart_ParkhurstJan2011prepub.pdf> shows 
how cars slash the social fabric like so many knives. On streets with little 
traffic, people tend to know more of their neighbours, have richer 
relationships with them and allow their children to be more independent than on 
streets with heavy traffic. Cars kill community; the death of community kills 
wellbeing.

As for what happens to us behind the wheel, it would be surprising if driving 
did not change the way we behave and think. When we drive, society becomes an 
obstacle to be wished away. Carsencourage the extreme individualism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2005/dec/20/politics.publicservices> that makes 
a sense of common purpose hard to achieve.

I don’t deny the freedom and convenience that cars offer. But while everyone 
is happy to acknowledge this, we seem almost incapable of recognising their 
downsides, except in the narrowest terms. Last week’s court ruling gives us a 
chance to ask the big questions, urgent but scarcely visited, that surround 
this issue. Let’s not blow it.

• Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>. A fully linked 
version of this column will be published atmonbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com>
 