
Governments have failed for more than a decade to ensure that social 
integration in the UK has kept up with the “unprecedented pace and scale of 
immigration” and have allowed some local communities to become increasingly 
divided, a major review has found.

At the end of a year-long study of community cohesion in Britain, Dame Louise 
Casey <https://www.theguardian.com/society/louisecasey> has branded ministerial 
attempts to boost integration of ethnic minorities as amounting to little more 
than “saris, samosas and steel drums for the already well-intentioned”.

Louise Casey's integration plan is behind the times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/05/louise-caseys-integration-plan-is-behind-the-times>
Accusing the government of serious failings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/tough-questions-social-integration-laws-values-every-person-britain>
 in its approach to social cohesion, the government’s integration tsar said 
efforts had been squeezed since 2010, with leaders “falling well below the 
stated ambition to ‘do more than any other government before us to promote 
integration’”.


What does the future hold for integration and multiculturalism? | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/what-does-the-future-hold-for-integration-and-multiculturalism>
“The problem has not been a lack of knowledge but a failure of collective, 
consistent and persistent will to do something about it or give it the priority 
it deserves at both a national and local level,” Casey concluded, who said 
there had been failures in each administration.

“The work that has been done has often been piecemeal and lacked a clear 
evidence base or programme of evaluation.”

Her report recommends a major new strategy to help bridge divides in UK towns 
and villages, with an “integration oath” to encourage immigrants to embrace 
British values, more focus on promoting the English language, encouraging 
social mixing among young people, and securing “women’s emancipation in 
communities where they are being held back by regressive cultural practices”.

It also says children should be taught British values in schools. 

The study, which was commissioned by then prime minister David Cameron and 
Theresa May when she was home secretary, is likely to trigger controversy. 
Among the findings, Casey claims:

The tough questions on social integration are being ducked | Louise Casey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/04/tough-questions-social-integration-laws-values-every-person-britain>
 * That the scale of immigration has felt too much for some local communities 
as the economy hit a downturn, and concerns about public services increased. 
 * That while segregation has reduced over the population as a whole, in a 
number of local areas ethnic or migrant groups have become increasingly divided.
 * That fears of being labelled racist have prevented society from challenging 
sexist, misogynistic and patriarchal behaviour in some minority communities. 
Net migration graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T11:59:38/embed.html>


Casey pointed to census data that showed there were 682 electoral wards with 
over 40% non-white British residents in 2011 – with 17 where the figure was 90% 
– up from just one a decade earlier.

In one borough of Sheffield, she was told of more than 6,000 people of Roma or 
eastern European heritage, of which more than half were under 16, living 
predominantly in one ward.

'I'm sick of being told I'm not getting on with people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/04/im-sick-of-being-told-im-not-getting-on-with-people>
She also claimed that integration rates were being undermined by high numbers 
of second-generation immigrants marrying spouses from their country of origin. 
Calling it “first generation in every generation”, she cited one northern town 
in which all except one of the Asian councillors had married a wife from 
Pakistan.

And she pointed to research by Demos that found 50% of non-white students were 
in schools where ethnic minorities were a majority. Casey gave the example of 
one non-faith, secondary school where a survey had found the pupils believed 
the population of Britain was between 50% and 90% Asian.

She also revealed that in one recent year more government money was spent on 
promoting the Cornish language than English.

Writing in the Guardian, Casey said she had found evidence of discrimination 
against young black men in the criminal justice system and Bangladeshi women in 
the workplace.

She also admitted that there was a “vicious circle” in which Muslims felt they 
were being blamed for terrorism and extremism, leading to suspicion, mistrust 
and hostility.

But she also warned that there had been a failure of calling out “deeply 
regressive religious and cultural practices, especially when it comes to women” 
in some ethnic minority communities in the UK.

In reference to what she found in some predominantly Muslim areas, Casey 
wrote: “I’ve met far too many women who are suffering from the effects of 
misogyny and domestic abuse, women being subjugated by their husbands and 
extended families. Often, the victims are foreign-born brides brought to 
Britain via arranged marriages. They have poor English, little education, low 
confidence, and are reliant on their husbands for their income and immigration 
status. They don’t know about their rights, or how to access support, and 
struggle to prepare their children effectively for school.”

She said the divide in Britain was not between those who voted for or against 
Brexit but between 99% of the population and 1% of extremists.
religion chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/casey_religion/giv-15726JJK2wwB3eKP7/>
“A failure to talk about all this only leaves the ground open for the far 
right on one side and Islamist extremists on the other. These groups are 
ideologically opposed to each other but share the same goal: to show that Islam 
and modern Britain are somehow incompatible,” she added, “but of course they 
are wrong.”

Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Casey said people should be able to 
discuss such issues without being “worried about being called racist or 
Islamophobic”.

She said: “We have to be able to talk about the fact that if you’re from a 
Pakistani heritage community in some areas of the north, you’re less less 
likely to speak English than your male counterparts, you’re less likely to be 
out getting a job, you’re more likely to be in the home, and not necessarily, 
in my view, by choice.”

But Casey noted that this was also a two-way process, saying: “In some ways 
we’re pushing some people in the Muslim community away, because they do 
experience this sense of taking responsibility.”

She said: “Every time there’s a terrorist attack people automatically blame a 
person that’s called a Muslim. That’s wrong. Muslims are no more responsible 
for terrorist attacks than I am for the IRA.”

The report cited claims that some sharia councils had supported the values of 
extremists, condoned wife-beating, ignored marital rape and allowed forced 
marriages.

It also warned that Muslim and Hindu women were more than twice as likely as 
Muslim or Hindu men to not speak English at all, while Pakistani and 
Bangladeshi women were significantly more likely to be economically inactive.

But it pointed to other faith groups including disruptions of mixed faith 
couples’ weddingsby extremists in the Sikh community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/03/i-never-thought-id-be-terrorised-by-my-fellow-sikhs-at-a-wedding>
 and the treatment of women insome Jewish Orthodox communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/17/orthodox-jewish-schools-erased-pictures-women-books-ofsted>
, with children reportedly being taught “that a woman’s role is to look after 
children, clean the house and cook”.
Language graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T12:02:50/embed.html>
Casey even cited newer Christian churches “with activists seeking to ‘cure’ 
people of homosexuality”, warning “all such instances undermine integration and 
should be challenged”.

Class, race, wealth: Britain is a nation blighted by divisions | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/29/britain-blighted-by-divisions-theresa-may-integration-casey-report>
She argued that the problem with a lack of integration was that it could cost 
the economy approximately £6bn a year, according to one study.

The report concluded: “We know that where communities live separately, with 
fewer interactions between people from different backgrounds, mistrust, anxiety 
and prejudice grow.

“Conversely, social mixing and interactions between people from a wider range 
of backgrounds can have positive impacts; not just in reducing anxiety and 
prejudice, but also in enabling people to get on better in employment and 
social mobility.”

It also included a figure for hate crime in 2015-16 of 62,518 incidents, up 
19% on the previous year, and warned of a further spike since the EU referendum.
hate crimes chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-04T18:48:16/embed.html>
Casey admitted that was repeating calls made previously, claiming that for 15 
years governments had commissioned studies only to fall short in their 
implementation as they were allowed to be “diluted and muddled”.

Although Casey has been carrying out the role as an independent figure, she 
has been based within a government department and Downing Street has appeared 
to delay the report’s publication for months.

The report drew immediate criticism from former communities minister Sayeeda 
Warsi, who particularly balked at one recommendation to emancipate marginalised 
groups of women.

“Yes those words are in the report,” Lady Warsi wrote on Twitter. “The empire 
strikes back!”

Warsi argued that many of the statistics were out of date, and failed to talk 
about raising aspiration among poor white Roma communities. She accused Casey 
of confusing “race, ethnicity, origin and faith”, and said that white women 
were most likely to be victims of domestic abuse.

In conclusion, she said the report had “some good bits, a few bad bits and 
lots of confused bits”.
statutory graphic 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-04T18:48:38/embed.html>
Chuka Umunna, the Labour MP who chairs an all-party parliamentary group on 
social integration, welcomed the report.


“The fact people live parallel lives in modern Britain has been swept under 
the carpet for far too long and deemed too difficult to deal with, which has 
left a vacuum for extremists and peddlers of hate on all sides to exploit,” he 
said.

Umunna insisted it was not about attributing blame, and warned against seeing 
the recommendations as an attack on multicultural Britain.

Why do so many Muslim women find it hard to integrate in Britain?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/bradford-muslim-women-integration-casey-report>
“Breaking down the barriers between communities is the best defence of the 
diverse country we have become,” he added, arguing that requiringEnglish 
proficiency from immigrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/18/pm-migrant-spouses-who-fail-english-test-may-have-to-leave-uk>
 or requiring them to enrol on courses was a positive thing.

Sajid Javid, the communities secretary, said: “This government is building a 
democracy for everyone and our country has long been home to lots of different 
cultures and communities, but all of us have to be part of one society – 
British society.

 “So while it’s right that we celebrate the positive contribution that diverse 
groups make to British life, we also need to continue making sure that nobody 
is excluded from it or left behind.”


Javid called the report a “valuable contribution” and said he would be 
studying its findings closely.

• This article was amended on 6 December 2016. A chart labelled “Net 
migration” but showing only emigration from the UK was updated to show net 
migration; and a chart labelled “Language proficiency” was updated to clarify 
that it shows the language proficiency of people living in the UK by country of 
birth.
 