
Britain has passed another milestone on the path to a cashless society, with 
2015 the first year that cash was used for less than half of all payments by 
consumers.

Cash usage will be eclipsed by debit cards and contactless 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/contactless-payments> payments by 2021, 
according to Payments UK, which represents the major banks, building societies 
and payment providers.

In 2015 cash made up 45.1% of payments, compared with 64% in 2005, and is 
expected to fall to just a quarter by 2025. It will largely be replaced with 
payments by contactless cards, which have soared in popularity.

Contactless payments <https://www.theguardian.com/money/contactless-payments> 
grew threefold in 2015, with more than a billion “wave and pay” transactions 
over the year. Since the start of 2016 contactless use has gathered pace, 
particularly on the London Underground network. On the high street, one in six 
card purchases are now contactless, with Tesco leading the way.

But Payments UK’s annual review of how households pay for goods and services 
reveals that the death of the cheque has been much exaggerated. It said that 
546m cheques were written in 2015, despite the fact most retailers now refuse 
to accept them.

The Payments Council, the predecessor to Payments UK, provoked a storm of 
protest in 2009 whenit proposed a complete withdrawal of cheques 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/dec/15/cheques-bounced-out-history> 
by 2018. Following a consumer revolt the plans were abandoned, and today the 
body says cheques remain a “convenient and secure method” for making payments.

Its annual report charts the changing nature of how British households choose 
to spend their money. The average adult makes a total of 648 payments a year, 
including cash, equal to 54 a month. Debit cards were used for 20 payments a 
month, with computers processing 19,276 debit card payments every minute in the 
UK in 2015.

On average, individuals make six direct debit payments a month and use their 
credit cards four times, but standing orders are less popular at just 0.7 a 
month.


The amount of money now transferred through the direct debit system is vast. 
In 2015 debits to pay mortgages, rents, energy and other bills were worth 
£1.22tn.

Debit card use is up 10% in 2015 compared with 2014, while credit card usage 
was up 9%. In total, 38.2bn payments of all forms were made across the UK in 
2015, including 1.5bn that were made between businesses.

Contactless payments mean card fraud now happens after cancellation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/19/contactless-payments-card-fraud-after-cancellation-bank-account>
Adrian Buckle, chief economist at Payments UK, said: “This year’s UK Payment 
Markets report 
<http://www.paymentsuk.org.uk/industry-information/annual-statistical-publications>
 reveals a picture of consumers and businesses more ready than ever to reassess 
how they make payments and make the most of the convenient, cost-effective and 
innovative options that are available.”

Barclaycard said the biggest increase in contactless payments has been among 
Britain’s over-60s, with the number of users up 116% over the past year – more 
than any other age group.

But not everyone wants to join the contactless revolution. A survey last week 
by the security company Defender Note found that 30% of consumers want banks to 
ask them before issuing them with contactless cards. It suggested that 
customers with contactless cards are twice as likely to report being victims of 
financial fraud.


However, banks say contactless fraud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/19/contactless-payments-card-fraud-after-cancellation-bank-account>
 is very low. Figures from the UK Cards Association show that in the first six 
months of 2015 there were £516,500 of fraudulent transactions on contactless 
cards – the equivalent of 2p for every £100 spent using the technology.

This year payment by mobile phone is expected to increase dramatically. 
Android Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/may/18/android-pay-apple-samsung-pay-google>
 went live across most of Britain’s banks and building societies last week, and 
is already accepted at 460,000 retail payment points.



 