
Cash Converters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/18/cash-converters-agrees-to-pay-23m-to-settle-class-action>
 will refund Australian consumers more than $10m in unfair payday lending after 
a major investigation by Australia’s corporate watchdog found it failed to meet 
responsible lending obligations.

The lending group has also been forced to pay fines totalling $1.35m as part of
30 infringement notices issued 
<http://download.asic.gov.au/media/4068983/cash-converters-infringement-notices-s131.pdf>
 by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission for failing to assess 
small loans as unsuitable.

The loans entered into were unsuitable because consumers had already entered 
into two or more loans at the time they were signed up by Cash Converters. Asic 
believed the loan terms amounted to breaches of the National Credit Act.

Dear Labor conference, please don't forget how payday lenders hurt poor people 
| Van Badham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/24/dear-labor-conference-please-dont-forget-how-payday-lenders-hurt-poor-people>
Asic announced on Wednesday 
<http://www.asic.gov.au/about-asic/media-centre/find-a-media-release/2016-releases/16-380mr-cash-converters-to-pay-over-12m-following-asic-probe/>
 it had accepted undertakings from Cash Converters and that it had agreed to 
pay back millions to consumers for the breaches of credit laws.

The basis for the undertaking was that Asic’s investigation found that 118,000 
small amount credit loans had been issued to people who were deemed unsuitable.

“Asic is seeking to protect financially vulnerable consumers, many of whom are 
recipients of welfare payments, from falling victim to unsuitable payday 
loans,” said Asic’s deputy chairman, Peter Kell.

“Payday lending is a high priority area for Asic and we will continue to 
pursue lenders who do not follow their responsible lending obligations.”

An independent expert will be appointed as part of the undertaking by Cash 
Converters to oversee the consumer refund and remediation program. The expert 
will also review Cash Converters’ business operations and compliance with 
credit laws.

Pervasive problems have been identified in small-amount credit contracts as 
well as consumer loans by consumer groups.

Consumer groups have warned that they often target vulnerable people who 
cannot afford the repayment terms and there have been consistent calls to 
tighten their regulation.

The former assistant treasurer Josh Frydenberg commissioned a Treasury review 
that focused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/14/consumer-groups-urge-change-to-lease-laws-after-hidden-costs-target-the-poor>
 on consumer leases and payday loans.

The review recommended substantial changes, but the government has not yet 
addressed them.

Complaints about loan contracts can be lodged with the Credit and Investments 
Ombudsman.
 