
Samin climbed down into the darkness of the sewer, homemade catapult in hand. 
He wasn’t using stones this time, concerned they might kill his prey. Instead 
he formed small balls from damp mud, just enough to stun the rats and get them 
into a rusty wire cage. The plan was to smoke them out. He threw a fistful of 
lit rags down the tunnel and waited.


That night, despite an evening thunder storm, the square outside Cakung 
district administrative office in East Jakarta was packed with street cleaners 
carrying an assortment of old birdcages and traps made from wire or discarded 
water dispenser bottles. A good haul for one afternoon – 650 live rats – many 
of them more than two feet long.

Civil servants in khaki uniforms gathered round to record the scene on 
smartphones as workers in protective suits and masks vigorously shook the 
squealing contents of each cage into a pair of steel drums to be gassed with 
sulphur. Shouts and screams went up whenever a rat escaped, zigzagging through 
the crowd of legs to get back to the sewer. A few made it. Most were stamped to 
death.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31dd8439eef2122cc9956c8b0911a8c849dba3ae%2F0_117_2448_1688%2F2448.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F31dd8439eef2122cc9956c8b0911a8c849dba3ae%2F0_117_2448_1688%2F2448.jpg>
 Samin with the homemade catapult he used to stun and catch six rats 
Welcome to the Rat Eradication Movement, a fledgling city programme to rid the 
Indonesian capital of its rodent problem. It’s theidea of deputy governor 
Djarot Saiful Hidayat 
<http://www.smh.com.au/world/jakarta-declares-war-on-rats-with-bounty-trial-20161021-gs7koz.html>
, who has offered the public a bounty of 20,000 rupiahs (£1.20) for each live 
rat – a generous incentive in a country where40% of the population live on less 
than $2 a day 
<https://www.adb.org/sites/default/files/publication/177017/ino-paper-04-2015.pdf>
. Collecting the rats alive stops people claiming rewards for dead rodents 
found in the street, and allows officials to ensure none have been poisoned or 
shot, which they fear could be dangerous to the public.


Cats used to catch them but now the rats are bigger than them
Murad Husein 
Jakarta recorded 40 cases last year of Leptospirosis 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/05/plague-rats> – a bacterial infection 
from rat urine which can be deadly to humans – with the situation made worse by 
the city’s frequent floods. While rodent populations are highest near markets 
and their ready supply of waste food, they can be seen almost anywhere in the 
city. Rats have been spotted in courthouses and government offices, exclusive 
apartment blocks and expensive restaurants. Wander the streets at 3am and rats 
can be seen scurrying in and out of drains. They don’t seem too scared of 
people.

The rats gnaw through plastic drainage pipes and electrical wires. It is both 
a fire hazard and an expensive problem to fix as a broken pipe or chewed 
through wire could be anywhere – outside, inside or under – that a rat can get.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb96d753c98a0045867f56db0ecf5eb1c7ba00a%2F0_172_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3eb96d753c98a0045867f56db0ecf5eb1c7ba00a%2F0_172_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A resident shows off the 200,000 rupiahs he earned for catching 10 live rats 
during a pilot programme in Kemayoran, Jakarta, last month. Photograph: 
Alessandro Kurniawan Ulung 
Funding for the programme currently comes from Djarot’s own budget, and full 
operation will not start until after city elections in February. He is standing 
on a ticket withJakarta governor Basuki ‘Ahok’ Tjahaja Purnama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/16/jakarta-christian-governor-to-face-blasphemy-trial-over-islam-insult-claim>
, who was last week named as a suspect in a blasphemy investigation.

A similar pilot evening two weeks ago in the sub-district of Kemayoran 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/jakarta-offers-bounty-on-live-rats-to-combat-infestation-1477640012>
 yielded 200 live rats. Djarot, who was there to supervise the operation and 
distribute money to the moonlighting cleaners andojek motorcycle-taxi drivers 
who caught the rats, said the city’s rodent population had until now been 
“uncontrollable”. Ojek driver Sutikno earned 100,000 rupiah after catching five 
rats with fishing nets and traps. “It’s good money. I’ll do it again,” he said.

Some, though, worry the programme could backfire in a phenomenon economists 
call theCobra Effect 
<http://freakonomics.com/podcast/the-cobra-effect-a-new-freakonomics-radio-podcast/>
, where cash rewards lead to unintended consequences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc227d6a039d5efb1bc0a7cba0be99949210002b9%2F0_428_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jakarta's%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jakarta%27s%20Rat%20Eradication%20Movement%3A%20public%20offered%20cash%20reward%20for%20live%20rats&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Fjakartas-rat-eradication-movement-public-offered-cash-reward-for-live-rats%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc227d6a039d5efb1bc0a7cba0be99949210002b9%2F0_428_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Workers in protective clothing gassed the rats with sulphur. Photograph: 
Alessandro Kurniawan Ulung 
The term was coined by German economist Horst Siebert 
<https://www.ft.com/content/aad452a8-660b-11e5-a57f-21b88f7d973f>, whose book 
of the same name contained an anecdote about attempts by colonial authorities 
in India to rid Delhi of cobras. When the British official in charge placed a 
bounty on the snakes, some enterprising locals started farming them. The scheme 
proved ineffective and was eventually cancelled. At that point the cobra 
farmers, faced with an unwanted stock of snakes, released them into the 
countryside around the city. The supposed solution had made the problem worse.

A similar situation has been documented by historian Michael Vann. His account 
of “the Great Hanoi Rat Massacre 
<http://www.freakonomics.com/media/vannrathunt.pdf>” tells of attempts by 
French colonial rulers to control rat populations in the Vietnamese city. New 
sewers in the wealthy European section unwittingly created a secret underground 
transportation network for the rats, where they were protected from predators, 
and the dark tubes provided an ideal breeding ground. They could make their way 
across the city, with flushable toilets in the poshest homes acting as a 
convenient entry point.

Welcome to Twitter city: is there no limit to Jakarta's social media obsession?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/21/twitter-city-facebook-jakarta-live-week-social-media-obsession->
Authorities offered a cash reward to the public, paying out on production of a 
rat tail to make administration of the scheme easier. Soon residents were 
turning in tails in huge numbers – tens of thousands a day – but it wasn’t long 
before tail-less rats became an increasingly common sight.

“[Officials realised residents] were catching rats, but merely cutting off the 
tails and letting the still-living pests go free – perhaps to breed and produce 
more valuable tails,” Vann said. “Later, things became even more serious as 
health inspectors discovered a disturbing development in the suburbs of Hanoi. 
These officials found … individuals were actually raising rats to collect the 
bounty.” The scheme was declared a failure and scrapped.

Could Jakarta’s Rat Eradication Movement end up creating similar unintended 
consequences? Currently the scheme is nowhere near the scale of Hanoi’s Great 
Rat Massacre and there seems no shortage of genuine sewer rats, but Benvika, 
head of wildlife at theJakarta Animal Aid Network 
<http://www.jakartaanimalaid.com/>, is not convinced by the project.

He advocates a return to a more natural balance, with predators such as snakes 
and owls used to control rodent populations. “The sulphur gas is not 
immediately lethal and causes unnecessary suffering,” he added. “The people of 
Jakarta must return to living healthily, and maintain their environment.”

Overseeing the Cakung operation was the vice-mayor of East Jakarta, Murad 
Husein. “Cats used to catch them but now the rats are bigger than them,” he 
said. “Without any predators the rat population has got bigger, and so have the 
rats themselves. We’ve no idea how many there are but you can see them almost 
anywhere, night or day.”

Additional reporting by Linda Hairani

What would make Jakarta better, and what changes are most urgently needed? 
Share your ideas, thoughts, stories and pictureshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/14/the-future-of-jakarta-what-needs-to-change-share-your-thoughts>
. You can also contribute onTwitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Instagram <https://www.instagram.com/guardiancities/> using the hashtag 
#GuardianJakarta



 