
What do you call someone who falls between a “home student” and an 
“international student”? It’s something I’ve often asked myself; four years 
ago, I packed up my life, which I’d spent in Finland, and transported it to 
chilly UK student accommodation. With a Finnish mum, a British dad, a 
stereotypically English surname and an accent that sounds part Finnish and part 
British, people have guessed I’m from places as disparate as Kent and Ukraine. 
But my situation isn’t only puzzling to other people; I’m still undergoing 
something of a dual culture shock myself.

According to the Higher Education Statistics Agency (Hesa) 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/free-statistics>, 13.4% of undergraduates at British 
universities were non-UK domicile in the academic year 2014-15, with an even 
higher number among the postgraduate population (38%). University websites and 
student blogs prepare international students coming to the UK for everything 
from finding funding to surviving the rainy weather and British politeness; 
while British students preparing for a year abroad are warned aboutthe 
difficulties of adjusting to a new environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/17/what-nobody-tells-students-about-studying-abroad>
, oreducated about the joys of discovering a new culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/mortarboard/2014/jul/17/10-american-habits-studying-abroad-students>
.

'Been there, done that' was how I felt when my new international friends 
posted photos of their cream teas on Facebook

Missing from these statistics is a diverse group who are neither “home” nor 
“international” students. Every year, British expats and those with other forms 
of British heritage – a British parent, for instance – travel to UK 
universities to experience a part of their cultural background first-hand. We 
don’t know how many such students there are, as students are classified by 
country of origin or nationality, not their cultural heritage. However, these 
undocumented not-quite-international students face some unique experiences and 
problems that evade their peers.

I got a head start to my freshers’ week with a few days dedicated to 
international students. Despite having never actually lived in the UK 
long-term, I couldn’t empathise with my peers who were completely new to the 
UK. “Been there, done that” was how I felt when my new international friends 
posted photos of their cream teas on Facebook, or discovered – with a mix of 
horror and curiosity – the blandness of British food.

The 10 best cities in the world to be a student in 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/dec/01/10-best-cities-in-the-world-to-be-a-student-2016-in-pictures>
But once my UK-domiciled peers arrived, it turned out that I was equally not 
quite one of them. I was at a loss when everyone reminisced about childhoods 
filled with Blue Peter – I was more familiar with Postman Pat – and I was well 
into my first term when I finally realised that the leavers’ hoodies everyone 
was so proudly sporting were not, in fact, tokens of national level sports club 
membership.

Kate Bulteel, 23, who recently graduated from the University of Cambridge, is 
half-British on her father’s side and hails from Maine in the US, and recalls 
similar experiences. “It wasn’t until my third year that I realised that some 
British families still have a roast every Sunday. I thought it was a quaint, 
forgotten custom, but it turned out some people still took it totally 
seriously,” she says. “Likewise with pancake day. Nobody does Mardi Gras in 
America except in New Orleans – why are Brits so keen?”

It’s not all about culture, though. With student budgets having to meet 
increasingly high tuition fees, non-UK-domiciled students with a British 
background find themselves facing extra hurdles. Many expat students are 
frustrated thattheir British passports don’t qualify them as home students for 
fees purposes 
<http://www.ukcisa.org.uk/Information--Advice/Fees-and-Money/England-fee-status#RL>
. Instead, they are classified as international students and are liable for 
higher fees. At Bristol, for example, a home or EU student will pay £9,000 a 
year for a science course, while their international peers will be forking up 
double the sum.

What nobody tells you about studying abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/17/what-nobody-tells-students-about-studying-abroad>
As they’re officially considered as “international”, not-quite-international 
students are alsounlikely to qualify for government-sponsored financial student 
support <https://www.gov.uk/student-finance/who-qualifies>, such as tuition fee 
loans, or for other sources of UK-based funding. The main funding body for 
non-science courses at postgraduate level,the Arts and Humanities Research 
Council (AHRC), for instance, requires applicants to be resident in the UK 
<http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/documents/TermsConditionsTrainingGrants.pdf>
 in order to meet the eligibility criteria for a full reward.

That said, there’s more to being not-quite-international than cultural 
confusion and financial hurdles. The intermediate status of students like 
Bulteel and me can also bestow upon us the role of a cultural mediator. “The 
international students all tended to say that the Brits came off cold and not 
particularly helpful when they were struggling to learn the British system and 
get more comfortable with English,” says Bulteel. “I felt like a bit of a 
bridge between the two.” When it comes to making friends, being able to build 
bridges between groups of fresh-faced students can be pretty useful.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter
 