
 Clare Hollingworth, the British foreign correspondent who has died aged 105, 
was just three days into her first journalism job when she landed the biggest 
scoop of her career.


Aged 27 and newly-hired by the Daily Telegraph, she was dispatched to Poland 
in August 1939 where she witnessed Nazi tanks gathering in their hundreds at 
the German-Polish border.


Her front page report, which ran without a byline, was headlined “1,000 tanks 
massed on Polish border. Ten divisions reported ready for swift strike” and 
broke the news of the outbreak of the second world war. It also heralded the 
start of an extraordinary career that saw Hollingworth report on many of the 
biggest stories of the 20th century.


Her death was confirmed on Tuesday in a short family statement on the Facebook 
page Celebrate Clare Hollingworth <https://www.facebook.com/celebrateclare/>. 
It read: “We are sad to announce that after an illustrious career spanning a 
century of news, celebrated war correspondent Clare Hollingworth died this 
evening in Hong Kong.”


Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> had been 
Hollingworth’s home since the 1980s, following a globe-trotting career for many 
newspapers including the Guardian, during which she bore witness to horrors in 
Vietnam, Algeria, the Middle East, India and Pakistan. She also reported on the 
cultural revolution in China, and was credited with the first and last 
interviews with the shah of Iran.


Her impressive postwar scoops included the fact that Kim Philby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kim-philby> was the so-called “third man’ in 
the Cambridge spy ring alongside Donald Maclean and Guy Burgess. In 1963, while 
working in Beirut for the Guardian, she wrote that Philby, who working for the 
Observer in the same city, was missing and suspected of defecting to Russia.

 Clare Hollingworth’s Guardian story which was published on 27 April 1963. 
She was bitterly disappointed when the Guardian, fearing a libel suit, put the 
story on hold for three months. When it was published, other papers picked it 
up. Shortly afterwards the government admitted it believed Philby had indeed 
fled to Russia.


Born in Leicester in 1911 and raised on a farm, Hollingworth attended domestic 
science college at her father’s insistence before going to work as secretary to 
the League of Nations organiser in Worcester. She won a scholarship to the 
School of Slavonic Studies at London University, and then attended Zagreb 
university to study Croatian.


As a young political activist she began working for a charity in Europe that 
helped save thousands of refugees from the Nazis. She booked a Christmas 
holiday to Kitzbuhel in Austria in 1938, but instead carried out reconnaissance 
in the ski resort, acquiring a Nazi-approved visa that would allow her to work 
for the British Committee for Refugees from Czechoslovakia.


Sent to Katowice, she led an operation to help refugees get visas to come to 
Britain. Archives suggest she helped between 2,000 and 3,000 people get to the 
UK, but her work was shut down in July 1939, with letters from MI5 suggesting 
there were complaints from those in the corridors of power that “undesirables” 
such as Germans, Jews and communists were arriving in Britain with visas she 
had signed.


Back in London, she “ran into” the editor of the Daily Telegraph and convinced 
him to sent her back to Poland as a stringer. Once there, she borrowed a 
diplomat’s car and drove into German-held territory, where she saw tanks, 
artillery and armoured cars.


She would later say that the British embassy in Warsaw was so disbelieving of 
her account that she was forced to hold her telephone receiver out of her hotel 
window in Katowice for the diplomat to hear the Wehrmacht for himself.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcelebrated-war-reporter-clare-hollingworth-dies-aged-105%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07907d37d359c050a504eb2215120e3e345e3f41%2F0_19_4760_2855%2F4760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celebrated%20war%20reporter%20Clare%20Hollingworth%20dies%20aged%20105&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcelebrated-war-reporter-clare-hollingworth-dies-aged-105%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celebrated%20war%20reporter%20Clare%20Hollingworth%20dies%20aged%20105&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fcelebrated-war-reporter-clare-hollingworth-dies-aged-105%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07907d37d359c050a504eb2215120e3e345e3f41%2F0_19_4760_2855%2F4760.jpg>
 Clare Hollingworth at a celebration to mark her 105th birthday in Hong Kong. 
Photograph: Anthony Wallace/AFP/Getty Images 
Of her scoop, she told the Telegraph in 2009: “I broke the story when I was 
very, very young. I went there to look after the refugees, the blind, the deaf 
and the dumb. While I was there, the war suddenly came into being”.

After the Russian army entered Poland, she moved to Bucharest and worked for 
the Daily Express. She later covered the Middle East for the Economist and the 
Observer, then moved to Paris for the Guardian, and from there to Beirut. She 
returned to the Daily Telegraph in 1967 and was posted to China in 1973, 
remaining in Asia for the rest of her days.


She narrowly escaped death in 1946 when a bomb blast destroyed the King David 
Hotel in Jerusalem, killing almost 100 people. She was just 300 yards away.


Hollingworth married twice, to the writer Vandeleur Robinson and then to the 
Times journalist Geoffrey Hoare, who gave her a stepdaughter. She dismissed the 
idea of having children of her own, preferring to devote herself to work. She 
was the author of five books drawing on her extraordinary experiences.


She once said of her career: “When I was very small, in world war one, I used 
to hear people talk about the battles, and I did become extremely interested in 
warfare. I’m not brave, I just enjoy it.”


“She kept no family photographs or children’s drawings,” her great nephew, 
Patrick Garrett, the author of Of Fortune and War: Clare Hollingworth, First of 
the Female War Correspondents, once wrote. “Her entire life has been defined by 
her work. To her, breaking news is all that really matters.”


She was a celebrated member of the Foreign Correspondent’s Club (FCC) in Hong 
Kong, having her own corner table which she used to visit almost daily. The FCC 
president, Tara Joseph, said: “Clare had a remarkable career as a foreign 
correspondent, beginning with the scoop of the century when she reported the 
start of world war two.” A wake will be held at the club in her honour.

Hollingworth received the James Cameron award for journalism in 1994 and a 
lifetime achievement award at the What the Papers Say awards in 1999.























 