
Now that a reality TV star is preparing to become president of the United 
States, can we agree that celebrity culture is more than just harmless fun – 
that it might, in fact, be an essential component of the systems that govern 
our lives?

The rise of celebrity culture did not happen by itself. It has long been 
cultivated by advertisers, marketers and the media. And it has a function. The 
more distant and impersonal corporations become, the more they rely on other 
people’s faces to connect them to their customers.

Corporation means body; capital means head. But corporate capital has neither 
head nor body. It is hard for people to attach themselves to a homogenised 
franchise owned by a hedge fund whose corporate identity consists of afiling 
cabinet in Panama City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/08/mossack-fonseca-law-firm-hide-money-panama-papers>
. So the machine needs a mask. It must wear the face of someone we see as often 
as we see our next-door neighbours. It is pointless to ask what Kim Kardashian 
does to earn her living: her role is to exist in our minds. By playing our 
virtual neighbour, she induces a click of recognition on behalf ofwhatever grey 
monolith sits behind her this week 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/30/business/media/instagram-ads-marketing-kardashian.html?_r=1>
.

Tim Cook on why he met Donald Trump and the future of desktop Macs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/20/tim-cook-meeting-donald-trump-desktop-macs-apple>
An obsession with celebrity does not lie quietly beside the other things we 
value; it takes their place. Astudy published in the journal Cyberpsychology 
<http://www.cyberpsychology.eu/view.php?cisloclanku=2011061601> reveals that an 
extraordinary shift appears to have taken place between 1997 and 2007 in the 
US. In 1997, the dominant values (as judged by an adult audience) expressed by 
the shows most popular among nine- to 11 year-olds were community feeling, 
followed by benevolence. Fame came 15th out of the 16 values tested. By 2007, 
when shows such as Hannah Montana prevailed, fame came first, followed by 
achievement, image, popularity and financial success. Community feeling had 
fallen to 11th, benevolence to 12th.

A paper in the International Journal of Cultural Studies found that, among the 
people it surveyed in the UK, those who follow celebrity gossip most closely 
are three times less likely than people interested in other forms of news to be 
involved in local organisations, and half as likely to volunteer. Virtual 
neighbours replace real ones.

The blander and more homogenised the product, the more distinctive the mask it 
needs to wear. This is whyIggy Pop was used to promote motor insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/apr/29/iggy-pop-swiftcover-insurance-advert-ban>
 andBenicio del Toro is used to sell Heineken 
<http://www.adweek.com/adfreak/benicio-del-toro-shows-how-act-you-love-crappy-gifts-heinekens-holiday-ad-174634>
. The role of such people is to suggest that there is something more exciting 
behind the logo than office blocks and spreadsheets. They transfer their 
edginess to the company they represent. As soon they take the cheque that buys 
their identity, they become as processed and meaningless as the item they are 
promoting.

The principal qualities now sought in a celebrity are vapidity, vacuity and 
physical beauty

The celebrities you see most often are the most lucrative products, extruded 
through a willing media by a marketing industry whose power no one seeks to 
check. This is why actors and models now receive such disproportionate 
attention, capturing much of the space once occupied by people with their own 
ideas: their expertise lies in channelling other people’s visions.

A database search by the anthropologist Grant McCracken reveals that in the US 
<http://cultureby.com/2016/02/the-rise-of-a-celebrity-culture.html> actors 
received 17% of the cultural attention accorded to famous people between 1900 
and 1910: slightly less than physicists, chemists and biologists combined. Film 
directors received 6% and writers 11%. Between 1900 and 1950, actors had 24% of 
the coverage, and writers 9%. By 2010, actors accounted for 37% (over four 
times the attention natural scientists received), while the proportion 
allocated to both film directors and writers fell to 3%.

You don’t have to read or watch many interviews to see that the principal 
qualities now sought in a celebrity are vapidity, vacuity and physical beauty. 
They can be used as a blank screen on to which anything can be projected. With 
a few exceptions, those who have least to say are granted the greatest number 
of platforms on which to say it.

This helps to explain the mass delusion among young people that they have a 
reasonable chance of becoming famous. Asurvey of 16-year-olds in the UK  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/fame-the-career-choice-for-half-of-16-year-olds-1902338.html>
revealed that 54% of them intend to become celebrities.

As soon as celebrities forget their allotted role, the hounds of hell are let 
loose upon them.Lily Allen  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/15/lily-allen-profile-refugees-criticised-social-media-speak-mind>
was the media’s darling when she was advertising John Lewis. Gary Lineker 
couldn’t put a foot wrong when he stuck to selling junk food to children. But 
when they expressed sympathy for refugees,they were torn to shreds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/gary-lineker-hits-back-at-online-abuse-over-hideously-racist-coverage-refugees>
. When you take the corporate shilling, you are supposed to stop thinking for 
yourself.

Celebrity <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> has a second 
major role: as a weapon of mass distraction. The survey published in the IJCS I 
mentioned earlier also reveals that people who are the most interested in 
celebrity are the least engaged in politics, the least likely to protest and 
the least likely to vote. This appears to shatter the media’s frequent, 
self-justifying claim that celebrities connect us to public life.

​Khizr Khan on being vilified by Trump: 'The far right feels that their voice 
has been heard'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/khizr-khan-vilified-trump-far-right-voice-heard>
The survey found that people fixated by celebrity watch the news on average as 
much as others do, but they appear to exist in a state of permanent diversion. 
If you want people to remain quiescent and unengaged, show them the faces of 
Taylor Swift, Shia LaBeouf and Cara Delevingne several times a day.

In Trump we see a perfect fusion of the two main uses of celebrity culture: 
corporate personification and mass distraction.His celebrity became a mask for 
his own chaotic, outsourced and unscrupulous business empire 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-donald-trump-can-make-money-even-when-trump-branded-properties-fail/2015/07/23/1ff64854-2ef1-11e5-8353-1215475949f4_story.html?utm_term=.b8c9aa19f272>
. His public image was the perfect inversion of everything he and his companies 
represent. As presenter of the US version of The Apprentice, this spoilt heir 
to humongous wealth became the face of enterprise and social mobility. During 
the presidential elections, his noisy persona distracted people from the 
intellectual void behind the mask, a void now filled bymore lucid 
representatives of global capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation>
.

Celebrities might inhabit your life, but they are not your friends. Regardless 
of the intentions of those on whom it is bequeathed, celebrity is the 
lieutenant of exploitation. Let’s turn our neighbours back into our neighbours, 
and turn our backs on those who impersonate them.

A fully linked version of this column will be published at monbiot.com 
<http://monbiot.com>
 