
Celtic <https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> fans have raised more 
than £130,000 for Palestinian charities in an attempt to match an impending 
Uefa fine for displaying Palestinian flags at a match against an Israeli team.


European football’s governing body began disciplinary proceedings against the 
Glasgow club last week after a number of fans displayed the flags during their
5-2 home victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/17/celtic-hapoel-beer-sheva-champions-league-playoff-match-report>
 against Hapoel Be’er Sheva in a Champions League qualifier.

The return leg in Israel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> on Tuesday 
night finished 2-0 to Hapoel Be’er Sheva. No Palestinian flags were in evidence 
and the match appeared to pass without incident.

Celtic fans: have you donated money to Palestinian charities?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/celtic-fans-have-you-donated-money-to-palestinian-charities>
The Green Brigade group of supporters set up an appeal 
<https://www.gofundme.com/matchfinepalestine> on the gofundme website on Sunday 
to match the anticipated fine, and donations passed £80,000 on Tuesday morning.

The fans are raising money for Medical Aid Palestine <http://www.map-uk.org/>, 
which delivers health and medical care to those “worst affected by conflict, 
occupation and displacement”, and the Lajee Centre, a cultural and sports 
project for children in Aida refugee camp, in Bethlehem.

The appeal read: “At the Champions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> match with Hapoel Be’er 
Sheva on 17 August 2016, the Green Brigade and fans throughout Celtic Park flew 
the flag for Palestine. This act of solidarity has earned Celtic respect and 
acclaim throughout the world. It has also attracted a disciplinary charge from 
Uefa, which deems the Palestinian flag to be an ‘illicit banner’.

“In response to this petty and politically partisan act by European football’s 
governing body, we are determined to make a positive contribution to the game 
and today launch a campaign to #matchthefineforpalestine.”

Brendan Rodgers says Celtic have Champions League place in their grasp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/brendan-rodgers-celtic-champions-league>
The statement said the money raised would help buy football kit and equipment 
to enable the refugee camp to have a team, which would be called Aida Celtic, 
in the Bethlehem youth league.

Celtic face their ninth Uefa <https://www.theguardian.com/football/uefa> 
punishment for supporter behaviour in five years when the case is heard on 22 
September. Two years ago the club was fined more than £15,000 after a 
Palestinian flag was displayed at a Champions League qualifier against KR 
Reykjavik.

Uefa rules forbid the use of “gestures, words, objects or any other means to 
transmit any message that is not fit for a sports event, particularly messages 
that are of a political, ideological, religious, offensive or provocative 
nature”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-are-among-the-great-clubs-in-europe-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Brendan%20Rodgers%3A%20Celtic%20is%20among%20the%20great%20clubs%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-are-among-the-great-clubs-in-europe-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Brendan%20Rodgers%3A%20Celtic%20is%20among%20the%20great%20clubs%20in%20Europe%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fbrendan-rodgers-celtic-are-among-the-great-clubs-in-europe-video&media=>
Brendan Rodgers: Celtic is among the great clubs in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/aug/23/brendan-rodgers-celtic-are-among-the-great-clubs-in-europe-video> 