
A number of Celtic fans displayed Palestinian flags during their Champions 
League qualifier against Israeli club Hapoel Be’er Sheva last week. As a result 
Uefa began disciplinary proceedings against the club, a decision thatsparked a 
fundraising appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/celtic-fans-raise-45000-for-palestinian-charities-after-flag-protest>
 set up by the Green Brigade supporters group to match the anticipated fine.

Celtic fans around the world have now raised more than £100,000 for 
Palestinian charities. Supporterswho responded to our callout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/23/celtic-fans-have-you-donated-money-to-palestinian-charities>
 are divided about whether the flag waving and fundraising has been a positive 
thing, or whether these are the actions of a self-serving minority who care 
little about the consequences their actions might have for the club.

Celtic fans warned not to fly Palestinian flags at match in Israel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/23/celtic-fans-warned-not-to-fly-palestinian-flags-at-match-in-israel>
‘This is a kick in the teeth for Uefa’

I was at the game last week. Uefa were always going to sanction Celtic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/celtic> for this. We all knew that and a 
section of the support was unhappy that the club would be held responsible for 
actions out of their control. Uefa have no moral authority over any football 
fan and have zero credibility to anyone who loves the game.

I believe that politics should not be left at the door, and am proud of the 
Green Brigade’s stance on this and indeed most of their previous displays and 
protests. The great work they do at home specifically viaGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> Food Banks should also be mentioned. 
Celtic IS more than a football club. This is a kick in the teeth for Uefa, who 
had hoped a fine would send us running for cover. Instead their stance has 
generated days and weeks of extra coverage, scrutiny and more importantly 
support and funds to help an oppressed people.Brian Glen

‘I have seen the charitable ethos of our club and fans on numerous occasions’

It’s a disgrace to fine a club for its fans displaying a flag of what is 
supposed to be a member of Uefa. Whether you feel strongly or have no interest 
in the ongoing conflict, surely you can see this decision beggars belief.

I have followed Celtic for nearly 30 years and have seen the charitable ethos 
of our club and fans on numerous occasions. In the past we’ve had a collection 
for the Galician fisherman before a match against Celta Vigo after an oil spil 
in 2003, have displayed our support with a huge jersey to the fans and family 
of Benfica player Marcos Fehrer after he passed away on the pitch in 2006 and 
been proud of the way we have continually supported the Good Child Foundation 
in Thailand. But nothing has made me prouder than this show of solidarity with 
the Palestinian people.David Brown
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa330dadb1e14d339cb5820f539206dccc04eed72%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa330dadb1e14d339cb5820f539206dccc04eed72%2F0_0_5472_3648%2F5472.jpg>
 Celtic manager Brendan Rodgers with Tomas Rogic after the game. Photograph: 
Russell Cheyne/Reuters 
‘The club should not be used as the Green Brigade’s political football’

The club is being held hostage by an ultra-political group of fans who have no 
regard for the consequences to the club. They have cost us £190,000 in fines in 
the last few years. By all means try raising money for charitable causes, but 
they should have thought about having a bucket collection at the game rather 
than causing the club even more grief. The club should not be used as the Green 
Brigade’s political football. I’ve no real problem with the cause, but they do 
not represent the views of all the fans at the club.Dan D

Celtic fans raise more than £100,000 for Palestinian charities after flag 
protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/22/celtic-fans-raise-45000-for-palestinian-charities-after-flag-protest>
‘Celtic is about standing up for the rights of those who don’t have a voice’

I’m not surprised about the sanction. We’ve been fined several times and 
rightly so for letting off flares but, like in Reykjavik, this is different. 
This is highlighting the plight of an oppressed people. Celtic is all about 
standing up for the rights of those who don’t have a voice and therefore I’m 
now delighted by a Uefa fine that’s only helped draw more attention to the 
human tragedy and showing how solidarity can force change.

It’s important to remember that this protest is not anti-Israel but 
pro-Palestine. A Uefa fine won’t stop the momentum. I’m immensly proud of the 
Green Brigade and Celtic fans across the globe. There are also fans from other 
clubs donating which also should be applauded.Will Gardner
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efc1b927914285e0f76c4513c2fc79201012990%2F0_0_3488_2480%2F3488.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0efc1b927914285e0f76c4513c2fc79201012990%2F0_0_3488_2480%2F3488.jpg>
 Celtic fans from the Green Brigade hold up large Palestinian flags during the 
match against Hapoel Beer Sheva. Photograph: Wallace/BPI/REX/Shutterstock 
‘Palestinian flags during a game against an Israeli team is a political 
statement’

Although it has been argued that “having a Palestinian flag isn’t political, 
we have it at every game,” I feel the plethora of Palestinian flags during a 
game against an Israeli team is a political statement. The fact they were 
pre-warned and turned up in numbers anyway annoys me. Protesting before the 
game in a peaceful manner is okay, but keep it out of the stadium. I feel Uefa 
are justified in their disciplinary procedure. It shouldn’t have taken a fine 
for a group so supportive of the cause to create a gofundme campaign. Why 
weren’t they doing this in the first place?Anonymous

‘The Green Brigade are not perfect but, let’s be honest, who is?’

Uefa pick and choose when they want to bring politics into football. A 
high-profile football match is the perfect place to highlight the wrongs in the 
world. Last week’s game has just highlighted that with the amount of publicity 
that it had generated. Uefa fined Manchester City for booing their anthem which 
is ridiculous. I think they would like everyone to sit in their seats and be 
quiet for 90 minutes. The Green Brigade do a lot of charitable work, not just 
for Palestinian causes, but for a lot of other causes that go unnoticed and 
unpublished. They are not perfect but let’s be honest, who is?John 

‘Hapoel Be’er Sheva are an excellent example of Jews and Arabs coexisting in 
Israel’


Why should Israeli football players be subjected to this? They are not the 
government. Sport should be above politics. Celtic’s opponents, Hapoel Be’er 
Sheva, are an excellent example of Jews and Arabs coexisting in Israel. The 
fans knew the consequences of their actions. They can raise money for what they 
like, but I don’t understand why they needed theChampions League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championsleague> draw to inspire them. 
Lorenzo Porini
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eb955c46d41f87a2390416ffd688cbf5a6766e5%2F0_0_5472_3630%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Celtic%20fans%20share%20their%20views%20on%20Uefa%20fine%20and%20fundraising%20for%20Palestinian%20charities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fceltic-fans-palestinian-flags-fundraising%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5eb955c46d41f87a2390416ffd688cbf5a6766e5%2F0_0_5472_3630%2F5472.jpg>
 Hapoel fans before the match. Photograph: Steve Welsh/Getty Images 
‘They defeat what they claim to stand for’

The Uefa sanction is fair. Rules are rules. We have a small group of fans who 
can be a great support with their constant drumming and singing, but who 
continually embarrass our club by adopting very left wing dogma and imposing it 
through the voice they have. Celtic FC is an inclusive club and the irony is 
that these people have actually made it less so through these constant 
political acts, hence they defeat what they claim to stand for.Celtic fan


‘Showing solidarity far outweighed disciplinary proceedings’

It’s no surprise that Uefa is opening disciplinary proceedings. It was always 
expected. But showing solidarity to the people of Palestine far outweighed this 
in many people’s eyes. Some things are more important in life. Celtic 
supporters have always stood up for the oppressed in all aspects of life, and 
Palestine is just one of the issues that fans over the years have consistently 
supported. The incredible response to the fundraising campaign only serves to 
prove the strength of feeling among Celtic fans and beyond.Chris 
 