
British Gas’s parent company, Centrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/centrica>, has given tens of thousands of 
dollars to a US thinktank that denies climate change and is backed by Donald 
Trump’s energy secretary.

Direct Energy, a US energy company wholly owned by Centrica, donated $20,000 
to the Texas Public Policy Foundation (TPPF) in 2010, according totax filings 
<https://www.texasobserver.org/wp-content/legacy/media/k2/attachments/TPPF%202010%20I-990_donorlistsearchable-1.pdf>
.

The Austin-based thinktank has rubbished climate change science, argued the 
Paris climate deal would“wreak havoc” in the US economy 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/434086/climate-alarmists-do-violence-earth-day>
 and said the idea of keeping fossil fuels in the groundwas a “ridiculous 
construct”. 
<http://www.texaspolicy.com/blog/detail/climate-change-speaking-truth-to-power>

Rick Perry, who was picked by Trump for energy secretary on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/rick-perry-formally-announced-as-trump-pick-for-energy-secretary>
, wrotea book <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fed_Up!_(book)> in 2010 that 
praised the thinktank for opposing “environmental policy based on the hysteria 
of global warming”. The TPPF also has relationships with other top Republicans, 
including former presidential candidate Ted Cruz.

Centrica told the Guardian it did not share the thinktank’s views on climate 
change, but confirmed it was still donating via its subsidiary and had no plans 
to stop.

Greenpeace <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/greenpeace>, which first 
spotted the Centrica link to the TPPF, urged the company to “rethink who they 
give money to” and rule out donating to “climate sceptic outfits”.

Hannah Martin, energy campaigner at the group, said: “Centrica claims to be ‘a 
world leader for action on climate change’ but has been donating thousands of 
dollars to a climate sceptic thinktank with links to Trump’s new energy 
secretary, Rick Perry, and Ted Cruz.

“Perhaps it’s just a case of the right hand not knowing what the left is 
doing, but this can only undermine Centrica’s credibility on tackling climate 
change.”

In total, $4.7m was donated by 129 individuals, corporations and foundations 
to the TPPF in 2010,tax documents inadvertently published online show. 
<https://www.texasobserver.org/revealed-the-corporations-and-billionaires-that-fund-the-texas-public-policy-foundation/>
 The Koch brothers, whohave bankrolled opposition to climate change action 
across the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/14/funding-climate-change-denial-thinktanks-network>
, were among the biggest donors, and the list includes oil companies ExxonMobil 
and Chevron.

In addition to Perry, the TPPF has links to Trump’s team through Doug 
Domenech, head of the president-elect’s interior department transition team, 
who has called carbon dioxide a “trace greenhouse gas”.

Domenech is director of the thinktank’s Fuelling Freedom project 
<http://fuelingfreedomproject.com/>, for which he has penned numerous articles 
attacking action on climate change. “Under the Clean Power Plan more people 
will suffer – and for no benefit to our climate,”he wrote 
<http://fuelingfreedomproject.com/doug-domenech-in-real-clear-policy-first-do-no-harm/>
 of Barack Obama’s flagship energy plan to move away from fossil fuels.

Writing about a recent conference of climate change sceptics in Washington, 
organised by the TPPF,he said 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/congress-blog/energy-environment/310068-climate-change-speaking-truth-to-power>
: “Is climate change real? Yes, it has happened in the past and will happen in 
the future. Is man making an impact on the climate? Perhaps but in very small 
ways. But the overarching consensus remains the climate change we are 
experiencing is by no means catastrophic.”

Centrica said its donations to the thinktank were entirely unrelated to its 
stance on the environment.

“We have a very clear position on climate change and we believe in the need to 
take material action to reduce the effect of fossil fuels on climate change,” a 
spokesman said. “We do not make contributions to any organisation to advocate 
specifically for a position on the environment and the Texas Public Policy 
Foundation is no exception.”

Centrica acquired the Houston-headquartered Direct Energy in 2000 for £406m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2000/jul/09/utilities.observerbusiness>. 
The company is the biggest residential energy supplier in North America, 
serving nearly 5m households and businesses.

Centrica said it donated to the TPPF because it shared some of its views on a 
“well-structured” retail electricity market. It is not clear exactly how much 
the company has donated in total to the thinktank but the Guardian understands 
the most recent donation was of the same order of magnitude as the $20,000 
given in 2010.

On Thursday, Centrica upgraded its annual profit forecast, partly due to a 
stronger-than-expected performance by its north American businesses. Earnings 
per share are up 6.5% to 16.5p, and the company’s adjusted operating cash flow 
is to be £2.4bn to £2.6bn, up from more than £2bn previously.
 