
Justin Trudeau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/20/canada-voted-politics-anti-austerity-justin-trudeau-liberals>
’s Canada offers a liberal, progressive face to the world, one that surely 
should be applauded in an era of rising bigotry and populism. If Donald Trump 
is elected, European democrats may increasingly turn to Canada as an important 
interlocutor across the Atlantic. So how is it that the European Union’s trade 
dealings with Canada ended up becoming such a focus of anger? Surely Canada, 
with its solid democracy, its tolerance and openness, stands out as a haven of 
decency. As Canadian trade ministerChrystia Freeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-meltdown-canadian-minister-walks-out>
 said, Canada is a “country that shares European values”.

The transatlantic trade deal TTIP may be dead, but something even worse is 
coming | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/transatlantic-trade-partnership-ttip-canada-eu>
But friendliness to Canada <https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> has not 
been readily on offer among parts of Europe’s radical left. Instead, the 
Canada-EU Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (Ceta) – a 1,500-page 
document seven years in the making – became the target of a spectacularly 
hostile campaign. For those who waged it, this was a battle in which democracy 
itself was at stake, not just the question of whether Europe would suddenly be 
swamped with chlorinated chicken or hormonally altered beef (which it won’t). 
That Justin Trudeau called the text “progressive” mattered little.

Across social media, warnings were rife that the deal was a “Trojan horse”. 
Belgium’s Wallonia region (3.5 million inhabitants), whichset out to oppose Ceta
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/oct/21/wallonia-eu-latest-rogue-element-walloons>
, was heralded as a champion defending the rights of all European citizens (508 
million people). In the end,the treaty was signed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/eu-canada-sign-ceta-free-trade-deal-trudeau-juncker>
, after an “interpretative” document was added to it – but without a single 
word of the treaty itself being changed.

Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the EU commission, stated an 
uncomfortable fact. “Nobody protests when we sign an agreement with Vietnam, 
which is a great democracy. But there are protests when we sign with the 
terrible Canadian dictatorship,” he said. That did little to sway Ceta critics. 
These days, anything that smacks of officialdom or of “the establishment” gets 
swiftly disqualified.

I’m not saying Ceta is perfect, nor that it shouldn’t be scrutinised. Of 
course, in the negotiation of free trade deals, interests can collide. Finding 
the right compromise is essential. The anti-Ceta movement in Wallonia and 
elsewhere was worried about a system of arbitration courts not being 
independent enough from the pressures of big business. What the objectors 
overlooked was that Ceta introduced more government oversight than any prior EU 
trade agreement.

Ceta has been maligned as a dangerous step towards TTIP, even after that deal 
was put on hold

Rather, I’m asking why so much wrath came down on an EU agreement with a 
country whose friendliness and proximity to European social-democratic 
principles should have inspired more trust. Ceta has been maligned asa 
dangerous step towards the EU-US TTIP agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/transatlantic-trade-partnership-ttip-canada-eu>
, even after that deal was put on hold, if not buried. Ceta also suffered from 
the Brexit vote, which made governments in Paris and Berlin worry about demands 
to “repatriate” powers from Brussels. As a result, Wallonia, where the ruling 
socialists were under pressure from the anti-globalisation radical left, got 
its 15 minutes of fame. It temporarily blocked the deal with Canada, making the 
EU look dysfunctional.

These days, the question of what triggers outrage and what doesn’t could be a 
good topic for academic research. There are so many daunting international 
issues, from mass slaughter in Syria to refugees drowning off European shores, 
yet these tragedies fail to produce the same kind of grassroots mobilisation 
that free trade agreements do.

This is not to say that holding multinationals to account isn’t important – it 
is. But when looking at the crowds that gather in European cities on trade 
issues (300,000 demonstrated in Berlin a year ago against TTIP, and other, if 
smaller, public protests were held against Ceta), I’m reminded of another 
episode of selective indignation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fceta-europe-far-left-activists-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a083134738af0da0af6fb09384b7acebc8020b1%2F45_0_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ceta%20isn%E2%80%99t%20perfect%2C%20but%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20radical%20left%20was%20wrong%20to%20oppose%20it%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fceta-europe-far-left-activists-canada%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ceta%20isn%E2%80%99t%20perfect%2C%20but%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20radical%20left%20was%20wrong%20to%20oppose%20it%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fceta-europe-far-left-activists-canada%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a083134738af0da0af6fb09384b7acebc8020b1%2F45_0_2649_1590%2F2649.jpg>
 Canada’s prime minister Justin Trudeau. Photograph: Chris Wattie/Reuters 
This was during the 2009 Copenhagen summit on climate. Tens of thousands of 
activists demonstrated to exert pressure on negotiators, and rightly so. But 
one of their key slogans was in support of the G77 group of developing nations, 
which that year happened to be chaired by Sudan – a country whose government 
had been carrying out atrocities in Darfur, and whose president had just become 
the object of an international arrest warrant issued by the international 
criminal court. None of this awkwardness got much mention at the time from 
climate protesters.

There is a vision of what a progressive Britain could be. It’s called Canada | 
Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/vision-of-progressive-britain-called-canada-justin-trudeau-trudeaumania>
That said, the anti-Ceta movement has served a purpose. It has forced EU 
officialdom to think much harder about how it needs to convince citizens of the 
benefits of free trade, at a time when trade has almost become a byword for 
evil. It has also helped ingrain the notion that transparency and pedagogy (the 
task of explaining, tirelessly) are essential to the very survival of the 
European project. At least citizens have stopped ignoring what Brussels is up 
to.

Trade is a key area where the EU must act as a bloc if it is to be effective 
globally (if it doesn’t, then China will set the rules). But now, Ceta will 
likely beheld hostage to 38 national and regional assemblies across Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/29/britain-must-learn-from-the-eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-saga>
. This kind of local “vetocracy” is also what happened to the EU-Ukraine 
association agreement, blocked by a Dutch referendum that required just 300,000 
signatures to go ahead. Those who think such trends are good for the 
anti-globalisation struggle should reflect on how they also affect efforts to 
forge a decent EU policy on refugees – basically, shattering them.

What’s perhaps most disturbing is that Ceta has been as much criticised by 
Europe’s far left as it has by the far right. This uneasy but real convergence 
of some progressives with constituencies that applaud Donald Trump and other 
nationalist populists should be scrutinised. No doubt it will have been noticed 
in friendly, democratic Canada.

• This article was amended on 7 November 2016. In the penultimate paragraph it 
originally said that the EU-Ukraine association agreement was blocked by a 
Dutch referendum in which 300,000 people took part, but in fact more than 4 
million took part. The referendum required 300,000 signatures before it could 
be conducted.
 