
The “just about managing” will have to continue just about managing, with less 
money, after the feeble set of giveaways inPhilip Hammond’s first – and last – 
autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
.

The chancellor is deviating little from the austerity path 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
 set by his predecessor, George Osborne. For most families, the bigger picture 
of Brexit, and what subsequently happens tojobs, interest rates and economic 
growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/the-brexit-economy-remarkable-resilience-as-spectre-of-inflation-looms>
, will far outweigh any tinkering by the Treasury.

Many were left wondering why government advisers focused so heavily on the 
Jams prior to the statement and then spread the giveaways so thinly.

Yes, there is some softening of cuts to tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/21/millions-affected-by-universal-credit-cuts-to-be-partly-compensated-by-chancellor>
, now under the umbrella of universal credit. The taper rate – the amount of
credit withdrawn as recipients earn more 
<https://about.universalcredit.service.gov.uk/kms/Pages/Earnings_taper_for_Universal_Credit.htm>
 – will fall from 65p to 63p per pound earned over the work allowance. In real 
terms, it means someone receiving the “national living wage” will gain about 
£250, while a family earning £30,000 a year will be £500 better off.

However, as the Resolution Foundation thinktank said, these gains were more 
thanoutweighed by cuts to the work allowance 
<http://www.entitledto.co.uk/help/Work-allowance-Universal-Credit>, which is 
the amount you can earn before your benefits are tapered away.

The households affected by this will be hit the most by rising food prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/uk-inflation-rises-near-two-year-high-consumer-price-index>
, which have a disproportionate impact on poorer Britons. The former 
Sainsbury’s chief executive Justin King is forecasting an increase of 5% in the 
coming year, which will wipe out the gains that low-income workers will make 
from therise in the national living wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/chancellor-aims-to-catch-the-eye-with-help-for-just-about-managing>
 to £7.50 an hour.


Other unavoidable bills are also marching upwards. The 2% rise in insurance 
premium tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-insurance-premium-tax-increased-again>
 will add £10.70 to the average bill for cars, and up to £10 to buildings and 
contents insurance.

Before the autumn statement on Wednesday, it was clear that car insurance 
rates were already rising sharply 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/27/aa-car-insurance-premiums-rise-annual-policy-costs>
, up by 16% over the past year. Even taking into account the shake-up on 
whiplash,which will cut bills by £40 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/crackdown-whiplash-claims-knock-40-off-car-insurance-bills>
, and the latest freeze in fuel duty, motorists will probably be net losers.

Then there are the scary forecasts of increases in gas and electricity bills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/01/home-energy-bills-will-rise-following-brexit>
 of at least 5%, but up to 26% on some tariffs. Household budgets willremain 
under intense pressure throughout 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
 and beyond.

But the ban on letting agency fees  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/rents-unfair-letting-fees-tenants-charges>
should not be anything other than thoroughly welcomed, irrespective of the 
predictable bleating from England’s estate agents. What we know is that in 
Scotland, where the ban has been in place for four years, agents are not in 
dire straits.


Hammond also promised another £1.4bn for affordable housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-social-housing>
 to help build an additional 40,000 homes. Combined with a plethora of schemes, 
he pledged to “more than double, in real terms, annual capital spending on 
housing”.

Housing is the central financial worry of the millennial generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/millennials-will-spend-53000-on-rent-before-age-of-30-thinktank-says>
, so this is to be welcomed. But whether an uptick in supply will have any real 
impact on making homes more affordable is another matter.

In one area, Hammond was curiously quiet. Pensioners, the bedrock of 
Conservative support, were barely mentioned, despite the fact that the state 
pension is a giant component of public spending. The triple lock, which
guarantees rises in the state pension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/06/triple-lock-pension-should-scrapped-mps-generational-inequalities>
 of whatever is higher out of the rate of inflation, average earnings or 2.5%, 
will be maintained, he said.

But in his next sentence, Hammond warned of the challenges of “rising 
longevity” and future spending priorities.

Not only was this the last autumn statement, we have probably also seen the 
last in which giveaways to pensioners are at the heart of the chancellor’s 
speech.
 