
The chancellor is to close an aggressive tax avoidance scheme that was exposed 
by a Guardian investigation as depriving the taxpayer of “hundreds of millions” 
of pounds a year.

The move follows publication of undercover footage last week that revealed how 
temp recruitment agencies have beenramping up the use of a “contrived” scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
 that seeks to make savings through the flat-rate VAT scheme and multiple 
claims of the employment allowance.

Revealed: temp agencies' avoidance scheme costs taxpayers 'hundreds of 
millions'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/revealed-temp-agencies-avoidance-scheme-costs-taxpayers-hundreds-of-millions>
It is understood that HMRC has received an extra 30,000 applications from 
small businesses to enrol in the flat-rate VAT scheme – above what it expected 
this year. A Treasury source said the bulk of the unexpected applications had 
come from “unscrupulous agencies” looking to benefit from the schemes.

Specifically referencing the abuse by employment firms detailed in last week’s 
investigation, Treasury documents said: “The government will introduce a new 
16.5% rate from 1 April 2017 for businesses with limited costs, such as many 
labour-only businesses. This will help level the playing field, while 
maintaining the accounting simplification for the small businesses that use the 
scheme as intended.”

The flat-rate VAT scheme is designed to free very small businesses with 
revenues of less than £150,000 a year from red tape. It allows those companies 
to charge VAT at 20%, but pay it back to HMRC at a lower rate – depending on 
the sector they operate in.

How can you tell if a temp agency is using a tax avoidance scheme?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/temp-agency-tax-avoidance-scheme-national-insurance>
However, the Guardian investigation exposed how, in the employment sector, 
flat-rate VAT ruleswere being exploited 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/temp-agency-tax-avoidance-scheme-national-insurance>
 by artificially dividing large businesses into hundreds of tiny companies.

Jolyon Maugham QC, a tax barrister at Devereux Chambers, said: “The loss to 
the exchequer of this sort of abuse runs into the hundreds of millions, if not 
billions.”

In an autumn statement speech that said the government must “constantly be 
alert to new threats to our tax base,” the chancellor said: “We will shut down 
inappropriate use of the VAT flat-rate scheme that was put in place to help 
small businesses.”

The disclosure of the schemes prompted Frank Field, the chairman of the House 
of Commons work and pensions select committee, toask HMRC to investigate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/labour-mp-frank-field-calls-for-urgent-investigation-tax-avoidance-scheme-hmrc>
.

 