
Reactor No 4 at Chernobyl, the scene of the worst nuclear accident in history, 
has been enclosed by a vast steel shelter designed to prevent radiation leaks 
from the site.

The structure covers the reactor and the unstable “sarcophagus”, which was 
hastily built around it by Soviet authorities in the immediate aftermath of the 
disaster 30 years ago. The shelter is said to be the largest land-based movable 
object ever constructed. It tookseveral years to build 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/19/ukraine-funding-chernobyl-arch>
 and cost more than €1.5bn (£1.27bn).

The huge steel arch was moved into place over several weeks, and the 
completion of this procedure was celebrated with a ceremony at the site on 
Tuesday, attended by the Ukrainian president,Petro Poroshenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/petro-poroshenko>, diplomats and site 
workers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d2ef663a15b903020228135d37185d4b08dad20%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chernobyl%20disaster%20site%20enclosed%20by%20shelter%20to%20prevent%20radiation%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chernobyl%20disaster%20site%20enclosed%20by%20shelter%20to%20prevent%20radiation%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d2ef663a15b903020228135d37185d4b08dad20%2F0_7_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, speaks at a ceremony celebrating the 
construction of the shelter. Photograph: Brendan Hoffman/Getty 
Poroshenko paid tribute to the Chernobyl workers who built the initial 
sarcophagus, despite dangerous radiation levels at the scene of the disaster.

“It was designed to last for 30 years to protect Kiev, Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> and the whole world from nuclear 
contamination. Thirty years later, we are present here just 100 metres away 
from reactor No 4 and we can say that this new historical construction has been 
completed,” he said.

The explosion at Chernobyl’s reactor No 4 occurred during the night shift 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/04/-sp-the-long-shadow-of-chernobyl>
 on 26 April 1986, and news of the disaster was initially covered up by Soviet 
authorities. About 50 people were killed as a direct result of the accident, 
but medical estimates suggest up to 4,000 people will die prematurely due to 
radiation exposure. Thousands more still suffer health effects, and a 20-mile 
(32km) exclusion zone around the plant remains in place.

'It was anarchy': a family reflects on the Chernobyl disaster, 30 years on
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/26/it-was-anarchy-a-family-reflects-on-the-chernobyl-disaster-30-years-on>
Suma Chakrabarti, the president of the European Bank for Reconstruction and 
Development (EBRD), which coordinated the construction project, said: “The old 
shelter has now disappeared from our sight, but we’re never going to forget the 
human toll of the 1986 accident and we owe our thoughts today to the victims of 
that accident.”

Vince Novak, the EBRD’s director of nuclear safety, said the shelter 
eliminated a number of fears and risks that had persisted since the accident, 
including a collapse of the sarcophagus or a fresh nuclear reaction inside the 
structure, given the tonnes of uranium still present at the site. There was 
also a danger that radioactive liquids could seep out of the site and into the 
water supply, because the sarcophagus was not watertight, he said.

“This is the first project of its kind, and I very much hope the last one 
too,” Novak said.

The shelter is 162 metres (531ft) long and 108m high. The metal used in the 
construction weighs 3.5 times more than the Eiffel Tower. Construction was 
complicated by the high radiation levels near the reactor, meaning that in 
order for workers to be able to spend extended periods of time building the 
shelter, it had to be assembled several hundred metres away and then slid 
slowly into place.

Chernobyl could be reinvented as a solar farm, says Ukraine
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/29/chernobyl-could-be-reinvented-as-a-solar-farm-says-ukraine>
Prior to the process, tens of thousands of tonnes of radioactive soil were 
removed from the construction area and replaced with clean soil. Much of the 
machinery and engineering equipment used had to be designed and built from 
scratch, including special cladding and a huge crane system.

Hans Blix <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hans-blix>, director general of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency at the time of the accident, who visited 
Chernobyl shortly after the explosion at the reactor and has been involved in 
the shelter project, said: “Moving together the two halves of the huge arch of 
this gigantic shelter is like closing a wound, a nuclear wound that belongs to 
all of us.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c1d6c16b50425a92255f8b1e0cac1decf50753%2F0_9_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chernobyl%20disaster%20site%20enclosed%20by%20shelter%20to%20prevent%20radiation%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chernobyl%20disaster%20site%20enclosed%20by%20shelter%20to%20prevent%20radiation%20leaks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fchernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1c1d6c16b50425a92255f8b1e0cac1decf50753%2F0_9_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 Workers who built the initial structure to cover the damaged reactor were 
exposed to very high levels of radiation. Photograph: Zufarov/AFP/Getty 
Over the coming year, work will continue on the structure to make it airtight 
and dismantle parts of the sarcophagus inside, using remote-controlled cranes 
inside the structure. When it is completed in November 2017, the final 
structure should ensure that the site is airtight for 100 years.


People are banned from living in the zone around Chernobyl and access is only 
granted by special permit, but a few residents have returnedin defiance of the 
ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/29/babushkas-of-chernobyl-film-nuclear-exclusion-zone>
. There are plans todevelop solar power facilities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/29/chernobyl-could-be-reinvented-as-a-solar-farm-says-ukraine>
 in the area and Ukrainian authorities want to rebrand the exclusion zone as a
destination for tourists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/apr/24/chernobyl-ukraine-the-nuclear-option-holiday>
, who can visit the city on a day trip from the capital, Kiev, and take an 
excursion around Pripyat, theghost city near Chernobyl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/07/chernobyl-30-years-residents-life-ghost-city-pripyat>
.

The nearly 50,000 residents of Pripyat, which was built to house Chernobyl 
workers, wereevacuated the day after 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/09/chance-show-truth-into-heart-of-chernobyl-nuclear-disaster>
 the disaster and never returned. Its eerie, deserted streets give asnapshot of 
the late Soviet period 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2013/apr/14/chernobyl-ghost-town-in-pictures>
.
 