
The Chicago <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chicago> police department 
regularly uses force that is “unjustified, disproportionate and otherwise 
excessive”, federal investigators have concluded.

Young black men again faced highest rate of US police killings in 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/the-counted-police-killings-2016-young-black-men>
In a scathing report released after a 13-month process, Department of Justice 
(DoJ) investigators found that police violated both the fourth amendment of the 
constitution and department policy in the use of deadly force. Poor training 
and accountability systems contributed to the department’s unconstitutional 
policing practices, the report said.

“Our review of CPD’s deadly force practices identified several trends in CPD’s 
deadly force incidents,” investigators wrote, “including that CPD engages in 
dangerous and unnecessary foot pursuits and other unsound tactics that result 
in CPD shooting people, including those who are unarmed.”

The US attorney general, Loretta Lynch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/loretta-lynch>, presented the report on 
Friday morning with federal and city officials, before announcing that the CPD 
and Chicago officials had agreed to begin negotiations to reach a 
court-enforceable reform agreement.

The lengthy report <https://www.justice.gov/opa/file/925846/download> 
excoriated the CPD on a range of issues, but particularly faulted officer 
training and use of force, and the way that officers who use unreasonable force 
are held accountable. It also outlines systemic problems within the department 
regarding how officers are supervised and supported.

Black and Latino civilians are “hardest hit by CPD’s pattern of unlawful 
force”, deputy assistant attorney general Vanita Gupta said on Friday.

In all incidents where police used force over a five-year period, black 
civilians were subject to force in 76% of cases. This disparity increased when 
force was used against children: 83% of cases involved black children and 14% 
involved Latino children, the report found.

Racial disparities were also present when civilians submitted misconduct 
complaints. A white complainant was three and a half times more likely to have 
his or her allegation sustained and an officer held accountable than a black 
complainant, according to the DoJ.

Officers who used unreasonable force were almost never held accountable, 
investigators wrote, adding that “there is no meaningful, systemic 
accountability for officers who use force in violation of the law or CPD 
policy”.


This lack of accountability allowed officers who should have been fired to 
remain on the force, and in some cases continue their misconduct, the DoJ 
concluded.

The report featured dozens of case studies and examples. Among the incidents 
included in the report:

 * Foot pursuits: the DoJ said it found “numerous incidents” where officers 
shot at fleeing people who posed no immediate threat. Police reportedly stopped 
a man they saw walking down the street and fidgeting with his waistband. 
Officers pursued the man when he fled and fired 45 rounds toward him, the 
report said. Although the officers claimed the man had fired at them, no gun 
was found on his person, according to the DoJ. The police review process 
concluded the shooting was justified. An inoperable gun was found in the area 
of the shooting. Chicago police do not have a written policy on foot pursuits.

 * Use of force against children: investigators said police had subjected 
children to force over non-criminal conduct or minor violations. An officer 
learned that some boys were playing basketball on his property and, while on 
duty, left his district to return home, the report said. He found the boys down 
the street, after which he “pointed his gun at them, used profanity, and 
threatened to put their heads through a wall and to blow up their homes”. The 
boys said they were handcuffed and forced to lie face-down. The officer 
involved received a five-day suspension and was never interviewed by police 
investigators.

 * Racist language: young black civilians told the justice department “they 
are routinely called ‘nigger,’ ‘animal,’ or ‘pieces of shit’” by police 
officers, and officers themselves confirmed such statements to the DoJ. 
 * “Guns for freedom”: officers use dangerous and sometimes unlawful methods 
to elicit information from people they have arrested, the DoJ said. The report 
highlighted alleged practices such as “guns for freedom”, in which officers 
detain someone for a low-level, nonviolent offense, such as a traffic offense, 
and then demand the person exchange a gun to secure their release or guarantee 
they won’t be stopped again. Chicago PD findings 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/documentcloud/index.html?docid=3288678-Chicago-Police-Department-DoJ-Findings>
The Chicago investigation is unprecedented in its scope. US attorney Zachary 
Fardonsaid 
<https://www.justice.gov/usao-ndil/pr/remarks-us-attorney-zachary-t-fardon-city-club-chicago-sept-26-2016>
 last year that the investigation was the largest of its kind in the justice 
department’s history. Investigatorsreportedly 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/local/politics/ct-rahm-emanuel-justice-department-civil-rights-met-0106-20170105-story.html>
 moved up the completion of the report so that it could be published before 
Donald Trump takes office next week.

Trump campaigned as a “law and order candidate”, calling for more support for 
police officers. Jeff Sessions, Trump’s nominee to head the justice department, 
has similarly questioned intense scrutiny of law enforcement. In confirmation 
hearings on Tuesday, Sessionssaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/jeff-sessions-police-reform-excessive-force-racial-bias-justice-department>
 department investigations tended to “undermine respect for our police 
officers”.

Both Lynch and Chicago’s mayor, Rahm Emanuel, expressed confidence in each 
party’s commitment to reform. Emanuel declined to speculate on Sessions’ 
willingness to participate and said he had not yet spoken with the Trump 
transition team about the DoJ’s findings.

“I can’t negotiate for him but we’re going to be at the table,” he said.

Jonathan Smith, who spent five years with the DoJ’s civil rights division, 
said he expected nationwide attention to make a reform agreement likely, but 
speculated that the strength of such reforms would depend on community 
involvement.

“If left to the city and to the Department of Justice, I’m worried that you’re 
not going to see the same kind of robust agreement that you saw in Baltimore 
yesterday,” he said.

On Thursday, Lynch announced a reform agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/baltimore-justice-department-police-reform-agreement>
 with police in Baltimore, following a similar investigation.

The Chicago investigation and other reforms were sparked by the release of 
shocking video footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/nov/24/chicago-officials-release-video-showing-police-killing-of-laquan-mcdonald-video>
 that showed a CPD officer fatally shooting 17-year-old Laquan McDonald.

A judge ordered the city to release the footage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/24/laquan-mcdonald-video-release> 
in November 2015, more than a year after the black teen was killed. The video 
showed the teen walking down the middle of the road, a small knife hanging 
limply by his side, before a responding officer, Jason Van Dyke, shoots and 
kills him as he walks away.

Laquan McDonald: senseless killing continues in video after video | Steven W 
Thrasher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/24/laquan-mcdonald-video-release> 
A local prosecutor charged Van Dyke with murder hours before the footage was 
released. In the following days the police chief was fired and the 
investigation was launched amid protests in the city and calls for reform.

The release of the dashboard camera footage received instant national and 
international attention, similarly to other high-profile police killings of 
dozens of other unarmed black civilians over the past two years.

Investigations into police departments have taken place in Ferguson, Missouri, 
after the shooting death of Michael Brown and in Baltimore after Freddie Gray 
died in police custody.

The attorney general opens such so-called “pattern or practice” investigations 
after receiving credible allegations of systemic police misconduct and 
unconstitutional practices. The Obama justice department has opened 25 such 
inquiries.
 