
The Bank of England’s chief economist has admitted his profession is in crisis 
having failed to foresee the 2008 financial crash and having misjudged the 
impact of the Brexit vote.

Andrew Haldane, said it was “a fair cop” referring to a series of forecasting 
errors before and after the financial crash which had brought the profession’s 
reputation into question.

Blaming the failure of economic models to cope with “irrational behaviour” in 
the modern era, the economist said the profession needed to adapt to regain the 
trust of the public and politicians.

Why has the UK economy defied predictions of doom?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/why-uk-economy-defied-predictions-doom-brexit-vote>
Haldane described the collapse of Lehman Brothers as the economics 
profession’s “Michael Fish moment” (a reference to when the BBC weather 
forecaster predicted in 1987 that the UK would avoid a hurricane that went on 
to devastate large parts of southern England).Speaking at the Institute for 
Government 
<https://livestream.com/accounts/5208398/events/6729795/videos/145963063> in 
central London, Haldane said meteorological forecasting had improved markedly 
following that embarrassing mistake and that the economics profession could 
follow in its footsteps.

The bank has come under intense criticism for predicting a dramatic slowdown 
in the UK’s fortunes in the event of a vote for Brexit only for the economy to 
bounce back strongly and remain one of the best performing in the developed 
world.


Haldane is known to be concerned about mounting criticism of experts and the 
potential for Threadneedle Street’s forecasts to be dismissed by politicians if 
errors persist.

Former Tory ministers, including the former foreign secretary William Hague 
and the former justice secretary Michael Gove, last year attacked theBank of 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> governor, 
Mark Carney, for predicting a dramatic slowdown in growth if the country voted 
to leave the EU.


Treasury's Brexit job loss claim a hoax, says Boris Johnson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/24/boris-johnson-eu-referendum-job-loss>
Prominent Brexit campaigners have also besieged the central bank. Before the 
vote, the foreign secretary,Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/boris-johnson-dismisses-bank-of-englands-brexit-warning>
 accused the bank of risking undermining economic confidence by issuing 
warnings about the potential effects of a vote for Brexit. During her 
conference speech following the vote, on 6 October, the prime minister,Theresa 
May, criticised the bank’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-speech-tory-conservative-conference-theresa-mays-speech-politics-live>
reaction to the vote after it cut interest rates further and boosted its 
package of stimulus measures by £60bn to £435bn.

Gove said last week that when he said experts needed to be challenged, he 
meant economists in particular. In a debate with Stephanie Flanders, the former 
BBC economics editor, he cited an academic study to support his argument that 
expert economists were not good at making predictions.

Gove said: “Sometimes we’re invited to take experts as though they were 
prophets, as though their words were carved in tablets of stone and that we had 
to simply meekly bow down before them and accept their verdict.

“I think the right response in a democracy, to assertions made by experts, is 
to say ‘show us the evidence, show us the facts’. And then, if experts or 
indeed anyone in the debate can make a strong case, draw on evidence and let us 
think again – then of course they deserve respect.”

'The lull before the tsunami': economists on the Brexit watch data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/the-lull-before-the-tsunami-economists-on-the-brexit-watch-data>
Flanders, who now works for JP Morgan, agreed that economists had a long 
record of being wrong on direct forecasts while expressing concerns about the 
consequences of expertise being dismissed out of hand. “I think we’ve seen over 
the last few years economists and indeed the elite, the technocrats, can be 
wrong in some pretty big areas,” she said. “They were wrong in their 
assumptions about certain financial instruments and developments, which helped 
contribute to the financial crisis.”

Official figures have shown the economy was outstripped only by the US among 
the large economies last year after growth in the third quarter was upgraded to 
0.6%.


Forecasts by the Treasury, the International Monetary Fund and the Paris-based 
OECD, all pointed to a recession after the vote, based on assumptions of 
steeply declining consumer spending and business investment.

Mark Carney's year in quotes: 'We are actors in a play written by others'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/28/mark-carney-bank-england-governor-2016-year-quotes>
Haldane said: “It’s a fair cop to say the profession is to some degree in 
crisis. It’s not the first time it has happened. It happened back in the 1930s 
and [during] the Great Depression. But out of that something good spread. It 
brought us [John Maynard] Keynes and the birth of modern macro-economics. Out 
of this crisis, there could be a rebirth of economics. I’m not someone who 
would say that all that’s been done in the past is terrible. It’s just that the 
models we had were rather narrow and fragile. The problem came when the world 
was tipped upside down and those models were ill-equipped to making sense of 
behaviours that were deeply irrational.”

He blamed the profession’s reliance on models that were built for an age when 
consumers and businesses, and especially banks, “behaved rationally”. Since 
2008, consumers have maintained their spending when the classic economic models 
would have expected them to be more circumspect.


Haldane, who is regularly cited as a dove on the bank’s interest rate-setting 
committee, has argued that the economy remains weak and that rates should stay 
low to boost growth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6ecda80edba5a22784514bf9aedb8a5208041b%2F0_104_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chief%20economist%20of%20Bank%20of%20England%20admits%20errors%20in%20Brexit%20forecasting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chief%20economist%20of%20Bank%20of%20England%20admits%20errors%20in%20Brexit%20forecasting&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fchief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c6ecda80edba5a22784514bf9aedb8a5208041b%2F0_104_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 The Bank of England, which set a gloomy forecast in November for the economy. 
Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
Answering critics of the bank’s gloomy November forecast for the economy, he 
admitted that the bank did not anticipate the resilience of consumer spending 
after Britain voted to leave the EU. But he said that he thought the bank was 
wrong about timing not about the fundamentals, and that the Bank of England 
still expected Brexit to harm growth.

“I think, near-term, the data, the evidence we’ve been accumulating since the 
referendum, has surprised to the upside. [There’s been] greater resilience, in 
particular among consumers and among the housing market, than we had expected. 
Has that led us to fundamentally change our view on the fortunes of the economy 
looking forward over the next several years? Not really.

“This is more a question, I think, of timing than of a fundamental 
reassessment of the fortunes of the economy. So back in November we published a 
forecast for inflation which was the highest we’ve ever published. And the 
forecast for growth in the UK economy, that was the lowest we have ever 
published.

“We are still expecting this rather difficult balancing act for monetary 
policy with a slowing, not a huge slowing, but nonetheless a material slowing, 
during the course of next year as the effects of higher prices in the shops 
begin to chew away a little at the spending power of consumers and cause them 
to rein back a little in their spending. That remains our central view, with 
huge amounts of uncertainty around it.”

He blamed decades of education policies – that had left numeracy levels in 
England only just above Albania – for holding back improvements in 
productivity. He said the lack of numeracy skills was stark in comparison with 
other countries, which placed more emphasis on workers having more than a basic 
level of maths.

Haldane said: “I’ll give an example of where Britain is punching well below 
its weight and that’s in core numeracy skills. There are 17 million people who 
have levels of numeracy that are no better than those expected of primary age 
children. In a recent OECD study that looked at numeracy as it applies to 
financial literacy, the UK came 17th, just above Albania, on questions of 
financial literacy.”

He added that the UK’s lack of numeracy skills across more than half the 
working population was a key reason for its lack of productivity growth since 
the financial crisis.
 