
‘Why be normal … when you could be Michaela?” asks deputy head Barry Smith in 
hisblog <https://hackingattheroots.wordpress.com/> about the idiosyncratic 
institution where he works, Michaela community school in Wembley, north London. 
And boy, does he have a point.

Michaela, blazing a trail for supporters of a traditionalist ethos in state 
education and shortly to be the subject of a book edited by its head,Katharine 
Birbalsingh <https://www.theguardian.com/education/katharine-birbalsingh>, may 
be many things. But “normal” it ain’t.

The school was at the centre of a row in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/29/headteacher-defends-policy-of-putting-pupils-in-lunch-isolation>
 over a letter telling parents that children would be placed in “lunch 
isolation” if they fell behind with lunch payments. Now a freedom of information
response 
<https://www.whatdotheyknow.com/request/school_meal_isolation?post_redirect=1> 
has revealed at least one Michaela pupil spent a whole term eating basic meals 
away from peers, outside the dining hall, under this punishment. Three 
children have been disciplined in this way, each for at least two weeks.

Headteacher defends policy of putting pupils in 'lunch isolation'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/29/headteacher-defends-policy-of-putting-pupils-in-lunch-isolation>
We have also seen a letter 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/iclmspmuj7n0xi6/newmichaelalunchletter191016.docx?dl=0>
, signed by Smith and emailed to parents last month, requiring that lunch bills 
are paid half-termly and up front. Children on free school meals do not have to 
pay, but parents who are applying for them are told they still have to pay up 
front, with the money repaid if their application succeeds. Parents are advised 
they could put weekly child benefit towards paying for the meals.

The email came our way after it was mistakenly sent to Dionne Kelly, the 
mother at the centre of theoriginal “lunch isolation” row, in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/09/uk-property-startup-department-for-education>
, who took her child out of Michaela at the time.

Many schools allow parents to pay weekly or daily and, as the government 
indicated <http://bit.ly/2c3Wqz3> last month, there are many families who are 
only “just about managing” but are not entitled to free meals.

Birbalsingh says the school does support parents who are struggling. “Unlike 
most schools, Michaela ensures that every child receives a healthy lunch. To 
enable us to do this, we ask parents to pay in advance. This is not unusual and 
several months’ notice is given in order to help with budgeting.” She adds that 
pupils are put in lunch isolation only if their parents were able to pay but 
had chosen not to, and that isolation was not a penalty but “fun”.

Back to Smith’s blog, where he curiously writes of himself as the “miserable 
old scrote in the corner sucking on his Werther’s” and warns that some will 
lambast as “hyperbollocks” the material Michaela has “spewed out into 
cyberspace”. Strangely, elsewhere in the blog Smith seems to suggest Michaela 
pupils are inculcated with a sense of “otherness”, which means not swearing. 
Instead, they should aspire to be “top of the pyramid”. Only “‘normal’ people 
swear”. Michaela, he warns, is a “Marmite” institution. This seems unlikely to 
change.

Is reputation a touchy subject for chain? 

An academy chain considered declining to take over a struggling school because 
of the potential risk to its “brand”, a document released under freedom of 
information reveals.

The minutes of a meeting in February of the E-ACT trust’s audit and risk 
committee show senior staff and trustees worrying that the unnamed Bristol 
school’s “poor exam results could trigger an Ofsted inspection”, which would 
lead to a “requires improvement” judgment after the takeover “resulting in 
damage to E-ACT brand”.

In the end, E-ACT did take on a Bristol primary it now names Hareclive 
academy, approved by the DfE. It says the discussion about its brand was all 
part of its “due diligence” and it was pleased to have received the 
department’s vote of confidence.

But the concentration on “brand” may be seen by some as another manifestation 
of increasing commercialisation in schools. And some might wonder why E-ACT was 
allowed to expand afterOfsted warned <http://bit.ly/2e4a7kM>, just weeks before 
the meeting that it was providing too many of its pupils with a “not good 
enough” education. The chainlost control of 10 schools 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/academy-e-act-michael-gove-schools> in 2014 after 
an earlier Ofsted report, so its reputation may be a touchy subject.

Additional reporting: Ann McGauran
 