
Each afternoon, after school, nine-year-old Success Damisa changes out of his 
uniform and eats lunch in the one-room shanty he shares with his three siblings 
and parents in one of Nigeria’s poorest neighbourhoods. He then heads straight 
to an after-school programme and joins other children in extra-curricular 
lessons.

“When he comes back from these lessons, he still goes to read his books,” says 
his mother, Blessing Damisa, who works as a food vendor. “The classes have 
helped him to perform so well in school that he was recently given a double 
promotion, skipping one class.”

Small and shy, Success wants to emulate Lionel Messi and become a superstar 
footballer when he grows up. It’s a big dream for someone growing up in Dustbin 
Estate, the Lagos neighbourhood built on a swamp. An estimated 5,500 people, 
who cannot afford to live elsewhere, call the estate home.

The e-waste mountains - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/18/the-e-waste-reduce-waste-old-technology-mountains-in-pictures>
It needn’t be a barrier to success, though. Some of Nigeria’s most prominent 
footballers, – including Watford FC’s Odion Ighalo, former Newcastle striker 
Obafemi Martins and Arsenal legend Kanu Nwankwo – learned their skills in 
Ajegunle, the parent community of Dustbin Estate.

The slum is divided in two by a sewage canal full of stagnant water, 
responsible for the putrid smells that permanently linger. A few decades ago, 
roaming homeless people who were too poor to sand-fill the swamps continued to 
dump refuse until the area resembled dry land – and then they moved in.

The nickname for the neighbourhood came from the children, says Solomon Aare 
of theLOTS Charity Foundation, <https://www.facebook.com/lotscharityfoundation/>
 a local NGO that works in the area. Originally from the Dustbin Estate, the 
21-year-old joined as a volunteer in his last days of high school and returned 
to work there full-time after obtaining a diploma in computer engineering. He 
is now the administrator of a three-bedroom flat that serves as a house, 
school, church and playground for the children.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fchildren-growing-up-dustbin-estate-lagos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78aaf59a8bae368e007372bb15fec16714b3176e%2F553_480_4312_2976%2F4312.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Children%20of%20the%20Dustbin%20Estate%3A%20growing%20up%20on%20a%20Lagos%20swamp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fchildren-growing-up-dustbin-estate-lagos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Children%20of%20the%20Dustbin%20Estate%3A%20growing%20up%20on%20a%20Lagos%20swamp&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fchildren-growing-up-dustbin-estate-lagos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78aaf59a8bae368e007372bb15fec16714b3176e%2F553_480_4312_2976%2F4312.jpg>
 Blessing Damisa outside her home. Photograph: Eromo Egbejule 
“When it rains, everywhere is flooded and the canal overflows, so it spills 
some of its content into the houses. It’s a sorry sight and it’s not healthy 
for the children,” says Aare. In a country with a critical unemployment rate –
currently at 13.3% 
<https://venturesafrica.com/these-charts-explains-the-current-state-of-unemployment-in-nigeria/>
 – a number of the residents fend for their families by charging people who 
want to dump refuse in the community, between N100 and N200 (20 to 40p) per 
drop.

“We pay N1500 [around £3] every month to rent this house,” says Blessing, 
pointing to her squalid ramshackle apartment made of wooden boards and old 
banners nailed together. “But it is too much to pay because the economy is 
bad.” Her family shares a single toilet with four others.

Like many other shanties, the foundation of litter is covered with old, grey, 
wet rugs with peeping strands of algae. Beside some of the houses, refuse is 
piled high in heaps large enough to swallow a child.

There are half-a-dozen boreholes that the entire community relies on for 
water. Four of them were donated by LOTS, but because of overload one is no 
longer functional. Across the community, there is no sign of a government 
project or initiative. A couple of years ago, however, a government bulldozer 
arrived to demolish a school just days after it made the front page of a 
national newspaper for its state of neglect.

In the slums around Islamabad, children need more support from their schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/may/08/pakistan-katchi-schools-ngo-islamabad>
Success’s dream of becoming a superstar footballer is mostly down to the work 
of LOTS, which organises the after-school learning programme for 150 children 
from the community. There are computer classes during the week, and football 
practice and aerobics classes on the weekends. LOTS also operates in two other 
slums – Makoko and the Beggars’ Colony in Oko-Baba.

Tolulope Sangosanya started LOTS in 2005 when she was still an undergraduate 
student. “I needed to be part of a lasting change and build a positive legacy,” 
she says. “[The children] have seen the worst and they will now work for the 
best. Their attitudes keep getting better as we show them the possibilities 
that education opens up for them.”

LOTS has provided a home for some children, such as 11-year-old Basit Abayomi, 
who was taken in by the charity four years ago when his abusive mother threw a 
knife at him. “I’m happy to be here,” he says. “I don’t want to stop living 
here but if I have to, I will come back and visit a lot.” Basit is in his last 
year of primary school and wants to be a banker. “I like doing mathematics and 
I want to help my country save its money,” he says.

LOTS also stepped in to pay for 16-year-old Faith Eze’s last three years of 
school when her parents could not come up with the N38,000 (£76) for her 
tuition each term. Faith travels to school from Amukoko, another community two 
bus journeys away.

“It feels like part of a family, sharing things with them and learning with 
them,” she says. The teenager idolises some of Nollywood’s finest stars and 
wants to be an actress. “Since childhood, I have always wanted to be involved 
in the arts, in singing and in entertainment.”

Faith and Basit are two of more than 30 children who attend schools outside 
the community, with financial help from LOTS. The charity’s apartment-office is 
small and a larger facility is needed, but the organisation’s budget is 
stretched thin with all of its projects and six full-time staff to pay for.

Four myths about slums: 'Don't assume people want to leave'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/sep/28/four-myths-about-slums-dont-assume-people-want-to-leave>
For now, most funding comes from the sale of proceeds from Sangosanya’s farm, 
because “emotional marketing is hard to do in a recession and there’s no 
government support”, she says.

Sangosanya has plans to organise a soup kitchen initiative for the rest of the 
community, and to increase the number of medical outreaches she currently 
coordinates. “My dream is to turn Dustbin Estate into Treasure Estate, [and 
make it a] housing project with basic facilities available for families.”

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 