
Responding to change and finding solutions to new problems is fundamental for 
public services. Innovation in policy and practice is vital to all professions 
and services. We need a policy framework enshrined in law that drives the 
values, skills and knowledge of professionals but enables new challenges and 
problems to be addressed. Learning, development and adaptation are essential 
for effective services.

The Department for Education’s (DfE’s) “power to test different ways of 
working” isset out in the children and social work bill 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/lbill/2016-2017/0057/lbill_2016-20170057_en_4.htm#pt1-ch2-pb6-l1g29>
 and intended to allow local authorities to apply to the education secretary 
for permission toopt out of child protection laws 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/social-workers-fierce-row-childrens-bill>
. Superficially, deregulation is a very attractive proposition – red tape and 
bureaucracy undoubtedly are sources of frustration for many professionals and 
service users. TheMunro review of child protection 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/munro-review-of-child-protection-final-report-a-child-centred-system>
 illuminated this problem.

But the argument for and detail of these clauses in the bill have raised 
significant concern 
<https://www.magistrates-association.org.uk/news/ma-response-children-and-social-work-bill>
. What is described as a “new way of working” is fundamentally a new way of 
working the law itself. There is therefore a key question: do these clauses end 
the law as we know it and replace it with a form of bureaucratic tyranny? 
Instead of law being made by parliament, will services be determined locally 
and by a bureaucratic process?

Government plans 'threaten children's legal rights built up over decades'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/10/government-plans-threaten-childrens-legal-rights-built-up-over-decades>
It is the sovereign right of parliament alone to make and amend the law. The 
law of the land applies to everybody – to every area, service and individual. 
And the courts alone have the duty and responsibility to determine the 
administration of the law. A clause that transfers these powers to individual 
local authorities and the secretary of state is a fundamental challenge and 
change to the constitution.


The examples cited by DfE to illustrate how this new power might be used are 
of great concern. These include introducing “flexibility” in the role of
independent reviewing officers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/sep/20/can-independent-reviewing-officers-really-be-independent>
, who may no longer need to chair care plan reviews for children in “settled 
placements”.

It is also suggested that adoption and fostering panels will be made optional 
or subject only to electronic forms of communication. This is a major turning 
away from their long established and critical role in big decisions that affect 
children throughout their lives. A “lower level of assessment” for family and 
friends foster carers is also proposed.

The DfE demonstrates a very poor level of understanding of the operation of 
these specific examples. For example, it argued – erroneously – that the 
current requirements for being approved as a foster carer result in family and 
friends of carers being excluded because every child requires a separate 
bedroom, a difficult issue given the housing situation of some of these 
families.

The fact is that the framework for the assessment and support of family and 
friends carers is facing a significant challenge. At least three children in 
such placements have died at the hands of family members in recent years, and 
serious case reviews have taken place into at least two of these. Learning from 
the terrible suffering of these children should take place nationally and be 
informed, thorough and responsible. The identified “solutions” and the 
resources must be embedded in law and apply to every child, every carer and 
every service. Every one of the DfE’s “innovation” examples can be explored in 
a similar way.

Justine Greening should withdraw the disastrous children and social work bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/nov/15/justine-greening-should-withdraw-the-disastrous-children-and-social-work-bill>
Currently the law applies to every child, family and service. While there is 
local provision at one level, the law provides a universal framework. There may 
be an unacceptable postcode lottery of services now but these clauses would 
legitimise and entrench this. Above all, they would lead to the undermining of 
the rights and position of children, their parents and other service users and 
providers. When the House of Lords explored the clauses in detail,peers voted 
to strike them out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/lords-defeat-government-over-child-protection-proposals>
.

The bill was introduced for scrutiny and debate into the Commons before 
Christmas. The children’s minister, Edward Timpson, tabled amendments to
reinstate the clauses 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/12/05/government-revive-controversial-exemption-plans-social-work-bill/>
. These protect six sections of children’s services legislation from the power 
to test deregulation and add some safeguards.

Yet core questions remain. Are we testing the potential for local “tyranny” as 
opposed to upholding the law of the land? Are we encouraging a hotchpotch of 
local provision and fragile protection rather than high quality services 
available as a right to every child and young person? Is this the avoidance by 
government of its responsibility to prioritise and resource a national 
children’s social care service? Who will benefit in the end? The Commons has a 
significant opportunity and responsibility to reinstate its sovereign power to 
make and change the law in the best interests of its citizens. It is to be 
hoped MPs use their constitutional power to delete these clauses from the bill.

John Simmonds is director of policy, research and development at CoramBAAF 
<http://www.corambaaf.org.uk>


Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more on issues like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 