
Parents are squeezing the role of play out of their children’s lives in favour 
of the three ‘R’s as they try to prepare their offspring for a competitive 
world, according to the head of Lego’s education charity arm.

A lack of understanding of the value of play is prompting parents and schools 
alike to reduce it as a priority, says Hanne Rasmussen, head of theLego 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lego> Foundation. If parents and 
governments push children towards numeracy and literacy earlier and earlier, it 
means they miss out on the early play-based learning that helps to develop 
creativity, problem-solving and empathy, she says.

According to Rasmussen, the evidence for play-based learning has built 
enormously over the last decade, but parents don’t know about it. “Both in the 
formal education system and in the homes of children, the focus on the value of 
play is rather limited. That’s really something we want to work on – to improve 
the understanding of the value of play and what play really can do, where more 
and more it is squeezed by a desire both from the formal system and from 
parents that children should learn specific literacy and numeracy quite early.”

The intervention by Rasmussen directly challenges the knowledge-based, heavily 
tested approach to schooling favoured by the UK government – and questioned by 
many education practitioners.

The 29-year-old Lego Foundation, generously funded with a quarter of Lego’s 
post-tax profits, is beginning to flex its muscles. Where once it quietly 
dished out cash – and bricks – to lots of small projects, it has set its sights 
on campaigning for a mindset change in education around the world. “Our 
contribution to the world is to challenge the status quo by redefining play and 
reimagining learning,” says the foundation’s mission statement.

Part of the mission involves putting £4m into a new “Lego professorship” at 
Cambridge University – the first incumbent will be chosen in April – and 
supporting an accompanying Centre for Research on Play in Education, 
Development and Learning (Pedal). There are more links with Harvard, MIT and 
other prestigious institutions. The aim is to provide an incontrovertible 
academic underpinning to the educational value of play, and to define more 
clearly what works and how to measure it, arming Lego with more evidence to 
support its campaigning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940accaba3bc869651551f68529bd1740f3a5a0f%2F0_0_2832_3536%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Children%20should%20learn%20mainly%20through%20play%20until%20age%20of%20eight%2C%20says%20Lego&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Children%20should%20learn%20mainly%20through%20play%20until%20age%20of%20eight%2C%20says%20Lego&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F940accaba3bc869651551f68529bd1740f3a5a0f%2F0_0_2832_3536%2F2832.jpg>
 Hanne Rasmussen, head of the Lego Foundation: ‘In the early years – up to 
around eight – a play-based methodology makes a lot of sense’. 
But can a toy company – albeit the largest in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/mar/01/star-wars-and-frozen-help-lego-to-1bn-pound-profits-for-2015?CMP=twt_gu>
 and so famous that its every move makes news (David Beckham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2014/feb/02/beckham-lego-calm-football-star-stress>
 builds Lego “to relax”;Ai Weiwei 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/oct/25/ai-weiwei-swamped-by-lego-donation-offers-after-ban-on-use-for-political-artwork>
 embarrassed “non-political” Lego into bulk-selling him bricks for art) – 
really influence the way our children learn? Conquering the globe with little 
red and yellow bricks is one thing; changing the minds of governments is 
another.

As a child in Denmark in the 1970s, Rasmussen recalls there was more time to 
play simply because there were fewer of the planned activities that clog up the 
timetables of today’s over-scheduled children. “We had more room to actually 
engage and keep ourselves entertained and we learned through that and we grew 
in many different ways through that,” she says. She and her sister played with 
Lego, but Rasmussen’s real joy was her years in the sea scouts, when she and 
three or four other teens would island-hop at weekends on a small boat off the 
coast close to the Danish capital, adult-free and entirely independent.

“All over the world, we see parents spending much energy doing the best for 
their child, and play is not on that list because they don’t have the 
background to understand what it could do.”

The problem is not that parents don’t have their child’s best interests at 
heart, she says. But “global competition, economic development – that has put 
fear or a concern into parents and into governments over how do we become 
relevant in 15 years or even right now”.

Countries fear seeing their young people left behind, their workforce made 
irrelevant. “And in that situation what the parent says is, ‘I want my child to 
have a job, without a job the child will not have a good life, so what can I do 
to prepare the child?’ And the answer often ends up being more focus on 
specific skills, and earlier and earlier.”

Rasmussen laments that “barriers in systems – school systems, homes, 
longstanding institutions that run on their own structures and methodologies” 
make it a “heavy, heavy task” to change things. Here in the UK – with a school 
starting age some three years earlier than that of our Scandinavian neighbours, 
“instructional” learning from the outset and external testing of 
seven-year-olds in literacy and numeracy – the barriers look pretty solid.

Lego identifies five types of play – physical, symbolic, with rules, with 
objects, and pretence – and points to the variety of skills developed through 
each. Even tech-driven play – that source of guilt and respite for so many 
parents – can fit in: not mindless screen-gawping but activities in which 
children can “engage with the technology”, or what Lego calls “hands-on, 
minds-on”. Its second definition of play is a playful state of mind in which, 
Rasmussen says, “you are open and try different things and are in a positive 
flow”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c75120485b9c3aacd8f52ae23d4860f1dd9b9b%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Children%20should%20learn%20mainly%20through%20play%20until%20age%20of%20eight%2C%20says%20Lego&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Children%20should%20learn%20mainly%20through%20play%20until%20age%20of%20eight%2C%20says%20Lego&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fmar%2F15%2Fchildren-learn-play-age-eight-lego%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7c75120485b9c3aacd8f52ae23d4860f1dd9b9b%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 Lego says the brick ‘is a very, very valuable tool in learning through play 
but is it the only way or only tool’. Photograph: Jim Watson/AFP/Getty 
Nailing the benefits of play seems a bit like describing beauty – the essence 
of it seems somehow diminished by scientific analysis – but research findings 
are accumulating.

A Cambridge University project, funded by the foundation, saw children devise, 
tell and act out stories with Lego before writing them down, with play shown to 
boost narrative and writing skills, as well as interaction and cooperation. The 
Cambridge study centre will now look into how early play relates to other 
aspects of young children’s development, explore what happens to the brain 
during play and conduct a longitudinal study examining what promotes children’s 
playfulness and how it helps learning and wellbeing.

With strong evidence of the power of play, parents and politicians can be 
convinced, Rasmussen says. It’s not a question of rejecting the importance of 
the “content” so beloved of Conservative education secretaries, “but things are 
changing so fast in our society so the understanding of how you gain and use 
content knowledge is for us much, much more important. It has to be a balance. 
You need skills to interact with others, to be able to seek knowledge yourself, 
because learnings will get outdated.”

An early school starting age need not necessarily be harmful, she says, 
providing the learning is based on whole-child development and not “sitting at 
a desk”. But, in contrast to the UK system, she advocates children learning 
through play well into key stage 2: “In the early years – and that’s up to 
around eight – a play-based methodology makes a lot of sense.” She cites New 
Zealand research indicating that early formal literacy lessons do not make 
children any better readers by age 11, and may even put them off reading.

If Lego is right, then in Britain, with our early formal schooling, we’re 
getting it wrong. Critics might say that the Lego Foundation – though separate 
from Lego’s commercial arm – is simply about flogging more models of the Star 
Wars Millennium Falcon. But, Rasmussen points out, Lego isn’t producing 
pro-play research itself: the findings come from some of the most esteemed 
universities on the planet. The Lego link does not compromise the argument, she 
insists. “We certainly believe the brick is a very, very valuable tool in 
learning through play but is it the only way or only tool? No, certainly not.”

Can Lego really persuade fearful parents and governments to trust in play? 
It’s a safe bet that most of its audience will at some time have locked a few 
Lego bricks together – and just might be willing to listen.
 