
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> from the poorest 
backgrounds who live in some of the most disadvantaged areas of the country 
leave secondary school having made almost two years’ less progress than their 
wealthier peers living elsewhere, according to a new report.

The findings are based on a comparison of student progress in six regions of 
the country – recently highlighted by the government as areas of particularly 
lowsocial mobility <https://www.theguardian.com/society/socialmobility> – with 
pupil progress elsewhere in England.

And while the problem is long-standing, the report concludes that among 
disadvantaged children, the progress gap in these areas has “grown 
dramatically” in the last five years.

The report, entitled Ambitious for Every Child 
<http://www.ambitionschoolleadership.org.uk/news/disadvantaged-children-less-progress-opportunity-areas/>
 and published on Tuesday, follows an announcement in October by the education 
secretary, Justine Greening, of a £60m investment insix so-called “opportunity 
areas” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37554334> – Norwich, Blackpool, 
Derby, Oldham, Scarborough and west Somerset – to try to boost social mobility 
rates which remain stubbornly low.

It’s no surprise that white working-class boys do badly at school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/18/its-no-surprise-that-white-working-class-boys-do-badly-at-school>
The study found that the most persistently disadvantaged pupils, those who 
were on free school meals (FSM) for 80% of their time at secondary school, were 
20.1 months behind by the age of 16, compared with non-disadvantaged children 
across England.


But even those children not classed as disadvantaged but living in one of the 
opportunity areas are falling behind their peers nationally, making almost five 
months less progress than pupils elsewhere.

The report has been compiled by a new education charity, Ambition School 
Leadership (ASL), which identifies and develops high-quality school leaders and 
places them in challenging schools as a way of improving attainment and 
extending equality of opportunity to children across the country.

It finds that the progress gap in the government’s six opportunity areas has 
grown every year from 2010 to 2015 – increasing by 3.6 months for 
non-disadvantaged pupils and 8.3 months for persistently disadvantaged students.

It also reveals that schools in these areas were most likely to see a fall in 
Ofsted’s grading of their leadership and management. About 18% of schools rated 
as having “good” or “outstanding” leadership in 2010 went down to “requires 
improvement” or “inadequate” by 2016.

My social mobility journey feels more like an exhausting, endless quest | 
Poppy Noor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/social-mobility-working-class-graduate-britain>
The report concludes: “Action is needed to stop the decline in progress in 
disadvantaged areas. We must increase the number of high-quality leaders in 
these areas and support those in post, so that schools have enough leaders 
capable of improving school performance, closing the progress gap and ensuring 
positive outcomes for pupils.”

Last week the government’s social mobility commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/16/uks-social-mobility-problem-holding-back-thatcher-generation-says-report>
 delivered its annual state of the nation report which found that “Britain has 
a deep social mobility problem which is getting worse for an entire generation 
of young people”.

“The rungs on the social mobility ladder are growing further apart,” said Alan 
Milburn, the former Labour MP who chairs the commission. “It is becomingharder 
for this generation of struggling families to move up 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/16/uks-social-mobility-problem-holding-back-thatcher-generation-says-report>
.”

Commenting on the ASL report, Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National 
Association of Head Teachers (NAHT), said: “We know that social disadvantage 
easily becomes entrenched, with low educational attainment and poverty 
exacerbating each other.


“We also know that without the right interventions and support, the most 
disadvantaged pupils tend to fare the worst. Headline-grabbing government 
policies like grammar schools rarely work for these children. Ensuring they get 
great teaching from the earliest age does.”

Secret Teacher: An invasive alien species is taking over education
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/19/secret-teacher-an-invasive-alien-species-is-taking-over-education>
James Toop, ASL chief executive, said: “Addressing social mobility has to 
start with great schools. Great schools have to start with exceptional school 
leadership at all levels. It’s these leaders who raise the expectations and 
self belief of pupils, parents and staff.

“Our new organisation is a chance to make this happen. We develop school 
leaders – from heads of department to head teachers and beyond – because we 
know great leaders at all levels make great schools.”

 