
The Chinese navy has seized an underwater drone in plain sight of the American 
sailors who had deployed it in international waters, in a seemingly brazen 
message to the incoming Trump administration.

According to a US defence official, the unmanned glider had come to the 
surface of the water in the SouthChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
 Sea and was about to be retrieved by the USNS Bowditch, an oceanographic and 
surveillance ship, when a Chinese naval vessel that had been shadowing the 
Bowditch put a small boat in the water.

Chinese sailors in the small boat came alongside the drone and grabbed it 
despite the radioed protests from the Bowditch that it was US property in 
international waters. The incident happened about 100 miles north-west of the 
Philippines’ port of Subic Bay.

The US has issued a formal protest and demanded the return of the glider.

Peter Cook, the Pentagon press secretary, said the Bowditch made radio contact 
with the Chinese ship and asked for the glider to be returned. “The radio 
contact was acknowledged by the [Chinese] navy ship, but the request was 
ignored,” Cook said.
Where the drone was captured 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/maps/embed/dec/2016-12-16T17:23:16.html> 
“The UUV [unmanned underwater vehicle] is a sovereign immune vessel of the 
United States. We call upon China to return our UUV immediately, and to comply 
with all of its obligations under international law.”

The aggressive Chinese gesture comes at a time of rising tensions between 
China and the US in the South China Sea, where Beijing has claimed ownership of 
a number of reefs and small islands – which it isin the process of militarising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
 – while the US navy has been conducting patrols nearby to assert freedom of 
navigation in the sea lanes.

The tension has spiked since Donald Trump was elected in November. The US 
president-elect quickly broke a 37-year protocol by taking a call from the 
president of Taiwan, and openly questioned Washington’s longstanding “one 
China” policy that does not recognise Taiwan as a separate state. Beijing has 
signalled it would respond dramatically if Trump implements a break in policy 
once he takes office on 20 January. In recent days, China has conducted bomber 
patrols close to Taiwan in a flexing of its military muscle.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20warns%20Trump%20of%20damage%20to%20bilateral%20relations%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fchina-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video&media=>
China warns Trump of damage to bilateral relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/12/china-warns-trump-of-damage-to-bilateral-relations-video>
The seizure of the drone is also a reflection of the struggle occurring under 
the surface of the South China Sea. As China develops a strategic submarine 
fleet, with the potential to carry nuclear missiles out into the Pacific Ocean, 
the US has built up a monitoring network designed to spot Chinese submarines as 
they leave their bases. Drones are key to the network, and there is a race 
under waybetween major naval powers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/16/trident-old-technology-brave-new-world-cyber-warfare>
to develop drones that can work together in swarms and “see” long distances 
through the water. Underwater gliders are drones that can stay underwater on 
the lookout for submarines for long periods of time.

“This looks like signalling from the Chinese in response to Trump’s Taiwan 
call,” said Bonnie Glaser, the director of the China Power Project at the 
Centre for Strategic and International Studies. “It is hard to believe this is 
the action of an independent commander. The Chinese now have much better 
control over the military, particularly the navy. It is in China’s interest to 
send signals before Trump is inaugurated, so that he gets the message and be 
more restrained once he is office.”

Sebastian Brixey-Williams of the British American Security Information Council 
said: “Nuclear states are increasing anxious about unmanned underwater vehicles 
(UUVs, or underwater drones) autonomously tracking their nuclear ballistic 
missile submarines (SSBNs), making them vulnerable to antisubmarine warfare. 
This is an issue for China in particular, whose SSBN fleet is small and noisy. 
Though the USNS Bowditch is an oceanographic ship and may sound harmless, the 
kinds of data it is collecting will make Chinese submarines easier to find over 
time.

“China therefore accomplishes a number of things by seizing a US underwater 
drone,” Brixey-Williams said. “It allows Chinese scientists to better 
understand the US’s offensive technical capabilities in this area, and 
potentially allows them to reverse-engineer them, bringing gains in both the 
commercial and military spheres.”

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
Glaser pointed out that the Chinese have frequently tested the US when there 
is a new administration. In the early months of the George W Bush 
administration, in 2001, the Bowditch was involved in aclose encounter 
<http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/world/war/south-china-sea-2009.htm> 
with a Chinese frigate which turned on its gun control radar and forced it to 
retreat. A week later there was a collision between a US spy plane and Chinese 
warplane off China’s Hainan island.

At about the same point in the early Obama administration, in March 2009, a 
number of Chinese navy shipsharassed another US oceanographic vessel 
<http://www.cnn.com/2009/POLITICS/03/09/us.navy.china/index.html?eref=rss_us>, 
the USNS Impeccable, coming as close as 50ft away, trying to snag its acoustic 
equipment with hooks, waving flags and demanding the Impeccable leave the area.
 