
China’s total debt was more than double its gross domestic product in 2015, a 
government economist has said, warning that debt linkages between the state and 
industry could be “fatal” for the world’s second largest economy.


The country’s debt has ballooned to almost 250% of GDP thanks to Beijing’s 
repeated use of cheap credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/chinese-central-bank-chief-hints-at-more-stimulus-for-slowing-economy>
 to stimulate slowing growth, unleashing a massive, debt-fuelled spending binge.

While the stimulus may help the country post better growth numbers in the near 
term, analysts say the rebound might be short-lived.

The bad smell hovering over the global economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/17/central-bank-global-economy-helicopter-money>
China’s borrowings hit 168.48 trillion yuan ($25.6 trillion) at the end of 
last year, equivalent to 249% of economic output, Li Yang, a senior researcher 
with the leading government think-tank theChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Academy of Social Sciences (CASS), 
has told reporters.

But the huge number, which includes government, corporate and household 
borrowings, was lower than some non-government estimates.

The consulting firm McKinsey Group said earlier this year that the country’s 
total debt had quadrupled since 2007 andwas likely as high as $28 trillion by 
mid-2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/feb/05/global-debt-has-grown-by-57-trillion-in-seven-years-following-the-financial-crisis>
.

The debt-to-GDP ratio is not the highest in the world. The US has a ratio of 
331%, for example, much of which is accounted for by federal debt.


But part of the concern about China’s massive debt binge is that the most 
worrying risks lie in the non-financial corporate sector, where the debt-to-GDP 
ratio was estimated at 156%. This sector includes the liabilities of local 
government financing vehicles, Li said.

Many of the companies in question are state-owned firms that borrowed heavily 
from government-backed banks and so problems with the sector could ultimately 
trigger “systemic risks” in the economy, he said.

“The gravity of China’s non-financial corporate debt is that if problems occur 
with it, China’s financial system will have problems immediately,” Li said.

He added that the problem would also affect state coffers because Chinese 
banks are “closely linked to the government”.

China's 'feud' over economic reform reveals depth of Xi Jinping's secret state
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/26/chinas-feud-over-economic-reform-reveals-depth-of-xi-jinpings-secret-state>
“It’s a fatal issue in China. Because of such a link, it is probably more 
urgent for China than other countries to resolve the debt problem,” he said.

Speaking earlier this week, David Lipton, first deputy managing director with 
the International Monetary Fund, also singled out China’s corporate borrowing 
as a major concern, warning addressing the issue is “imperative to avoid 
serious problems down the road”.

Despite the concerns, China is having difficulty kicking its credit addiction. 
On Wednesday, the People’s Bank of China announced that new loans extended by 
banks jumped to 985.5 billion yuan last month, up from 555.6 billion yuan in 
April.

The country’s economy grew 6.9% last year, the slowest rate in a quarter of a 
century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/19/china-economy-grows-at-slowest-pace-in-25-years-latest-gdp-figures-show>
, and weakening economic figures have signalled the slowdown has continued this 
year.
 