
China’s government has ordered that all Chinese history textbooks be rewritten 
to extend the second Sino-Japanese war by six years, a move likely to inflame 
relations withJapan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>.

The conflict, which has been known for generations in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> as the “eight-year war of resistance 
against Japanese aggression”, is usually recorded as starting in 1937 and 
ending in 1945. However, in a statement on Wednesday, President Xi Jinping’s 
government renamed the conflict the “14-year war of resistance against Japanese 
aggression” and has ordered that textbooks be revised to record it as lasting 
from 1931 until 1945.

The decision means China officially considers that the second Sino-Japanese 
war started in autumn of 1931, when the Imperial Japanese army invaded 
Manchuria, rather than six years later during the Marco Polo Bridge incident, 
when Japanese and Chinese troops fought along a rail line south-west of 
Beijing. This event has traditionally been considered by historians everywhere 
as the start of full-scale conflict between the two countries.

In recent years, President Xi has worked hard to promote the achievements of 
the communists during the second world war, despite many historians arguing 
that it was the Chinese nationalist party, not the communists, who did most of 
the fighting and led efforts to negotiate a truce with Japan before 1937.

The Communist party has not previously emphasised its role in the country’s 
conflict with Japan before 1937, a period when communist forces were engaged in 
a civil war with the Kuomintang nationalists, led by Chiang Kai-shek. It was 
not until 1937 that the communists and nationalists joined forces to fight the 
Japanese army.

Historian Antony Beevor told the Guardian that while there has long been a 
debate about the start of the war, China’s decision to revise the dates “does 
show weakness rather than strength”.

“The Communist party did very little to resist the Japanese during 1931-37, so 
why try to pretend otherwise? I can only imagine that this is an attempt to 
reverse the recent tide of historiography, which has recognised that Chiang 
Kai-Shek and the nationalists had been very unfairly treated not just by 
Chinese communist dogma, but also by the US administration and journalists of 
the time,” he said.

Beevor, whose book The Second World War begins with Japan’s invasion of 
Manchuria in 1931, said it was hard to tell how Japan would react.

“The invasion of Manchuria was brutal colonialism, but the Sino-Japanese war 
from 1937 was a semi-genocidal war, comparable only to Hitler’s invasion of the 
Soviet Union,” he said.

Zhang Lifan, a historian in Beijing, told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/12/29/world/asia/japan-fights-a-political-battle-using-history-texts.html>
 that while revising the dates was justified in terms of historical accuracy, 
the decision would have been motivated by the possible political benefits for 
the Communist party and may encourage anti-Japanese sentiment.

“Chinese leaders still have a cold war mentality,” he said. “They’ve tried to 
conjure up imaginary enemies in the world.”

Yasuhisa Kawamura, press secretary for the Japanese ministry of foreign 
affairs, said on Thursday that China did not have the power to decide when the 
conflict started. “It is important that Japan and China should demonstrate they 
do not focus excessively on the unfortunate past,” he said.

Japan’s government has been criticised in the past for attempts to revise 
school textbooks to remove or downplay instances of Japanese military 
aggression, which critics fear may push the country farther from its postwar 
pacifism. In 2007, Shinzo Abe’s conservative government ordered history books 
change all references to forced suicides during the second world war.

In 2013, plans were mooted that would require all Japanese textbooks to 
include viewpoints of nationalist scholars on contentious historical data, 
including the death toll of the 1937 massacre in Nanking of Chinese civilians 
by Japanese soldiers. China’s official estimate is 300,000, but most Japanese 
scholars say that figure is a vast exaggeration.
 