
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has overtaken the US to become 
the biggest car market in the world as government policy initiatives spur 
demand.

China sold more than 13.5m vehicles last year, the official Xinhua news agency 
said today, compared with 10.4m cars and light trucks sold in the US, the 
lowest level in 27 years.

The Chinese tally includes heavy vehicles but is still higher than that of the 
US after roughly 650,000 units of heavy trucks are deducted, according to 
Orient Securities, the Chinese brokerage.

China's market grew by 45% year-on-year in 2009, providing a rare glimmer of 
hope for the world's beleaguered car manufacturers, such as General Motors, 
Volkswagen and Toyota. Total industry sales fell 21% in the formerly dominant 
US market, and Volkswagen has said that China is now its biggest market.

"This is even better than anyone expected," said Rao Da, secretary general of 
the China Passenger Car Association, at a news conference in Shanghai.

China was not expected to exceed the US market until 2020 but the speed with 
which the recession affected consumers in the States combined with incentives 
from the Beijing government to help buyers accelerate the trend.

China's communist government cut sales taxes on smaller, fuel-efficient cars 
and spent $730m (Â£450m) on subsidies for buyers of larger cars, pickup trucks 
and minivans. Stimulus spending on building highways and other public works 
also helped to boost sales of trucks used in construction.

Rao said that car sales this year could grow by another 20% so long as China's 
economic recovery continued and oil prices remained stable.

Motor manufacturers are looking to first-time buyers in smaller Chinese cities 
to help drive sales as incomes outside the country's prosperous east coast rise.

"People there are getting richer and can afford cars. Younger people can work 
for two or three years and with the help of their parents can buy a car," Rao 
said. "Being able to afford a car in China is not so difficult any more. People 
with an average salary can afford to buy a car."
 