
Asia’s mountains of hazardous electronic trash, or e-waste, are growing 
rapidly, new research reveals, withChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> leading the way.

A record 16m tonnes of electronic trash, containing both toxic and valuable 
materials, were generated in a single year – up 63% in five years, new analysis 
looking at 12 countries in east and south-east Asia shows.

In China the mountain of discarded TVs, phones, computers, monitors, e-toys 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/18/the-e-waste-reduce-waste-old-technology-mountains-in-pictures>
 and small appliances grew by 6.7m tonnes in 2015 alone. That’s an 107% 
increase in just five years. To get a sense of scale, if every woman, man and 
child in China had an old LCD monitor and dumped it the pile would not equal 
the 2015 tonnage. [1]

The region’s fast-increasing middle class is the main driver of e-waste 
increases, not population growth, the report by theUnited Nations University 
found <http://bit.ly/2i8Q9X2>. However, Asia’s 3.7kg per person of waste is 
stilltiny compared to Europe’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/19/worlds-mountain-of-electrical-waste-reaches-new-peak-of-42m-tonnes>
 15.6 kg per person, it said.

The e-waste mountains - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/18/the-e-waste-reduce-waste-old-technology-mountains-in-pictures>
“Growing incomes, the creation of more and more gadgets and ever-shorter 
lifespans of things like mobile phones are the reasons for this tremendous 
increase in Asia,” said co-author Ruediger Kuehr of the UN University.

Electronics and electrical devices have a big eco footprint, meaning their 
manufacture consumes a lot of energy and water, along with valuable and 
sometimes scarce resources, making recycling and recovery very important. The 
increasing volumes of e-waste combined with a lack of environmentally sound 
management is a cause for concern, said Kuehr.

“We risk future production of these devices and very high costs without 
recycling the materials,” he said.



Although plenty of e-waste is recycled in Asia it’s mainly done by backyard 
businesses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/10/china-secret-lives-urban-waste-pickers>
 who resort to hammers and burning to access re-usable metals, resulting in 
local pollution and health impacts. Mobile phones, TVs, monitors, printers and 
other electronics contain hazardous materials such as mercury and lead. Ink 
toner from printers is also considered toxic.

Much of Asia’s e-waste comes from Europe and North America despite 
restrictions on exports and imports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/dec/14/toxic-ewaste-illegal-dumping-developing-countries>
 by most countries, said Jim Puckett, coordinator of the NGO Basel Action 
Network (BAN).

China: the secret lives of urban waste pickers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/10/china-secret-lives-urban-waste-pickers>
The scale of e-waste exported to Asia has previously been difficult to 
estimate. BAN put GPS trackers inside old printers and monitors sent to 
recycling centres in the US last year to enable them to get a clearer picture. 
About 40% left the US with most ending up in Asia.Nearly all of these exports 
were illegal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/12/up-to-90-of-worlds-electronic-waste-is-illegally-dumped-says-un>
 under US law. “Some of the trackers died so it’s likely 50% were exported,” 
Puckett said.

China, once a big importer of e-waste, has cracked down but Hong Kong has 
picked up the slack, with an estimated 100 containers of e-waste entering the 
port each day Puckett said. “There are at least a 100 small e-waste junk yards 
in a semi-rural part ofHong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> 
called the New Territories. That’s where we found most of the printers and 
monitors with our trackers.”

A similar investigation to track where Europe’s e-waste is really going is now 
being planned by BAN.

Proper recycling of electronics is costly and expensive and is rarely done, 
even in the US. Manufacturers need to remove all toxins from their products and 
make them easier to repair and recycle, said Puckett. Another solution in 
Puckett’s view is to adopt a lease-based business model where people lease 
rather than buy most electronics, and use upgrades or trade-ins to get the 
latest features.

• [1] My estimate based on the average weight of a 17in LCD monitor – 4.5 kgs. 
So 220 monitors would weigh 1 tonne

 