
China has stepped up its rhetoric against Donald Trump, with a Communist 
party-controlled newspaper declaring Beijing will have no choice but to “take 
off the gloves” if the incoming president insists on tearing open a Pandora’s 
box overTaiwan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan>.

Taiwan’s assertive president, Tsai Ing-wen, meanwhile declared her country’s 
determination to “walk on the international stage” aftertwo stopovers in the US 
that angered Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/ted-cruz-meets-taiwan-president-china-trump>
.


The China Daily warned on Monday that Beijing needed to ready itself for a 
“costly” battle with the property tycoon after he takes office on 20 January. 
An editorial said Trump’s repeated threats to abandon the “one China” policy 
couldno longer be dismissed as “bluster or miscalculation” 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/2017-01/15/content_27959479.htm> but 
instead appeared to be a deliberate and intolerable ploy designed to extract 
concessions from Beijing.

“If Trump is determined to use this gambit on taking office, a period of 
fierce, damaging interactions will be unavoidable, as Beijing will have no 
choice but to take off the gloves,” warned theChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Daily, which the Chinese government 
uses as an international mouthpiece for its views.

The editorial was accompanied by a cartoon of Trump brandishing a hand grenade 
labelled “Trump’s China Policy”.
Tom Phillips (@tomphillipsin) 
The @ChinaDailyUSA <https://twitter.com/ChinaDailyUSA> says Beijing should 
prepare to 'take off the gloves' with@realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> pic.twitter.com/hEYirHkCxw 
<https://t.co/hEYirHkCxw>
 <https://twitter.com/tomphillipsin/status/820833079501750272> January 16, 2017
 <https://twitter.com/tomphillipsin/status/820833079501750272> 
An editorial in the Global Times, a ferociously nationalist party-run tabloid, 
accused Trump of behaving like “a rookie” whose “amateurish” foreign policy 
steps threatened to plunge the world into chaos.


“We find him risible, <http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1028870.shtml>” the 
newspaper said.

Under a nearly four-decade old policy, the United States has acknowledged 
Beijing’s position that there is only one China. The US has formal ties with 
China rather than the island of Taiwan, which Beijing sees as a breakaway 
province to be reunified with the mainland one day.

After attacking China repeatedly during the election campaign, Trump has 
continued in the same vein with critical Twitter messages over its alleged 
currency manipulation, military moves in the South China Sea, and for not doing 
enough to restrain North Korea’s nuclear and missile programmes.


Beijing had called on Washington to prevent Tsai’s two stopovers on US soil 
and uphold the “one China” policy. China has regularlyvoiced its fury with Trump
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/china-warns-trump-that-taiwan-policy-is-non-negotiable>
 since he spoke by phone with Tsai after winning the US presidential election. 
It was the first time a US president or president-elect had spoken to Taiwan’s 
leader since “one China” became the official diplomatic status quo in 1979.

On Sunday, Tsai was making no apologies as she returned to Taiwan from her 
trip to the Americas, which included US meetings withTexas Republican Senator 
Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/ted-cruz-meets-taiwan-president-china-trump>
 and state governor Greg Abbott, as well as a visit to the headquarters of 
Twitter in San Francisco.

Tsai said the trip, which took her on to Central America, elevated the 
island’s international profile.

“Our first objective [of this trip] was to consolidate our state friendships 
and allow Taiwan to walk on the international stage,” Tsai said at Taiwan’s 
international airport upon her return.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwe-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151783c3a59eb4ff1afbc8287bbfa7d31ff0b1cd%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20threatens%20to%20'take%20off%20the%20gloves'%20if%20Trump%20rips%20up%20status%20quo%20on%20Taiwan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwe-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20threatens%20to%20%27take%20off%20the%20gloves%27%20if%20Trump%20rips%20up%20status%20quo%20on%20Taiwan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fwe-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F151783c3a59eb4ff1afbc8287bbfa7d31ff0b1cd%2F0_0_3500_2102%2F3500.jpg>
 Tsai Ing-wen waves to supporters ahead of her departure from California bound 
for Taiwan. Photograph: Stephen Lam/Reuters 
 She said she had bilateral talks with four heads of state in Central America. 
“We also grasped the opportunity during our short transit time in the United 
States to visit industries and talk with important people in America,” Tsai 
said.

 US officials had said Tsai’s transit stops were based on longstanding US 
practice and Tsai’s office had characterised her meetings there as private and 
unofficial.
 