
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> will ban all domestic ivory 
trade and processing by the end of 2017, state media reported on Friday, in a 
move hailed by activists as a gamechanger for Africa’s elephants.

African ivory is highly sought after in China where it is seen as a status 
symbol and prices for a kilo (2.2 pounds) can reach as much as $1,100 (£890).

“China will gradually stop the processing and sales of ivories for commercial 
purposes by the end of 2017,” the official Xinhua news agency said, citing a 
government statement.

The announcement follows Beijing’s move in March to widen a ban on imports of 
all ivory and ivory products acquired before 1975 afterpressure to restrict a 
trade that sees thousands of elephants slaughtered every year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/29/china-agrees-to-phase-out-its-ivory-industry-to-combat-elephant-poaching>

Xinhua said the complete ban would affect “34 processing enterprises and 143 
designated trading venues, with dozens to be closed by the end of March 2017”.

“This is great news that will shut down the world’s largest market for 
elephant ivory,” Aili Kang, executive director of the WildlifeConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society in Asia, said in 
a statement.

“I am very proud of my country for showing this leadership that will help 
ensure that elephants have a fighting chance to beat extinction. This is a 
gamechanger for Africa’s elephants.”

Conservationists estimate that more than 20,000 elephants were killed for 
their ivory last year, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/16/angry-one-culled-elephant-20000-poached>
 with similar tolls in previous years. The WWF campaign group says 415,000 of 
the animals remain.

Saving Africa's elephants: 'Can you imagine them no longer existing?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/01/frontline-bloody-battle-save-africa-elephants>
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and 
Flora (CITES), which took effect in 1975, banned the ivory trade in 1989.

Like other countries, China permits the resale of ivory bought before the 1989 
ban – and also has a stockpile purchased with CITES approval in 2008, which it 
releases for sale with certification.

The WWF also praised China’s move to a complete ban but called on the Chinese 
territory of Hong Kong to bring forward a plan to end its ivory trade by 2021.

“With China’s market closed, Hong Kong can become a preferred market for 
traffickers to launder illegal ivory under cover of the legal ivory trade,” 
said Cheryl Lo, senior wildlife crime officer at the WWF.
 