
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> is set to announce when it 
will close its legal ivory carving factories, 18 months after pledging to act.

Last year, the world’s largest market for both legal and illegal ivory said it 
would shut down commercial sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/29/china-agrees-to-phase-out-its-ivory-industry-to-combat-elephant-poaching>
 within the country. But did not set a timeline.

At the time, conservationists described the announcement as the “single 
greatest measure” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/29/china-agrees-to-phase-out-its-ivory-industry-to-combat-elephant-poaching>
 in the fight to save elephants from poaching. Wildlife advocates have since
urged Beijing to get on with the job 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2016-08/31/content_26658806.htm>.

“The preparation for the domestic ivory trade ban is under way in China,” Zhou 
Fei, head of the China programme at wildlife trade watchdog Traffic, told the 
Guardian. “According to our information, most of the legal ivory vendors are 
developing alternative business. The ivory price of both legal and illegal 
ivory products dropped.”

Legal ivory carvers in China use tusks imported during one-off, sanctioned 
sales from Africa. Advocates for the total ban believe it will discourage local 
demand for black market ivory and shut off smugglers’ attempts to launder 
poached tusks into legal markets.

In a bilateral announcement 
<http://www.cctv-america.com/2016/06/07/full-text-2016-china-u-s-strategic-and-economic-dialogue-strategic-fact-sheet>
 with the US in July, China pledged to set a timeline for the phase out of its 
market by the end of this year. WildAid’s executive director Peter Knights told 
the Guardian that he believed the government would honour that pledge.

“I think the Chinese government is serious about shutting down the domestic 
market in ivory in China,” Wildlife Conservation Society ivory trade policy 
analyst Simon Hedgestold a Guardian Q&A last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2016/nov/18/live-qa-elephants-critically-endangered-how-save-them#comment-87991014>
.

“Our government is serious upon any promise made to the world,” said Wei Ji, 
an independent wildlife researcher who does consulting work for China’s largest 
environmental NGO.

Ivory carving is designated as “intangible cultural heritage” in China. The 
government wants to make the transition easy on those who make a living carving 
and selling ivory from existing legal stockpiles. The State Forestry 
Administration, which manages the ivory trade, has completed a feasibility 
study in which it interviewed many of the legal traders. But the results will 
not be made public.

Wei said: “There is not much resistance from the Chinese public, because the 
legal market in China is relatively small. Only 34 manufacturers and 130 
retailer shops are licensed.”

But Isabel Hilton, founder of the chinadialogue 
<https://www.chinadialogue.net/> website, told the Guardian Q&A that the signal 
from the top of the Chinese government may not be as influential or effective 
as some campaigners believe.

“China often resists legislation for as long as possible, then acts when the 
diplomatic costs become too high. But that is not the same as effective 
enforcement. China is a very big country, Beijing’s reach is less effective 
than many outsiders imagine, and enforcement may not be a priority,” said 
Hilton.

The US state department has made strong representations to China to secure the 
commitment to shut down its local trade. With the USfollowing China’s lead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/02/us-adopts-near-total-ban-on-commercial-ivory-trade>
 this year and adopting a near total ban on the trade.

But conservationists have raised concerns that Europe’s expanding 
international ivory exports may undermine the diplomatic pressure for China to 
implement and police the shut down in a robust way.

“There is a concern among the western world that the longer that China leaves 
telling us how it’s going to implement its plan, there is an increased danger 
that they might dilute the legislation that they were going to introduce, said 
Tusk CEO Charlie Mayhew.

“And there is a concern that the lack of momentum from Europe, and in 
particular the UK, could provide them with an argument as to why they don’t 
need to fully implement their plan,” he said.

Europe is the biggest legal exporter of ivory on earth. The number of tusks 
sold from member states jumped significantly in recent years.Traffic analysis 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52016SC0038&from=EN>
 of the international trade database showed that the EU exported more than 300 
raw tusks in 2013 and 2014. The EU has only ever sent more than 100 tusks 
offshore once in the past decade.

Chinese and Hong Kong buyers were the recipients of 92% of the tusks. The data 
also shows shipments of ivory carvings also jumped in recent years.
Conservationists have also criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/conservationists-and-mps-call-for-a-total-uk-ban-on-ivory-sales>
 the UK for allowing antique ivory sales to continue.

Following his two-part BBC documentary on the ivory trade 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/proginfo/2016/43/hugh-and-the-ivory-war>, 
environmental campaigner and celebrity chef Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall called 
for the EU to cease its ivory exports.


“There are now rumours that China might be backtracking, and that this may be 
partly because it is just not seeing international solidarity on this issue,” 
he told the Guardian. “It really seems as if China is now saying, maybe we’re 
not in such a hurry to do this, because the UK and other EU countries seem to 
be quite happy to sell their ivory to us.” A petition on theUK government 
website <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/165905> calling for the 
closure of the domestic ivory market in the UK has already got nearly 80,000 
signatures and a parliamentary debate will be triggered when it hits 100,000.

At a recent wildlife trade convention meeting in South Africa, the EU voted as 
a bloc and helped defeat a motion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/06/african-wildlife-officials-appalled-as-eu-opposes-a-total-ban-on-ivory-trade>
 to put the African elephant on the highest level of protection.

The move was also opposed by some southern African countries where elephants 
are in their highest numbers, said Wei.

“I think the international environment is at the moment the biggest challenge 
for China to take further action,” he said. “Although I have no idea of what 
and when the final decision of our government towards domestic market would be, 
the decision would come out and would most probably respect the will of the 
majority of the world and take different voices from range states seriously 
into consideration.”
 