
China has warned Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 that he has no chance of striking a deal with Beijing involving Taiwan’s 
political status following the US president-elect’s latest controversial 
intervention on the subject.

The Chinese foreign ministry told Trump that the US’s longstanding “One China” 
policy, by which it does not challenge Beijing’s claim over the self-ruled 
island, was the political basis for all Sino-US relations.

In an interview with the Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-sets-a-bar-for-russia-and-china-1484360380>
 on Saturday Trump said all options were on the table as he considered how he 
might reshape Washington’s relations with China, a country he accused of 
deliberately devaluing its currency in order to hamstring US businesses.

China voices economic fears about Donald Trump presidency
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/china-voices-economic-fears-about-donald-trump-presidency>
“Everything is under negotiation, including ‘One China’,” Trump said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/trump-suggests-he-may-drop-russia-sanctions-if-moscow-helpful>
, referring to the US’s longstanding diplomatic decision not to challenge 
Beijing’s claim that Taiwan, an independently and democratically-ruled island, 
is part of its territory.


China’s foreign ministry hit back in a statement 
<http://www.fmprc.gov.cn/mfa_eng/xwfw_665399/s2510_665401/2535_665405/t1430637.shtml>
 advising Trump, a billionaire property tycoon who has claimed “deals are my 
art form”, that he would never be able to achieve such a deal.

“There is only one China in the world, Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/taiwan> is an inalienable region of China, 
and the government of the People’s Republic of China is the only legitimate 
government representing China,” spokesperson Lu Kang was quoted as saying.

“The ‘One China’ principle, which is the political foundation of the China-US 
relations, is non-negotiable.”

Lu warned the president-elect that the only way to avoid “disruption” to the 
relationship was for him to recognise the “high sensitivity” of the Taiwan 
question and approach the issue with “prudence and honour”.

The latest exchange between Beijing and the incoming president came after Rex 
Tillerson, Trump’s nominee for secretary of state, infuriated Beijing by 
likening its island-building campaign in the South China Sea toRussia’s 
“invasion” of Crimea. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/28/russia-crimea-white-house>

China’s state-run media counter-attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/trump-risks-war-with-beijing-us-blocks-access-south-china-sea-state-media>
, claiming Trump would face a “large-scale war” if the US followed through on 
Tillerson’s threat to deny China access to those artificial islands.

“Tillerson had better bone up on nuclear power strategies if he wants to force 
a big nuclear power to withdraw from its own territories,” the Global Times, a 
Communist party-controlled tabloid, argued in an editorial.

Before Trump’s 8 November election, leading China experts said they suspected 
Beijing was relishing the possibility of a Trump White House as“an enormous 
opportunity” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-tantalized-mayhem-us-election-prospect-thug-donald-trump-president>
.

But the billionaire began ruffling Chinese feathers within days of his 
victory, holdinga 10-minute phone conversation with Taiwanese president Tsai 
Ing-wen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/03/trump-angers-beijing-with-provocative-phone-call-to-taiwan-president>
, the first such call since the US broke off ties with the self-ruled island in 
1979.

Since then the atmosphere between Beijing and Washington has continued to 
sour, with Trump using television interviews and Twitter to criticise China’s 
leaders on a range of issues including North Korea, the SouthChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Sea and their alleged manipulation of 
the yuan.

Trump’s decision to hand notorious China hawk Peter Navarro a position in his 
administration also went down badly in Beijing.

Navarro, a scholar at the University of California, Irvine, has described the 
Chinese government asa despicable, parasitic, brutal, brass-knuckled, crass, 
callous, amoral, ruthless and totally totalitarian imperialist power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/22/brutal-amoral-ruthless-cheating-trumps-trade-industrial-peter-navarro-views-on-china>
.

However, it has been Trump’s threat to overturn longstanding US policy on 
Taiwan – which China regards as a breakaway province – that has caused most 
consternation in Beijing.

 Last month China called on Washington to prevent Tsai from transiting through 
the US, amid speculation that the Taiwanese president was hoping to land a 
protocol-shredding audience with Trump en route to a tour of Central America.

Those calls fell on deaf ears but Tsai is not known to have met with Trump 
while in the US. Instead she visited Twitter’s headquarters in San Francisco on 
Saturday, using the social network to announce her appearance there.

蔡英文 Tsai Ing-wen (@iingwen) 
Had a great visit to @Twitter <https://twitter.com/Twitter> HQ today. Thank 
you to@vijaya <https://twitter.com/vijaya> and team for showing us around! 
pic.twitter.com/m38tmO13d1 <https://t.co/m38tmO13d1>
 <https://twitter.com/iingwen/status/820455592301101056> January 15, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/iingwen/status/820455592301101056> 
The previous weekend Tsai met Republican senator Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/ted-cruz-meets-taiwan-president-china-trump>
 who rejected Beijing’s calls to shun Taiwan’s first female president.


“We will continue to meet with anyone, including the Taiwanese, as we see 
fit,” Cruz said.
 