
When Beijing won the right to host the 2022 Winter Olympics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2015/jul/31/beijing-wins-right-host-winter-olympics-2022>
, it was seen as a real coup for China, even if it only had to beat longshot 
Almaty, Kazakhstan, after all the European contenders had pulled out. After 
all, China doesn’t have much of a winter sports tradition – it won its first 
Olympic gold at the 2002 Salt Lake City games, in speed skating, and it’s never 
won a medal in the skiing events.

But President Xi Jinping is out to remedy this. In grandiose style, the 
government has launched a nationwide initiative to transform 300 million 
non-skiers into winter sports enthusiasts. This may be music to marketers’ 
ears, but how realistic is it?

Numbers of skiers are still relatively modest, but growing rapidly. According 
to a report released in February by China’s biggest real estate developer, 
Vanke, at last month’s Asia Pacific Snow Conference in Beijing, visitors to ski 
resorts in China have increased from fewer than 10,000 a year in the mid-1990s 
to 12.5m last year. And it says there are now 568 resorts in China, up 25% over 
the previous year, and operated by private developers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14e43fc154ba10a1fffaa7c242a8ad898eddd07d%2F0_242_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20ski%20industry%20is%20set%20to%20soar%20following%20Olympic%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20ski%20industry%20is%20set%20to%20soar%20following%20Olympic%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14e43fc154ba10a1fffaa7c242a8ad898eddd07d%2F0_242_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Skiers at the new Thaiwoo ski resort, which will host events at the 2022 
Olympics. Photograph: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
But there are only a handful with facilities on a par with the west. This is 
sure to change, however, as developers back bold new ventures, anticipating an 
Olympics-inspired boom.

The £2.5bn Changbaishan resort, built by China’s Dalian Wanda Group and 
Canadian mountain resort planner Ecosign, has shown the way forward. Opened in 
2012, it has quickly established itself as the country’s top destination, with 
43 trails totalling 30km in the Changbai (“ever white”) mountains in Jilin 
province and upscale hotels by Park Hyatt, Sheraton and Westin offering such 
luxury amenities as outdoor heated plunge pools and spa treatments.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2936c20fd03dd7386402d527eaf88fdfbca174db%2F0_0_5452_3789%2F5452.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%E2%80%99s%20ski%20industry%20is%20set%20to%20soar%20following%20Olympic%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%E2%80%99s%20ski%20industry%20is%20set%20to%20soar%20following%20Olympic%20win&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fmar%2F12%2Fchina-ski-industry-boom-olympic-winter-games%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2936c20fd03dd7386402d527eaf88fdfbca174db%2F0_0_5452_3789%2F5452.jpg>
 A Canadian ski instructor teaches Chinese ski instructors at Thaiwoo. 
Photograph: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
Changbaishan is certainly at the high-end of the market, with wealthy families 
“pulling up in Range Rovers and renting out suites”, says Jeff Oliveira, the 
American founder of ski consultancy SkiChina, which has tested slopes across 
the country. For the weekend ski crowd in Beijing, there are cheaper options a 
three-hour drive north-west in Chongli, Hebei province, where the Olympic 
snowboarding and freestyle skiing events will be held. The downside? Near-total 
reliance on man-made snow. “Picture Killington (Vermont) with no natural snow,” 
Oliveira says. “But the Chinese don’t care – the industry is young, they want 
groomed snow. It’s perfect.”

Two Ecosign-designed resorts here have also greatly improved the skiing 
landscape:Genting Resort Secret Garden 
<http://www.chinaskitours.com/beijingsecretgarden.html>, which opened in 2011 
with 22 lifts and an impressive 87 trails; and theThaiwoo Ski & Alpine Resort 
<http://www.skiresort.info/ski-resort/thaiwoo/>, near the Great Wall, which 
aims to combine top-notch skiing with an après-ski culture lacking at other 
Chinese resorts. There’s an alpine chalet at 2,000m, serving what’s purported 
to be “authentic Austrian cuisine”, for instance, and plans for a resort 
village with hotels, bars and a skating rink.

More adventurous developments are on the horizon, too. Just announced last 
month: the world’s highest ski resort to be built in Tibet, near Lhasa.
 