
This has never been a good season for animals, but two or three centuries ago 
it was rather worse.Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner was preceded by 
artisanal cruelty in all its terrible variety. Poultry, for instance: the less 
they ran or fluttered about, the fatter they got, so geese would be nailed by 
their webbed feet to the floor, while chickens and game birds were confined to 
windowless cells, sometimes after their keeper had taken the extra precaution 
of blinding them or cutting off their legs.

Mammals were, literally, a tougher proposition. Popular belief said that meat 
was best tenderised while it was still alive, so calves and pigswere whipped to 
death with knotted ropes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2002/nov/07/highereducation.books1>, and 
bulls killed only after dogs had baited them. Succulent Dorset lambs, according 
to the historian Keith Thomas, arrived at the Christmas tables of the Georgian 
gentry only after a lengthy imprisonment in “dark little cabins”.

A desire for paler meat led to longer deaths. A calf’s executioner, having 
cut the animal at the neck, would let it bleed for a while and then staunch the 
wound for a day to let death come slowly. As for turkeys, the custom was 
to snip a vein inside their mouths and hang them upside down, so that their 
blood dripped out little by little. The upside-down position remains a constant 
of turkey slaughter, though the process today is industrial, possibly less 
painful and necessarily quicker.

Somewhere around 10 million of the birds 
<http://www.britishturkey.co.uk/facts-and-figures/christmas-stats-and-traditions.html>
 will be eaten this Christmas in Britain, ending their brief lives suspended by 
their legs from a production line that plunges them head-first into the 
electrified stunning baths, and then to the slaughterhouse workers who slash 
open their carotid arteries. One stroke usually does it.

Ignorance was bliss – but is it time to go vegan?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/12/ignorance-bliss-vegan-planet-destroyed>
It would be wrong to think of our unease as new. Abstinence from meat has been 
a feature of Hinduism and its various offshoots in the east for perhaps 3,000 
years. Somewhat later in Europe, the philosopherPythagoras refused meat 
<http://www.ivu.org/history/greece_rome/pythagoras.html> because he believed 
that souls could migrate between animals and human beings; eating animal flesh 
was therefore no better than cannibalism.

In England, the foundations of modern vegetarianism were laid in 1683, when a 
Christian mystic and dietary reformer,Thomas Tryon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Tryon>, published a remarkably 
modern-sounding book, The Way to Health, Long Life and Happiness, that asked 
its readers to consider: “How shall they but bestial grow, / That thus to feed 
on beasts are willing? / Or why should they a long life know, / Who daily 
practice KILLING?” Forthe poet Alexander Pope 
<http://grammar.about.com/od/classicessays/fl/On-Cruelty-to-Animals-by-Alexander-Pope.htm>
, 30 years later, nothing could be “more shocking or horrid” than the prospect 
of a kitchen “covered with blood and filled with the cries of creatures 
expiring in tortures”.

Nevertheless, our unease did nothing to stop us. More and more animal flesh 
was eaten. Bread and cheese kept the poor alive in 18th-century England, but 
the middle and upper classes stuffed themselves with roasts, steaks and chops – 
a morning, noon and night gluttony that turned England into the most 
carnivorous country in Europe and left many among its wealthier population 
corpulent and ill. In his excellent history of vegetarianism,The Heretic’s 
Feast, Colin Spencer 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/611306.The_Heretic_s_Feast> suggests that 
the consequent revulsion against the obese and the drunk, slobbering under 
their cockeyed wigs, made the idea of a strict vegetable and water diet almost 
fashionable.

The “almost” is important. People such as Benjamin Franklin who took it up 
usually put it down again, seeing it as a cure, the equivalent of two weeks’ 
rehab in the Priory, rather than a lifetime commitment. But the arguments for 
abstinence were developing. Percy Bysshe Shelley, who was probably the cause’s
most celebrated advocate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/A_Vindication_of_Natural_Diet> until George 
Bernard Shaw <http://www.ivu.org/history/shaw/vegetarianism.html> and Mahatma 
Gandhi came along, added economic efficiency to a list that already included 
human wellbeing and the humane treatment of animals.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meat-eaters%2C%20you%20all%20secretly%20hate%20yourselves%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meat-eaters%2C%20you%20all%20secretly%20hate%20yourselves%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F02%2Fmeat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video&media=>
Meat-eaters, you all secretly hate yourselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/sep/02/meat-eaters-you-secretly-hate-yourselves-vegetarian-video>
“The quantity of nutritious vegetable matter consumed in fattening the carcass 
of an ox would afford 10 times the sustenance [to people],” the poet wrote in 
1812, publicising a proposition that is increasingly relevant to a world in 
which the process known as meatification turns traditionally plant-eating 
societies into new markets for hamburgers and replaces rain forests with cattle 
ranches.

When the Vegetarian Society was founded in 1847, the anti-meat cause took the 
name we now know it by and began to think of itself as a movement. At its first 
annual general meeting in Manchester, then the world’s most radical city, 31 of 
its members recorded a lifelong abstinence from “flesh food”, while another 12 
said they hadn’t touched it for 30 to 40 years. The banquet that followed 
included two kinds of omelette, four kinds of fritter and plum pudding. 
The toasts were drunk in water.

Punch magazine thought the whole affair absurd, and doubted the 
banquet’s “mixture of messes” could promote health. A mainstream viewpoint had 
been fixed. Hostile caricature followed English vegetarianism wherever it went 
over the following 150 years, so much so that London’s most popular vegetarian 
restaurant in the 1970s boldly went by the nameCranks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2001/dec/19/london>. I ate at its plain wood 
tables regularly.

All that has changed, at least in London, where, according to the British 
Social Attitudes survey, a quarter of British vegetarians live. The sandwich 
chain Pret a Manger opened a vegetarian branch this year andplans a second 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/second-veggie-pret-to-open-in-london-following-successful-popup-trial-a3338456.html>
. Vegetarian restaurants now go by names such asVanilla Black 
<http://www.vanillablack.co.uk/>. Jane Muir, the owner of Mildreds 
<http://www.mildreds.co.uk/>, was determined on a title that carried no 
suggestions of plain living or Mother Earth, and named her restaurants after a 
favourite American film noir,Mildred Pierce 
<http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037913/>, with Joan Crawford as the eponymous 
heroine.

Stop telling me not to eat meat: we should all be flexitarians | Toby Moses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/meat-flexitarians-vegetarians>
Not everyone who eats there is a vegetarian, but like many similar places its 
success has been underpinned by dietary groups that vegetarianism has helped 
create. First, the growing number of vegans drawn to the logic of abstaining 
from animal products as well as animals – because the dairy industry depends on 
the slaughter of cattle and at the same time contributes to the methane 
emissions of cattle overall, which are estimated tomake up of 18% of 
greenhouses gases 
<http://timeforchange.org/are-cows-cause-of-global-warming-meat-methane-CO2>.

Second, the “meat reducers” – the people (often men over 60) who’ve been told 
by their doctors, partners and children to eat less of it, or reached the 
decision to live longer on no other advice but their own. Both groups are 
overwhelmingly middle class. Like obesity, unrestrained meat consumption 
(fry-ups, burgers, kebab wraps) has changed sides, and now suggests poverty 
rather than wealth.

Am I a vegetarian? Of course – anyone with half an imagination must be. The 
question really is: how often am I a vegetarian? Not so long ago I could look 
over the hedge into the plaintive eyes of a young calf, resolve to go meatless 
and then order a steak pie from the butcher an hour or two later. That has 
changed. A day or two would now be needed to separate the two events, and in 
any case the steak pies have become rather few. We hardly ever cook meat at 
home, but I’m omnivorous as the guest of others. A good life and a humane 
death: these considerations of provenance influence the decision of which 
animals’ flesh to buy, but the charge of hypocrisy hangs over them.

Last Christmas we had a nut roast – an item I’d be delighted never to see 
again. This Christmas, to my surprise, the current vegetarian in chief has 
suggested fillet steaks and dauphinoise potatoes. To be looked forward to: 
Christmas comes but once a year, and with it an extra portion of cruelty.
 