
There’s a Barbie sat among other dolls. A dancing monkey. Soft cuddly toys. In 
a food bank in Paddington, London, volunteer Jane is counting through the 
donated presents to hand out to children next week. Or, as she puts it to me, 
for “any who need one”.

Kayleigh is on universal credit. Her first payment arrives next year | Frances 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/universal-credit-first-payment-delay-christmas>
For families who don’t have the money for bags of pasta or a tin of meat, 
Christmas means not only hunger but more costs they can’t afford. “I ask people 
who come in what they’re doing for Christmas and they look at me like, ‘I’m in 
a food bank. What can I do for Christmas?’” Jane says.

Look around the food bank’s neighbouring streets and you find yourself in the 
middle of two-tier Britain: in Jane’s words, a “posh” part of the capital that 
also runs emergency food parcels out of the local community centre. This month 
has seen the biggest surge in use in the food bank’s three-year history: last 
week about 100 people came through the doors in a couple of hours. Kensington 
and Chelsea – where there are streets where theaverage property can set a buyer 
back £8m 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/business/kensington-and-chelsea-home-to-12-of-the-top-20-most-expensive-streets-in-england-and-wales-a3135051.html>
 – is about toshut its food bank 
<https://kensingtonchelsea.foodbank.org.uk/locations/>. Its users are already 
coming to Paddington, Jane says.

Jane, 52, started helping at the food bank a year ago, after she was made 
redundant. She’s familiar with illness – she was a health journalist – but is 
struck by seeing people hungry. “Not a little bit peckish because they skipped 
breakfast or haven’t had lunch. But hungry because they haven’t eaten for 
around three or four days,” she says. “Literally nothing.”

As wages shrink, rents rise and benefits are cut, Jane sees the citizens who 
could be described ascollateral damage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/14/spike-food-bank-usage-blamed-delays-benefit-claims-frank-field>
: a stroke victim left with large lapses in memory sanctioned by the jobcentre 
for forgetting an appointment; a care worker earning barely a tenner a day 
because her travel costs come out of her pocket; a PhD student who lost his 
house and now lives in a Tesco car park. It’s the dark shadows under people’s 
eyes that stand out for Jane. Frequently they’re stick-thin; disoriented. Very 
often they’re on the verge of tears. “They feel they have to apologise for 
being here,” she says. “We had one pensioner shaking with embarrassment.”

Jane is now used to “coaxing” people in as they hover in the doorway. The 
first thing she does is offer a cup of tea and a biscuit. Nine times out of 10 
people ask for theirs with three or four sugars, she says. For nerves. Or 
energy. “A phrase I hear over and over again as people pick up a food parcel 
is, ‘The system’s washed its hands of me.’”

Food banks <https://www.theguardian.com/society/food-banks> are now used to 
plugging the gap – Paddington even has a weekly volunteer from the Citizens 
Advice to help with benefit delays or evictions – but as deprivation sets in, 
the bank acts as reassurance that someone cares. Local support services in the 
area have closed down. The food bank, Jane says, is one of the few places some 
people can go to even be listened to.

For the Christmas period, on top of the toys for young families, every food 
parcel given out will include something extra: a packet of mince pies, a 
Christmas pudding, chocolates or a box of biscuits. It’s a little bit of 
normality – a secondhand doll or football for your children or a Quality Street 
to offer a friend when they drop by – at a time when it’s especially needed. 
More and more people coming in for food parcels this winter have had their 
electricity cut off and can’t afford to get it put on again. There’s been an 
increase in people talking about ending their own lives. “It’s happening every 
week now,” she says.

As temperatures drop, Lily’s charity is working to keep homeless people alive 
| Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/manchester-homeless-crisis-cocktail-cuts-charities-shelter>
What really gets her, Jane admits, is that in her affluent area, so many who 
need a food parcel are severely ill or disabled. “We have a blind man who comes 
in, and someone who’s deaf,” she says. They’ve now started to deliver to 
housebound people with disabilities who can’t get out to get a food parcel. 
Jane sees it is like this: the food bank is a microcosm of what’s wrong with 
the country, but just as much, what is good about people.

Three days before Christmas Day, she and other volunteers will use their spare 
time to put on a Christmas dinner at the food bank. The meal is made up of 
donated food, and is for anyone who’s used the service this year. So far, 80 
people have signed up. “Most ask, ‘Can I bring my kids too?’”

• You can donate to North Paddington food bank here 
<https://mydonate.bt.com/donation/donate.html?charity=northpaddingtonfoodbank>
 