
Chris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling> was for 
years the premier Tory attack dog of David Cameron’s days in opposition, happy 
to bash Labour and the trade unions at every opportunity.

His combative qualities were clearly appreciated by Theresa May, who wrote of 
him in a2007 column 
<http://conservativehome.blogs.com/columnists/2007/10/theresa-may-on-.html>: 
“Tall and strong, he’s effective in the line out. Likes to get in his 
opponent’s face.”

Now her transport secretary, the 54-year-old Conservative stalwart shows no 
sign of toning down his tribal approach to politics in the way he has handled 
theSouthern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> train strikes.

The walk-outs over the safety of train doors were “palpable nonsense” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/chris-grayling-southern-rail-strike-is-palpable-nonsense>
 worked up by militant unions trying to bring the rail network to its knees, 
Grayling claimed last week.

He initially declined to meet rail union leaders unless they called off the 
strike and then inflamed relations further by saying the Aslef general 
secretary had at their introductory meeting “virtually with his first breath 
promised 10 years of industrial action” – a claim disputed by the union boss.

The temperature moved up a notch again as it emerged that Grayling was happy 
to consider a proposal by the Tory MP Chris Philp aimed at limiting rail 
strikes with tighter legislation.

It has added up to a strategy that has infuriated commuter groups, the unions 
and a number of MPs, with Tory former minister Bob Neill even calling for his 
resignation over a separate row about south London train franchises.

“The man has so far shown himself to be totally and utterly partial, 
ideologically driven and up to his neck in political chicanery,” said Andy 
McDonald, Labour’s shadow transport secretary.

McDonald, who was also on the Commons justice committee when Grayling held 
that portfolio, believes his opposite number has an anti-union agenda that is 
counter-productive when transport secretaries need to be able to help sort out 
industrial disputes.

“You’ve got senior civil servants who’ve said at public meetings that 
ministers want the political dust-up with the unions,” said McDonald. “They 
want to starve them back to work and they want to drive those union people out 
of their industry. There has always been issues of negotiation and discussion 
in rail industry over many decades but Grayling fails to recognise that and has 
absolutely no interest in good industrial relations. He just wants to grind the 
RMT and Aslef out of existence.”

The transport secretary has clearly made no attempt to build bridges with 
Manuel Cortes, general secretary of the TSSA, whose union has been considering 
separate industrial action over ticket office closures and jobs.

“I have been in the industry for over 20 years and I have no doubt he is the 
worst transport secretary we have had in that time,” Cortes said. “He has so 
far failed to meet with me and I wrote a letter to him in early November about 
safety concerns in the London underground and he still hasn’t responded to it. 
So he’s got a cheek when he said trade union leaders hadn’t responded to a 
letter he sent a few days ago. I think he has an agenda looking for cheap 
headlines to bash unions.”

Labour are now not cutting him any slack over a video that emerged last week 
showing him opening a car door on a cyclist, knocking him over, with Dudley MP 
Ian Austin writing to the prime minister and police to complain.


However, there are no signs yet though that May disapproves of the way 
Grayling has dealt with the strikes. From the same stolid middle-class, grammar 
school and home counties background as the prime minister, the transport 
secretary earned his stripes by becoming the first Brexiter to declare for May 
during the leadership contest.

David Laws, the former Lib Dem minister, reported in his book about the 
coalition that May and Grayling “fought like scorpions” over home affairs and 
justice. Grayling played the referendum campaign carefully – much like May – 
coming out early for the leave camp but refusing to engage in personal 
criticism of Cameron or George Osborne.

He had not previously been thought of as a May loyalist, having run Liam Fox’s 
leadership bid in 2005, but she picked the rightwinger to chair her campaign 
and was instrumental in winning many pro-leave Tory MPs to her camp rather than 
that of Michael Gove, Fox or Andrea Leadsom.

He told friends at the time that he was not after a big office of state after 
she won the top job, but was highly satisfied with the transport brief, 
overseeing major decisions such as Heathrow and HS2.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fchris-grayling-tory-combative-mood-deal-with-rail-union-bosses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F901c7648a0998c9bc2d6de7b9385a6accdae5b94%2F0_249_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Grayling%3A%20Tory%20in%20combative%20mood%20to%20deal%20with%20rail%20union%20bosses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fchris-grayling-tory-combative-mood-deal-with-rail-union-bosses%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Grayling%3A%20Tory%20in%20combative%20mood%20to%20deal%20with%20rail%20union%20bosses&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fchris-grayling-tory-combative-mood-deal-with-rail-union-bosses%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F901c7648a0998c9bc2d6de7b9385a6accdae5b94%2F0_249_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 Commuters protest at Victoria station, calling for Chris Grayling to resign 
amid the continued disruption on Southern rail. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
It was in fact yet another example of Grayling’s ability to recover from 
career setbacks that have seen him demoted or sidelined over the years. His 
first disappointment was failing to make it into Cameron’s first cabinet, 
despite serving as shadow home secretary.

It came after he drew widespread condemnation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/09/chrisgrayling-general-election-2010>
 for suggesting B&B owners should have the right to turn away gay couples if it 
was their own home, rather than a hotel. In aprevious gaffe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/oct/07/richard-dannatt-conservative-conference-military>
, he suggested the appointment of Gen Sir Richard Dannatt was a “political 
gimmick” without realising the military chief was to advise Cameron rather than 
Gordon Brown.

He did not spend long as a junior minister, though, rising to become justice 
secretary under Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2012/sep/04/chris-grayling-justice-secretary-non-lawyer>
 in 2012, where he rubbed many charities, officials, lawyers and those in the 
prison sector up the wrong way. The attempted ban on books being sent into 
prisons, the controversial shake-up of legal aid and mandatory court fees all 
went down badly. These were all scrapped by his successor, Michael Gove, when 
Grayling was moved to the political equivalent of the departure lounge in the 
role of leader of the House of Commons.

Among political aides at Tory HQ, Grayling was known ubiquitously as “the 
Graylord”. “He’s easy to rub along with, he knows how to play the game and will 
go out and deliver a line,” one who worked closely with him says. “But he does 
comes up with some silly ideas. It doesn’t surprise me that the MoJ was chaos 
when he was there and he’s messing up transport as well.”

Despite a chequered political career, many colleagues regarded him as a 
reliable and solid team player. “He’s really widely liked within the 
parliamentary party because he’s not showy. He’s very approachable and happy to 
talk to anyone,” said Lord Hayward, Conservative peer and former MP.

Tim Loughton, a Conservative MP whose Worthing and Shoreham constituency is 
affected by the strikes, also believes Grayling is doing a better job than his 
predecessors at dealing with the problems afflicting the Southern franchise and 
is willing to listen to his ideas about a new bill entitling passengers to 
automatic compensation for disruption and a tough new rail complaints ombudsman.

Loughton said: “Chris Grayling and Paul Maynard, the rail minister, have been 
much more proactive, though it’s still not brilliant. They are engaged with the 
problem. It’s slightly helped that Grayling has got Southern trains operating 
through his constituency so he can see it first-hand. But with the strike, the 
thing I have raised in prime minister’s questions is the absurdity of Aslef 
objecting to drivers pressing the door buttons on Southern trains but not 
Thameslink ones.”

He also argues the charge of being overly political could aptly be applied to 
the trade unions. “It isn’t some big moral issue,” Loughton said. “Aslef and 
the RMT know that Southern is the weak link and it’s been poorly managed so 
that is why they have targeted them. If they win and get a climbdown here, they 
will be on to Anglia, Northern and others. The agenda is to bring it all back 
into public ownership.”

It may be that Grayling – who is used to being called the jackal of the Tory 
party – was put in place to hold the line in a lengthy battle.
 