
It is the week before Christmas at the UK’s busiest food bankand there are 
seasonal additions to the usual donations of food boxes. Stacks of advent 
calendars, Christmas crackers and children’s soft toys are being unpacked by a 
team of volunteers in the West End area of Newcastle-upon-Tyne. A cheerful cry 
goes up to report that 20 Christmas trees have just been delivered to the back 
door.

“It’s completely crazy and mad at this time of year,” says Michael Nixon, 
chief executive of the Newcastle West End Food Bank, which sprang to wider 
national renown this year when it formed the background to a powerful scene in 
Ken Loach’saward-winning I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
. In the film, it is visited by single mother Katie who is so overcome by 
hunger that she rips the lid off a can of baked beans and eats them cold, 
straight from the tin.

This week, attention has been drawn to the food bank from a different media 
source. Nixon is expecting more donations after the Newcastle-born comedian 
Ross Noble appealed via Twitter for donations to the centre, which is based two 
miles outside the city centre. Nixon’s staff and volunteers will manage the 
donations carefully, as they typically take a nosedive in January.

Universal credit delays forcing people to food banks, says MP
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/universal-credit-delays-forcing-people-to-food-banks-says-mp>
NWEFB is an independent charity and part of the 420-strong network of food 
banks run by the Trussell Trust, which provides emergency three-day food 
supplies to individuals and families in crisis.

“People go hungry for all sorts of reasons,” says Margaret Nelson, the trust’s 
regional coordinator in the north-east. “It can be due to redundancy or 
bereavement, benefit sanctions, or spiralling debt problems compounded by 
receiving a huge bill out of the blue.” As one of the larger food banks in the 
UK, NWEFB also offers advice from specialist agencies such as Shelter and 
Jobcentre Plus to help make sure users get the benefits to which they are 
entitled.

An estimated 95% of the food bank’s users live within a two-mile radius. The 
area is the 40th most deprived council ward in the UK. The Trussell Trust 
typically sees a 45% spike in referrals for the three-day emergency food 
parcels in the two weeks before Christmas. Everyone who comes to a Trussell 
Trust food bank will have been referred by a frontline professional agency such 
as Citizens Advice, housing associations and children’s centres; they are given 
a voucher to exchange for the parcel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c780079f32535872b9b7614266be5adb1fb4f82%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20at%20a%20food%20bank%3A%20'We're%20trying%20to%20change%20people's%20lives'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20at%20a%20food%20bank%3A%20%27We%27re%20trying%20to%20change%20people%27s%20lives%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8c780079f32535872b9b7614266be5adb1fb4f82%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Christmas lunch being served at the Newcastle West End Food Bank. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
In a cafe-style room at the food bank, rows of freezers stuffed with frozen 
bakery products and desserts line the wall. Being served up with custard for 
pudding today – after a Christmas lunch of turkey, potatoes and peas – are 
individual apple crumble desserts that were originally destined for British 
Airways’ business class, but were made to the wrong size. The food bank gets 
regular donations from large local manufacturers such as the bakery chains 
Greggs) and Warburtons and from a tie-up with Tesco, which provides surplus or 
narrowly in-date food from its local stores.

The cafe expects to serve up more than 100 free Christmas lunches on this 
particular weekday , to its neediest users, including young mothers with 
toddlers in tow. After lunch, diners can collect their Christmas food parcel. 
These are pre-packed and contain enough food – rice, pasta, tinned vegetables, 
tea and biscuits – to last three days and provide 10 meals. The food bank 
actively works with about 100 local families with chronic social and financial 
problems. Last year it helped 40,000 people – down from 50,000 the previous 
year – but it expects to return to the higher level because of the rolling out 
of theuniversal credit benefit payment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/universal-credit-delays-forcing-people-to-food-banks-says-mp>
.

“What we’re really trying to do is change people’s lives for the better, not 
just feed them,” says Nixon, who set up the food bank four years ago. “We are 
trying to give people a way out of the problems that led to their hunger in the 
first place. Social isolation is the biggest barrier to people seeking help 
from us, but we can only help those we see.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04ec7439a31985ef0e48f64ab9e12350dcae8b5f%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Christmas%20at%20a%20food%20bank%3A%20'We're%20trying%20to%20change%20people's%20lives'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Christmas%20at%20a%20food%20bank%3A%20%27We%27re%20trying%20to%20change%20people%27s%20lives%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fchristmas-food-bank-newcastle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04ec7439a31985ef0e48f64ab9e12350dcae8b5f%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Julie Magneron and her partner Tony Jackson eating Christmas lunch at the 
Newcastle West End Food Bank. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Often clients become volunteers – and even staff – themselves. Centre manager 
Elena Dumitru, a Romanian, was on the streets selling the Big Issue and earning 
£10 a week, with a three-month-old baby in her arms. Nixon worked closely with 
Loach and his scriptwriter on the food bank scenes – filmed at a church hall 
round the corner that is also part of the West End food bank – and the clients 
who appeared in it as extras were paid in Morrisons vouchers.

The most up-to-date figures reveal that between April 2015 and April 2016, 
Trussell Trust food banks provided more than 1.1m three-day food parcels to 
people in crisis. Of these, more than 415,000 were for children.

After lunch, 44-year-old Tony Jackson and his fiancée, 44-year-old Julie 
Magueron, both on benefits, voice their desire to provide a decent Christmas 
for their eight-year-old son. “We’ve gone without food ourselves to feed him,” 
says Jackson. “It’s been a horrendous year when I lost my two-year-old daughter 
to cancer. Now we are rebuilding our lives thanks to the help and support we 
have received here.”
 