
Named after the Latin word meaning “curling lock of hair”, cirrus clouds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2014/oct/13/weatherwatch-clouds-environment> 
form high in the atmosphere, and often signal that a deterioration in the 
weather is on the way. But these beautiful repeating wisps of cloud are also 
mysterious: little is known about what triggers the embryonic ice-crystals to 
grow, from which cirrus clouds grow. The question is important because these 
cold high-level clouds act like a blanket around Earth, trapping heat in, and 
their predisposition to form in the future could have big implications for the 
rate at which global warming progresses.

Cloud spotting: a beginner's guide to predicting the weather
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/12/cloud-spotting-beginners-guide-predicting-weather>
Now scientists from the US Department of Energy’s Pacific Northwest National 
Laboratory in Washington state have managed to watch the birth of a cirrus 
cloud in unprecedented detail, by recreating the temperature, pressure and 
humidity of the high atmosphere, inside a minute cloud-chamber – smaller than a 
poppy seed. Using a scanning electron microscope they watched how tiny 
particles (2 microns wide, equivalent to one tenth the width of human hair) 
attracted water vapour, andgrew an ice-crystal 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qGeaPOkC9kE&feature=youtu.be>, over the course 
of about 20 minutes. “Behind all these beautiful images were months and months 
of hard work,” says Alexander Laskin, one of the co-authors, whosefindings have 
been published in Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics 
<http://pubs.rsc.org/en/Content/ArticleLanding/2016/CP/C6CP05253C#!divAbstract>.

The images, which were taken every three seconds, resolved detail as small as 
50 nanometres wide (one-thousandth the width of a human hair). Such 
high-resolution means that scientists can start to understand how a particle’s 
size, shape, chemistry and texture affect the way that ice crystals grow, and 
better understand what kind of conditions encourage these high-level clouds to 
form.
 