
The City regulator has announced a crackdown on crowdfunding – the 
fast-growing sector that lets businesses and individuals raise money from 
online investors.

The Financial Conduct Authority said it had concerns about loan-based 
businesses <https://www.fca.org.uk/publication/feedback/fs16-13.pdf> – also 
known as peer-to-peer (P2P) lenders – and investment-based platforms. It said 
it was examining online alternative finance to take account of the UK market’s
rapid growth from £1.7bn of loans, investments and donations in 2014 to £3.2bn 
last year <http://www.nesta.org.uk/sites/default/files/pushing_boundaries_0.pdf>
.

Peer-to-peer operators, including Zopa and Funding Circle, cut out banks by 
matching borrowers and lenders. Investment-based platforms such asCrowdcube 
<https://www.crowdcube.com/> let companies sell shares and bonds to investors 
who are often enthusiasts for their products.BrewDog, the self-styled punk 
brewer, has raised £26m from UK beer drinkers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/brewdog-us-expansion-scottish-punk-brewer-crowdfunding>
 using crowdfunding.

FCA to shake up fund management to get better deal for investors
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/fca-fund-management-fee-investment-consultant>
The FCA said it was difficult for investors to understand the risks and 
returns of crowdfunding, marketing material was sometimes unclear and 
misleading, and some firms did not manage risks and conflicts of interest 
properly.

It took over regulation of crowdfunding in April 2014 and its proposed changes 
stem from a review of rules that it announced in July. The government has 
encouraged the growth of the sector, particularly peer-to-peer lending, as an 
additional source of capital for new businesses.

Andrew Bailey, the FCA’s chief executive, said rule tightening would be aimed 
mainly at peer-to-peer lenders because they have changed a great deal in the 
past year. By introducing provision funds to cover bad debts and attracting 
institutional investors, peer-to-peer lenders have become more like banks and 
asset managers but without the regulation that covers those industries, he said.

“We have seen substantial innovation in the loan-based crowdfunding market. 
What we are trying to do is strike the right balance between enabling 
innovation and protecting consumers,” Bailey said.

Provision funds may give investors the incorrect belief their money is safe 
because they are not covered by the government’s deposit protection scheme, the 
FCA said. Some firms do not have solid plans in place if they fail and the 
regulator has told some lenders to improve how they handle clients’ money.


Bailey said: “Are they marketed transparently? We’ve seen firms which say: 
‘We’ve got a reserve fund and no one has lost money on our platform.’ But there 
is no guarantee.”

The FCA will next year sound out new rules to address the problems it has 
found. The regulator has proposed higher standards of disclosure by all 
crowdfunders and stricter rules on wind-down plans for peer-to-peer lenders.


Christine Farnish, who chairs the P2P Finance Association industry group, said 
she welcomed the FCA’s review if it used evidence to assess the sector.

“In any dynamic market regulators need to keep the regulatory regime under 
close review,” she said. “It is not easy for a regulator to grapple with new 
market entrants, especially when they are disrupting traditional business 
models and challenging powerful incumbents.”

Zopa was the first peer-to-peer lender when it launched in 2005 to bring 
consumer lenders and borrowers together. The sector took off as banks withdrew 
lending during the financial crisis, spawning imitators and new types of 
business such as Funding Circle, which lets people lend to small businesses.


Bailey said the FCA had received about 375 applications from peer-to-peer 
lenders of which 17 were fully authorised, 284 were withdrawn and the rest were 
waiting for full approval. He said the large number of withdrawn applications 
showed many operators had morphed into other businesses or had not understood 
the requirements.

The FCA’s action on crowdfunding is the latest in a series of interventions by 
the regulator since Bailey took over as chief executive in July.It has proposed 
measures to increase competition between fund managers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/fca-fund-management-fee-investment-consultant>
, tougherregulation of high-cost consumer credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/fca-high-cost-credit-catalogue-credit-payday-loans>
, and a clampdown on the spread-betting industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/spread-betting-industry-loses-1bn-after-city-watchdog-steps-in>
.

 