
When your last TV series was named by Guinness World Records as the most 
watched factual television show in the history of the world you may think it 
would be pretty hard to equal. But you’d be wrong, forThe Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-grand-tour-amazon>, the new Amazon series from 
Jeremy Clarkson, James May and Richard Hammond looks set to be the Lamborghini 
Diablo to Top Gear’s Countach; the Ferrari Testarossa to the BBC show’s 
Berlinetta Boxer. Not necessary better, but certainly different.

For a start, it has been reported that there is a lot money involved, $200m of 
it to be precise; a rather large portion of which has been spent on an 
explosive opening episode in which the dynamic trio travel to Dry Rabbit Lake, 
just outside Los Angeles in the southern Mojave desert. In total there will be 
a dozen instalments, with episodes released every Friday from 18 November 
exclusively for Amazon Prime members. As well as on-location documentary 
segments, each show will feature “studio” segues filmed in front of a live 
audience in a giant travelling tent pitched in new exotic – and not so exotic – 
locations each week.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32393c23157d15bbc60e53009fc9a703259ff0a8%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32393c23157d15bbc60e53009fc9a703259ff0a8%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
“It’s three badly dressed, middle-aged, decrepit men, who can’t do anything, 
attempting to do extraordinary things in amazing places around the world,” says 
Clarkson. “The great thing about the tent is that it’s the same studio every 
week, packed up and shipped, all 300 tonnes of it, to the next location. But 
it’s got these huge picture windows behind us, so week one is the California 
desert, then it’s the African plain, with Johannesburg in the distance. Then 
it’s Whitby, then it’s Rotterdam, then it’s Finland, then Scotland.


“So you’ve got a load of bloody Yorkshire men up in Whitby going: ‘Come on you 
fat bastard, make us laugh.’ And then you’ve got whooping Americans in 
California and then you’ve got very tall Dutch people. A lot of it is a travel 
programme, much more so than a car programme.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7d23c5567e3413ad3a4df1b6cc22cbc0dc9dd25%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7d23c5567e3413ad3a4df1b6cc22cbc0dc9dd25%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Not that The Grand Tour will skimp on the trio’s favourite subject – the 
vehicles themselves. Clarkson is quietly confident that petrolheads will be 
pleased with what they see. “I would be very surprised if programme one was to 
be reviewed badly. I really would,” he says. “We’ve got a McLaren P1 and the 
Porsche 918, and the Ferrari LaFerrari. Everybody’s tried to put those together 
and failed; we managed to get them all together in the same place for a few 
days in Portugal and it’s a bloody good film. Plus the six-minute opening 
sequence is a moving thing, I think.”


Hammond also believes that Top Gear fans will be impressed with the epic scale 
of the new show. “We filmed some footage in the desert that looks pretty 
amazing. Some of the explosions in this series are a bit ... big,” he says. “We 
got carried away on a couple of occasions with that. You’ll think: ‘That must 
be CGI.’ But no, it’s actually real.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d09b7969df9fe38f5552cec3a27948cbd638385%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d09b7969df9fe38f5552cec3a27948cbd638385%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Episode two will see Clarkson, Hammond and May becoming special forces 
soldiers, with an all-action challenge at a top-secret training base deep 
within Jordan, while the famous Grand Tour tent will make its way to the 
stunning Cradle of Humankind world heritage site near Johannesburg in South 
Africa. Week three sees the trio joining a modern take on the traditional 
gentleman’s tour of Italy, with the tent visiting Whitby.

May suggests that the show’s documentary sections have become not just more 
ambitious, but rather more absurd as a result of their upscaling. “Avant garde 
would be too strong a word for it, but they have become sillier I suppose,” he 
says. “There is massive silliness in it.”

All three presenters freely admit that the new show was forced into format 
changes because they no longer own the rights to key Top Gear elements, but 
they believe the shift has given them a new lease of life. “I don’t think Top 
Gear had become stale but one or two commentators were saying: ‘Is it time you 
changed the format?’” admits Clarkson. “What this does is just move it into a 
different gear. It’s the same, but different. The weird thing is, I loathe 
James and Richard – I hate them on a cellular level – but when we work together 
we do work together really very well.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc515380ee6441edbdf9527348936b5c08dd46aac%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20Hammond%20and%20May%20return%20in%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fclarkson-hammond-and-may-return-in-amazons-the-grand-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc515380ee6441edbdf9527348936b5c08dd46aac%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Illustration: Paul Tinker (all) 
May says: “It gave us the obligation to rethink ourselves a bit, do a proper 
refresh, reboot the operating system. We do have a track, but it doesn’t come 
round with us with our tent obviously. You have to have somewhere where you can 
drive cars fast because you can’t really do it on the road. And we do have a 
man who, in cases where it is necessary, independently tries things out for us 
to settle disputes. But it’s not a mystery racing driver like the Stig.”


As for Clarkson himself, his co-presenters suggest that the man has changed 
little since Top Gear. “Clarkson: he’s slightly fatter I think, but no, as far 
as I can see, he’s the same,” says May. Hammond adds: “He’s still appalling – 
the man doesn’t change. But people seem to like him.”

 