
Clare Hollingworth, who has died aged 105, was one of the most active war 
correspondents of the 20th century and the one who managed to circumvent 
official rules banning women in order to report on the British North African 
campaign in 1941.

Hollingworth began her reporting career in eastern Europe in 1939 and quickly 
established her reputation with a brilliant scoop about German troop movements 
on the Polish border that heralded the outbreak of the second world war. She 
borrowed the consul-general’s car to drive into Germany across a closed border, 
even receiving a salute from the Germans as she had a flagged car. On the way 
back she noticed a large hessian screen preventing anyone from seeing the 
valley below. But the wind blew the hessian away from its scaffolding to reveal 
scores of German tanks lined up to enter Poland.

The consul-general did not believe her story until she produced some of the 
goods she had bought in Germany. Then, while she telephoned her report to the
Daily Telegraph <https://www.theguardian.com/media/dailytelegraph>, he sent a 
secret message to the Foreign Office.

The following year Hollingworth was in Bucharest covering the abdication of 
King Carol – and the subsequent riots incited by the Iron Guard – for the Daily 
Express. For two months she had consistently managed to avoid the Guardists’ 
stringent censorship by sending one story through the press bureau stamped by 
the official censor and another, completely different, version dictated over 
the phone to Geneva. When the security police eventually came to her flat to 
arrest her, she stripped and rang her friendRobin Hankey 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-lord-hankey-1353442.html> at 
the British Legation. She told the security police authoritatively: “You can’t 
possibly arrest me, I’m naked.” Within minutes Hankey arrived and escorted the 
blanket-covered reporter to the embassy.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg4271zrTgE&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg4271zrTgE>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DRg4271zrTgE&media=>
 Clare Hollingworth and other correspondents talk to the BBC in 1999 about 
their experiences in Vietnam 
In 1941 Hollingworth was sent to Egypt, where she worked alongside the 
official war correspondents, although, as a woman, she was denied the formal 
accreditation that she needed to travel openly to any of the forward areas. She 
chafed under these restrictions. “Cairo may have been the nerve centre for 
disseminating information, but for me the news was out there in the desert with 
the British troops,” she said.

Hollingworth managed, however, not merely to attend official press conferences 
and briefings, but also embarked on more trips, for longer and under more 
dangerous conditions, than any other female reporter, and was often behind 
enemy lines. She soon found herself at loggerheads with General Bernard 
Montgomery (later Viscount Montgomery of Alamein), whose opposition to women in 
the frontline was notorious.

At the end of the desert campaign, after the Eighth Army had captured Tripoli, 
he suddenly ordered her back to Cairo. Ever resourceful, Hollingworth 
immediately joined US military operations based in Algiers and became 
affiliated to the Chicago Daily News. General Dwight D Eisenhower welcomed the 
presence of experienced female correspondents, as long as they asked for no 
special treatment, something Hollingworth was always meticulous about, 
claiming: “I would never use my femininity to get a story that a man could not 
get.” She thrived on danger and believed that the more dangerous the assignment 
the better the story.

In 1950 Hollingworth moved to Paris and began working for the Manchester 
Guardian. She immediately started making regular forays to Algeria and 
developed excellent contacts among the left-wing FLN (Front de Libération 
Nationale), as well as being accredited to the French army. By the early 60s 
she was living in Algiers for months at a time and survived the ransacking of 
her hotel bedroom by OAS (Organisation Armée Secrète) terrorists who objected 
to what she was writing. On another occasion she held off a gang of OAS gunmen 
with nothing more than an imperious threat to use her shoe.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fclare-hollingworth-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed836f4b98ee0ddf31089b8172c0511d1f23bc4%2F0_16_1134_680%2F1134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clare%20Hollingworth%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fclare-hollingworth-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clare%20Hollingworth%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fclare-hollingworth-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faed836f4b98ee0ddf31089b8172c0511d1f23bc4%2F0_16_1134_680%2F1134.jpg>
 Clare Hollingworth in Suez in 1970 
While other journalists skirted around the casbah, the walled warren of 
twisting streets that was home to the best FLN sources, Hollingworth made it 
her business to go there almost every day, convinced that because she was a 
woman she would receive no worse than a bucket of slops emptied over her head. 
This had nothing to do with being brave, she maintained: “If you put me in a 
rickety lift, I’d be terrified. It’s just that I don’t feel frightened under 
machine-gun fire. The excitement of the job overcomes it.”

Hollingworth produced a steady stream of good stories for the Guardian from 
the Middle East, including in early 1963 the first indication thatKim Philby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kim-philby> had defected to the Soviet 
Union. Harold Macmillan had already denied that Philby was the “third man” in 
the Burgess and Maclean affair and the paper was reluctant to run the story for 
fear of enormous libel damages. Three months later, when Hollingworth returned 
to London, Philby was still missing, and she wrotea careful account of his 
disappearance from Beirut 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/10/27_April_1963.jpg> – and probable flight 
to Moscow <https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2017/01/10/Philby_2_July_1963.jpg> – 
which was duly followed up by the other papers and later confirmed in 
parliament.

In 1962 she won the Hannen Swaffer award for Woman Journalist of the Year and 
the What The Papers Say award for the best news reporting of the year forher 
coverage of the Algerian war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/04/archive-1962-algiers-algeria-independence>
.

From 1963 until 1967, Hollingworth was defence correspondent for the Guardian 
– the first woman to hold the post. She had made herself familiar with military 
hardware over the years, and had a particular interest in aircraft, having 
learned to fly in the 40s. The new job took her to many of the world’s 
capitals, reporting on developments in western defence and Nato proposals, but 
she was also in the thick of post-imperial trouble spots such as Sarawak and 
Aden.

In the late 60s Hollingworth went to Vietnam, but not, as was expected of many 
female journalists, to write about hospitals or orphanages. “Of course that’s 
important,” she explained recently, “but in a war situation they are soft 
stories. The frontline is the thing that really matters because the future 
depends on it at that moment.”

From the archive, 4 July 1962: Algiers in frenzy of joy following independence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2012/jul/04/archive-1962-algiers-algeria-independence>
Daughter of Albert and Daisy Hollingworth, she was born in Knighton, near 
Leicester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/leicester>, into a middle-class 
family and derived her fascination with warfare from regular visits with her 
father, an industrialist, to battlefields such as Naseby, Bosworth and 
Agincourt.

Intending to make her career in politics, she became a secretary at the League 
of Nations Union (LNU) and while there began writing articles for a variety of 
small publications. In 1936, she marriedVandeleur Robinson 
<http://www.albanianphotography.net/robinson/>, a fellow LNU worker, but the 
marriage broke up during the war and they divorced in 1951. The following year 
she married the journalist Geoffrey Hoare, who worked for the News Chronicle. 
He died in 1965.

In the early 70s Hollingworth went to Beijing for the Daily Telegraph as its 
first resident staff correspondent in China. This was a period of intense 
change and she met Zhou Enlai and other members of the politburo, including Mao 
Zedong’s wife, Madame Jiang Qing. In the later years of her life she divided 
her time between France, Britain and Hong Kong, from where she made frequent 
visits to China. She was there in 1989 when the student uprising began and 
watched the tragedy ofTiananmen Square 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/tiananmen-square-protests-1989> from a fifth 
floor balcony of the Peking hotel.

She had hoped, aged 79, to be invited to cover the Gulf war and spent five 
nights sleeping on the hard floor of her Hong Kong flat in preparation. But it 
was one of the few conflicts of the 20th century that she missed. In 1990 
Hollingworth published her autobiography,Front Line 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Front-Line-Clare-Hollingworth/0224028278>, 
which disappointed some who had hoped for more revelations about her private 
life. But the hallmark of Hollingworth’s journalism was her supreme 
professionalism and her ability to present facts objectively rather than 
promote a cause or write about personalities, least of all her own.

In recent years she became a VIP fixture at the Foreign Correspondents’ Club 
in Hong Kong <http://www.fcchk.org/>, but trouble with her eyesight meant that, 
in spite of her determination to be independent, she needed the help of two 
live-in companions.

In 2015 Patrick Garrett published a biography of his great-aunt, Of Fortunes 
and War: Clare Hollingworth, First of the Female War Correspondents 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Fortunes-War-Hollingworth-female-correspondents/dp/1910670847>
, which revealed that, although Hollingworth had given up her habit of drinking 
beer for breakfast, she still kept her shoes by her bedside in case she had to 
leave in a hurry.

She is survived by a stepdaughter, Hilary, from her second marriage, and by a 
niece, Jennifer, and nephew, Richard.

• Clare Hollingworth, journalist, born 10 October 1911; died 10 January 2017
 