
Clearing <https://www.theguardian.com/education/clearing> offers a way out of 
the gloom for those who have missed the grades for their initial five 
university choices. It can catapult you from a feeling of failure to the 
excitement of knowing you’ve begun the next chapter of your life.

But the best places are likely to be snapped up by lunchtime on results day, 
which doesn’t allow much time for consideration. Unless the available options 
are a close match to your original choice, accepting a clearing offer is a 
gamble. And, in my experience, it’s a gamble that’s easy to lose.

I realise now that I was romanticising my spontaneity
Patrick Heardman 
When I got CCC in my A-levels <https://www.theguardian.com/education/alevels>, 
it didn’t leave me with much choice. Rather than face re-sits, I went through 
Clearing and jumped at an offer from the University of the West of England 
(UWE) to study psychology and sociology. I had originally hoped to study 
psychology in Leeds, so it felt like a good alternative. I thought I was being 
bold and instinctive, taking a chance that I would look back on and 
congratulate myself for.

But I realise now that I was romanticising my spontaneity. There was every 
chance it might not work out well. I had no idea what UWE was like, or any real 
grasp of what the course would entail. I’d never even been to Bristol. But I 
signed up like a shot.

I became depressed within weeks of enrolling, and found myself suffering from 
a crippling sense of failure. While others were enjoying themselves, I grew 
increasingly distant from my studies, having never imagined the course would be 
so statistics-heavy. I’m not criticising the institution, or other students; 
the reason it didn’t work for me was because of an application system that 
doesn’t give scared young people room to pause and think.

The wrong call

Last year, a record 
<https://www.ucas.com/sites/default/files/app_level_report_2015-dr2_008_01.pdf> 
64,000 students got into university via Clearing – up almost 70% from 10 years 
ago. For many this will be the start of an amazing journey, but it’s worrying 
to think how many will suffer experiences like mine.

Ucas considers radical changes as clearing rates rise sharply
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/19/ucas-considers-radical-changes-as-clearing-rates-rise-sharply>
There are no nationally published statistics on the drop-out rate for students 
who go through Clearing. Ucas stops tracking students’ progress after they’ve 
accepted an offer and the Higher Education Statistics Agency (Hesa) doesn’t 
break figures down by entry route.

We do know that half of all 18-year-olds who miss out on their chosen places 
re-apply a year later with a90% success rate 
<https://twitter.com/ucas_analysis/status/639773419626737664>. Perhaps these 
impressive figures are because students have had a chance to stop and think 
about which course is best for them. It’s a cliché, but the case for taking a 
year to “find yourself” is actually pretty compelling.

I dropped out of UWE in the first week of my second year. I spent the rest of 
the year at home and in the library, studying for A-level re-sits. I raised my 
CCC to ABB and got accepted into Goldsmiths to study English. Taking that time 
out was the best decision I’ve ever made. It allowed me to step back, assess 
what I really wanted, and focus.

My naivety and lack of direction at 18 definitely contributed to my bad 
experience. But asking people to sign away the next three years of their life 
on a whim, as Clearing does, feels irresponsible. I know it works for some 
people, but having been through both Clearing and a year out, I know what I’d 
choose if given the chance again.

 * This piece was amended on 22 August for clarity. An earlier version 
referred to a case study which has since been removed 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 