
China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has rejected Donald Trump’s 
claims that climate change is a Chinese hoax, urging the US president-elect to 
take a “smart decision” over his country’s commitment to the fight against 
global warming.


Trump, who is the first self-declared climate change denier to lead one of the 
world’s top emitters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/13/the-guardian-view-on-climate-change-trump-spells-disaster>
, has dismissed global warming as“very expensive … bullshit” 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/418542137899491328> and claimed the 
concept “was created by and for the Chinese in order to make US manufacturing 
non-competitive”.

But speaking at UN climate talks in Marrakech on Wednesday, China’s vice 
foreign minister, Liu Zhenmin, pointed out that it was in fact the 
billionaire’s Republican predecessors who launched climate negotiations almost 
three decades ago.

“If you look at the history of climate change negotiations, actually it was 
initiated by the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] with the 
support of the Republicans during the Reagan and senior Bush administration 
during the late 1980s,”Liu was quoted as saying by Bloomberg 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-16/china-tells-trump-that-climate-change-is-no-hoax-it-invented?cmpid=socialflow-twitter-business&utm_content=business&utm_campaign=socialflow-organic&utm_source=twitter&utm_medium=social>
.

The IPCC <https://www.ipcc.ch/organization/organization_history.shtml> was set 
up by the UN Environment Programme and the World Meteorological Organisation 
(WMO) in 1988 in a bid to better understand and respond to the risks of climate 
change.It received the 2007 Nobel peace prize 
<https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/2007/press.html> for 
helping build “an ever-broader informed consensus about the connection between 
human activities and global warming”.


Less than three months ago climate campaigners were celebrating after China 
and the US, the world’s biggest greenhouse gas emitters, agreed to ratifythe 
Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> during a 
meeting between the Chinese and US presidents, Xi Jinping and Barack Obama.


Signatories to the deal, which came into force at the start of November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, committed to limiting global warming to no more than 2C above pre-industrial 
levels, after which scientists believe its effects will become irreversible.


“We have a saying in America that you need to put your money where your mouth 
is. And when it comes to combating climate change that is what we are doing … 
we are leading by example,”Obama said during the announcement in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
 in September.


But the shock victory of Trump threatens to undo much of that work. The 
president-elect has pledged to pull out of the Paris climate deal and scrap 
Obama’s Clean Power Plan to slash US carbon emissions.

“A Trump presidency might be game over for the climate,” Michael Mann, a 
prominent climate researcher,told the Guardian last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
.


Fears over the environmental cost of a Trump presidency have been heightened 
by reports that Myron Ebell, a notorious climate change skeptic, has been 
appointed to head his Environmental Protection Agency transition team.

Such concerns have dominated the UN Climate Change Conference in Marrakech, 
the first such meeting since the historic 2015 talks in Paris. The Morroco 
talks began on the eve of the election and conclude on Friday.

With some fearing Trump’s victory could embolden other fossil fuel-rich 
countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-victory-may-embolden-other-nations-to-obstruct-paris-climate-deal>
 to step back from their commitments under the Paris deal, China’s vice foreign 
minister told reporters it was “essential” the US continued to back the 
agreement.

“We hope that the US will continue to play a leadership role in the climate 
change process as people are worried about a repeat of the experience ofthe 
Kyoto protocol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/26/kyoto-protocol-not-dead>,” 
which Washington never ratified, Liu told reporters.

“We shall have to wait and see what position they will take … [But we] expect 
that they will take a right and smart decision to live up to the world’s 
expectations,” he added,according to Xinhua, China’s official news agency 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-11/17/c_135835168.htm>.

John Kerry, the outgoing US secretary of state, has sought to reassure 
politicians and activists in Marrakech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/16/john-kerry-we-will-fight-to-keep-us-in-the-paris-climate-deal>
 while conceding that Trump’s victory had left the international community 
“feeling uncertain about the future”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='No%20one's%20an%20exception'%3A%20toll%20of%20climate%20change%2C%20from%20US%20to%20the%20Marshall%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27No%20one%27s%20an%20exception%27%3A%20toll%20of%20climate%20change%2C%20from%20US%20to%20the%20Marshall%20Islands%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fclimate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming&media=>
‘No one’s an exception’: toll of climate change, from US to the Marshall 
Islands – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/sep/15/climate-change-marshall-islands-global-warming>
“While I can’t stand here and speculate about what policies our 
president-elect will pursue, I will tell you this: in the time I have spent in 
public life, one of the things I have learned, some issues look a little bit 
different when you’re actually in office compared to when you’re on the 
campaign trail,”Kerry told delegates at the talks. 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/donald-trump-wont-slow-efforts-to-fight-climate-change-john-kerry-says-1479324706>


He added: “No one, no one should doubt the overwhelming majority of the 
citizens of the US who know climate change is happening and who are determined 
to keep our commitments in Paris.”

But with the American commitment to fighting climate change suddenly in doubt, 
activists have urged Beijing to continue leading the international effort.


“Not only is climate change no Chinese hoax, but Chinese seriousness may be 
our best hope,” Deborah Seligsohn, an expert in environmental governance from 
the University of California at San Diego, arguedin an article on the China 
Dialogue environmental website 
<https://chinadialogue.net/article/show/single/en/9376-Trump-s-victory-may-force-climate-leadership-role-onto-China>
.

 