
The correct question is not where, it is whether. And the correct answer is 
no. The prime minister has just announced that her cabinet will recommend where 
a new runway should be built. Then there will be a consultation on the 
decision. There is only one answer that doesn’t involve abandoning our climate 
change commitments and our moral scruples: nowhere.

The inexorable logic that should rule out new sources of oil, gas and coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/fracking-digging-drilling-paris-agreement-fossil-fuels>
 also applies to the expansion of airports. In a world seeking to prevent 
climate breakdown, there is no remaining scope for extending infrastructure 
that depends on fossil fuels. The prime minister cannot uphold theParis 
agreement on climate change <http://unfccc.int/paris_agreement/items/9485.php>, 
which comes into force next month, and permit the runway to be built.

Airport expansion vote put on hold for more than a year by Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/18/airport-expansion-vote-put-on-hold-for-more-than-a-year-by-theresa-may>
While most sectors can replace fossil fuels with other sources, this is not 
the case for aviation. The airline companies seek to divert us with a series of 
mumbo-jumbo jets,mythical technologies 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920916000158> never 
destined for life beyond the press release. Solar passenger planes,blended wing 
bodies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/mar/03/aviation-technology-emissions-electric-solar-x-planes-anti-insect>
, hydrogen jets,algal oils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/02/ecover-algae-laundry-liquid-palm-oil>
, other biofuels: all are either technically impossible, commercially 
infeasible, worse than fossil fuels or capable of making scarcely a dent 
in emissions.

Aviation means kerosene. Using kerosene to hoist human bodies into the air 
means massive impacts. Improvements in the fuel economy of aircraft have
declined to 1% a year or less 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1361920916000158>, greatly 
outstripped by thegrowth in aviation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/223839/aviation-forecasts.pdf>
. So other means must be found of trying to make it fit.

The government’s decision will be based on the findings of the Airports 
Commission,which reported last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/440316/airports-commission-final-report.pdf>
. It favours a new runway at Heathrow, and proposes two means of ensuring that 
the extra flights will not conflict with Britain’s climate pledges. Neither is 
either fair or workable. The first is that the rest of the economy should make 
extra cuts in greenhouse gases to accommodate aviation. Already the Climate 
Change Act imposes a legal target of 80% reductions by 2050. But if flights are 
to keep growing as the commission expects, those cuts would have to rise to 
85%. This is fundamentally unjust.Three-quarters of  international passengers 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/440316/airports-commission-final-report.pdf>
 at the UK’s biggest airports travel for leisure, and they are 
disproportionately rich:at Heathrow their mean income is £57,000 
<https://www.caa.co.uk/uploadedFiles/CAA/Content/Standard_Content/Data_and_analysis/Datasets/Passenger_survey/CAA%20Passenger%20survey%20report%202015.pdf>
. Just15% of people in the UK take 70% of international flights 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/sites/default/files/pdfs/Air%20Traffic%20Controls%20report.pdf>
. So everyone must pay for the holidays taken by the better off.

Final aiport expansion vote won't happen for at least another year, says No 10 
- Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/18/hague-calls-for-bank-of-england-and-other-central-banks-to-raise-interest-rates-or-lose-independence-politics-live>
The alternative strategy is a carbon tax. The commission is remarkably evasive 
about what this entails, and its reckonings are opaque, contradictory and 
buried in remote annexes. Perhaps that’s unsurprising. Ananalysis by the 
Campaign for Better Transport 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/sites/default/files/pdfs/Air%20Traffic%20Controls%20report.pdf>
 suggests that the tax required to reconcile a new runway with our carbon 
commitments is somewhere between £270 and £850 for a return flight for a family 
of four to New York.

In other words, the Airports Commission plan amounts to increasing airport 
capacity then pricing people out. Where’s the sense in that?

As the commission doubtless knows, no government would impose such charges, or 
shut down northern airports to allow Heathrow to grow. Having approved the 
extra capacity, the government will discover that it’s incompatible with our 
commitments under the Climate Change Act, mull the consequences for a minute or 
two, then quietly abandon the commitments. It’s this simple: a third runway at 
Heathrow means that the UK will not meet its carbon targets. Hold me to that in 
2050.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fclimate-change-airport-expansion-heathrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4fc97cf9c233a2dd16b037fa1c2aa67dce5903%2F0_0_4427_2657%2F4427.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20change%20means%20no%20airport%20expansion%20%E2%80%93%20at%20Heathrow%20or%20anywhere%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fclimate-change-airport-expansion-heathrow%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20change%20means%20no%20airport%20expansion%20%E2%80%93%20at%20Heathrow%20or%20anywhere%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fclimate-change-airport-expansion-heathrow%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5c4fc97cf9c233a2dd16b037fa1c2aa67dce5903%2F0_0_4427_2657%2F4427.jpg>
 ‘For years there has been a lively debate about the noise, local pollution and 
disruption caused by building a new runway at Heathrow.’ Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
But that’s not the half of it. The Airports Commission based its projections 
on the work of another government body: the Committee on Climate Change.Last 
week the committee announced 
<https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/10/UK-climate-action-following-the-Paris-Agreement-Committee-on-Climate-Change-October-2016.pdf>
 that to meet our commitments under the Paris agreement theUK will need to go 
much further 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/13/focus-carbon-removal-meet-paris-goals-uk-committee-climate-change>
 than the 80% cut envisaged by the Climate Change Act. The Paris deal implies 
reductions of “at least 90%” by 2050. This istough under any scenario 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/ccc-uk-needs-negative-emissions-to-comply-with-paris-climate-deal>
, simply impossible if airport capacity grows.

It knocks the Airports Commission’s calculations out of court. If the 
government uses the commission’s figures to justify its decision, it will be 
relying on estimates that are out of date, invalid and incompatible with its 
international commitments.

Heathrow or not, have we resolved the human impacts of the third runway? | 
Andy McDonald
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/heathrow-or-not-human-impacts-third-runway>
Don’t expect help from the opposition. On Sunday Labour’s shadow transport 
secretary,Andy McDonald, argued 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/16/heathrow-or-not-human-impacts-third-runway>
 that we should pay the environmental consequences of building a new runway 
“full and proper heed”, then go ahead. The people of future drought zones will 
feel so much better when they hear about that full and proper heed.

As for the international framework, forget it. Two weeks ago 191 nations 
struck the world’s onlyagreement to regulate aviation emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/aviation-emissions-agreement-united-nations>
. It’s voluntary, it’s pathetic, and it relies on planting trees to offset 
aircraft emissions, which means replacing a highly stable form of carbon 
storage (leaving oil in the ground) with a highly unstable one vulnerable to 
loggers, fires and droughts. The meeting at which the deal was done probably 
caused more emissions than it will save.

For years there has been a lively debate about the noise, local pollution and 
disruption caused by building a new runway at Heathrow, all of which are valid 
concerns. But almost everyone ignores the issue that dwarfs all others.Climate 
change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> means no new 
runway.

If our airports are full, there’s an immediate solution. Fly less. The Free 
Ride campaign <http://afreeride.org/> has proposed a just means of achieving 
this: curb demand by taxing frequent flyers but not those who seldom fly. (In 
case you’re wondering, I limit my flying to once every three years).

Is this beyond contemplation? Are we incapable of making such changes for the 
sake of others? If so, our ethics are weaker than those of 1791, when 300,000 
British people, to dissociate themselves from slavery,stopped using sugar 
<https://www.panmacmillan.com/authors/adam-hochschild/bury-the-chains>, 
reducing sales by one-third. They understood the moral implications of an act 
that carried no ill intent, that seemed sweetly innocent.

The perceptual gulf between us and the distant and future victims of climate 
change is no wider than the ocean that lay between the people of Britain and 
the Caribbean. If we do not make the leap of imagination that connects our 
actions with their consequences, it is not because we can’t, but because 
we won’t.

But reason has taken flight. The moral compass spins, greed and desire soar 
towards the stratosphere, and our conscience vanishes in the clouds. Will 
anyone confront this injustice?

• Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>. A fully linked 
version of this column will be published atmonbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com/>
 