
 Piers Sellers, a climate scientist and former astronaut who gained fame late 
in life for his eloquent commentary about the earth’s fragility and his own 
cancer diagnosis, has died. He was 61.

British-born Sellers, who flew on three space shuttle missions between 2002 
and 2010, died on Friday morning in Houston, Texas, of pancreatic cancer,Nasa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa> said in a statement.

Sellers shared his astronaut’s perspective on climate change in Leonardo 
DiCaprio <https://www.theguardian.com/film/leonardodicaprio>’s documentary, 
Before the Flood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/before-the-flood-review-leonardo-dicaprio-climate-change-documentary>
, released earlier this year. He told DiCaprio that seeing the earth’s 
atmosphere as a “tiny little onion skin” from space helped him gain a fuller 
understanding of the planet’s delicacy.

He also wrote a New York Times op-ed about grappling with the meaning of his 
life’s work after learning he had terminal cancer. In both the film and the 
op-ed, he was optimistic, arguing that he expected human ingenuity to rescue 
the planet from a dire future of runaway global warming.

The Nasa administrator, Charles Bolden, described Sellers “a tremendous public 
servant who was dedicated toNasa <https://www.theguardian.com/science/nasa>, 
the nation and the world”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361095907ded667db486c725e5a2ec8fd4fe6c1b%2F0_37_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20scientist%20and%20Nasa%20astronaut%20Piers%20Sellers%20dies%20aged%2061&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20scientist%20and%20Nasa%20astronaut%20Piers%20Sellers%20dies%20aged%2061&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F361095907ded667db486c725e5a2ec8fd4fe6c1b%2F0_37_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Piers Sellers meets the US Secretary of State, John Kerry with Leonardo 
DiCaprio and Fisher Stevens at the premiere of Before The Flood. Photograph: 
Brad Barket/Invision/AP 
“Piers was dedicated to all facets of exploration,” Bolden said. “His 
curiosity and drive to uncover new knowledge was generously shared with 
audiences around the world, both from space and in wide travels to reach as 
many people as possible with an essential understanding of our fragile planet.

“His legacy will be one not only of urgency that the climate is warming, but 
also of hope that we can yet improve humanity’s stewardship of this planet. His 
cancer diagnosis became a catalyst for him to work even harder on efforts to 
save the planet from global warming for the benefit of future generations.”

Bolden said Sellers “was a strident defender and eloquent spokesperson for our 
home planet, Earth”.

“Spacewalker and scientist, free thinker and friend to our planet, and all who 
seek new knowledge – to say he will be missed would be a gross understatement,” 
he said.


Originally from Crowborough in East Sussex, the University of Leeds and 
Edinburgh graduate gained American citizenship to fulfil a childhood dream of 
flying into space.

“When I was a kid, I watched the Apollo launches from across the ocean, and I 
thought Nasa was the holy mountain,” Sellers said earlier this year when Bolden 
presented him with the Distinguished Service Medal, the agency’s highest 
honour. “As soon as I could, I came over here to see if I could climb that 
mountain.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f7dea29c1ff3d2330c3e5d5c7101d9e01c5dd7%2F0_154_3032_1818%2F3032.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Climate%20scientist%20and%20Nasa%20astronaut%20Piers%20Sellers%20dies%20aged%2061&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Climate%20scientist%20and%20Nasa%20astronaut%20Piers%20Sellers%20dies%20aged%2061&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fclimate-scientist-and-nasa-astronaut-piers-sellers-dies-aged-61%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40f7dea29c1ff3d2330c3e5d5c7101d9e01c5dd7%2F0_154_3032_1818%2F3032.jpg>
 Piers Sellers carries out a spacewalk on the International Space Station in 
2006. Photograph: NASA/Getty Images 
Sellers was deputy director for sciences and exploration at Nasa’s Goddard 
Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland. He started working for Nasa as a 
scientist in 1982 and joined its astronaut corps in 1996. He logged 35 days in 
space during the three shuttle missions to the InternationalSpace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station and was appointed an OBE in 
the New Year’s Honours List in 2011.

 “As an astronaut, I spacewalked 220 miles [354km] above the Earth,” Sellers 
wrote in his op-ed. “Floating alongside the International Space Station, I 
watched hurricanes cartwheel across oceans, the Amazon snake its way to the sea 
through a brilliant green carpet of forest, and gigantic night-time 
thunderstorms flash and flare for hundreds of miles along the equator.

“From this God’s-eye view, I saw how fragile and infinitely precious the Earth 
is. I’m hopeful for its future.”

Sellers wrote that the best way he could imagine spending his final months was 
to continue working, despite knowing he would not live to see the worst of
climate change <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-change> or the 
harnessing of possible solutions.

“New technologies have a way of bettering our lives in ways we cannot 
anticipate,” Sellers wrote. “There is no convincing, demonstrated reason to 
believe that our evolving future will be worse than our present, assuming 
careful management of the challenges and risks. History is replete with 
examples of us humans getting out of tight spots.”

Associated Press and Press Association contributed to this report
 