
As Donald Trump assembles his cabinet, one consistent theme has emerged: many 
of his nominees have expressed doubt about the science of human-caused climate 
change.


“We’re seeing an unprecedented amount of influence from the fossil fuel 
industry in Trump’s cabinet,” Jeremy Symons, who works on climate politics for 
the Environmental Defense Fund, said. “What’s missing from this cabinet is the 
balance one would expect to bring the other side to the equation and it really 
leaves us wondering: who is looking out for us? Clearly the oil companies are 
well attended, but who’s looking out for us?”

Here is where Trump’s cabinet nominees stand on climate change.

Environmental Protection Agency: Scott Pruitt

The Oklahoma attorney general has been a longtime adversary of the EPA and a 
close friend to the fossil fuels industry. He helped lead a lawsuit from 28 
states against the agency’s clean power plan, an Obama administration 
initiative to cut carbon pollution from coal power plants. He has also accepted 
more than $250,000 in donations from the oil and gas industry over the course 
of four campaigns for attorney general, lieutenant governor and state senator. 
In a joint op-ed in theNational Review 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/435470/climate-change-attorneys-general>
, Pruitt wrote that the debate on climate change is “far from settled”, adding: 
“Scientists continue to disagree about the degree and extent of global warming 
and its connection to the actions of mankind.” In fact, theoverwhelming majority
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/16/climate-change-scienceofclimatechange>
 of scientists agree climate change is happening and caused by humans.

Department of the Interior: Ryan Zinke

Zinke is a Montana congressman, former Navy Seal commander and Iraq war 
veteran who has consistently voted in favor of oil and gas drilling projects on 
federal lands. As interior secretary he will have oversight over the use of 
federal lands and controversial pipeline and drilling projects. The congressman 
supports the Keystone XL pipeline and and supported measures to remove 
protections of endangered species, while opposing legislation to regulate 
fracking. The League of Conservation Voters gave him alifetime 
<http://scorecard.lcv.org/moc/ryan-zinke> voting scorecard of 3%. While 
previously acknowledging the science behind climate change, Zinke said in 2014 
that it “is not proven”.

Will Rick Perry's pro-wind power stance carry on in the Trump administration?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/rick-perry-wind-power-energy-secretary-trump-administration>
Department of Energy: Rick Perry

The former Texas governor will be nominated to take over the agency he 
famously wanted to abolish but could not name during his presidential bid in 
2012. In 2011, Perry said that global warming was an unproven scientific theory.

Department of State: Rex Tillerson

The former chairman and CEO of ExxonMobil was nominated to be the country’s 
top diplomat. Much has been made of his ties to Russia and how that may affect 
his role, while Tillerson’s position on climate change has been less of a 
focus. On the surface, Tillerson acknowledges the science of human-caused 
climate change and supported a carbon tax in 2009; ExxonMobil issued a 
statement of support for the Paris agreement while he was at the helm. However, 
Exxon is currently under investigation by New York’s attorney general for 
misleading investors on the risks of climate change. The company has also 
consistently lobbied against climate change proposals. Exxon has also pushed to 
open the Arctic up for drilling.

Department of Defense: James N Mattis

Mattis would be taking over a defense department that has identified climate 
change as a national security “threat multiplier”. He has made few public 
statements on climate change, but according to a 2010 report on the military’s 
energy policy the former Marine general asked to “unleash us from the tether of 
fuel” during the drive into Baghdad. His longtime colleague, retired Marine 
Corps Brig Gen Stephen Cheney, toldClimate Change News 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2016/11/30/trump-defence-secretary-favourite-gets-climate-change/>
 that Mattis “gets climate change”.

Department of Housing and Urban Development: Ben Carson

Carson has said that he is not convinced by the science behind human-caused 
climate change. “I know there are a lot of people who say ‘overwhelming 
science’, but then when you ask them to show the overwhelming science they 
never can show it,” Carson told the San Francisco Chronicle. In multiple 
exchanges, he acknowledged that the climate was changing before asserting that 
the climate has always changed, but “when things stop changing, then we’re 
dead”. Hetold <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cFlK9It4jtU> a crowd at a 
campaign event in New Hampshire last year that he believes in taking care of 
the environment but does not think the issue should be politicized.

CIA: Mike Pompeo

Pompeo is among the most the outspoken critics of climate change legislation. 
He has expressed skepticism over the science that climate change is caused by 
humans, saying in 2013: “Look, I think the science needs to continue to 
develop. There are scientists who think lots of different things about climate 
change. There’s some who think we’re warming, there’s some who think we’re 
cooling, there’s some who think that the last 16 years have shown a pretty 
stable climate environment.” He derided Barack Obama last year for describing 
climate change as a national security threat. Pompeo referred to the Paris 
agreement as a “radical climate change deal”.

National security adviser: Michael Flynn

The former general does not view climate change as a priority. He slammed 
President Obama on Fox News for discussing climate change after a terrorist 
attack.Speaking on Fox 
<http://insider.foxnews.com/2016/06/29/gen-flynn-goes-obama-talking-about-climate-change>
 News in June, he said: “Here we have the president of the United States up in 
Canada talking about climate change. I mean, God, we just had the largest 
attack, as you just said, on our own soil in Orlando. Why are we talking about 
that? Who is talking about that? You know, I mean, Fort Hood, Chattanooga, 
Boston. People forget about 9/11.”

Attorney general: Jeff Sessions

Throughout his time in the US Senate, Sessions has consistently voted against 
climate action, with the League of Conservation Voters giving him a scorecard 
of 7%. Hesaid 
<https://www.congress.gov/congressional-record/2003/10/29/senate-section/article/S13484-2>
 on the Senate floor in 2003: “I believe there are legitimate disputes about 
the validity and extent of global warming … Carbon dioxide does not hurt you. 
We have to have it in the atmosphere. It is what plants breathe. In fact, the 
more carbon dioxide that exists, the faster plants grow.” Sessionsreportedly 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/jeff-sessions-climate_us_5840902fe4b09e21702da99e>
 said last year that the fight against climate change hurts poor people. In 
2015, he reiterated his claim that increased carbon dioxide was not bad for 
you: “Carbon pollution is CO2, and that’s really not a pollutant; that’s a 
plant food, and it doesn’t harm anybody except that it might include 
temperature increases.”

Al Gore: climate change threat leaves 'no time to despair' over Trump victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/al-gore-climate-change-threat-leaves-no-time-to-despair-over-trump-victory>
Department of Homeland Security: John F Kelly

Kelly has made few public statements on climate change but told 
<http://www.hsgac.senate.gov/download/testimony-kelly-2016-04-13> the Senate 
committee on homeland security and governmental affairs: “As with the campaign 
today to raise awareness of climate change – whether one agrees or disagrees 
with the cause-and-effect claims – all are at least fully aware of the issue. 
Even those who reject the science have reduced their energy consumption and 
know it is good for the environment.”

Department of Health and Human Services: Tom Price

Tom Price is a noted climate change skeptic. In a statement supporting a bill 
to fight EPA regulations on carbon dioxide, Pricesaid 
<https://votesmart.org/public-statement/490191/republicans-continue-to-fight-national-energy-tax#.WFKs6KIrLBI>
: “This decision goes against all common sense, especially considering the many 
recent revelations of errors and obfuscation in the allegedly ‘settled science’ 
of global warming.” He hasconsistently voted 
<http://www.ontheissues.org/GA/Tom_Price_Energy_+_Oil.htm> against 
incentivizing renewable energy sources with tax credits and in favor of 
increased oil exploration. He signed a pledge created by Americans for 
Prosperity, a conservative thinktank funded by the Koch brothers, to oppose 
climate legislation.

Department of Commerce: Wilbur Ross

The commerce department encompasses the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration, which has a key role in monitoring the effects of climate 
change. Ross’s views on the issue are not clear. In his career of buying 
distressed companies, he has invested hundreds of millions into oil and gas 
businesses.

Department of the Treasury: Steven Mnuchin

Trump’s financier during this campaign and a former Goldman Sachs executive, 
Mnuchin has made little public comment on climate change. Having never held 
public office, his views on the issue have not been interrogated.

Department of Education: Betsy DeVos

DeVos is the chairman of the Windquest Group, an investment company she 
founded with her husband in 1989 that invests in clean energy technology. She 
may have the most measured views on climate change in the administration.

Department of Transportation: Elaine Chao

Chao was previously a fellow at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative 
thinktank that opposes policies to fight climate change. “Chao’s connection to 
institutions that manufacture climate denial, like the Heritage Foundation, 
requires the public demand she prioritize both public health and the impacts of 
climate change when managing our transportation infrastructure,” said 
Greenpeace USA spokeswoman Cassady Craighill. She wrote a blogpost in 2009 for 
the foundation in which she derided a proposed cap-and-trade system, a 
market-based approach to reducing pollution by providing incentives to reduce 
emissions.
 