
On 11 September 1929 the Wall Street Journal quoted Mark Twain for its thought 
of the day: “Don’t part with your illusions; when they are gone you may still 
exist, but you have ceased to live.” Whatever that day’s subeditors thought 
they were doing, their choice now sounds as falsely confident as a rambler 
about to step off a ledge.

Markets were already in turmoil, America was sinking into economic depression 
and running through the daily news was a thin, high note of hysteria. Still,
Irving Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-sector-training/training-crisis-management-lusk>
 and the other wise men foresaw only the slightest of setbacks, and the brokers 
couldn’t take the cash fast enough. As John Kenneth Galbraith writes in his 
classic,The Great Crash 1929 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/oct/15/useconomy-usa>: “The end 
had come, but it was not yet in sight”.

George Osborne made more than £300,000 in a month from speeches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/george-osborne-made-more-than-300000-in-a-month-from-speeches>
Just six weeks later shares nosedived, countless families had their life 
savings destroyed, and an entire ruling class was stripped of its illusions. It 
took another 25 years, theGreat Depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jun/17/remember-great-depression-no-doesnt-seem-anyone-does>
, theNew Deal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XbVcHmdIFyc> and a world war 
before stocks regained their 1929 levels.

Look around today: the political class of 2016 is stuffed with people firmly 
clinging on to their illusions. Come Brexit, come Trump, come possible break-up 
of Europe: no lessons will be learned, barely an inch will be deviated from the 
ordained course.

For some, the best pose is an uncomprehending defiance. Taking a break from 
tending to his £27m property portfolio, Tony Blairtells the New Statesman 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/11/tony-blair-s-unfinished-business>
, “I can’t come into front-line politics. There’s just too much hostility.” 
Thus does the patron saint of exasperation inform his ex-voters: it’s not me, 
it’s you.

Others are smart enough at least to pay lip service to the new times. A couple 
of months agoGeorge Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne>
 told the Financial Times how much he’d learned from Brexit: “There’s a pretty 
profound sense out there that the system’s not working for people, and instead 
of telling people, ‘Shut up, you’ve never had it so good,’ you’ve got to 
respond to that … I want to use this time out of office to try and understand 
it better.”

Trouble is, lip service doesn’t pay so well. Days after that interview, the 
recently ejected chancellor began a speaking tour of America. In just a month, 
it was revealed last week, heraked in £320,400 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/george-osborne-made-more-than-300000-in-a-month-from-speeches>
. Osborne made more from five speeches (nearly all to the finance industry, 
naturally, and putting inwhat his parliamentary register records  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmregmem/161121/osborne_george.htm>
as a total of 13 and a half hours’ work)than the average British worker 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/file?uri=/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2016provisionalresults/ae861f67.xls>
 will earn in over 11 years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Felite-austerity-theresa-may-poor-rich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe354640e8092a18784719b1cbdcaa072f022d31c%2F0_154_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinging%20to%20illusions%20%E2%80%93%20the%20blinkered%20elite%20who%20still%20think%20austerity%20works%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Felite-austerity-theresa-may-poor-rich%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinging%20to%20illusions%20%E2%80%93%20the%20blinkered%20elite%20who%20still%20think%20austerity%20works%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Felite-austerity-theresa-may-poor-rich%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe354640e8092a18784719b1cbdcaa072f022d31c%2F0_154_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Theresa May and Philip Hammond visit an engineering plant in Gloucestershire 
after last week’s autumn statement. Photograph: Toby Melville/PA 
And for those still running the show, the solution appears to be: keep those 
blinkers on. Take last week’sautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-panel-make-a-difference-philip-hammond>
, which made clear that Britain is now heading for at least one lost decade. It 
predicted an earnings squeeze for the average Briton as bad as any in the past 
70 years, and public debt climbing to Spanish levels. Listening to Philip 
Hammond, the chancellor, reeling off those numbers, I was reminded of what 
Keynes described in the 1930s as“the long dragging conditions of semi-slump” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/nov/08/after-crash-semi-slump>
.

Faced with all this, what did the new chancellor do? Cling with white knuckles 
to his illusions. First, the illusion that austerity works. When Osborne set 
out in 2010 his programme of spending cuts, wage freezes and privatisations, 
his pledge was that the entire thing would be over within one parliament. Then 
it was extended to two parliaments. His successor will soften that austerity,as 
predicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/brexit-tories-economy-philip-hammond-debt-targets>
 in the Guardian last month, but he will extend it into three parliaments, or 
up to 15 years. If a general election is held in 2020, the big question put to 
party leaders by the Today programme and others will be exactly the same as in 
2010: what will you cut?

Hammond’s second illusion is that some loose change chucked at roads, 
transport and other things marked “infrastructure” amounts to a growth 
strategy. The£23bn giveaway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/23/business-leaders-call-for-tarmac-and-telecoms-from-productivity-fund>
 that made all the headlines is to be spent over five years: that makes itthe 
equivalent of roughly 50 pence for every £100 of public spending 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-budget-infrastructure-idUKKBN13I1CI>
.

The Theresa May modus operandi can be summed up as: Cameroonism with a very 
quick paint job.

This is dumb centrism and failed austerity, inflicted on a now mutinous public 
that is palpably sick of both. It fits perfectly and disastrously with the 
Theresa May modus operandi, which can be summed up as:Cameroonism 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-14115047> with a very quick paint job. The 
ruinously expensive Hinkley Point plant ispaused just long enough to annoy the 
Chinese 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/hinkley-point-bad-business-theresa-may-david-cameron>
, then given the green light. The administration that talks aboutworkers 
sitting on company boards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/11/theresa-mays-plans-curb-boardroom-excess-receive-mixed-reaction>
 then pours buckets of cold water on the idea. A public that votes to take back 
control and give more money to the blessed NHS then sees 200 NHS and care 
serviceshanded over to the billionaire tax exile Richard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/11/virgin-care-700m-contract-200-nhs-social-care-services-bath-somerset>
.

Even the tired old “global race” is back, this time as “match fit”. Most of 
all, there is the same taking from the poor to give to the rich. Hammond 
confirmed last week that he would jack up the higher-rate tax threshold for 
high earners. By the time it’s fully implemented, the policy willcost £1.9bn 
<http://election2015.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/bns/BN172.pdf> a year. 
That will lose the government about15 times 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/548741/welfare-reform-and-work-act-impact-assessment-for-the-benefit-cap.pdf>
 what the new benefit cap saves, which will leave about aquarter of a million 
children facing homelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/child-poverty-theresa-may-housing-benefit-cuts>
. Taxes on big business will plunge ever lower, even as every year inflation 
eats into benefits for working families.

Journalists remind us that the prime minister is a vicar’s daughter. Looking 
at her policies, I can only imagine her favourite Bible verseto be Matthew 
25:29: <https://www.kingjamesbibleonline.org/Matthew-25-29/> “For unto every 
one that hath shall be given, and he shall have abundance: but from him that 
hath not shall be taken away even that which he hath.”

Austerity isn’t inevitable or even advisable, as the IMF, OECD and all the 
rest will tell you. But as the political economist Mark Blythwrites in a new 
paper <http://www.elgaronline.com/view/journals/ejeep/13-2/ejeep.2016.02.06.xml>
: “We all benefit from better fiscal policy, but some very powerful folks – 
those who have made off with 90% of everything for the past 30 years and are 
already doing very nicely with private financing initiatives, speculation 
against government debts, the outsourcing of jobs, and the chasing down of 
bankrupts both large and small – benefit less. That they can veto good policy 
is down to the politics of fiscal policy, not the economics.” What’s lacking 
isn’t brain power, but muscle power.

Put another way, Britain has no means of countering the elite’s illusions, of 
reining in the delusions. Thatcher claimed There Is No Alternative, then tried 
to make that true by destroying any alternative. First through strikes then 
with privatisations, the trade unions were crushed. When council housing was 
flogged off, so went the fiercely independent tenants’ associations. The BBC 
was put for ever on the back foot. And the parliamentary Labour party led 
Europe’s social democrats into quavering irrelevance.

But doing the same thing over and over is a merely a collective death wish 
made policy. If half a decade of austerity heaped on top of decades of 
inequality produced Brexit, what will be unleashed by 15 years of it? The elite 
will not part with their illusions. But their illusions may be wrenched from 
them.
 