
Hillary Clinton’s campaign fired back on Tuesday as WikiLeaks released a new 
tranche of hacked emails from the account of its chairman, John Podesta, 
dubbing the website a “propaganda arm of the Russian government” seeking to 
help elect the Republican nominee,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.

The latest batch of more than 2,000 emails, disclosed on Monday, offered a 
glimpse into the inner workings of the Clinton campaign. They included insights 
on multiple fronts, such as a lack of preparedness for Bernie Sanders’ 
insurgent campaign, concerns raised by Chelsea Clinton over potential conflicts 
of interest for the family’s foundation, and efforts by aides on how to best 
frame the former secretary of state’s second bid for the White House.

Did Hillary Clinton intimidate Bill's accusers? Let's look at the evidence | 
Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/hillary-clinton-bill-accusers-jones-willey-broaddrick>
Last week, WikiLeaks published other hacked emails from Podesta’s account, 
which includedalleged excerpts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
 of Clinton’s paid speeches to Wall Street. Clinton’s campaign has neither 
confirmed nor denied the authenticity of the emails, but in recent days 
escalated its charge that the hack was conducted by Russian state actors.

Brian Fallon, a spokesman for Clinton’s campaign, fired off a tweet storm late 
on Monday in which he assailedWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> and its founder, Julian Assange, 
for working on behalf of the Russian government.

“You are no media organization,” Fallon tweeted at WikiLeaks. “You are a 
propaganda arm of the Russian government, running interference for their pet 
candidate, Trump.

“How about probing possibility of Trump associates directly coordinating with 
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and WikiLeaks? That is the 
thing that should cause chills,” he added.

In another tweet, Fallon acknowledged that reporters would be interested in 
their internal campaign operation but implored the media to scrutinize 
collusion between the hackers and Trump’s associates.

“For God sakes, Roger Stone admitted meeting with Assange,” Fallon said of one 
of Trump’s closest advisers.

“Wouldn’t it be good reading to see internal discussions [about] Trump’s 
taxes? Yes but WikiLeaks isn’t targeting Trump. That tells you something.”
Brian Fallon (@brianefallon) 
Media needs to stop treating Wikileaks like it is same as FOIA. Assange is 
colluding with Russian government to help Trump.
 <https://twitter.com/brianefallon/status/785675136578023424> October 11, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/brianefallon/status/785675136578023424> 
The US government has formally accused Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 of attempting to “interfere” with the 2016 presidential election, pointing to 
the hacking of more than 19,000 emails from Democratic party officials in a 
statement over the weekend to suggest that only the country’s “senior-most 
officials could have authorized these activities”.

The allegations against Russia include the hacking in July of the Democratic 
National Committee’s emails, which were released just before the party’s 
convention in Philadelphia and prompted the resignation of the DNC chairwoman,
Debbie Wasserman Schultz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/24/debbie-wasserman-schultz-resigns-dnc-chair-emails-sanders>
. President Vladimir Putin of Russia praised that breach as a public service, 
but has denied that his government had any involvement.

US officially accuses Russia of hacking DNC and interfering with election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
The White House weighed in about the latest hack on Tuesday, saying the 
administration “will ensure that our response is proportional”.

“The president has talked before about the significant capabilities that the 
US government has to both defend our systems in the United States, but also 
carry out offensive operations in other countries,” Josh Earnest, the White 
House press secretary, told reporters.

“So there are a range of responses that are available to the president and he 
will consider a response that is proportional.”

The latest batch of Podesta emails include concerns within Clinton’s inner 
circle about her positioning on key issues as well as the private server email 
controversy that has dogged the campaign since March of last year.

In one email, Clinton’s chief strategist, Joel Benenson, wrote that she “risks 
looking very political” in coming out against the controversialKeystone XL 
Pipeline <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/keystone-xl-pipeline>. In 
another, Podesta said he was “skeptical” about hitting Sanders on his gun 
control record, which during the Democratic primary became one of Clinton’s 
more prominent lines of attack against the Vermont senator.

“Interestingly, I am worried about blowback from our supporters,” Podesta 
wrote, as the campaign mulled criticizing Sanders in an op-ed that ran in 
Clinton’s name in the New York Daily News.

Aides ultimately concluded they would “tone down the contrast” between Clinton 
and her Democratic opponent.

One exchange revealed tensions between Clinton’s longtime aide Doug Band and 
her daughter Chelsea Clinton in late 2011, when Chelsea cited “serious 
concerns” about the blurring of lines between the family’s foundation and 
Band’s consulting company, Teneo.

Band, who insisted his company had “almost nothing to do” with the Clintons or 
its foundation, lashed out at Chelsea in an email to Podesta on the subject.

“She is acting like a spoiled brat who has nothing else to do but create 
issues to justify what she’s doing because she, as she has said, hasn’t found 
her way and has a lack of focus in her life,” Band wrote.

The fallout from Clinton’s use of a private email server while heading the 
state department was also a topic of discussion. In an email from August of 
2015, campaign spokeswoman Jennifer Palmieri noted Clinton was “not in the same 
place” as her team on how to address the controversy.

“As you all know, I had hoped that we could use the ‘server moment’ as an 
opportunity for her to be viewed as having take [sic] a big step to deal with 
the email problem that would best position us for what is ahead,” Palmieri 
wrote. “It is clear that she is not in same place (unless John has a convo with 
her and gets her in a different place).”

The Trump campaign pounced on the hacked emails, focusing on one exchange it 
claimed showed evidence of “collusion” between Clinton’s campaign and the 
Department of Justice in the investigation into her private server. But the 
emails cited by Trump adviser Jason Miller weresent two months before 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/under-the-radar/2016/10/trump-clinton-wikileaks-doj-229615>
 the federal government opened its inquiry into Clinton’s email setup, and show 
nothing more than the exchange of information that was already publicly 
available.


Trump tried to draw attention to the hacked emails himself on Monday during a 
rally in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, holding up a printed statement he 
misattributed to longtime Clinton friend Sidney Blumenthal.

“Sleazy Sidney,” Trump told his supporters, admitted “they could have done 
something about Benghazi”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fclinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3afa7e4ffcec09c14db36632607f9b2b4dbdd2d2%2F0_357_5352_3211%2F5352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clinton%20campaign%20dubs%20WikiLeaks%20'Russian%20propaganda'%20after%20latest%20hack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fclinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clinton%20campaign%20dubs%20WikiLeaks%20%27Russian%20propaganda%27%20after%20latest%20hack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fclinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3afa7e4ffcec09c14db36632607f9b2b4dbdd2d2%2F0_357_5352_3211%2F5352.jpg>
 Trump supporters outside a rally in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. Photograph: 
Dominick Reuter/AFP/Getty Images 
“This just came out a little while ago,” he added, prompting the familiar 
“lock her up” chants against Clinton that are now a staple at Trump’s rallies.


But the words the Republican nominee claimed were written by Blumenthal were, 
in fact, sentences from a story published in Newsweek by journalist Kurt 
Eichenwald last October about the 2012 attack in Benghazi. Blumenthal was 
simply passing along the article to Podesta, in an email that contained the 
subject line “the truth” and promptedan essay 
<http://www.newsweek.com/vladimir-putin-sidney-blumenthal-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-benghazi-sputnik-508635>
 in Newsweek on Monday evening from Eichenwald himself titled: Dear Donald 
Trump and Vladimir Putin, I am not Sydney Blumenthal.

The source of the false story linking Blumenthal to the passages he never 
wrote was Sputnik, a government-controlled Russian news agency. The website 
took its post down after the error became clear, but Eichenwald questioned how 
a conspiracy went quickly from Russian print to Trump’s podium.

The Guardian has contacted the Trump campaign to ask how the Benghazi email 
came to the candidate’s attention and whether the campaign would acknowledge 
what the Republican nominee quoted as Blumenthal’s words were, in fact, from 
Eichenwald’s 2015 Newsweek article.
 