
Your article on the enforced closure of the London nightclub Fabric (When the 
dancing stops: closure of Fabric raises fears for the future of nightclubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/07/fabric-closure-alarm-future-london-nightlife>
, 8 September) also referred to the closure of the Arches in Glasgow. The 
Arches was a successful nightclub, but it was also so much more than that.

Situated in tunnels under Central station, it opened in 1991 as a temporary 
theatre and arts venue for Glasgow’s now defunct Mayfest, and following a 
successful run of events its lease with the rail authorities was extended. 
Visionary director Andy Arnold realised that a lack of public funding for the 
venue’s experimental events meant that alternative sources of revenue were 
required, hence the club nights. This innovative business model meant that the 
highly profitable club nights funded a diverse range of artistic works and 
cemented the Arches’ reputation as Scotland’s premier alternative arts venue.

In the early 2000s a significant lottery grant enabled the Arches to ramp up 
its artistic outputs as well as revamp its clubbing and music facilities. 
Latterly, as withFabric <https://www.theguardian.com/music/fabric>, there were 
tragic drug deaths which ultimately lead to the Arches’ late licence being 
revoked.

Without the club nights the Arches’ business model was compromised and it 
closed shortly after. I am not dismissing the seriousness of these deaths, but 
the Arches’ management tried to work with Police Scotland andGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> city council to address issues that 
led to the deaths, to no avail.

These deaths could have happened in any nightclub, but for some reason the 
Arches was singled out for particularly stringent sanctions. The result is that 
Glasgow – and Scotland – lost one of its most innovative arts venues. 
In deference to the bereaved relatives of the young people who died at the 
venue I will not describe this closure as a tragedy, but it was a severe blow 
to the Scottish cultural community.
Ronan Breslin
Glasgow

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 