
The Turnbull government has hit a new low in its two-party preferred vote and 
the Greens trail One Nation in a fresh poll that also shows widespread anger at 
theCentrelink <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink> debt 
debacle.


The ReachTel poll of 2,126 Australians for the progressive political campaign 
group GetUp shows the Coalition trailing Labor 46% to 54% in two-party 
preferred terms.

The poll, taken on Thursday and released on Monday, found One Nation has a 
primary vote of 9.7%, ahead of the Greens on 8.9%.


Internal Centrelink records reveal flaws behind debt recovery system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/internal-centrelink-records-reveal-flaws-behind-debt-recovery-system>
One Nation has steadily risen in the polls, from a nationwide Senate vote of 
4.3% at the July election, toa Newspoll in October showing it with a vote of 6% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/17/pauline-hansons-one-nation-triples-support-since-election-newspoll>
.

The ReachTel poll found One Nation support was strongest with men, and people 
over 51, with more than 11% of people in those groups indicating they would 
vote for it.

Respondents were asked if they supported stopping Centrelink using automated 
systems to issue tens of thousands of letters about alleged debts. Most (46.2%) 
were in favour of ending the system, compared with 31.8% who wanted to keep it 
and 21.9% who were undecided.

However, respondents were told that “the government admits that at least 20% 
of [Centrelink] letters are incorrect, but the burden is on Centrelink clients 
to correct the information or pay the debt”.

In fact, the government disputes accusations the Centrelink debt recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/centrelink-debt-recovery> system 
has an error rate of 20%.

In a statement on Friday 
<https://www.mhs.gov.au/media-releases/2017-01-13-false-say-there-20-percent-error-rate-centrelink-debt-recovery-system>
 the human services minister, Alan Tudge, said the first letter sent was “not a 
debt letter” but rather notes and asks people to explain the discrepancy 
between their income data held at the Australian Taxation Office with the 
income they declared to Centrelink.

“On 20% of occasions, the recipient is able to validly explain the discrepancy 
in the data,” he said. “In the other 80% of occasions, a debt notice is 
subsequently issued.

“This is not an error rate. This is the system as it was designed to work.”

On Thursday Guardian Australia reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/12/centrelink-human-oversight-slashed-after-cost-benefit-analysis>
 that before Centrelink adopted an automated system an internal analysis showed 
that 15% of detected discrepancies were not debts owed.

The automated system has come under significant criticism because individuals 
are told to begin paying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/28/call-to-suspend-centrelink-system-after-single-mother-receives-24000-debt-notice>
 even when they dispute a debt.

In many cases, welfare recipients are not receiving initial letters owing to 
changes of address, or are unable to track down years-old information about 
their income to prove they were entitled to benefits.

The Labor opposition has said debts are issued on an unfair, indiscriminate 
and inaccurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/30/centrelink-debt-notices-idiotic-big-data-assumptions-expert>
 basis to low-income and vulnerable people, includingone case of a cancer 
survivor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/centrelinks-debt-recovery-failures-referred-to-auditor-general-by-labor>
 told to repay $4,500 he claimed while recovering from chemotherapy.

Asked in the ReachTel poll how “errors with the Centrelink automated debt 
recovery system” affected their vote, 49.8% said it made them less likely to 
vote for the Coalition compared with 14.4% who said they were more likely to 
and 35.8% who said it would not impact their vote.

Asked which should be the Turnbull government’s priority, a large majority 
(82.2%) nominated cracking down on international tax avoidance, compared with 
recovering debts from Centrelink overpayments (17.8%).

Respondents were asked given the “significant errors” in the system whether 
individuals should have to “defend themselves which may include accessing pay 
slips and employment records from up to five years ago”.

Most said the burden of proof should be on Centrelink (78.6%) not the 
individual (21.4%).

The poll was taken on Thursday after a week of revelations of taxpayer funded 
travelclaims by ministers and MPs to attend sports events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/mps-havent-sought-to-defraud-says-minister-as-travel-claims-scandal-widens>
 and Sussan Ley’s trips to the Gold Coast including oneon which she bought a 
$795,000 apartment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/06/sussan-ley-bought-apartment-impulse-taxpayer-funded-trip>
 and two to attend New Year’s Eve events withmultimillionaire Coalition donor 
Sarina Russo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/09/sussan-ley-used-taxpayer-money-for-gold-coast-events-with-multi-millionaire>
.

The government’s horrific start to the year is fully deserved and completely 
appropriate | Greg Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2017/jan/15/the-governments-horrific-start-to-the-year-is-fully-deserved-and-completely-appropriate>
The week culminated in Ley’s resignation as health minister on Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/sussan-ley-quits-health-minister-turnbull-outlines-reform-expenses>
.

GetUp’s campaigns director, Mark Connelly, said the poor poll result was “no 
surprise” given revelations government ministers had been spending taxpayer 
funds on chartered flights and to go to polo matches “while sending tens of 
thousands of false debt-threat letters to everyday Australians”.

“Treating Australians like crap is going to get you crap poll results.”

 