
When Colin George announced in 1967 that the new theatre planned for Sheffield 
would have a thrust stage with the audience on three sides, one city councillor 
said he was not “going to pay to see Hamlet’s backside” and Sir Bernard Miles, 
then running the Mermaid in London, but with a background inSheffield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/sheffield> rep, said: “It will be blacklisted 
by all reputable dramatists.”

Ten years later, however, the city was famous as the home of world 
championship snooker – broadcast from theCrucible 
<https://www.sheffieldtheatres.co.uk/news/paying-tribute-to-colin-george-founding-artistic-director-of-the-crucible-theatre>
. The theatre was also doubling its audience and winning awards.

George, who has died aged 87, was one of the postwar generation of British 
directors who moved theatre on from fortnightly rep in “the provinces” to more 
adventurous productions that could compete with television drama and the West 
End stage. A quietly spiritual man – he became a Quaker – he was also a theatre 
visionary, founding the Crucible’s education and community company,Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> Vanguard. It made Sheffield only 
the second rep in the UK to produce work for schools and young people.

George was born in Pembroke Dock, south-west Wales, the son of Edward George, 
a Congregational minister, and his wife, Helen (nee Sandercock). He attended 
Caterham school in Surrey, and after national service studied English at 
University College, Oxford, where he was heavily involved with the Oxford 
University Dramatic Society. On graduating, withPeter Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2005/feb/12/rsc.theatre>, John Barton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2006/feb/07/theatre.rsc>, Paul Almond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/30/paul-almond> and Toby 
Robertson <https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2012/jul/08/toby-robertson> in 
1952 he formed the Oxford and Cambridge Players, which became the Elizabethan 
Theatre Company. Its Henry V, in which he took the title role, was televised.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8e8432bd5638d9d34063f5ccfd751f4fa56933%2F89_182_2266_2831%2F2266.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colin%20George%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colin%20George%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf8e8432bd5638d9d34063f5ccfd751f4fa56933%2F89_182_2266_2831%2F2266.jpg>
 Colin George in Othello. 
He joined Birmingham Rep as an actor in 1956 before going in 1958 to the old 
Nottingham Playhouse as associate director – a move influenced by fears that a 
troublesome lung might not stand up to an acting career. There, in 1964, he 
directed Alastair Sim as Shylock and Gemma Jones as Portia, and the theatre’s 
artistic director,John Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2011/nov/21/john-neville>, in Sophocles’s 
Oedipus the King. Steeped in the classics, he would direct Oedipus again in a 
memorable Sheffield production using masks; a “fascist” Macbeth followed in 
1970 withNigel Hawthorne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/dec/26/guardianobituaries.filmnews> 
establishing himself as much more than a light comedian.

George took over from Geoffrey Ost as artistic director of Sheffield Playhouse 
in 1965, and introduced the city’s audiences toHarold Pinter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2008/dec/27/harold-pinter-obituary-playwright-politics>
, Bertholt Brecht,John Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2014/dec/24/john-osborne-a-natural-dissenter-who-changed-the-face-of-british-theatre>
 and John Arden. While these writers did not fill the 560-seater converted 
temperance hall, the play about the“Sheffield outrages” 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/about-tuc/union-history/section-events-led-first-tuc> – 
murderous attacks on exploitative non-union employers a century before that led 
to the first trade union regulation – which he commissioned from the actor Alan 
Cullen most certainly did. CalledThe Stirrings in Sheffield on Saturday Night 
<http://www.suds.shef.ac.uk/production/stirrings/stirrings.html>, and with 
music by Rod Horn using traditional material, the play entered the city’s 
bloodstream and there are hundreds of Sheffielders today who can still make a 
fair stab at To Be a Sheffield Grinder, the show’s hit song. The production 
featured Dorothy Vernon, a former Sheffield teacher turned actor, whom George 
married in 1967.

In 1966, much to his astonishment, the city’s Labour council asked George 
where he wanted his new theatre. The Playhouse was to be demolished to make way 
for a ring road. A site was found, within a stone’s throw of the old Edwardian 
Lyceum theatre. A proscenium arch with a large forestage was planned for the 
new building. But in October 1967 the director Tyrone Guthrie visited Sheffield 
to give a talk. Something of a maverick, he had discovered the “thrust” 
configuration in Edinburgh when, working with Laurence Olivier, a production 
had to be moved into a hall with seats arranged on three sides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5d31efde96d85eabc89218f549a3bd61831deb%2F51_108_2373_1424%2F2373.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colin%20George%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colin%20George%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fcolin-george-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a5d31efde96d85eabc89218f549a3bd61831deb%2F51_108_2373_1424%2F2373.jpg>
 Colin George in rehearsal. Photograph: Crucible Theatre 
He persuaded George to visit the US and Canada and look at the thrust stages 
in Stratford, Ontario, and Minneapolis. Henry V, and the prologue’s speech 
asking the actor to “ascend the brightest heaven of invention” came into 
George’s head as he walked up the tunnel to the stage of theGuthrie Theater 
<https://www.guthrietheater.org> in Minneapolis. It was a road-to-Damascus 
moment.

The 1,000-seater Crucible opened in November 1971 with Fanfare, a compilation 
show featuring Ian McKellen and Edward Petherbridge in Chekhov, a brass band 
and Sheffield children singing Consider Yourself from Oliver!. All well and 
good but not yet the real thing.Guthrie died before he could direct the first 
play, Aeschylus’s Agamemnon. George staged Peer Gynt instead, but the energy 
needed to get the theatre built had taken its toll. With many theatregoers 
already sceptical about the thrust stage, this was not the moment for a 
somewhat underpowered Ibsen and an even less well-known play, in Thomas 
Dekker’s The Shoemaker’s Holiday.

But when he revived Stirrings in 1973 things looked up. He left Sheffield on a 
high a year later with Calamity Jane, featuring Lynda Marchal – now better 
known as the writer Lynda la Plante – as a wonderfully feisty and funny lead.

Letter: Colin George, Tyrone Guthrie and the thrust stage in Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2017/jan/17/colin-george-obituary-letter> 
George worked in turn at the State Theatre Company of South Australia 
<http://www.statetheatrecompany.com.au> and then the Hong Kong Academy for 
Performing Arts <https://www.hkapa.edu>, where he was dean for 11 years. In 
Australia, he gave Mel Gibson and Judy Davis their first stage roles as the 
leads in Romeo and Juliet, and from Hong Kong he toured a Chinese production of 
Euripides’ The Bacchae to Shanghai and Beijing.

Returning to Britain he devised his own one-man-show in the person of 
Shakespeare’s father and in 1994 joined the Royal Shakespeare Company. In the 
company wasDaniel Evans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/dec/02/daniel-evans-new-artistic-director-chichester-festival-theatre-sheffield-jonathan-church>
, who later became artistic director of the Crucible.

In 2011, in the theatre’s 40th anniversary production of Othello with Dominic 
West and Clarke Peters, Evans invited George back to play Desdemona’s aged 
father. It was George’s last role, in a theatre he loved and which was now 
garlanded with awards. And it was a full house.

George’s first marriage ended in divorce. He is survived by his second wife, 
Sue Spanner, whom he married in 1992, by the four children, Gwendolyn, 
Caroline, Lucy and Edward, of his first marriage, and by 14 grandchildren.

• Colin George, actor and director, born 20 September 1929; died 15 October 
2016
 