
Britain’s public finances suffered a shock setback in September after a 
collapse in corporation tax receipts to the lowest level since 2009 widened the 
budget deficit to £10.6bn.

A slowdown in the growth of VAT receipts was also blamed for pushing the 
deficit £1.3bn, or 14.5%, higher than September last year and higher thanthe 
£10.5bn recorded in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/government-borrowing-higher-than-expected-at-105bn-figures-show-brexit>
.


City analysts, who had expected an £8.5bn shortfall, warned that the figures 
were a setback forPhilip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> as he prepares to boost 
public spending in his autumn statement next month. The chancellor is seeking 
ways to boost growth next year to cushion the economy against a widely expected 
slowdown following the Brexit vote.

In recent months he has sent conflicting signals about the likely size and 
scope of extra spending to compensate for the uncertainty surrounding the 
Brexit negotiations and forecasts of growth for next year that have halved from 
around 2.2% to nearer 1%.

Immediately after the vote he ripped up George Osborne’s fiscal rule of 
achieving a budget surplus by the end of the parliament, and talked about the 
need for extra spending to create jobs and improve the country’s infrastructure.

But he has sought to dampen expectations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-rules-out-splurge-in-public-spending-in-autumn-statement>
 by emphasising that he is constrained by volatile international money markets, 
which could drive up the government’s borrowing costs if he is seen to be 
reckless.


The weak September figures took the budget deficit to £45bn for the first six 
months of the year, down nearly 5% from the same period in 2015. The Office for 
National Statistics said it could not offer a reason for the dive in 
corporation tax receipts.

Paul Hollingsworth, UK economist at Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics>, said if the public finances 
continued on the current trend, then borrowing would overshoot the Office for 
Budget Responsibility’s (OBR) forecast of £55.5bn for the financial year by 
about £17bn.


He said: “Even before the vote to leave the EU, the OBR’s fiscal forecasts 
were looking optimistic. But the weaker economic prospects over the next few 
years as a result means that these forecasts are likely to be revised 
substantially in the autumn statement next month.”

Government expenditure since April has been kept in check, rising by £5.9bn or 
1.7%, to £348.7bn while tax receipts from the biggest sources of income – 
income tax and national insurance – increased at a faster pace. National 
insurance was 7% higher at £59.3bn and income tax rose 2.7% to £78.7bn.

These improvements were undermined when the usually strong September 
corporation tax receipts proved much weaker, limiting the tax take to £21bn in 
the first half of the year. The interest bill on the government’s debts caused 
another headache for the Treasury after it increased by £800m, or 9%.

The OBR said the rise in debt interest payments and a change in the monthly 
profile of contributions to the EU budget opened up a gap between central 
government expenditure and income to 4.5% from the first six months last year.

Suren Thiru, head of economics at the British Chambers of Commerce, said the 
rise in government borrowing underscored the weakness of the UK economy.

“The UK’s ability to generate tax revenue has diminished following the 
financial crisis, and this underlying weakness is likely to be exacerbated 
further if the UK economy slows as we predict,” he said, addingit was vital the 
chancellor offered incentives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/16/invest-in-housing-and-broadband-business-lobby-tells-chancellor>
 to “invest, create jobs, and support growth”.

Hammond said: “We have already made significant progress in bringing the 
public finances under control, reducing the deficit by almost two-thirds since 
2010, but our debt and deficit remain too high. We remain committed to fiscal 
discipline and will return the budget to balance over a sensible period of 
time, in a way that allows us the space to support the economy as needed.”
 