
Colour plays a huge part in the way we live. It’s in our language – indulging 
in ‘blue sky thinking’ or being ‘green with jealousy’. The colours we choose 
tell people who we are - few lawyers or bankers sport pink hair. And the hues 
that surround us affect our mood, whether we’re feeling depressed in a 
dull-brown painted office or stimulated by the bright colours in a painting. So 
how does colour have such a strong effect on us?

“There has been much written on the psychology of colour, but without too much 
hard evidence to back it up,” says Julia Begbie, development director at the 
KLC School of Design in London, which runs online courses on the power of 
colour. “However, the way we see colour - via cone receptor cells in the eye 
aligned roughly to red, blue and green - means that colour can be manipulated 
to produce environments that are physically more or less comfortable to occupy, 
in terms of visual feed.”

Create a cosy living room with these on-trend colour schemes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/create-a-cosy-living-room-with-these-on-trend-colour-schemes>
Big brands know all about the power of colour. Research has found that 62-90% 
of a customer’s assessment of a product is based on just its colour. That shade 
can also influence everything from the amount a customer eats (such as the 
bright appetite-stimulating red used by McDonalds, together with “friendly” 
yellow) to making them feel good about themselves, as in the case of the 
tasteful hues used by luxury brands.

Selecting a brand colour is also about finding the exact shade to communicate 
a value – check out the dependable blue of Facebook or the bright, look-at-me 
Easyjet orange. “‘Mood’ and colour are closely related,” explains Begbie. “This 
is particularly true in terms of how fully saturated a colour is. The colours 
of the Google logo are fully saturated: their green and blue tones are close to 
primary colours. ‘Harrods’ green is a green with black added – a shade of 
green. ‘Tiffany’ blue is a tint of blue: it is blue with white added. Shades as 
part of a colour scheme can create a sophisticated, grown-up and slightly 
sombre effect. Primaries are less mature, perky and possibly a bit wearing to 
live with over large surfaces. Tints can be quite childish, girly or pretty.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcolour-psychology-how-different-shades-and-tones-affect-your-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80df83c4ae98ebc213a1fc31246f01c5f2fc4502%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Colour%20psychology%20%E2%80%93%20how%20different%20shades%20and%20tones%20affect%20your%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcolour-psychology-how-different-shades-and-tones-affect-your-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Colour%20psychology%20%E2%80%93%20how%20different%20shades%20and%20tones%20affect%20your%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcolour-psychology-how-different-shades-and-tones-affect-your-mood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80df83c4ae98ebc213a1fc31246f01c5f2fc4502%2F0_410_6144_3686%2F6144.jpg>
 Colour shades can create a sophisticated mood while primaries are less mature. 
Photograph: Westend61/Getty Images 
Colour therapists even use different shades to help us feel certain ways. 
“Colour is an energetic vibration, just like sound is,” explains creative coach 
Kate Taylor. “The way that colour hits our eyes makes a difference to how we 
feel about something. So colours work on a different frequency. Lighter 
colours, like white, have a really high frequency. They go into the eye and hit 
the pituitary gland in a different way than the more dense colour of red will. 
Those different frequencies hit our brains and our nervous systems and have a 
different effect on how we feel. Red, for example, is the colour of being 
rooted down, the colour of passion, the colour of strength. It’s a powerful 
colour and stimulates the mind and the body. It increases blood pressure and 
heart rate. It invokes passion, but it also signals danger.”

Design tips for a sumptuous interior
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/design-tips-for-a-sumptuous-interior>
Colour is used all around us by architects and designers. Research by paint 
manufacturer Dulux, for example, recommends that waiting areas in hospitals, 
where people spend long periods of time, should have uplifting and interesting 
colours such as blues, purple and green shades. Patient rooms, meanwhile, 
should avoid bright colours as these can actually interfere with a doctor’s 
visual diagnosis.

And these different shades might even help to encourage certain kinds of 
behaviour. In the 1970s, socio-biologist Alexander Schauss created a specific 
pink paint tone, which he believed would help calm prisoners down. Thirty years 
later, colour designer Daniela Späht renamed his Baker-Miller Pink as Cool Down 
Pink. Thirty cells in jails and police stations across Switzerland have now 
been painted pink as part of the Cool Down Pink project. So, the next time you 
choose a product, eat in a restaurant, or sit in a waiting room, look at the 
colours surrounding you. They may say more than you think.
 