
Last night, BBC2 launched Common Sense, a sort of soap-box Gogglebox, in which 
Britons comment on current affairs. A couple who run a butchers shop chat about 
fracking. Three octogenarian women do a gentle exercise class while discussing 
whether Theresa May needs to get a move on with Brexit. A pair of male nail 
technicians shoot the breeze about the Trump-Putin relationship.

Common Sense is one of TV’s attempts to address a growing sense of crisis in 
the provision of journalism. Falling audiences for – and declining faith in – 
traditional reporting is often attributed to a so-called “post-truth” 
environment, in which fact has little impact on opinion.

Post-truth, though, is only a third of the problem. In All Out War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/21/all-out-war-tim-shipman-the-brexit-club-owen-bennett-bad-boys-of-brexit-arron-banks-review>
, Tim Shipman’s tremendous book on the EU Referendum, the Remain team makes an 
alarming discovery during a focus group with potential voters in Doncaster. The 
convener of the meeting reports urgently to London mission control: “People had 
absolutely no idea what the EU was, or how it worked at all, to the point that 
it beggars belief. No one had ever heard of the single market, or knew about 
what it did ... [they] have literally no idea what you’re on about.Literally no 
idea.”

All journalists and politicians should pin that quote to their walls or 
foreheads. The Doncaster anecdote suggested the existence of a “pre-truth” 
population that does not follow news at any level.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda62ca6918115d72f20d8e606dbb752c5b38a993%2F0_178_4253_2553%2F4253.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda62ca6918115d72f20d8e606dbb752c5b38a993%2F0_178_4253_2553%2F4253.jpg>
 Dinner ladies Christina and Winifred. Photograph: Studio Lambert 
The mainstream news media, though, cannot be too pious. Their coverage of 
recent major events has often proved to be anti-truth. This was inadvertent – a 
result of metropolitan bubble-think, dodgy opinion polls and, in broadcasting, 
strict rules of impartiality – but the consequence was that the real stories 
were missed.

Anyone watching the main news bulletins in the UK over the past 18 months 
would have got the impression that the first election of Jeremy Corbyn, the 
Brexit victory and the Trump presidency were impossibilities until almost the 
moment they occurred.

Common Sense answers this by going to the source: real people saying what they 
really think. The concept presumably came from the BBC wanting to tap in to the 
energy of Twitter, chat-rooms or radio phone-ins. But Victoria Derbyshire, on 
BBC2 in the mornings, already delivers that powerfully – and on her show, 
people can talk about events that just happened. In contrast, hot topics on 
Common Sense included stories that were a week or more old: the Queen being 
mistaken for an intruder by one of her soldiers, Tony Blair’s re-emergence in 
UK politics, and afluffy survey 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/living/2519684/average-brit-will-spend-one-year-and-eight-months-of-their-life-in-a-bad-mood-study-finds/>
 about how many hours the average Briton spends in a bad mood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0e253ce36d765fef6bfef03817341d921c69bc0%2F0_305_4270_2561%2F4270.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff0e253ce36d765fef6bfef03817341d921c69bc0%2F0_305_4270_2561%2F4270.jpg>
 The Hull ladies who keep fit with Heather. Photograph: Studio Lambert 
This distance from what people are genuinely talking about is partly a result 
of the time required for editing. But it also comes from the editorial caution 
and impartiality to which the BBC is constitutionally bound. The problem with 
Common Sense is that the best conversations about news events this week in 
Britain were almost certainly either grossly defamatory or savagely partisan – 
two forms of discourse obviously problematic for aBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> on the verge of coming under the 
regulation of Ofcom. In the opener, one person made a passing reference to 
ancient gossip about the love life of the Duke of Edinburgh, but that was as 
edgy as it got.

One reason the show has to be moderate is that it has no moderator. Ruth 
Jones’s voiceover identifies the news events and speakers but otherwise makes 
no intervention. The drawback of this decision is that, if a contributor gets 
something wrong, the only options are to cut the line or transmit it 
unchallenged.

For example, when discussing Donald Trump’s tensions with the US intelligence 
agencies – in connection with last week’s private meeting, rather than 
yesterday’ssensational press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>
 – a market trader suggested that he should watch out because President Nixon 
was forced out of office by the “Secret Service”, proving that you “don’t mess” 
with them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2467122027f2c8392cdc21a1081bfcb054c27603%2F0_0_4283_2855%2F4283.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Common%20Sense%3A%20TV%20news%20to%20burst%20the%20mainstream%20media%20bubble%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fcommon-sense-bbc-tv-news-to-burst-mainstream-media-bubble-post-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2467122027f2c8392cdc21a1081bfcb054c27603%2F0_0_4283_2855%2F4283.jpg>
 Market traders Frank and Aby. Photograph: Studio Lambert 
Although there are numerous conspiracy theories about the Watergate scandal, 
it has never been suggested that the President’s resignation was a result of 
being nobbled by his bodyguards, and nor was that what the speaker meant to 
say. A phone-in host would intervene, “Hang on, mate…”, but Common Sense has 
given itself no method of correction.

The biggest test is whether – if it had been going out during the last two 
years – the show would have given an early warning of the public undercurrents 
that led to victories for Corbyn and Leave. I suspect that the raw footage 
might have done, but that the transmitted show – edited to meet BBC anti-bias 
guidelines – would have been as misleading as the rest of mainstream media 
coverage.

Unless Common Sense can get closer to real-time news, and catch the scabrous 
and speculative nature of real street speech, it threatens to be no more than 
an out-of-focus group.
 