
Theresa May has spoken on the phone to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> and stressed to the new US 
president-elect that he should seek to unite America when he takes office, 
Downing Street has said.

May talked to Trump earlier on Thursday, a Downing Street statement said. It 
added that the prime minister called “to congratulate him on his hard-fought 
election campaign and victory”, and confirmed May had been invited to visit the 
US “as soon as possible”.

“She noted President-elect Trump’s commitment in his acceptance speech to 
uniting people across America, which she said is a task we all need to focus on 
globally,” read one section of the statement, which is as close as May has come 
so far to referring to Trump’s controversial and divisive campaign.

In the call, Trump made reference to the famously close relationship between 
Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher as a hopeful aim for their ties, a Downing 
Street source said.

Trump “alluded to their relationship as a way to underline that he was keen to 
have a good personal working relationship, too,” the source said.

The call came after concerns that the much-vaunted special relationship with 
the US might have suffered an early setback under Trump as he spoke to nine 
other world leaders in the 24 hours after his election win, without May getting 
a call.

“The prime minister and President-elect Trump agreed that the US-UK 
relationship was very important and very special, and that building on this 
would be a priority for them both,” the statement said. “President-elect Trump 
set out his close and personal connections with, and warmth for, the UK.

“He said he was confident that the special relationship would go from strength 
to strength.” May noted to Trump that the UK and US had “a long history of 
shared values”, the statement said.

“She highlighted her wish to strengthen bilateral trade and investment with 
the US as we leave the EU. But she said that our relationship is so much more 
than that and our two countries have always stood together as close allies when 
it counts the most,” it said.

“President-elect Trump strongly agreed and added that the UK is a ‘very, very 
special place for me and for our country’. The call ended with President-elect 
Trump inviting the prime minister to visit him as soon as possible.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmay-congratulates-trump-victory-corbyn-expresses-doubts-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=May%20congratulates%20Trump%20on%20victory%2C%20Corbyn%20expresses%20doubts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmay-congratulates-trump-victory-corbyn-expresses-doubts-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=May%20congratulates%20Trump%20on%20victory%2C%20Corbyn%20expresses%20doubts%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fmay-congratulates-trump-victory-corbyn-expresses-doubts-video&media=>
May congratulates Trump on victory, Corbyn expresses doubts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/09/may-congratulates-trump-victory-corbyn-expresses-doubts-video>
Meanwhile the British chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, said Trump’s election on 
a platform of protectionism showed how the case must be made for free trade, 
but also stressed that it was by no means certain the president-elect would 
pull out of trade deals as promised.

“He has only been president-elect for two days,” Hammond said following talks 
with China’s vice-premier, Ma Kai. “I think we should let him take stock, 
consider with his advisers, consult widely, and then of course we will look 
forward to engaging with him.”

Asked about Trump’s views on imposing tariffs, Hammond said: “We will continue 
to make the case for open markets and free trade. We equally recognise the 
challenge that occurs when within a society there are significant groups of 
people who no longer see that open markets and free trade are delivering 
results for them.”

According to reports, the first leader Trump spoke to on the phone after his 
election victory was the Egyptian president, Abdel Fatah al-Sisi. Sisi 
congratulated him on the election victory, aspokesman for the Egyptian leader 
said 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/egypts-sisi-says-spoke-donald-trump-telephone-congratulated-094905815.html>
.

Ireland’s government said the taoiseach 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-37934904>, Enda Kenny, had a 10-minute 
call with Trump, and was invited to visit the White House on St Patrick’s Day.

Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, has said he and Trump 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-mexico-trump-idUSKBN1343IW> 
agreed in their call to meet before Trump takes office, while Israel’s prime 
minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, wasinvited to the White House 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/trump-invites-netanyahu-to-white-house-in-phone-call/>
.

Other leaders to have a chat with Trump so far include the Turkish president, 
Recep Tayyip Erdoğan 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-turkey-erdogan-idUSKBN1343I8>, 
India’s prime minister,Narendra Modi 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/PM-Modi-calls-Donald-Trump-to-congratulate/articleshow/55339959.cms>
, the Japanese prime minister, Shinzo Abe – theyreportedly talked for 20 minutes
 
<http://www.japantimes.co.jp/news/2016/11/10/national/politics-diplomacy/abe-trump-look-meet-next-week-new-york/#.WCRoWzaLTAw>
 and agreed to meet soon in New York – andSouth Korea’s president, Park Geun-hye
 <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-election-southkorea-idUSKBN13508O>.

Australia’s prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, was reported to have chatted 
with Trump about security and trade 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-11-10/politics-live-november-10/8011624> in 
their call.
 