
The government must implement a total ban on ivory sales in the UK, according 
to scores of politicians, conservationists, scientists and entertainment stars 
including William Hague, Jane Goodall, Stephen Hawking and Ricky Gervais.

Ministers this week announced a ban on ivory younger than 70 years old 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/uk-ban-on-modern-day-ivory-sales>, but 
stopped short of a total ban.

The group have written to prime minister Theresa May 
<http://actionforelephantsuk.org/letter-to-theresa-may-calling-for-ban-on-uk-ivory-trade/>
 “appealing to the government for a total ban on ivory sales”, which was a 
pledge made in both the 2010 and2015 Conservative party manifestos 
<https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/manifesto2015/ConservativeManifesto2015.pdf>
.

Elephants are being slaughtered by poachers for their ivory in huge numbers 
and, while the international trade is illegal, critics say legal domestic trade 
allows illicit ivory to be passed off as antique and therefore legitimate. “The 
legal ivory trade in the UK feeds one of the largest markets for ivory in 
Europe,” write the group. “The closure of all ivory markets, both international 
and domestic, is critical for elephants’ survival.”

A total ban on ivory would be disastrous for elephants. Better to legalise it 
| Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/total-ban-ivory-disastrous-elephants-legalise-it>
Over 140,000 of Africa’s savannah elephants were killed between 2007 and 2014, 
wiping out almost a third of their population, according to amajor survey 
published in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/31/poaching-drives-huge-30-decline-in-africas-savannah-elephants>
. Just 350,000 remain, with poaching continuing today and an elephant being 
killed every 15 minutes on average.

The letter’s signatories include Richard Leakey, Joaquin Phoenix, Tim Farron, 
Caroline Lucas, Ed Miliband and Richard Dawkins, plus 19 more MPs from across 
the parties. The letter was coordinated byAction for Elephants UK 
<http://actionforelephantsuk.org/> before the government announced its ban on 
modern ivory sales and ahead ofprotest marches in the UK and around the world 
<http://march4elephantsandrhinos.org/> on Saturday.

In an addendum to the letter, Maria Mossman from Action for Elephants UK, 
said: “The crackdown on ivory sales announced by the government does not 
represent the total ban we are calling for. It simply tightens controls on the 
documentation of ivory for sale, however no mechanisms could ever ensure that 
such controls were met and enforced for every single piece of ivory sold in the 
UK. As long as a legal ivory trade is allowed to continue, illegal ivory will 
find its way on to the market – and the scourge of poaching will continue.”

“We are dismayed that the government has chosen this route rather than 
announcing a complete ban and demonstrating the kind of leadership so urgently 
needed for a global ban on ivory,” she said.

Environment secretary, Andrea Leadsom, who announced the ban on UK sales of 
post-1947 ivory items, said on Wednesday: “Elephants are some of our world’s 
most iconic animals and it will take truly global action to stop the insidious 
criminals who selfishly prosper from the ivory trade. This [UK] ban will send 
the message that the ivory trade is a thing of the past.” It was already 
illegal in the UK to trade in raw tusks or unworked ivory of any age.

A coalition of conservation groups, including the Zoological Society of London 
(ZSL), Tusk, Environmental Investigation Agency, WildlifeConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> Society and WildAid, 
have also criticised the new restrictions on the UK ivory trade as inadequate.

“The announcement is welcome but falls short of what is needed,” said the 
groups in a joint statement. “By focusing on ‘modern day ivory’, the government 
has overlooked the huge problem of worked ivory dated prior to 1947, which 
makes up the vast majority of the market. The government must recognise that a 
near-total ban would be the most effective step the UK can take to protect the 
future of elephants. Failure to do so will mean the UK neither meets its 
international commitments nor represents public opinion.”

“Maintaining domestic ivory markets helps fuel the illegal killing of 
thousands of elephants,” said Prof Jonathan Baillie, director of conservation 
programmes at the ZSL. The US implemented a ban on ivory sales in July, 
following France’s in April, while China, the major market for ivory, has 
imposed a three-year ban on ivory imports.

In a statement to be read at Saturday’s marches, the foreign secretary Boris 
Johnson, said: “The elephant is perhaps the single greatest glory of the animal 
kingdom. It is utterly heartbreaking that their numbers are falling so far and 
so fast. We must act and that means an ivory ban, as we Conservatives promised 
in our manifesto at the last election.”

A global summit on the international trade in endangered species 
<https://cites.org/cop17> (Cites) begins in South Africa on Saturday, where 182 
nations will debate proposals to either loosen controls on ivory sales or 
tighten them.


Environment minister Thérèse Coffey, who represents the UK at the Cites 
summit, said: “Working with other governments, I want to see strong outcomes 
from this conference to protect our precious global wildlife, including 
elephants, lions and rhinos.”

The EU is set to oppose a total global ban on ivory sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/06/african-wildlife-officials-appalled-as-eu-opposes-a-total-ban-on-ivory-trade>
. Johnson, who backed the UK leaving the EU, said: “It is dismaying that the EU 
finds itself unable to unite on this question and therefore unable to speak up 
properly in Cites. By taking back control of our conservation strategy we in 
Britain will once again be able to show a global lead.”
 