
Many of us in the United States are in deep shock and despair. The election of 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> speaks of a 
country and a world that represents so many things that go against our deepest 
grains. However, as I told my children this morning, the Earth will still turn, 
the sun will still rise. In fact, a Trump presidency will not have the dire 
consequences that many of us fear – especially for people like me who will be 
insulated from his policies. Surely it will change the economics and courts in 
the US, among other things. But really, all of these are transient.

The one thing that isn’t transient is the impact this will have on climate 
change. It is now virtually certain the world will not meet any of its climate 
targets. If Trump (and the Republican-controlled Congress) stand by their 
pledges, we will see a major rollback of the tremendous progress that has been 
made on reducing emissions. A Trump presidency will likely set us back at least 
a decade, perhaps longer. Andthat is a decade we can’t afford 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/the-critical-decade-part-3-emissions-reductions.html>
.

The world will blow past the 2C (3.6F) target set in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/dec/14/the-paris-agreement-signals-that-deniers-have-lost-the-climate-wars>
. This means it will be difficult to avoid the worst consequences of climate 
change.

The election also affects how we should talk about climate change. In the US, 
and in many other countries, opposing steps to cut carbon pollution has become 
a litmus testfor conservative politicians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/sep/14/trump-and-the-republican-party-are-doing-big-oils-bidding>
. So, in this sense, conservatives now own climate change. I can just imagine 
the slogans, “Climate change, brought to you by your neighborhood 
conservatives.”

George W Bush was the worst president ever on climate change. Back then, with 
the reality of climate change not as widely known, it is conceivable to give 
voters a pass. But not now. Anyone who voted for Trump shares the 
responsibility for what is now inevitable.


It’s really too bad because many conservatives certainly don’t want to destroy 
the Earth’s climate. Furthermore, there are some conservatives who do take 
climate change seriously. However, when a central belief to conservatism 
results in decades of inaction, it makes it impossible to avoid staring facts 
in the face.

Conservatives own climate change.

Conservatives own the consequences of climate change.

They own the increased droughts, more severe storms, sea level rise, and 
floods.

They own the heat waves, the loss of habitat and the shifting climate zones.

They own the climate refugees, the resulting political strive, and climate 
conflicts.

They own it all.

Liberals, both in the US and around the world, have tried to work with 
conservatives to devise practical plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jun/13/how-revenue-neutral-carbon-tax-creates-jobs-grows-economy>
 that will reduce the threats of climate change. In the past few yearsthere was 
real progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
.

We had hope.

Now, we can look forward to the US going backwards. Becoming the world’s 
laggard on climate change (again). Once again, America’s leaders will describe 
climate change as a hoax or as a non-threat.


So, I’d like to rename climate change to “Climate Change, brought to you by 
Conservatives”. I will spend the next four years reminding people that the 
climate change we are seeing, and the climate change which is now unavoidable 
could have been stopped. I will count up the economic and social consequences 
of climate change which could have been stopped. These are now the liability of 
conservatives. The financial costs of adapting will also be owned by 
conservatives.

They asked for it, they got it. Our job is to never let them forget it.
 