
One cold day last February, Terry Tempest Williams, a prominent environmental 
author and advocate, stepped into Utah’s Salt Palace to begin her unlikely 
career in the energy industry.

Salt Palace, Salt Lake City’s largest convention center, was hosting a federal 
oil and gas lease sale, at which the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) would 
auction off 45,000 acres of public land for oil and gas extraction.

The BLM, the nation’s largest landlord, sold drilling rights to 810,000 acres 
in 2015. While that may sound like a vast area, it’s barely a postage stamp for 
BLM. Energy companies currently hold leases to more than30m 
<http://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en/info/newsroom/2016/april/nr_04_11_2016.html> 
BLM-managed acres nationwide.

Williams had arrived with a cadre of protesters, who charged that drilling the 
parcels – and burning the fuel buried beneath them – would damage the land and 
contribute to dangerous climate change. Though Williams’s history of civil 
disobedience included more arrests and climate marches than she could count, 
she’d begun to feel she wasn’t doing enough. She’d come to the Palace to 
attempt a new form of activism, to further exercise what she called her “moral 
imagination”.

Williams filled out a bidder registration form and sat down in the front row, 
among representatives from Silver Spur Resources and Turner Petroleum.

A BLM agent approached to warn her that she could be prosecuted for 
misrepresenting herself as a legitimate energy bidder. Tim DeChristopher, an 
activist who in 2008 had purchased leases worth nearly $1.8m with no means or 
intent of paying for them, had served 21 months in prison. Though Williams knew 
DeChristopher’s story well, she told the agent that she had the right to be 
there. Before he could object further, the auction began.

US eco-activist jailed for two years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jul/27/tim-dechristopher-jailed-two-years>
Depressed oil prices made for a sluggish start to the bidding. The protesters 
began singing to disrupt the sale and were soon ushered from the hall.

Williams wanted to bid, but her mental math couldn’t keep pace with the 
auctioneer’s patter. Instead, she tweeted: “Holding the space. #witness,” she 
wrote. Many of her missives ended with #keepitintheground, or, in moments of 
particular passion, #keepitinthefuckingground. The auction ended without 
Williams placing a bid, and onlyhalf the acreage sold 
<http://www.blm.gov/style/medialib/blm/ut/lands_and_minerals/oil_and_gas/february_2016.Par.85406.File.dat/CompStatsTwo.pdf>
.

That afternoon, though, she and her husband, Brooke, traveled to BLM’s office 
to buy some of the unsold parcels over the counter. They spread out the 
agency’s maps and selected two tracts: one in Utah’s Book Cliffs, and another 
on the doorstep of Arches National Park, 14 miles from their home.

Altogether, the couple purchased rights to 1,120 acres at the bargain-basement 
price of $1.50 an acre. With the processing fee, the transaction cost $2,500, 
which they charged to their credit card.

Williams filed paperwork the next day to create her own firm, Tempest 
Exploration, LLC – the first energy company in history devoted not to 
extracting fuel, but to keeping it in the ground.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb367e6ae8e01ba38723f9d098f27de6b6b054d%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20living%20dangerously%3A%20Conservationist%20Terry%20Tempest%20Williams%20steps%20up%20to%20the%20BLM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20living%20dangerously%3A%20Conservationist%20Terry%20Tempest%20Williams%20steps%20up%20to%20the%20BLM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2cb367e6ae8e01ba38723f9d098f27de6b6b054d%2F0_0_3872_2592%2F3872.jpg>
 Blue Whale at the American Museum of Natural History Photograph: Breakyunit 
Ten weeks later, I met Williams in New York City, beneath the blue whale that 
hangs from the ceiling of the American Museum of Natural History. Williams had 
spent the spring teaching creative nonfiction at Dartmouth University in New 
Hampshire, 2,000 miles from her stomping grounds in Utah’s canyon country, and 
had come to the city for the weekend to visit a friend.

She had interned at the museum in 1983, and immediately made herself at home 
by lying down beneath the whale’s pleated belly.

“Don’t you get the sense that you’re in the presence of a higher 
intelligence?” she asked, her silver hair spread out on the grimy floor. “We’re 
not the only species that lives and dreams on this planet.”

I’d come to talk to her about her new book, The Hour of Land, which considers 
the role of America’s national parks in fomenting and reflecting political and 
social change. Though the release of The Hour of Land corresponded with the 
2016 centennial of the National Park Service, Williams’s history is a radically 
different celebration than the authorized version.

The Hour of Land explores the notion that the creation of public land is 
inherently politically subversive, and that public lands – the“open space of 
democracy”, as Williams puts it 
<http://www.amazon.com/Space-Democracy-Terry-Tempest-Williams/dp/160899208X> – 
offer staging areas to rebel against the pillage and plunder that have come to 
characterize our relationship with the natural world.

National parks <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/national-parks>, 
Williams writes, “are so much more than a federally constructed reservation for 
recreation and retail. They are places of recognition – where we can renew and 
revive our understanding of what makes us human in relationship to the life 
that surrounds us.”

Visiting a dozen parks, Williams finds activism in many forms. For example, 
the Hollywood producer who bought 187 acres from the state of California and 
promptly gave it to the United Farm Workers, resulting in the César E Chávez 
National Monument.

Even oil barons, Williams writes, have become revolutionaries for American 
landscapes: John D Rockefeller covertly bought up much of Jackson Hole, 
Wyoming, in the 1930s, eventually donating the acres that became Grand Teton 
National Park.

Nearly a century later, the theater has shifted, but the war for America’s 
public lands shows no signs of abating. The Republican Party’s 2016 platform 
vows to gut the Antiquities Act – a law, first championed by Theodore 
Roosevelt, that Barack Obama has deployed to conserve monuments in Maine, 
Hawaii, California and elsewhere. The Grand Canyon Escalade, a motorized tram 
that would convey tourists to the canyon’s floor, faces staunch opposition from 
the National Park Service, conservation groups, and many Navajo, who fear the 
arrival of “Disneyland on the edge of the canyon 
<http://www.nationalgeographic.com/magazine/2016/09/grand-canyon-development-hiking-national-parks/>
”.

“These are the closest thing we have to sacred lands,” Williams told me in the 
shadow of the whale. “And we’re willing to let them go? Who are we becoming?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71769949a52915113981e182a2af6ced983dd4b%2F0_0_2048_1357%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20year%20of%20living%20dangerously%3A%20Conservationist%20Terry%20Tempest%20Williams%20steps%20up%20to%20the%20BLM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20year%20of%20living%20dangerously%3A%20Conservationist%20Terry%20Tempest%20Williams%20steps%20up%20to%20the%20BLM&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Fterry-tempest-williams-books-conservationist-public-lands-fight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd71769949a52915113981e182a2af6ced983dd4b%2F0_0_2048_1357%2F2048.jpg>
 The Hall of North American Mammals Photograph: edwardhblake 
We moved on to the Hall of North American Mammals, where a taxidermied 
pronghorn stood against a painted backdrop of pastel mesas. Williams, who’d 
spent the semester teaching among the claustrophobic forests of Dartmouth 
University, was relieved to be in the presence of her native red-rock, even an 
ersatz version.

“I’ve thought so much lately about what erosion means – how the same geologic 
principles that erode stone also erode us closer to the essence of who we want 
to become,” she said.

In her philosophical consideration of the natural world, Williams might be 
considered a successor to Thoreau, most famous for his nature writing but most 
ardent in his abolitionism.

She’s taken up the gauntlet from her friend Edward Abbey, the Utah polemicist 
whose novel The Monkeywrench Gang launched a thousand bulldozer-wrecking Earth 
Firsters. Public lands have always been more than scenery in the US: they’re 
political battlegrounds, now and forever.

“Lease sales are an ostensibly public process in which the public has no 
actual say,” Jason Schwartz, a Greenpeace media officer, told the Guardian. To 
Schwartz’s mind, Williams’s intervention carved out a potential new avenue for 
participation in the opaque auction system. “She showed that you don’t have to 
get arrested to protect the public interest – you can put a credit card down.”

The risk of setting precedent may be why BLM has refused to tolerate her 
interference. Unlike Tim DeChristopher, Williams won’t face charges, since she 
immediately paid her fees – but they will not readily permit her to keep her 
leases.

The agency’s rules stipulate that “lessees must exercise reasonable diligence 
in developing and producing … leased resources”, language intended to prevent 
companies from sitting on valuable energy.

By broadcasting her intent to keep her fossil fuels below ground, the agency 
ruled this fall, Williams violated the diligence requirement. In a letter to 
Williams dated 18 October, BLM state director Edwin Roberson wrote: “(S)ince 
you have stated publicly that you intend to keep the oil and gas resources in 
the ground … the lease offers are hereby rejected.” Williams would get a 
refund, but she’d lose her acres.

Some experts question the agency’s rationale. “If she’s willing to pay the 
money, I’m not sure BLM has reason to turn her down,” Mark Squillace, director 
of the Natural Resources Law Center at the University of Colorado Law School in 
Boulder, told the Guardian before the ruling.

Williams wouldn’t be the first to neglect her leases. Energy companies often 
elect not to exploit their parcels, if, for instance, they’re confronted with 
unfavorable oil or gas markets. If the rights-holder hasn’t drilled in 10 
years, their leases return to the pool – although companies often manage to 
obtain “suspensions”, loopholes that allow them to stockpile land rights 
without making payments.

According to a 2015 report from the Wilderness Society, more than 20m acres of 
national leased land 
<https://wilderness.org/sites/default/files/TWS%2520Hoarders%2520Report-web.pdf>
 remain undeveloped.

The Republican crusade against public land must end | Raúl M Grijalva
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/17/congress-republicans-public-land-federal-states-bill>
The upshot, Williams claimed in her response to BLM, is that she’s being held 
to a different standard than other bidders. “The BLM has never demanded that a 
lease applicant promise to develop the lease before it was issued,” she wrote.

Squillace pointed out that Williams’s purchase likely wouldn’t protect any 
lands from drilling – after all, if her 1,120 acres had been coveted by energy 
companies, they would have been snapped up at auction.

But the author’s actions make more sense in the context of “Keep it in the 
Ground”, a burgeoning campaign to prevent the extraction of buried coal, oil 
and gas.

The movement is guided by climate science: a 2015 Nature study 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
 suggested that more than 80% of the planet’s coal reserves and half its 
natural gas will have to remain underground to keep warming below 2C. The Paris 
climate agreement, a global deal thattakes effect 
<https://www.un.org/sg/en/content/sg/statement/2016-10-05/statement-secretary-general-paris-agreement-climate-change>
 on 4 November, aims to hold warming at 1.5C – a goal that’srapidly receding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/06/global-warming-target-miss-scientists-warn>
 from reach.

Transitioning to clean energy won’t happen overnight, but if we’re to avert 
disaster, the climate activist Bill McKibbenwrote 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/136987/recalculating-climate-math> in 
September, “(W)e can’t dig any new coal mines, drill any new fields, build any 
more pipelines.”

The Keep It In The Ground Act 
<http://www.sanders.senate.gov/newsroom/press-releases/sanders-merkley-leahy-introduce-bill-to-ban-new-drilling-on-public-land>
, introduced last fall by senators Jeff Merkley and Bernie Sanders, would 
prohibit new leases on public acres.

Yet the effort is largely defined by its direct tactics, from the “kayaktivists
 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/us-news/2015/jun/15/seattle-kayak-activists-detained-blocking-shell-arctic-oil-rig>
” who tried to prevent Shell’s Arctic drill rig from leaving port toprotesters 
who sought to barricade a lease sale in Denver this May 
<http://www.denverpost.com/2016/05/12/hundreds-swarm-blm-auction-in-lakewood-to-protest-oil-gas-drilling/>
. BLM laterannounced 
<http://www.blm.gov/wo/st/en/info/newsroom/2016/august/nr_08_30_2016.html> that 
lease auctions would be allowed to take place online, in part toprevent meddling
 
<http://www.hcn.org/issues/48.12/keep-it-in-the-ground-prompts-online-oil-and-gas-leasing-auctions>
.

This land is our land: is it the end of the line for the great American west?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/great-american-west-land-bundys-oregon>
To Williams, Keep it in the Ground is about transition – from extraction to 
preservation, from fossil fuels to renewables, from observation to 
participation.

Her own family is grappling with upheaval as well. Williams’s father, John 
Henry Tempest III, former president of a pipeline construction business, was 
initially enraged by his daughter’s tactics.

“When we got home the day of the auction, he said, ‘You have made a mockery of 
our family business,’” Williams recalled at the museum. “He was ashamed; he was 
embarrassed; he was scared.”

But her father was also horrified by the callousness with which many energy 
companies treat their workers. Thus Williams was not entirely surprised when, a 
few weeks after her purchase, she came home to find John waiting for her.

“He said, ‘You don’t know what you’re doing, but I do,’” Williams recalled. 
“‘And somebody’s got to take on these guys.’”

And so Williams’s father, a man who for decades fed his family on proceeds 
from the fossil fuel industry, accepted the chairmanship of Tempest 
Exploration’s board.

Whether Tempest Exploration will have any parcels to steward remains an open 
question. Williams announced last month that she would fight BLM’s decision to 
reject her leases. On her behalf, the Western Environmental Law Center filed an 
appeal, citing her legal right to have her lease bids considered “on an even 
basis with other bidders”.

In times like these, said Williams over the phone, “we’re going to have to get 
creative. Public land is hallowed ground.”













 