
 Several owl species sit tied to a makeshift wooden perch as a TV plays a 
loud, animated owl-themed film behind them in the dimly lit room.

This is Tokyo’s Forest of Owl cafe, filled with locals and snap-happy tourists 
even on a weekday morning, and as the countdown to 2017 begins, its resident 
owls will be petted and photographed by more Japanese customers than usual as 
people seek good fortune for the New Year.

Fukurō – the Japanese word for owl – means good luck or protection from 
hardship. Here, owls aren’t merely lucky, they’re cute, orkawaii 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/kumamon-the-new-science-of-cute>
, which is a culture all on its own in Japan.


The Akiba Fukurou cafe website promises customers a relaxing experience and 
claims owls are like therapy for “tired hearts”. But bird of prey experts warn 
that owls make terrible pets and welfare groups consider cafe conditions 
questionable, if not abusive.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb382a26eed48de3cb5fb6ab0298d9f9d5fd9cabf%2F0_922_2643_3110%2F2643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conservationists%20get%20their%20talons%20out%20for%20Japan's%20owl%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conservationists%20get%20their%20talons%20out%20for%20Japan%27s%20owl%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb382a26eed48de3cb5fb6ab0298d9f9d5fd9cabf%2F0_922_2643_3110%2F2643.jpg>
 A tethered owl in a cafe in Japan. Photograph: Millie Kerr 
“Owls have acute hearing and vision and are birds of prey who have evolved 
perfectly for flight and precision hunting,” said Peta in a statement. “It’s 
cruel to deny wild animals the opportunity to fulfil their basic behavioural 
needs by intensively confining them and exposing them to constant human 
harassment.”

Rob Laidlaw, executive director of the charity Zoocheck 
<https://www.zoocheck.com/>, says animal cafe environments can cause “chronic 
stress, negative emotional states, and deteriorating physical health”, which 
could cause owls to bite or scratch visitors.

Though owl cafe practices vary in Japan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, with only some allowing petting, 
animal rights groups believe many of them violate legal welfare requirements by 
restraining owls with ropes and disrupting natural sleep cycles by keeping them 
awake during the day.

Japanese cat cafe closed down over neglect fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/22/japanese-cat-cafe-closed-down-over-neglect-fears>
Japan’s welfare laws offer limited guidance but improvements may be on the 
horizon, says Sayoko Yamada, director of the Kanagawa Society for the 
Prevention of Cruelty toAnimals <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals>. 
Yamada predicts legislators will amend Japan’s animal welfare laws by 2020, 
anticipating international scrutiny accompanying the 2020 Olympics. It is 
believed that Japan passed its first animal welfare legislation in 1973 just in 
time for a visit from Queen Elizabeth II.

 For the time being, animal cafes are on the rise in Japan. According to the 
websiteWhere in Tokyo <http://whereintokyo.com/>, the Japanese capital has 48 
animal cafes featuring a range of inhabitants, from cats and dogs to birds and 
snakes. Fourteen of Tokyo’s animal cafes are bird-centric. At least half of 
Tokyo’s eight owl cafes opened in the last two years.

 Some believe the surge stems from Japan’s obsession with trendiness – cat 
cafes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/video/2012/feb/03/tokyo-cat-cafe-video> are 
now so abundant, they’re passé – but owl popularity is also linked to the 
popularity of Harry Potter. 

In the UK, where pet owls are legal, ownership was negligible prior to the 
publication of the Harry Potter books, spiked during the height of the series’ 
popularity, and dropped off by the time the final book Harry Potter and the 
Deathly Hallows was published. Once people realised the cost and complexity of 
caring for an owl, they abandoned their feathered pets. JK Rowling publicly 
denounced the practice of keeping owls as sanctuaries had to make room for 
neglected animals. But in 2015,60,000 Londoners bid for the chance to visit a 
pop-up owl cafe 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/londons-first-owl-caf-opens-its-doors-to-the-public-in-secret-location-10166424.html>
 that promised to donate proceeds to an owl charity.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcab1b7a1e965491ecbc97c9fd492d43bb356d34%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Conservationists%20get%20their%20talons%20out%20for%20Japan's%20owl%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Conservationists%20get%20their%20talons%20out%20for%20Japan%27s%20owl%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fconservationists-get-their-talons-out-for-japans-owl-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbcab1b7a1e965491ecbc97c9fd492d43bb356d34%2F0_173_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 The Japanese word for owl, fukurō, means good luck in Japan. Photograph: 
Millie Kerr 
Japan’s attractions do not claim to advance conservation. Animal experts 
acknowledge that cafes may foster animal appreciation but say they are more 
likely to inspire customers to buy pet owls than donate to animal welfare.

Sumo Yamamoto, a Japanese owl expert, does not consider the trend for owl 
cafes an immediate threat to the conservation of owl species as most birds on 
display are bred in captivity, either in Japan or abroad.

However, chicks stolen illegally from the wild sometimes end up in legal 
markets. In2014, a Belgian court convicted four traders 
<https://cites.org/eng/cites_welcomes_Belgian_court_judgement_illegal_trade_birds_prey>
 of forging trade permits for endangered species to make chicks caught in the 
wild appear to be captive-bred; the traders were part of a larger crime 
syndicate involved in fraudulent bird of prey trade throughout parts of Europe 
and the UK.


 <> 

 