
Consumers are at risk of falling victim to fraudulent payments made on 
contactless credit and debit cards that have already been cancelled following a 
loss or theft.

Guardian research has revealed that banks do not automatically check many 
contactless payments, allowing thieves to continue to use stolen cards even 
after they have been cancelled. This is because some payments – such as when 
contactless cards are used to pass through London’s tube network barriers – are 
waved through as offline transactions and only checked later. One bank told the 
Guardian that virtually all transactions for less than £15 were not immediately 
checked.

Contactless technology allows customers to make quick payments by simply 
touching their card on to a terminal. There are now 74.5m contactless cards in 
circulation in the UK, and they have become more popular since the spending 
limit was raised from £15 to £30.

However, most customers will not realise that the cards cannot be completely 
cancelled if lost or stolen, and that some banks will expect the customer to 
spot and report fraudulent payments to reclaim their cash. Cards do contain a 
chip which limits losses, but they may be used until this limit is reached if 
the payment terminal is operating offline.

While a shop’s payment terminal might go online to process a payment and 
verify the card before allowing a sale, some transactions are made offline and 
only processed with the bank later. While this allows payments to be processed 
quickly, it also means that lost or stolen cards may be used even after being 
cancelled.

“The contactless facility on bank cards across the industry is designed to 
approve transactions ‘offline’ without referring to the account provider for 
authorisation, for the speed and convenience of customers,” says Gillian 
Fleming, spokesperson for First Direct and HSBC. A spokesman for RBS and 
NatWest, meanwhile, says: “In theory a small number of contactless transactions 
could be made before the card is blocked.”

RBS, Lloyds and Santander all say their systems can pick up contactless 
spending after a card is reported stolen, with Santander saying it would 
proactively contact customers to verify any payments, and Lloyds saying it 
would automatically refund any payment after a theft.

Barclaycard says: “When a customer reports a card lost or stolen, a block is 
applied to the card preventing all further activity. However, some contactless 
transactions are processed offline so may not appear on a customer’s account 
until after the block has been applied.” It says payments that had been made 
offline on the day of cancellation may be applied to accounts and would be 
refunded when the customer identified them; payments made on days after the 
cancellation will not be taken from an account.

At other banks the onus seems to be on customers to spot all rogue payments.

To date, fraud on contactless cards is low. Figures produced by the UK Cards 
Association show that in the first six months of 2015 there was £516,500 of 
fraudulent transactions on contactless cards – the equivalent of just 2p for 
every £100 spent using the technology.

A small number of contactless transactions could be made before the card is 
blocked

However, the figure could understate the true level of losses as many 
customers are unaware that they can still be defrauded after reporting a card 
as stolen or lost. Geoffrey Barraclough, a payments and technology expert, 
thinks this could be the case: “The fraud statistics that are shared would only 
be fraud that the banks are aware of,” he says. “If nobody reports it – 
because, for instance, they didn’t know to look for it – the banks wouldn’t be 
aware of it. Unless you go through your statements there is no way of telling 
whether the cards are being used after you have cancelled them.”

A spokesman for the UK Cards Association says: “There is absolutely no 
evidence to suggest fraud on contactless cards is under-reported. Incidents of 
fraud are identified in a number of ways, not just by a customer, and all banks 
have advanced security systems in place to detect fraudulent transactions.

“As always, it is important to check bank or card statements regularly for any 
unusual transactions, especially if a card has been lost or stolen. Anyone who 
is a victim of card fraud will get their money back and will not be left out of 
pocket.”

As a security measure, contactless cards demand that a user keys in his or her 
pin number after a certain number of payments or when a certain financial 
threshold is met. This is set by the card provider and varies from bank to 
bank. There is no time limit on the payments, so until it is reached the card 
can continue to be used.

“Our cards do have a spend limit that triggers the card to ask for a chip and 
pin verification, which would then prevent someone from making contactless 
purchases on the card,” says a spokeswoman for TSB.

Banks are reluctant to reveal how many fraudulent transactions could take 
place before the pin number is requested. Tom Foxton, a spokesman for 
Barclaycard, says: “We wouldn’t give out that information as it would be useful 
for those intending to use the cards for criminal purposes.”

An unnecessary stress

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcontactless-payments-card-fraud-after-cancellation-bank-account%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1452e94fca00e13106d1ff620d2f250c8510a29%2F0_118_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Contactless%20payments%20mean%20card%20fraud%20now%20happens%20after%20cancellation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcontactless-payments-card-fraud-after-cancellation-bank-account%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Contactless%20payments%20mean%20card%20fraud%20now%20happens%20after%20cancellation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2015%2Fdec%2F19%2Fcontactless-payments-card-fraud-after-cancellation-bank-account%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1452e94fca00e13106d1ff620d2f250c8510a29%2F0_118_4368_2622%2F4368.jpg>
 Emma Hartley: ‘Instead of being a one-off, the theft continued for a week.’ 
Photograph: Martin Godwin for the Guardian 
Earlier this year I had my handbag stolen, writes Emma Hartley. I cancelled my 
cards, called the police to get a crime number and tried not to dwell on the 
uninsured personal items I’d lost. It’s only stuff, right?


But it wasn’t as easy as I’d hoped to put the incident behind me. A couple of 
days later I looked online and saw that my current account had been used by 
someone other than me.

I rang my bank, First Direct, and asked what was going on; how had my 
cancelled debit card been used three times in a McDonalds in Greenwich the 
previous day and twice on a garage forecourt? It’s because it’s a contactless 
payment card, I was told. I would need to keep an eye on my account and claim 
back any money that was lost through these fraudulent transactions.


At this point I was struck by the ­horrible thought that the First Direct 
debit card was not the only contactless payment card that had arrived, unasked 
for, through the post. A call to Barclaycard confirmed that the same thing was 
also happening with the two cards, a Visa and an Amex, attached to the same 
credit card account. Several of the fraudulent transactions were through 
Transport for London (TfL).


The person who stole my handbag also committed fraud totalling £135 across my 
various contactless payment cards, nearly all of which I was eventually able to 
reclaim (although there was a stray payment to TfL that I didn’t spot until 
later). What it meant, however, was that instead of being a one-off event, the 
theft continued for around a week: the last transaction was five days after my 
handbag was stolen.


Contactless payment made having my bag stolen far more stressful than it would 
otherwise have been.
 