
A combative Jeremy Corbyn has said he welcomes the tough byelections triggered 
by the resignations of two Labour MPs as an opportunity to challenge the 
government, as his allyJohn McDonnell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-mcdonnell> said the party had had a 
good week.

Tristram Hunt, a fierce critic of Corbyn’s leadership, announced on Friday that
he was stepping down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 as the MP for Stoke-on-Trent Central, a constituency where Ukip came second in 
2015 and thatvoted heavily for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
.


His resignation to run the Victoria and Albert Museum in London followed that 
ofJamie Reed in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
, whose Copeland constituency in Cumbria is home to the Sellafield nuclear 
plant.

In a robust appearance on the BBC’s The Andrew Marr Show on Sunday, Corbyn 
said he welcomed the forthcoming contests. “It’s an opportunity to challenge 
the government on theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. It’s an 
opportunity to challenge the government on the chaos of Brexit. It’s an 
opportunity to challenge the government on the housing shortage,” he said.

Why Tristram Hunt concluded he had a brighter future in a museum | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/15/tristram-hunt-better-future-in-museum-jeremy-corbyn-labour>
He said the resignations had not affected his determination to keep leading 
Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/labour-struggling-build-voter-support-poll-theresa-may-jeremy-corbyn>
. “I look in the mirror every day, and I think, let’s get out there and try to 
create a society where there are opportunities for all,” he said.

Labour is still languishing far behind the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/brexit-poll-conservatives-labour-ukip>
 in the opinion polls, but Corbyn said he believed the party’s ratings would 
start to bounce back as the public realised thefull state of the crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/14/health-service-in-crisis-cancer-ops-cancelled-nhs>
 in the NHS.

He said Labour’s priority would be to cancel planned cuts to corporation tax 
and put thecash into social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-decries-social-care-crisis-made-in-downing-street>
.

The two mid-term resignations have raised concerns at Westminster that more 
Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MPs disillusioned with 
Corbyn’s leadership could follow suit. “There won’t be loads, but there will be 
some, I’m sure,” a senior party insider said.

The Wigan MP Lisa Nandy, who is sometimes talked about as a future Labour 
leadership contender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/labours-lisa-nandy-urges-party-to-ditch-tribalism>
, told BBC Radio 5 Live on Sunday she planned to spend more time in her 
constituency in the coming months, as a response to the feeling among some 
voters that their voices were not being heard.

Asked if she thought other colleagues would follow Reed and Hunt, Nandy said: 
“People are thinking very seriously about what they can actually contribute 
personally to the political process.”

She added that Labour was in the difficult position of trying to speak for 
both sides of the Brexit divide. “A lot of my colleagues are spending a lot 
more time outside the Westminster bubble and in their constituencies,” Nandy 
said.

Corbyn’s appearance on the Sunday television interview circuit was part of a 
new year relaunch, in which his advisers have sought toharness his unpolished 
style 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-rebranded-labour-leader>
 and willingness to reject the political mainstream. He has floated the idea of
capping excessive corporate pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 andnationalising failing care homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/jeremy-corbyn-vows-to-take-failed-care-homes-into-public-ownership>
 – ideas that Corbyn’s team believe will be popular with the public.

McDonnell, in an interview with Sky News’s Sophy Ridge, said he believed the 
relaunch was going well. “I think this week’s been pretty good,” he said. “On 
the issues that we wanted to get across on the day, the issue around pay was 
raised and he answered honestly, in the authentic way he always does.

“We drew people into a debate that they’d never had before, or not for a long 
time anyway, and we drew them in on our own terms.”

But an attempt to shift the party’s line on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/15/big-issue-labour-policy-immigration>
, which many backbench MPs believe iskey to winning back votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/tom-watson-labour-party-immigration-policy-free-movement-eu>
 in working-class constituencies, floundered as Corbyn appeared to back away 
from the idea of limits on free movement.

Trying to pin down Labour’s position on free movement | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/11/trying-to-pin-down-labours-position-on-free-movement>
The shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, when asked to clarify Labour’s 
position by ITV’s Robert Peston, said: “We’re not going to die in a ditch about 
it, it’s up for negotiation, but Labour’s principle has always been that the 
economy is the most important thing.”

Diane Abbott, one of Corbyn’s closest allies, has struck a different tone 
since the Brexit vote, warning that by caving in to demands for a tougher 
stance on immigration, theparty risked becoming “Ukip-lite” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/26/labour-will-not-win-a-general-election-as-ukip-lite-says-diane-abbott>
.

Corbyn sought to sidestep the issue on Sunday, emphasising the impact of 
exploitative employers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/27/jeremy-corbyn-rules-out-pledge-cut-immigration>
 on low-paid workers, rather than the scale of immigration, saying: “Let’s not 
blame migrants for the problems we have.

“What I have been talking about all along is the question of ending the 
grotesque exploitation and the undercutting that goes on. Are we going to cut 
ourselves off fromEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
completely? I don’t think so.”

He also hit out at the representation of Labour and his leadership in the 
media. Corbyn said it had been unfair and he would like to see a “right of 
reply”.

No date has been set for the two byelections, but both are expected to be held 
within weeks, and could give the clearest indication yet of how the referendum 
hasshaken up British politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/ukip-prospect-stoke-on-trent-voted-leave>
.
 