
The BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg has been booed by Labour supporters at a speech by 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, leading to 
the party leader shushing the crowd before the broadcaster’s political editor 
could ask him a question.

Kuenssberg was invited to ask a question after Corbyn’s speech but was briefly 
prevented from speaking by hissing and then boos from people in the crowd.

Corbyn was making a pro-EU speech on workers’ rights at the Institution of 
Engineering and Technology. He did not react for several seconds as Kuenssberg 
prepared to ask her question, but then put up his hand to quieten the crowd.

Journalists on Twitter said the atmosphere in the room after the speech was 
hostile. Financial Times journalist Jim Pickard said the reaction was 
“pathetic”. Kuenssberg herself pointed out:
Laura Kuenssberg (@bbclaurak) 
Corbyn also mentioned importance of free press in his speech ...just sayin
 <https://twitter.com/bbclaurak/status/738304728300392448> June 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/bbclaurak/status/738304728300392448> 
Clashes with what Corbyn’s supporters regard as an unsympathetic “mainstream 
media” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/labour-booing-jeremy-corbyn-strategy>
 have been a regular feature of his leadership.

When the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader was asked 
a question about whether he was getting his message across on the EU, he 
replied that was up to how the media covered it – and his supporters cheered, 
turning around to the journalists seated in one corner of the room.

Labour must stop booing the media – they’re Jeremy Corbyn’s best hope | Ellie 
Mae O’Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/labour-booing-jeremy-corbyn-strategy>
Kuenssberg has come under repeated attack from Corbyn supporters who accuse 
her of holding anti-Labour views. The campaign group38 Degrees took down a 
petition last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/may/10/laura-kuenssberg-petition-sexist-abuse-38-degrees-bbc>
 that called for her to be sacked, saying it had become a focal point for 
sexist abuse on social media.

During the row over the petition, Corbyn faced calls to condemn the targeting 
of Kuenssberg. The former Independent on Sunday political editor Jane Merrick 
said there was “a core of hard-left misogyny that comes out against women when 
Corbyn is under pressure – such as the abuse against [Labour MPs] Stella Creasy 
and Jess Phillips”.

At the time, the Labour leader distanced himself from those calling for 
Kuenssberg to be sacked. His spokesman said then: “Jeremy Corbyn is 
consistently on the record calling on people to treat each other with respect.”

A party spokesman later said: “Labour is committed to freedom of the press, 
freedom of speech and encourages everyone to treat people and opinions with 
respect.”


A senior party source added: “We don’t think it’s appropriate for journalists 
to be booed and jeered while they’re doing their job.”
 