
Say what you like about the ‘shared society’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
, it’s catching on a lot better thanDavid Cameron’s ‘big society’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/apr/04/david-cameron-big-society-fund>
. Theresa May has spent much of the last week sharing the blame for the crisis 
in the NHS between the NHS itself and patients who will insist on getting ill 
at inconvenient times. Anyone but her, in other words. And Jeremy Corbyn was 
busy sharing – call that annexing – a Times cartoon about patients being forced 
to share hospital trollies and beds at prime minister’s questions.

After Tuesday’s shambolic series of relaunches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
, there were many on the Labour benches who feared their leader might fail to 
take advantage of the most open of goals and allow himself to wander off topic. 
So there was some relief that Corbynused all six of his questions to press the 
prime minister on the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2017/jan/11/pmqs-verdict-jeremy-corbyn-has-best-of-home-fixture-labour-theresa-may>
; such a feat of concentration hasn’t always been the Labour leader’s strongest 
asset. It certainly seemed to catch the Maybot on the hop as she appeared to 
have been programmed to expect something else entirely.

Corbyn began by bringing up the Red Cross’s assertion that the NHS was in the 
middle of a humanitarian crisis. The Maybot didn’t bother to disguise her 
disgust for the Red Cross. No charity had ever done so much global damage and
their statement had been irresponsible and overblown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/red-cross-description-of-nhs-irresponsible-and-overblown-says-pm-may-pmqs-a-and-e-demand>
. Britain was nothing like Syria, so the Red Cross should just shut up. As long 
as Britain was not officially designated a war zone with many of its cities 
bombed to rubble, then everything was absolutely hunky dory.

“OK,” said Corbyn. “If the prime minister isn’t prepared to listen to the Red 
Cross, perhaps she will listen to the British Medical Association who are 
saying that conditions in hospitals are reaching a dangerous level, the Royal 
College of Nursing who has said that conditions in the NHS are the worst ever 
and the Royal College of Physicians who have described theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as under-funded, under-doctored and 
overstretched.”

The Maybot clanked her way through her data files. Nothing there. Switch to 
default. La, la, la. The NHS was working absolutely brilliantly. No one had 
ever done more for it than her. Why was everyone getting so worked up about 
thousands of people beingpiled up on trollies for more than four hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/sharp-rise-in-trolley-waits-hospital-beds-england>
? Four hours was only anarbitrary time span anyway 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
 and so what if it was sometimes moved to 24 hours and patients died? No one 
could expect to live for ever.

The longer the Maybot’s answer went on, the tetchier she sounded. She can dish 
it out but she can’t take it. As their leader struggled, her own backbenchers 
became quieter and quieter: they know they are on dodgy ground over the NHS and 
would rather keep their heads down. In the sand, preferably.

“You seem to be in some degree of denial about this,” Corbyn observed.

The Maybot softened a little at this apparent offer of therapy. “OK,” she 
said. “I accept there have been a small number of incidents in which 
unacceptable practices have taken place.”

Corbyn paused. It wasn’t much, but it was a start. The Maybot was one of his 
more self-destructive patients and it would take many more sessions to break 
down her defences. After pointing out that her government was planning to cut 
one third of hospital beds in the near future, he moved on to mental health 
services. Why was it that there had been an 89% increase in young people with 
mental health issues going to A&E over the past five years?

“I said there was more to do,” the Maybot replied sullenly.

“Er, yes,” said Corbyn. But couldn’t she see she hadn’t done herself any 
favours by cutting the numbers of nurses working in mental health by 6,000 and 
doctors by 400?

“You’ve asked me this question before,” she said.

And Corbyn would keep on asking it until she came up with some sort of answer 
that she felt able to share with the group. But that would do for now. There 
was no need to show up the Maybot’s inadequacies by taking the piss. That was 
the one bit of the Donald Trump playbook he was keen to avoid.
 