
Theresa May has defended plans to make patients show passports to determine if 
they qualify for NHS treatment, asJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> accused the government of 
using so-called health tourism to distract from the health service’s funding 
crisis.

NHS staff and managers condemn 'passport before treatment' plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/nhs-staff-and-managers-condemn-passport-before-treatment-plan>
The prime minister said the government was determined to tackle concerns about 
migrants using the health service. “For many years there has been a concern 
about health tourism, people turning up in the UK and accessing health services 
and not paying for them,” she told the Commons.

“We have to deal with health tourism and those who should be paying for the 
use of our health service.”

During a prime minister’s questions in which the Labour leader focused 
exclusively on funding for health and social care, Corbyn said suggestions that 
patients show passports before receiving treatment were “divisive and 
impractical”.

Corbyn said the cost of health tourism was “over 100 times less than the £22bn 
of cuts the NHS is facing”. TheNational Audit Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/nhs-financial-problems-endemic-and-no-longer-sustainable-national-audit-office-deficit>
 estimates that theuncollected fees are worth £200m a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/doctors-threaten-to-boycott-plan-for-patients-to-show-id-for-nhs-care>
, about 1% of the current NHS debt.

Passports for NHS access plan: what are the implications?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/22/passports-for-nhs-access-what-are-the-implications>
“All of us who visit A&E know the stress they are under,” Corbyn said. 
“Instead of looking for excuses and scapegoats, shouldn’t the prime minister be 
ensuring health and social care is properly secure and properly funded?”

The Labour leader said the impact on elderly people and those without 
passports – estimated at 9.5 million Britons – had not been considered. “Rather 
than distracting people with divisive and impractical policies, could the prime 
minister provide theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> and social 
care with the money that it needs for people who need the support?” he said.

Pointing to the chancellor’s autumn statement immediately following PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, May it was clear that the country 
could “only afford to pay for the NHS and social care if we have a strong 
economy creating wealth, and that’s precisely what he will hear from the 
chancellor of the exchequer”.

NHS passport-checking might save a few pence – at the cost of our humanity | 
Diane Taylor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/22/nhs-passport-checking-patient-id-checks-chris-wormald-health-tourists>
During the exchange, Corbyn said he had been contacted by a woman whose 
89-year-old mother had suffered two falls and been admitted to hospital because 
she could not receive adequate care at home or in a nursing home.

May said the government was already investing billions in the better care fund 
and social care precept, but said Labour had failed to get a grip on social 
care during 13 years in government despite numerous commissions and green 
papers.

Corbyn, a backbencher during the Blair and Brown governments, said Labour’s 
time in power saw health spending treble. “Levels of satisfaction with the 
national health service were at their highest ever in 2010,” he said.

“The government’s choice was to cut social care by £4.6bn in the last 
parliament and found the space to cut billions in corporate taxation bills.”
 