
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has 
promised Labour would introduce a maximum wage for executives at companies with 
government contracts, but backed away from proposing the nationwide pay cap he 
had mooted hours earlier in broadcast interviews.

Kicking off a long-planned relaunch, the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader said companies would have 
to stop executives earning more than 20 times the wage of their lowest paid 
worker if they wanted to bid for public sector work, which he calculated would 
set a salary limit at about £350,000.


But the pledge, made in an afternoon speech, did not go as far as Corbyn had 
in morning interviews wherehe said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-calls-for-maximum-wage-law>
 he would like there to be ““some kind of high earnings cap, quite honestly” 
and suggested it could cover star footballers as well as highly paid CEOs.

Jeremy Corbyn is on the right track – we have a pay ratio at Reprieve, and it 
works | Clive Stafford Smith
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-pay-ratio-wage-equality-reprieve>
Speaking in Peterborough, Corbyn said it was wrong in principle that a company 
boss could earn in a few days what nurses or other public sector workers take 
home in a year.

The Labour leader said: “In the 1920s, JP Morgan, the Wall Street banker, 
limited salaries to 20 times that of junior employees. Another advocate of pay 
ratios was David Cameron. His government proposed a 20:1 pay ratio to limit 
sky-high pay in the public sector and now all salaries higher than £150,000 
must be signed off by the Cabinet Office.

“Labour will go further and extend that to any company that is awarded a 
government contract. A 20:1 ratio means someone earning the living wage, just 
over £16,000 a year, would permit an executive to be earning nearly £350,000. 
It cannot be right that if companies are getting public money that can be 
creamed off by a few at the top.”

If adopted by a Labour government, the Corbyn plan would mean that the bosses 
of public sector outsourcing would have to take massive pay cuts. Andy Parker, 
the chief executive of Capita, earned £2.68m in 2015, while Ashley Almanza, 
chief executive of G4S, took home about £2.61m in the same year. The average 
annual wage in the UK is £27,600.

Corbyn also floated a string of other ideas to tackle pay inequality, 
including letting workers on remuneration committees set the pay of their 
bosses, setting a higher rate of income tax on the top 5% or 1% of incomes, or 
offering lower rates of corporation tax for companies that limit executive pay.

The plan to tackle pay inequality is the first evidence of Corbyn’s relaunch, 
which is intended to highlight his leftwing populism at a time when Labour is 
well behind in the polls. Labour figures believe that a more combative approach 
from Corbyn – and more frequent appearances by the leader in the media – could 
help the party harness the anti-politics mood in Britain in the aftermath of 
the Brexit vote.

Earlier on Tuesday, Corbyn had declined to say at what level a wage cap should 
be set. During an interview on the Today programme he said: “I can’t put a 
figure on it and I don’t want to at the moment. The point I’m trying to make is 
that we have the worst levels of income disparity of most of the OECD 
countries. It is getting worse. And corporate taxation is a part of it. If we 
want to live in a more egalitarian society, and fund our public services, we 
cannot go on creating worse levels of inequality.”

Corbyn, who earns about £138,000 a year, later told Sky News he anticipated 
any maximum wage would be “somewhat higher than that” and hinted that it could 
cover top sportspeople. He said: “I think the salaries paid to some footballers 
are simply ridiculous; some salaries to very high earning top executives are 
utterly ridiculous. Why would someone need to earn more than £50m a year?”

A number of Labour MPs were subsequently reluctant to endorse the idea, 
including the shadow energy secretary, Barry Gardiner, who said it was not 
something he would personally favour, while the shadow work and pensions 
secretary, Debbie Abrahams, said it was a proposal rather than policy.


Business groups such as the Institute of Directors dismissed it as a 
“non-starter” and a “blunt tool”, while acknowledging excessive executive pay 
was an issue companies should consider.

But Corbyn’s focus on pay inequality and economic reform after Brexit was 
praised by Ed Miliband, the former Labour leader. “Whatever precise mechanism, 
Jeremy Corbyn is totally right to be setting agenda on the crucial issue of 
obscene pay differentials today,” he said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmaximum-pay-cap-needed-to-tackle-inequality-says-jeremy-corbyn-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Maximum%20pay%20cap%20needed%20to%20tackle%20inequality%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmaximum-pay-cap-needed-to-tackle-inequality-says-jeremy-corbyn-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Maximum%20pay%20cap%20needed%20to%20tackle%20inequality%2C%20says%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fmaximum-pay-cap-needed-to-tackle-inequality-says-jeremy-corbyn-video&media=>
Maximum pay cap needed to tackle inequality, says Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/10/maximum-pay-cap-needed-to-tackle-inequality-says-jeremy-corbyn-video>
Asked about the pay cap proposal, again in Peterborough, Corbyn said it was 
“probably better to look at the ratio issue”, as he set out concrete plans to 
limit the pay of those working for government contractors.

The Labour leader also took the opportunity to refine his position on 
immigration, after comments released before the speech said the party was “not 
wedded to freedom of movement for EU citizens [into the UK] as a point of 
principle”. He told the event: “I don’t want that to be misinterpreted; nor do 
we rule it out.”

Corbyn said Labour’s priority was maintaining access to Europe’s single market 
but that there would also have to be changes to the way immigration rules 
worked after Brexit. This may or may not include supporting a continuation of 
free movement, depending on negotiations with the EU.

“When it comes to border controls, we are proud to say we will meet our 
international obligations to refugees fleeing wars and persecution,” he said. 
“To those EU citizens who are already here, we will guarantee your rights. And 
we continue to welcome international students who come to study in this 
country. We cannot afford to lose full access to the European markets on which 
so many British businesses and jobs depend. Changes to the way migration rules 
operate from the EU will be part of the negotiations.”

Some Labour MPs appeared happier with the idea of pay ratios than proposing in 
an overall maximum wage cap but there were still some critical voices in the 
parliamentary party.

Migrants are not to blame for Britain’s problems | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/10/migrants-are-not-to-blame-for-britains-problems>
Chris Leslie, the former shadow chancellor, said: “I think it would be better 
for us to have a discussion about a progressive tax system. It is an important 
lesson in thinking through policy, consulting and following evidence and best 
practice. All of the history shows that the best way of tackling unfairness in 
pay is through a progressive tax system. I thought we were supposed to be 
addressing the Brexit and immigration issues today and it’s a bit unfortunate 
that the important message has been perhaps lost in that.”

Patrick McLoughlin, the Conservative party chairman, said Corbyn’s relaunch 
was descending into chaos. He said: “Today he showed that Labour simply will 
not take control over immigration, by saying that he ‘doesn’t rule out’ keeping 
freedom of movement. And he suggested a new 100% tax rate, which he U-turned on 
within hours ... Labour simply could not be more out of touch with ordinary 
working people.”

Labour is deeply split on the issue of immigration, with some MPs calling for 
the party to back much tougher controls and others wanting to stand up for free 
movement.

In a joint letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/10/migrants-are-not-to-blame-for-britains-problems>
, four members of Labour’s national executive committee, a member of the 
steering committee of Momentum, the general secretaries of two trade unions and 
a number of others called for a robust defence of free movement of people 
across Europe.

“We are alarmed by the way more MPs are now also turning their firepower on 
immigration,” they said. “While we cannot ignore the concerns of anyone 
struggling and feeling insecure in a country that still has huge but 
concentrated wealth, we cannot pander to anti-immigrant sentiment in a race we 
cannot win and should never want to.”
 