
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> will use 
his first speech of 2017 to claim that Britain can be better off outside the EU 
and insist that the Labour party has no principled objection to ending the free 
movement of European workers in the UK.

Setting out his party’s pitch on Brexit in the year that Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will trigger article 50, the 
Labour leader will also reach for the language of leave campaigners by 
promising to deliver on a pledge to spend millions of pounds extra on the NHS 
every week.

He will say Labour’s priority in EU negotiations will remain full access to 
the European single market, but that his party wants “managed migration” and to 
repatriate powers from Brussels that would allow governments to intervene in 
struggling industries such as steel. Sources suggested that the economic 
demands were about tariff-free access to the single market, rather than 
membership that they argued did not exist.

Tom Watson refuses to be drawn on Labour's immigration policy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/tom-watson-labour-party-immigration-policy-free-movement-eu>
Corbyn’s speech and planned media appearances represent the first example of a 
new anti-establishment drive designed by strategists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/labour-plans-jeremy-corbyn-relaunch-as-a-leftwing-populist>
 to emphasise and spread his image as a leftwing populist to a new set of 
voters. They hope the revamp will help overturn poor poll ratings across the 
country, particularly with alooming byelection in Copeland, Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/labour-nuclear-test-copeland-byelection-cumbria>
.

Speaking in Peterborough <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/peterborough>, 
chosen because it is a marginal Tory seat that voted heavily in favour of 
Brexit, and which Labour is targeting, Corbyn will lay into May’s failure to 
reveal any Brexit planning, and say that Labour will not give the government a 
free pass in the negotiations.

After comparing the prime minister’s refusal to offer MPs a vote on the final 
Brexit deal to the behaviour of Henry VIII 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jeremy-corbyn-you-are-not-henry-viii-theresa-may-brexit-deal-commons-vote>
 in a Guardian interview, Corbyn will say: “Not since the second world war has 
Britain’s ruling elite so recklessly put the country in such an exposed 
position without a plan.”

In a town that has experienced high rates of change in terms of migration, he 
will use his strongest language yet on the subject.

“Labour is not wedded to freedom of movement for EU citizens as a point of 
principle. But nor can we afford to lose full access to the European single 
market on which so many British businesses and jobs depend. Changes to the way 
migration rules operate from the EU will be part of the negotiations,” he will 
say.

“Labour supports fair rules and reasonably managed migration as part of the 
post-Brexit relationship with the EU.”

Corbyn will also say, however, that there will be no “false promises on 
immigration” and that his party will not echo the Conservatives by promising to 
bring the numbers down to the tens of thousands.

Instead, he will repeat an argument that action against the undercutting of 
pay and conditions, closing down labour loopholes and banning jobs being 
exclusively advertised abroad could bring down the amount of people travelling 
to the UK.

“That would have the effect of reducing numbers of EU migrant workers in the 
most deregulated sectors, regardless of the final Brexit deal,” he will say.


The speech comes as tensions grow within the Labour party as a number of high 
profile MPs, including the deputy leader, Tom Watson, and home affairs 
committee chair,Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/yvette-cooper>, suggest that the party 
has to change its position on free movement.


This weekend two MPs – Emma Reynolds and Stephen Kinnock – suggested the time 
had come for a two-tier system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/labour-must-introduce-fair-immigration-system>
 under which highly skilled workers such as doctors could travel to Britain for 
confirmed jobs, while there would be quotas for lower-skilled workers. They 
argued that the EU referendum “was a vote for change on immigration”, an 
argument that May has also made.

Reynolds, who is a member of the select committee on leaving the EU, said she 
welcomed Corbyn’s commitment to managed migration but that the party had to 
understand what that meant.

Corbyn has been criticised from within the party for failing to talk about 
free movement reform, often stressing the positive impact of migration instead. 
Some MPs fear the position could cost the party votes across the north of 
England and the midlands where voters have been desertingLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> over the past decade.

Labour can tackle the challenges of Brexit in a way Theresa May simply cannot 
| Keir Starmer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/03/labour-challenges-brexit-theresa-may-ivan-rogers-values>
Corbyn will also use his speech to try to contrast Labour and the 
Conservatives over the NHS after theBritish Red Cross said the health service 
was facing a humanitarian crisis. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>

“The Tory Brexiteers and their Ukip allies promised that Brexit would 
guarantee funding for theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> to the 
tune of £350m a week. The pledge has already been ditched,” he will say, 
promising to end underfunding and privatisation.

“The British people voted to refinance the NHS, and we will deliver it.,” he 
will say. Sources would not say whether that would necessarily amount to a 
commitment of £350m a week.

As politicians and academics grapple to explain June’s Brexit vote, the party 
leader will provide his interpretation, arguing that it was about regaining 
control over the economy, democracy and people’s lives.

“We will push to maintain full access to the European single market to protect 
living standards and jobs,” he will say. “But we will also press to repatriate 
powers from Brussels for the British government to develop a genuine industrial 
strategy essential for the economy of the future.”

Corbyn has objected to EU state aid rules that prevent governments from 
intervening in industries such as steel. He also wants to make arguments about 
taking back control of the jobs market with collective bargaining agreements in 
key sectors and ending “the unscrupulous use of agency labour and bogus 
self-employment”.
 