
Jeremy Corbyn’s idea for a maximum wage cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 has been branded unworkable, but the Labour leader’s focus on tackling the pay 
gap between bosses and workers was given a warmer reception by campaigners 
against inequality.

Major companies are on alert to attacks on boardroom pay after Theresa May put 
the issue on the agenda during her campaign to become Conservative party leade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
r and prime minister in the wake of the vote for Brexit. A consultation paper 
published in November, however, was criticised for not taking bold enough 
action to clamp down on boardroom excess 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/government-business-shareholders-executive-pay-greg-clark>
.

The intervention by the Labour leader is an indication that the issue remains 
on the agenda, experts said.

Maximum wage cap: how might it work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/maximum-wage-cap-how-might-it-work>
Oliver Parry, head of corporate governance at the Institute of Directors, 
said: “Boards must see today’s suggestion as a warning of things to come if 
they do not show they can moderate directors’ remuneration.”

But, he said, Corbyn’s suggestion for a maximum pay cap was a “non-starter”.

“Politicians simply do not know the right level of pay for the heads of 
multinational companies, and no successful economy operates with this level of 
intervention by government,” he added.

David Blanchflower, who used to advise Labour and is a former member of the 
Bank of England’s monetary policy committee, said the idea was “totally 
unworkable” and a “lunatic idea”.

After raising the idea of a “maximum wage cap” in an interview on BBC Radio 
4’s Today programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live>
, Corbyn later turned his focus to other ideas to tackling pay inequality.

Corbyn said company bosses wanting to be eligible to bid for government 
contractsshould have their pay limited to less than 20 times that of their 
lowest-paid worker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
. This would put a cap on the pay of the chief executives of such companies at 
£262,000 if measured against the £13,104 national living wage.


Stefan Stern, head of the High Pay Centre, said a general focus on pay ratios 
helped tackle the issue of inequality.

Data from the High Pay Centre shows that leading bosses now typically earn 129 
times more than their employees 
<http://highpaycentre.org/pubs/10-pay-rise-thatll-do-nicely>. Stern has tried 
to work towards a “40 times club” of FTSE 100 companies, in which executives 
earned no more than 40 times the average salary of their employees. But Stern 
said finding companies where the pay ratio was this low, closer to where it was 
in the 1990s, was difficult.

Vast numbers of companies bid for government contracts from consultancies – 
such as Deliotte which was embroiledin a row over its warning over Brexit last 
November – and major outsourcing companies such as G4S and Capita.

G4S, whose chief executive received more £2m last year, pointed out that 
contracts from central government contributed to only around 5% of its overall 
sales.


 “Our pay rates reflect the global nature of our business, with over 85% of 
revenue generated outside the UK,” said G4S, which runs prisons and runs 
services to house asylum seekers in the UK.

The fund management industry – which gets a vote on executive pay – has also 
been considering ways to tackle ballooning boardroom remuneration. Leon Kamhi, 
head of responsibility at fund managers Hermes, saidremuneration committees at 
individual companies should set out a maximum possible pay for their chief 
executives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/executive-pay-business-hermes-investment-managment-theresa-may>
.

Mark Littlewood, director general at the Institute of Economic Affairs, a free 
market thinktank, said Corbyn’s ideas had moved from “misguided to simply 
muddled” and branded the idea for a maximum wage cap to tackle inequality as 
“dangerous and, for all intents and purposes, a 100% income tax rate”.

“Pay ratios are sector discriminatory. A 20:1 ratio would have much less of an 
effect at a hedge fund than it would on a regular company, which is doubtful 
the intended consequence. Controlling wealth accumulation is a race to the 
bottom – the Labour leader would do better to focus on poverty alleviation 
rather than pay intervention.”

The Adam Smith Institute, which also promotes unfettered markets, was also 
dismissive. Sam Bowman, executive director, said: “A maximum salary cap would 
hurt British firms and ultimately ordinary British workers. If you’re a worker 
for a FTSE 100 firm, this is bad news: your job security and wages will suffer 
if your company isn’t led by the best people in the world.

“If you’re saving for a pension, this is bad news: the value of your savings 
will suffer as British firms become less productive, starved of global top 
talent. If you rely on the NHS or other public services, this is bad news: tax 
revenues will fall as these highly-paid executives move abroad.”
 