
Police searching for a missing RAF serviceman have played down his mother’s 
fears that he may have been abducted.

Corrie McKeague, 23, was last seen in the early hours of 24 September when 
CCTV footage showed <https://vimeo.com/184714019> him with a takeaway meal 
meandering through the streets of Bury St Edmunds, 11 miles from his base at 
RAF Honington.

His mother, Nicola Urquhart, said she was worried that he might have been 
kidnapped, and said this had been mentioned as a possibility by the police.

She has also pleaded for anyone who may have seen him to come forward. She 
said: “My son has disappeared, so if anyone knows anything, get in touch with 
Suffolk police. We would like him to come home soon so please get in touch.”

She said her son would “never, never” be out of contact with his family for so 
long. He had spoken to his brother four times the day before he went missing. 
“This is not Corrie, he would not do this out of choice,” she added.

Her appeal comes after Urquhart told the Sunday Times: “It’s looking more and 
more suspicious as time goes on that they’re not actually finding him. It 
[kidnapping] is something that they’re thinking of.”

The paper cited the attempted kidnap in July of a serviceman jogging near his 
base at RAF Marham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/23/raf-marham-abduction-plot-suspects-accomplices>
, 30 miles north of Bury St Edmunds. But a spokesman for Suffolk police said 
the two incidents were different, and the possibility that McKeague had been 
kidnapped “has never been a main line of inquiry”.

He said the force was concerned about McKeague’s welfare, but there was no 
evidence of foul play. “The most likely scenario is that he has been for a 
night out, he’s had a bit to drink and he’s attempted to walk back [to the 
base]. That is the working theory – obviously we keep an open mind to every 
possibility.”

The spokesman added: “The incident in RAF Marham where [the serviceman] was 
out jogging in the vicinity of the base was a totally different circumstance.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44de31e4e217e5ead2d1f22e47e3f03740d38a22%2F0_0_1382_829%2F1382.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corrie%20McKeague%3A%20police%20play%20down%20fears%20missing%20serviceman%20was%20abducted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corrie%20McKeague%3A%20police%20play%20down%20fears%20missing%20serviceman%20was%20abducted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44de31e4e217e5ead2d1f22e47e3f03740d38a22%2F0_0_1382_829%2F1382.jpg>
 McKeague on CCTV in Bury St Edmunds. Photograph: EPA 
On Sunday police said they had widened the search area 
<https://www.suffolk.police.uk/news/missing-persons/corrie-mckeague> after 
carrying out extensive checks along the A134 between Bury St Edmunds and the 
Honington base. Search and rescue teams and police helicopters have been 
combing the area.

GPS data from McKeague’s mobile phone suggests it moved to the Barton Mills 
area, 22 miles to the north-west of Bury St Edmunds and near two other 
airbases, RAF Mildenhall and RAF Lakenheath.

Police have not recovered the phone, but they believe it may have been lost or 
discarded as the timings of the movements match a bin lorry run from Bury to 
Barton Mills. A bin lorry is being searched.

Police do not believe McKeague himself was picked up by the bin lorry, as the 
weight of the load was recorded as under 15kg (2st 5lbs).

Police have been working with staff at RAF Honington since McKeague was first 
reported missing.

A Ministry of Defence spokeswoman said: “We can confirm that an RAF serviceman 
from RAF Honington is currently missing; our thoughts are with his family at 
this very difficult time.

“The civilian police have primacy in this matter and we understand that the 
investigation is ongoing. It would not be appropriate for the MoD to comment or 
speculate on the case at this time.”

Police have released photographs of the type of clothing McKeague is believed 
to have been wearing when he disappeared. They show a pink Ralph Lauren shirt 
and brown suede Timberland boots.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97923f62a5d65cc59d55d215caf85da3542aa04c%2F0_210_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Corrie%20McKeague%3A%20police%20play%20down%20fears%20missing%20serviceman%20was%20abducted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Corrie%20McKeague%3A%20police%20play%20down%20fears%20missing%20serviceman%20was%20abducted&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fcorrie-mckeague-police-play-down-fears-missing-serviceman-was-abducted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F97923f62a5d65cc59d55d215caf85da3542aa04c%2F0_210_1440_864%2F1440.jpg>
 A pink Ralph Lauren shirt similar to what Corrie McKeague is believed to have 
been wearing when he disappeared. Photograph: PA 
McKeague is described as white, 1.78 metres (5ft 10ins), of medium build, with 
short light brown hair.

Ch Insp Steve Denham said: “This behaviour is totally out of character for 
Corrie and we are very concerned for his welfare. We are still examining CCTV 
in Bury St Edmunds town centre and urging any friends or members of the public 
who may have seen or spoken to Corrie over the course of the evening of Friday 
23 September and the early hours of Saturday 24 September in Bury St Edmunds to 
come forward.

“We are also appealing for people or drivers in the local area or further 
afield who may have seen him after our last confirmed sighting of him on 
Brentgovel Street at 3.20am to contact us.”

Anyone with information should contact police on 101 or Crimestoppers on 0800 
555 111.
 