
The UK’s largest coffee chain Costa Coffee <http://www.costa.co.uk> is to 
launch a recycling scheme in all of its stores to ensure that as many as 
possible of its own takeaway cups – and those from its competitors – are 
recycled.

In a move designed to reduce the millions of used disposable cups that end up 
in landfill, the chain’s customers will be encouraged to leave or return them 
to a Costa store, where they will be stored on a bespoke rack. Costa’s waste 
partner,Veolia, <http://www.veolia.co.uk/> will transport them to specialist 
waste processing plants which have the capacity to recycle takeaway coffee cups 
– potentially as many as 30m a year from Costa alone.

Following a successful trial in more than 45 stores across London and 
Manchester, Costa is rolling out the recycling racks in all 2,000-plus stores 
at the end of January with a clear message that “we recycle any paper takeaway 
cup, no matter what brand”.

It was revealed earlier this year that only 1 in 400 coffee cups are recycled 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/environment/article4713387.ece> in the UK 
because they are made of a difficult-to-recycle mix of paper and plastic. That 
prompted calls for a charge on takeaway cups by prominent figures including 
chef and campaignerHugh Fearnley-Whittingstall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/jul/29/hughs-war-on-waste-fearnley-whittingstall-coffee-cup>
.

“As the UK’s largest coffee shop brand, we want to make it as easy as possible 
for the public to recycle their used coffee cups,” said Jason Cotta, the 
managing director of Costa UK and Ireland. “Our research in Manchester and 
London shows around 40 cups per day are left in stores, which means we have the 
potential to recycle 30m Costa cups a year. What’s more, the fact that we will 
accept competitors’ cups means we could significantly increase that figure.”


Costa is funding research at Sheffield University into cup recyclability and 
currently donates 25p to litter charities every time a customer uses a reusable 
cup in a Costa store.

“We are committed to taking a lead and, like many others, we are working hard 
to find a cup that can be recycled anywhere,” Cotta continued. “Whilst there is 
more work to do in partnership with the wider industry, we are excited to see 
the impact our new in-store recycling offer will have and hope it is embraced 
by everyone – by our customers and by those who buy their coffee elsewhere.”

Meanwhile, Starbucks <https://www.theguardian.com/business/starbucks> is 
trialling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/21/starbucks-trials-recyclable-cups-in-move-to-tackle-landfill-waste>
 a fully recyclable coffee cup – theFrugalpac  <https://www.frugalpac.com/>– 
which could eventually divert huge numbers of cups away from landfill. And 
environmental charity Hubbub is facilitating the trial of a paper cup recycling 
bin scheme in Manchester, supported by McDonald’s, Costa Coffee, Caffè Nero, 
Pret a Manger, KFC, Greggs and Nestlé.
 