
With the help of Tanenbaum’s gift of 20 million Canadian dollars (£12million) 
the ‘Neuro’, the Montreal Neurological Institute and Hospital, is setting up an 
experiment in experimentation, anOpen Science Initiative 
<http://www.sciencemag.org/news/2016/01/montreal-institute-going-open-accel-erate-science>
 with the express purpose of finding out the best way to realise the potential 
of scientific research.

It is hard to be against ‘open science’. Openness – the public sharing and 
challenging of knowledge – is held up as one of the foundational ideals of 
science. During the cold war, Niels Bohr was not alone in arguing that this 
principle should apply to politics too: ‘The best weapon of a dictatorship is 
secrecy, but the best weapon of a democracy should be the weapon of openness’. 
For much of its history, science has been ahead of the curve when it comes to 
openness. However, as access to online information has exploded, scientific 
research, much of which is hidden behind paywalls, looked like a closed shop.


As open access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/open-access-scientific-publishing> to the 
pdfs produced by scientists begins to gain momentum, some have begun to 
question whether this goes far enough. Evgeny Morozov is critical of rhetorical 
nods to openness 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/03/17/opinion/sunday/morozov-open-and-closed.html?_r=0>
, which he calls ‘the latest opiate of the (iPad-toting) masses… “open” has 
become the new “green.”’ A 2012report from the Royal Society 
<https://royalsociety.org/topics-policy/projects/science-public-enterprise/report/>
 argued for meaningful, ‘intelligent openness’ rather than blanket transparency.

One area in which openness threatens to be truly meaningful is intellectual 
property, and it is here that the Montreal Open Science Initiative is 
disruptive. It will be built on a hypothesis that could overturn our 
assumptions about the value of science to the economy. Rather than capturing 
the potentially lucrative intellectual property from basic and clinical 
neuroscience, the Neuro will be giving it away.

Governments in science-rich countries are increasingly concerned that they do 
not appear to reaping the economic returns they feel they deserve from 
investments in scientific research. Their favoured response has been to try to 
bridge what they see as a‘valley of death’ 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmsctech/348/348.pdf>
 between basic scientific research and industrial applications. This has meant 
more funding for ‘translational research’ and the flowering of technology 
transfer offices within universities.

In 1980, the US Congress cemented this new approach with the Bayh-Dole act, 
granting universities the right to make money from the intellectual property of 
their researchers. There are some success stories, particularly in the life 
sciences.Patents from the work of Richard Axel at Columbia University 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2750841/> at one point brought 
the university almost $100 million per year. The University of Florida received 
more than $150 million for inventing Gatorade in the 1960s. The stakes are high 
inthe current battle between Berkely and MIT/Harvard 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-university-patents/> over who owns the 
rights to the CRISPR/Cas9 system that has revolutionised genetic engineering 
and could be worth billions.

Policymakers imagine a world in which universities pay for themselves just as 
a pharmaceutical research lab does. However, for critics of technology 
transfer, such stories blind us to the reality of university’s entrepreneurial 
abilities.

For most universities, evidence of their money-making prowess is, to put it 
charitably, mixed. Arecent Bloomberg report 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/graphics/2016-university-patents/> shows how quickly 
university patent incomes plunge once we look beyond the megastars. In 2014, 
just 15 US universities earned 70% of all patent royalties. British science 
policy researchersPaul Nightingale and Alex Coad 
<http://quarterly.demos.co.uk/article/issue-2/innovation-and-growth/> conclude 
that ‘Roughly 9/10 US universities lose money on their technology transfer 
offices… MIT makes more money from selling T-shirts than it does from 
licensing’. Areport from the Brookings institute 
<https://www.brookings.edu/research/university-start-ups-critical-for-improving-technology-transfer/>
 concluded that the model of technology transfer ‘is unprofitable for most 
universities and sometimes even risks alienating the private sector’. In the 
UK, the situation is even worse. Businesses who have dealings with universities
report that their technology transfer offices are often unrealistic in 
negotiations 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201213/cmselect/cmsctech/348/348.pdf>
. In many cases, academics are, like a small child who refuses to let others 
play with a brand new football, unable to make the most of their gifts. And 
areas of science outside the life sciences are harder to patent than medicines, 
sports drinks and genetic engineering techniques. Trying too hard to force 
science towards the market may be, to use the phrase of science policy 
professor Keith Pavitt, like pushing a piece of string.

Science policy is slowly waking up to the realisation that the value of 
science may lie in people and places rather than papers and patents. It’s an 
idea that the Neuro, with the help of Tanenbaum’s gift, is going to test.By 
sharing data and giving away intellectual property 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosbiology/article?id=10.1371/journal.pbio.2001259>, 
the initiative aims to attract new private partners to the institute and build 
Montreal as a hub for knowledge and innovation. The hypothesis is that this 
will be more lucrative than hoarding patents.

This experiment is not wishful thinking. It will be scientifically measured. 
It is the job of Richard Gold, a McGill University law professor, to see 
whether it works. He told me that his first task is ‘to figure out what to 
counts… There’s going to be a gap between what we would like to measure and 
what we can measure’. However, he sees an open-mindedness among his colleagues 
that is unusual. Some are evangelists for open science; some are sceptics. But 
they share a curiosity about new approaches and a recognition of a problem in 
neuroscience: ‘We haven’t come up with a new drug for Parkinson’s in 30 years. 
We don’t even understand the biological basis for many of these diseases. So 
whatever we’re doing at the moment doesn’t work’. There are plenty of issues to 
work out, including how young scientists can progress while giving away the 
fruits of their labour and how patient privacy should be protected, but Gold is 
sanguine about this shared experiment in open science: ‘Even if we’re wrong, 
we’re contributing to our knowledge of how science works’.

This article was updated after launch to correct Larry Tanenbaum’s name.

 