
Why has Pfizer been fined the colossal sum of £84.2m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/07/pfizer-fined-nhs-anti-epilepsy-drug-cma>
 over a drug it makes to control epilepsy seizures?

The Competition and Markets Authority 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-fines-pfizer-and-flynn-90-million-for-drug-price-hike-to-nhs>
 says Pfizer and a small company called Flynn Pharma both charged “excessive 
and unfair prices” for the supply of an anti-epilepsy drug in the UK.

It’s a huge fine – in fact, it’s a record. The CMA has hit Pfizer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/pfizer> as hard as it is able, partly 
because the huge American pharmaceutical company has such large coffers that 
anything less will not make much of a dent, and partly to send a message to 
other drug companies that they should not even think about trying the same 
thing. It has also fined Flynn Pharma £5.2m, which is 10% of its worldwide 
turnover – the maximum possible fine.

So what have they done that is so heinous?

Pfizer has been making phenytoin sodium capsules for so many years – nobody is 
quite sure how long – that the price originally agreed with the NHS now looks 
very low, at £2.83 for a 100mg pack. Pfizer claims it was losing money on it. 
In September 2012, the company sold the distribution rights to Flynn Pharma, 
which debranded the drug. That meant that the drug, called Epanutin, was no 
longer sold as a Pfizer drug, and any profits from sales would no longer count 
towards the total amount Pfizer is allowed to earn in a year from the NHS, 
which is capped under the complicated arrangements of thepharmaceutical price 
regulation scheme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/pharmaceutical-price-regulation-scheme-2014>
 (PPRS).

Did Flynn Pharma take over the manufacture and sales?

No. Pfizer continued to make the drug, just as before, but sold it to Flynn 
Pharma, which sold it on to the NHS – at £67.50 per pack. That’s an increase of 
2,600%. Later it dropped the price a tad, to £54. But it was still far more 
expensive than anywhere else that Pfizer sells the drug in Europe.

That must have cost the NHS a pretty penny.

Yep. The NHS bill for Epanutin shot up from £2m in 2012 to £50m in 2013. The 
NHS has been paying this hugely increased price for four years now.

Why didn’t the NHS stop buying it then? This drug was old and out of patent. 
Weren’t there cheaper generic alternatives?

Normally they would, yes – generics are cheaper because anybody can make 
copies of drugs that are out of patent, so there is competition, which drives 
prices right down. But in this case, Pfizer and Flynn had the NHS over a 
barrel. Because this drug prevents people having epileptic fits, doctors are 
advised not to switch patients even to a generic version of the same thing, for 
fear that their epilepsy might slip out of control. So yes, there are generic 
versions of phenytoin sodium, but some are liquids, some are in different 
doses, and none of them is exactly the same as Epanutin. So the 48,000 patients 
on Epanutin had to stay on Epanutin.

Does Pfizer accept the CMA’s findings?

Absolutely not. Pfizer rebuts any allegation of wrongdoing 
<http://www.pfizer.co.uk/latest-news/2016-12-07-pfizer-statement-competition-and-markets-authority%E2%80%99s-infringement-decision>
 and says it acted entirely within the rules. It says it was making a loss and 
“the Flynn transaction” was a chance to secure the supply of an important 
medicine. It also said it pitched the price to the NHS at 25% to 40% less than 
that of an equivalent version of the drug that the NHS had been buying for a 
long time. In a very robust statement, Pfizer said it would appeal every aspect 
of the decision.

US drug company hiked price of acne cream by 3,900% in less than 18 months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/21/novum-pharma-acne-cream-aloquin-price-gouging>
So what happens next?

The government has realised that it does not have quite the kind of control 
that it thought it had over drug prices. There is new legislation under way to 
ensure that the department of health can get tough with companies hiking their 
prices, so even if Pfizer wins on appeal, it hopes it will be able to block 
this particular loophole. In the meantime, there are several other cases being 
investigated by the CMA. It won’t say which companies or which drugs, but it is 
thought they may involve similar situations.

Are drug companies often found to be up to anti-competitive practices?

There is a bit of history. Big Pharma has been caught looking for ways to hang 
on to profits from blockbuster drugs when they approach the end of their patent 
life. Earlier this year,GlaxoSmithKline was hammered by the CMA 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cma-fines-pharma-companies-45-million>, 
effectively for paying off generic companies that wanted to make cheap copies 
of its best-selling antidepressant, paroxetine (Seroxat). In 2001, profits from 
Seroxat were earning GSK £90m, so lobbing a few million to some generic 
companies to get them to keep out of the way seemed like good business. But 
that meant the NHS continued to have to pay a high price for the drug, and the 
CMA was not impressed, fining GSK a total of £37.6m.
 