
Ian Jack (Snobbery, ignorance and the traducing of tenement life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/john-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements>
, 8 October) is right to suggest that, as with most housing, it’s not the 
construction that’s at fault but the management – and the lack of family 
planning. If the 19th-century Scottish tenements hadn’t been overcrowded they 
would have been good, solid homes; inconvenient by our standards – lugging coal 
upstairs, shared privies – but better than much of what people had had in the 
countryside before moving into the new industrial cities. John Cleese and 
anyone who doubts this should visit theGlasgow tenement house 
<http://www.nts.org.uk/Property/Tenement-House/> belonging to the National 
Trust, which shows the dignity that was possible on a low income.

John Cleese has shown his ignorance about poor people, bad housing and modern 
life | Ian Jack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/08/john-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements>
There is one thing the Scottish tenements could teach designers of housing 
now: the drying green. A close of houses would have one or more fixed set of 
lines for drying clothes. Even at the humblest level, the posts would be cast 
iron with decorative finials, often a pineapple. Now people in flats are 
obliged to use tumble dryers – energy intensive and, recently,potentially 
dangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/24/killer-tumble-dryer-faulty-whirlpool-machine-product-safety-scandal>
 – or else to dry clothes on tiny balconies where that isn’t actually banned.

A lovely example of the drying green moving south – and of very good planning 
provision – was in the Ossulston Street estate in St Pancras, London, in the 
1930s, where Father Basil Jellicoe with theLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> county council believed that poor 
people should still have beauty: some of the fantastical finials from those 
posts survive in the basement of the British Library alongside.
Judith Martin
Winchester, Hampshire

• In a 1949 photo of my four-year-old brother in the back court of our Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> dockside tenement, his shining white 
socks were the only things not grim and grey.

But what lives on for me are memories of warmth, community spirit and humour. 
Halloween, when we had to “do a turn” in neighbours’ “single ends” and “but and 
bens” for a handful of nuts and an orange; Hogmanay with ships toot-tooting 
Happy New Year from the nearby Clyde; Easter bonnets and parades … so many 
happy memories.

Crushing poverty, absolutely. And it is to this country’s shame that we have 
so many food banks in existence today; young people cannot afford to buy or 
indeed rent a home; the NHS under threat; work and pay conditions under threat. 
Not in 1949, but 2016.
Pat Ferguson 
Nottingham

• Further to your correspondent Joyce Blackledge’s sensible suggestion that 
councils requisition empty houses as they did after the first world war (Letters
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/07/victorian-roots-of-theresa-mays-tory-conference-rhetoric>
, 8 October), is there such a need for more housing to be built in the south, 
as is so often mooted? In London, ridiculously expensive foreign-owned property 
lies empty, while Liverpool council is offering houses for £1. The government 
could curb exploitation in the capital and encourage more businesses to move 
north to even out the housing demand.
Jennifer McClean
Sheffield

• Giles Fraser might be right in considering the Heygate estate, for all its 
design faults, an example of a “thick community” (Loose canon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/oct/06/diversity-is-a-boon-but-were-losing-our-sense-of-community>
, 7 October). I lived in his parish, in a council estate off East Street 
Market, from 1943 until 1971. I remember my parents taking me across bombsites 
and slum areas to the Trocadero cinema at the Elephant and Castle, so when the 
council built the Heygate it was considered a godsend. Finished in 1974, in its 
heyday the estate housed more than 3,000 people.

That was progress, and now further progress is resulting in luxury apartments 
being built privately. Giles shouldn’t be too hard on the new tenants. How does 
he know that they constitute a “thin community”? Some may even join his 
congregation. I’m sure Southwark council has done its best for the Heygate 
tenants. It’s market forces that have done for his thick community. The price 
of the average home in London is now just over half a million.
Dave Shonfield
London

Diversity is a boon – but we’re losing our sense of community | Giles Fraser | 
Loose canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/oct/06/diversity-is-a-boon-but-were-losing-our-sense-of-community>
• Giles Fraser says Labour moved its HQ from Walworth Road, in his current 
parish, to Millbank in 1997, and from then on began to lose touch with the 
communities it was set up to serve. In fact a short (18-month) lease on 
Millbank Tower was taken in November 1995 for use as a campaign HQ for the 
forthcoming general election. Prior to five-year fixed terms, the governing 
party could go to the country whenever it pleased, andLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> wanted to be ready whenever John 
Major fired the starting gun.

Labour HQ remained at Walworth Road until early 1998, when the national 
executive committee decided that a party in government needed an HQ in SW1, not 
SE17. It was a practical decision, and in fact the cost per square foot at 
Millbank was hardly any more than the party had paid at Walworth Road.

When the landlord tripled the rent in 2002, Labour moved out of Millbank, and 
relocated half its head office to Tyneside. So much for losing touch with the 
communities we serve, Comrade Fraser – maybe more a retreat to our heartlands?
Jackie Robinson
Whitley Bay, Tyne and Wear
 