
In a little council house in Birkenhead, Steve is panicking over how he’ll 
find an extra £304 rent money a month. He has just days to magic up an answer. 
If he can’t, he can guess what will happen. “Eviction. Come the end of 
November, I won’t have a roof.” As a single parent, Steve won’t be the only one 
slung out. His four boys, aged from three to eight, would also lose their home 
and probably be taken from their dad. “I’d be fed to the dogs.” Everything I’ve 
tried so hard for …” – a snap of his fingers – “Nothing.”

In Liverpool, 840 families risk losing their homes because of benefits cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/oct/03/liverpool-840-families-risk-losing-homes-benefits-cuts>
It’s not a landlord doing this to Steve; it’s our government. It’s not his 
rent that’s going up; it’s his housing benefit that’s getting cut. And he’s not 
the only one; on official figures, almost 500 households in the borough of 
Wirral face ashortfall of up to £500 a month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/18/george-osborne-housing-benefit-cuts-tax-credits-500-per-year>
.

From next Monday 88,000 families across Britain will have their housing 
benefit slashed. They will no longer have the cash to pay their rent. Among all 
those whose lives will be turned upside down will be a quarter of a million 
children. That’s enough kids to fill 350 primary schools, all facing 
homelessness.

Those figures come directly from the Department for Work and Pensions 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/548741/welfare-reform-and-work-act-impact-assessment-for-the-benefit-cap.pdf>
. Plenty dispute them, which is unsurprising since DWP officials keep changing 
their minds. Some experts believe the number of children at risk could total 
500,000.

This is the biggest benefit cut that you’ve never heard of. The newspapers 
will waste gallons of ink onCandice Bake-Off’s lipstick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/29/bake-off-has-found-its-ross-and-rachel-botanical-week>
 andCheryl’s apparent baby bump 
<http://www.hellomagazine.com/celebrities/2016101133977/cheryl-baby-bump-photos-date-night-liam-payne/>
. But about a government policy that could disrupt hundreds of thousands of 
lives, there is near silence.

So allow me to explain. From next week Theresa May’s government will extend 
the cap on household benefits. Poor families in London willnot be allowed more 
than £442 a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/20/lower-benefit-caps-exclude-poor-families-make-cities-unaffordable>
. Those outside the capital will be cut to £385 a week. In some areas the cuts 
will be brought in straightaway; in others with a slight delay. But in the end, 
families above the limit will be hit twice over. First, they will be pushed 
further into poverty. And, like Steve, their housing benefit will be docked, so 
they will be left scrabbling just to make the rent and keep a roof above their 
heads.

Life in a B&B or shelter: has austerity left you needing a new home? | Sarah 
Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/austerity-alternative-accommodation-share-experience>
How those families will manage is anyone’s guess. When Steve opened the letter 
at the end of July he had a “panic attack”. All that went round his mind was 
one question: “How the hell am I going to pay this?” Then came what he calls “a 
depressive state” that lasted nearly two months. Now he bottles it up, for the 
sake of his boys. “When they’re not around, that’s when I cry. When they’re out 
at school, when they’re asleep: that’s when I break down.”

It’s the fear of losing the boys he fought so hard for custody of that haunts 
him most. So worried is he about a social worker taking them away that he 
requests a false name.

Like many of the families that will be hit, Steve’s options are very limited. 
He can borrow from his mum, although she’s hard up. He can try to land 16 
hours’ work a week – and has already been giving out his CV – but not too many 
employers will be able to fit around his school runs and meal preps. Or he can 
ask Wirral council to top up his rent, by filling out a complicated form that 
asks for proof of his weekly spend on everything from cigarettes to toiletries. 
And that would only cover him for a few months.

He has one jumper and one coat to last him the entire winter. He sometimes 
gets by on a single bowl of cornflakes a day

Even before next week’s cuts, Steve is already bumping along the bottom. He 
has one jumper and one coat to last him the entire winter. He sometimes gets by 
on a single bowl of cornflakes a day. Anything spare goes towards the boys. But 
they don’t get fresh fruit or veg, subsisting on frozen meals from Iceland.

The three-year-old comes into the kitchen for a drink, and as Steve opens the 
fridge, I can see it contains nothing apart from a half-full bottle of milk. 
The house is empty to the point of desolation: no shades for any of the 
lightbulbs, none of the usual family photos or decorations.

George Osborne’s benefits cap was always a rotten policy that played well in 
focus groups. But when introduced in 2013, it hit a relatively small number of 
poor families in high-rent London. And, some on the right would whisper in the 
ears of biddable journalists, the poor really had no place in the world’s 
biggest property bubble. The cuts that start next week will be a step change. 
They will hit low-rent areas such as Wirral and Darlington. They will render 
family homes rented out by housing associations “financially toxic”, according 
to thehousing expert Joe Halewood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/07/benefit-cap-pitch-children-poverty-12bn-cuts-tory-budget>
: tenants will no longer be able to afford them, and housing associations can’t 
afford to leave them empty. And they will rip through the budgets of already 
cash-starved local councils, who will now have to find emergency accommodation 
and cash funds for displaced families.

To see how deep it will cut, have a look at these figures. I grew up on the 
outskirts of London, in a place called Edmonton. It has pockets of deprivation 
as bad as anything in Wirral and, on DWP estimates, around 1,200 households 
here will be hit by the new benefits cap. By my reckoning, this government now 
expects children growing up in my former home to be raised on £1.02 a day.

The basic expenses for a family with four children in Edmonton come to £399.14 
per week.

My sums go as follows:

£315.12 for rent (the allowable local rent for a three-bed home).

£33.36 for council tax (Enfield council, band E property).

£32 for gas and electric (the average weekly bill, according to government 
figures, with an extra 20% added for a large family).

£8.54 for water (Thames Water’s average bill for 2015, with 20% added for a 
large family).

£10.12 phone and broadband (BT Anytime standard package).

Taking all that from the £442.31 allowed to any London family leaves £43.17 
each week left over for the family. That is £1.02 per person per day.

Of course, these figures are arguable. The family could cut down on energy use 
by choosing to be cold this winter. Or they could go without showers and 
washing up. That said, I’ve left off mobile phone calls and TV. I’ve not 
factored in school trips or family breaks or Christmas.

These cuts will do something Thatcher never managed: they break once and for 
all the link between the needs of benefits claimants and their entitlements. 
Children will be punished for the “sins” of their parents: the sins of being 
poor and of having too large a family in the eyes of Osborne and Iain Duncan 
Smith. David Cameron’s Tories once legislated to “eliminate child poverty”: 
Theresa May’s Tories are re-creating it for a new generation.
 