
Colour is the foundation of home design and colour scheme is crucial to a warm 
and welcoming atmosphere. Here, interior stylist and writer Joanna Thornhill 
recommends five of her favourite colours for creating warmth and a relaxing 
ambience, while making sure your home is stylish.

Petrol blue
A rich and opulent shade, petrol or “inky blue” is an on-trend choice that 
layers well with grey and green. “Choose a shade of deep blue with an earthy 
tone, rather than a cold base,” says Thornhill. “When you pair petrol blue with 
green it creates a stunning effect. If you paint an accent wall in this shade 
and choose artwork and accessories with blue and green tones, it really adds a 
sense of warmth and harmony to a living space.”

If you’re simply looking for accessories to add warmth to a room, petrol blue 
is a great choice; velvet curtains, long pile rugs and textured cushions all 
look beautiful in this colour. “It adds a warm and sumptuous touch to your 
interior,” says Thornhill.

Lead grey
You may be wary of painting your walls a dark colour in case it makes your 
room look stark, but Thornhill says a warm shade of dark grey can actually make 
the room feel cosier, whatever its size. “Dark grey walls can make a space look 
interesting, as well as cosy,” she says, “and a dark background makes any 
brighter colours you add to the room, in the form of soft furnishings and 
accessories, pop out. Dark grey is also a practical choice for chairs and 
sofas, particularly if you have a young family. If you want to add a talking 
point, try accessorising a charcoal sofa with jewel-coloured cushions. It looks 
incredibly warm and inviting, as well as fun.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcreate-a-cosy-living-room-with-these-on-trend-colour-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f6d73caf7f9add8bde4d01e98239c367a0be87f%2F0_12_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Create%20a%20cosy%20living%20room%20with%20these%20on-trend%20colour%20schemes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcreate-a-cosy-living-room-with-these-on-trend-colour-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Create%20a%20cosy%20living%20room%20with%20these%20on-trend%20colour%20schemes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fcreate-a-cosy-living-room-with-these-on-trend-colour-schemes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f6d73caf7f9add8bde4d01e98239c367a0be87f%2F0_12_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Dark grey walls make brighter colours, like mustard, really stand out. 
Photograph: Ola Smit for the Guardian 
Mustard
Mustard is an on-trend shade that adds a blast of colour to a room and creates 
a cocooning effect. “Vibrant mustard is a versatile colour,” says Thornhill. 
“You can use it for a feature wall with mustard paint, or wallpaper that has a 
small, repeat pattern. It also works very well as an accent colour with mustard 
details dotted around the room, such as a desk or sideboard with a laminated 
mustard top.

“If you want your room to be cosy, yet elegant, try pairing mustard with a 
crisp white, which looks fresh and bright, or alongside a light grey for a 
warm, sophisticated air.”

Dark chocolate
Brown is still treated with suspicion in interior design circles thanks to its 
copious use in the 1990s, but Thornhill says if you choose a warm shade of 
chocolate, it can look smart and luxurious. “When you’re choosing paint or 
accessories in this shade, look for colours that resemble dark chocolate, not 
Dairy Milk. The 90s brown had a slightly garish orange hue, so to create warmth 
in a contemporary way, a darker shade with a warm grey base tone is the way to 
go.”

Once you’ve got past any preconceptions, Thornhill says dark chocolate adds 
modern warmth and lends itself well to other earthy tones: “Try it as an accent 
shade with green for a bold effect, or soften its impact with accessories in 
putty or taupe.”

Interior design tips: how to create a ‘warm’ room
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/interior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room>
Mid-green
“Rather than mint or a blue-green shade, look for forest green if you want to 
add warmth,” Thornhill says. “Look for shades with a yellow or olive tone. 
Avoid anything too dark.”

Mid-green can be used to promote harmony in a living space – but it’s 
especially effective for creating a cosy bedroom or bathroom.

“Mid-green creates a relaxed environment. People tend to choose blue for 
bathrooms, because of the connection to water, and often pick out a cool-toned 
shade that can make a bathroom feel cold and unwelcoming. Green still has a 
natural connection, but it’s a much warmer choice.

“In a bathroom, try working mid-green into the scheme with your tiles, as well 
as walls. In the bedroom, use green as an accent, rather than a foundation 
colour. Forest green in bedding, cushions, throws, curtains or an accent chair 
brings flexible cosiness to your bedroom; turn up the warmth in winter and keep 
the room brighter and cooler in summer.”
 