
Credit card companies are not doing enough to help more than 3 million 
customers struggling with persistent debt, according to the City regulator.


In an interim report 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/your-fca/documents/market-studies/ms14-6-2-ccms-interim-report>
 on thecredit card market <https://www.theguardian.com/money/creditcards>, the 
Financial Conduct Authority said 2 million people have debts they are 
struggling to shake off and 1.6 million habitually make minimum payments on 
their borrowings. The watchdog noted that such customers are profitable for 
card providers, and firms “therefore have fewer incentives to help these 
customers”.

UK reliance on loans and credit cards puts recovery at risk, IMF warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/15/imf-economic-recovery-risk-loans-credit-cards>
The regulator said: “The FCA is concerned about the scale of potentially 
problematic debt for consumers who are just above default levels, and the 
incentives for firms to manage this. For a significant minority who are in 
persistent levels of debt, the market could potentially work better.”

The FCA added that borrowers who default are unprofitable for firms, with a 
further 2 million people in the UK either in arrears on their card debt or in 
default. As a consequence, banks and other lenders contact customers who miss 
payments and offer them easier terms, while being less concerned about 
contacting and helping long-term borrowers or those who make only the minimum 
payment because the interest they pay adds to profits.

It proposed that to help people with problematic debt, credit card lenders 
should:

 * Give borrowers more control over credit limits 
 * Encourage customers to pay off debts quicker when they have the funds 
available 
 * Identify struggling borrowers earlier and help them manage repayments. 
The FCA said its study was important because Britain has about 30 million 
credit card holders who owe a total of £61bn, making it one of the biggest UK 
markets for unsecured debt. The UK credit cards market is Europe’s largest, 
with British consumers holding about 70% of all European cards.

The regulator launched the inquiry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/25/credit-card-market-city-watchdog-investigate>
 last November and said it would examine the complexity of credit card 
products, the fairness and clarity of terms and conditions and how easy it is 
for customers to switch between lenders.

In its report, the FCA called for measures to help people find the best deals, 
including improved access to their transaction history and a greater role for 
comparison websites. Consumers should also be able to shop around without 
damaging their credit score and lenders should notify customers when they are 
near the end of a promotional period, the FCA said.

The watchdog said the market works reasonably well for most consumers and 
lenders do not target particular groups to subsidise other borrowers.
 