
A few months into my first job in the NHS, some 38 years ago, I watched Prime 
Minister Jim Callaghanbeing interviewed 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=dX06xqN6710>, on his return to the UK after an 
international mid-winter summit in the Caribbean, about the strikes in public 
services that have come to be known as the winter of discontent. I and pretty 
well everyone working in the NHS, and most of the population, knew there was a 
crisis. Callaghan’s dismissive commentwere famously reported 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/921524.stm> as “Crisis, what crisis?” 
They didn’t go down well, he didn’t act, and he went on to lose the impending 
election.

Today, can it really be that our current prime minister is the only one who 
doesn’t realise there is anNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> crisis?

It is clear to anyone in the NHS that we cannot carry on as we are | Bob 
Kerslake
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/14/nhs-cannot-carry-on-as-we-are-bob-kerslake-hospital-chief>
The comment by the British Red Cross chief executive that there is a “
humanitarian crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
” upped the ante, but at prime minister’s questions Theresa Maysaid he was 
crying wolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/red-cross-description-of-nhs-irresponsible-and-overblown-says-pm-may-pmqs-a-and-e-demand>
. However, the fact is that, humanitarian or not, crisis means crisis, and if 
she carries on with her current denial – and inaction – the NHS will soon cease 
to be able to cope.

There have been three further NHS crises since 1979: in 1987-8, as the NHS ran 
out of money and failed to cope with the winter pressures it faced; in the 
early 90s, when the sickest patients were left waiting on trolleys in corridors 
for days; and in 2006, when the NHS overspent across the board because it 
couldn’t do the limitless amount the Blair government expected of it. Each 
crisis began to be sorted only when the government of the day finally accepted 
there was problem, and that ministers had to play a leading part in solving it. 
And so will this one.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&media=>
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
My own experience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2013/aug/07/failure-nhs-jan-filochowski>
 taking on and turning round three different “failing” hospitals taught me that 
failure occurs when those responsible for poor performance can’t or won’t face 
up to the reality and instead present it as merely “challenging”. This 
government describes a service that is being financed as requested, struggling 
to meet surprising “record” demand but “mainly” coping reasonably, as (it 
thinks) NHS England confirms, and which would cope well if the resources 
diverted to thoughtless people who aren’t very ill were used to support the 
truly needy.

The reality is starkly different. Senior NHS staff know it but keep quiet 
because they risk being sacked if they speak out. Demand is rising steadily, in 
line with long-term predictions, atup to 5% a year 
<https://twitter.com/BBCNewsnight/status/819320218929405952>, so there is no 
justification for any surprise. On the other hand, waits are risingup to 20 
times as fast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/193000-nhs-patients-a-month-waiting-beyond-target-for-surgery>
, which should be cause for alarm. NHS England’s most recent quarterly figures 
for major A&Es show an increase in attendances of under 5% and an increase of 
over 70% in waits of more than four hour in a year. Astonishingly, that the 
numbers waitingmore than four hours increased 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/10/more-than-2m-people-wait-over-four-hours-in-a-and-e-nhs-figures-show>
 by more than the number of patients, so fewer patients were seen within four 
hours than a year previously. If these rates of decline continue, the NHS will 
simply keel over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeremy-hunt-30-percent-people-using-ae-departments-emergency-care-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Hunt%3A%20up%20to%2030%25%20of%20people%20using%20A%26E%20departments%20do%20not%20need%20emergency%20care%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeremy-hunt-30-percent-people-using-ae-departments-emergency-care-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Hunt%3A%20up%20to%2030%25%20of%20people%20using%20A%26E%20departments%20do%20not%20need%20emergency%20care%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fjeremy-hunt-30-percent-people-using-ae-departments-emergency-care-video&media=>
Jeremy Hunt: up to 30% of people using A&E departments do not need emergency 
care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-30-percent-people-using-ae-departments-emergency-care-video>
What capacity exists is increasingly silting up as patients are unable to move 
from one part of their care to the next because there is no room. Because they 
are stuck where they don’t need to be, they prevent the next (sicker) group of 
patients from getting the care they need promptly, a classic downward spiral. 
To make matters worse, capacity is actually being reduced in social care and 
the NHS – the result of a financial settlement for this parliament with minimal 
growth andan assumed £22bn of savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/18/nhs-short-target-22bn-savings>
. As his Commons appearance last week revealed, the NHS England chief,Simon 
Stevens, now realises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
 the settlement was insufficient from the outset.

Ministers can’t silence NHS concerns because people can see it unravelling | 
Gaby Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/ministers-silence-brexit-fears-nhs-unravelling-simon-stevens>
The capacity shortfall has little to do with the “thoughtless 30% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
” so excoriated by Jeremy Hunt for turning up unnecessarily at A&E. May’s 
suggestion,making already overwhelmed GPs work longer hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/theresa-may-nhs-crisis-doctor-surgeries>
, completely misses the point, and suggests she does too. It would obviously 
help a bit if some of the 30% didn’t turn up unnecessarily, but it wouldn’t 
create capacity where it is currently lacking. The real problems relate to 
blockages in treating those who are really ill and in immediate need of 
treatment, and those who need further support in their own home or a care home, 
to make their discharge from hospital possible. These are the problems May must 
turn her mind to.

The best report on the NHS in the last 30 years, chaired by Sir Roy Griffiths, 
memorably said: “If Florence Nightingale were carrying her lamp through the 
corridors of the NHS today she would almost certainly be searching for the 
people in charge.” Yet today, three decades on, no one is in charge of the NHS. 
So much time is spent buck-passing and cost-shifting for problems that require 
concerted action.

In the meantime, ballooning wait times prejudice safety everywhere, on 
occasion with disastrous and fatal consequences. This is what “mainly” coping 
really means. And as the delays increase, so will these consequences.
 