
Three elections ago I was reporting for the BBC, banging on about the effect 
of the internet on politics:cybersquatting 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/the_daily_politics/5152342.stm#parties>, 
vote-swapping 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/vote_2005/frontpage/4435677.stm> and 
the use of websites and even online video by Tory leadership candidates,seen at 
the time as an incongruous clash of cultures 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4339366.stm>.

It was the Beeb’s response to the 2004 American election: Howard Dean’s use of 
MeetUp.com 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2003/dec/18/newmedia.uselections2004>, the 
Swift Boat veterans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/sep/28/uselections2004.usa1> and other 
electronic game-changing. One package I never made was about the direction of 
online political discussion in the US, or rather directions: the siloing of 
debate into two camps who spend their energy (a) despising each other and (b) 
engaged in warfare on the Cultural Front, howling about flags, religion and 
Jane Fonda more than the future.

This non-debate seemed to go better for one camp: the liberal caricature of 
George W Bush as a dim-witted hayseed (rather than as a prissy prince) played 
rather well with voters who were sick of being dismissed as dim-witted 
hayseeds. Happily, the same binary divide didn’t seem to be happening over here.

A couple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/23/six-lessons-from-the-scottish-referendum-for-the-europe-campaign>
 of referendums (referenda? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2013/jan/07/crossword-roundup-tricky-plurals>
) later, and we have an EU vote-split that looks startlingly like an American 
presidential election, and those using the net to talk through its meaning so 
rarely encounter someone who went the other way that the normally unflappable 
digital-democracy guru Tom Steinberg haswritten in Civicist of a crisis 
<http://civichall.org/civicist/defined-by-the-filter-bubble/>:
Tom Steinberg (@steiny) 
An appeal to everyone I know who works at Twitter, Facebook, Google etc, and 
for the people who influence thempic.twitter.com/TRBTbZHrxG 
<https://t.co/TRBTbZHrxG>
 <https://twitter.com/steiny/status/746352702284771329> June 24, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/steiny/status/746352702284771329> 
I agree with Tom: the prospect of Britain dividing into two camps who regard 
each other as cosseted metropolitan chumps and slack-jawed bigoted chumps is a 
threat to democracy, to civic life and to the quality of crossword debate.

As a warning, take a look at this Slate piece on the New York Times crossword 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/xx_factor/2016/06/28/the_new_york_times_crossword_can_be_clueless_about_race_and_gender.html>
. Ruth Graham picks up on the clue “Decidedly non-feminist women’s group” for 
HAREM. “Groan,” she comments, and recalls other clues which, for her, merit a 
conversation about judgment: ILLEGAL as a noun, clued “One caught by the border 
patrol”, say, and “Shylock” for JEW.

And because identity politics are one of the eternal skirmishes on the 
cultural front, the piece’s comments section is a depressing, angry place. 
Graham is scorned and derided as though she were campaigning for censorship, 
rather than raising a question about tone. She cares about how women are 
described, therefore she is on the Other Side, therefore she’s wrong and must 
be told how wrong. Groan.

How about here? I’ve written before 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/two-girls-one-on-each-knee.html> about how 
crosswords, especially cryptics, use language as a playkit. They tend to work 
apart from the arguments in the rest of a newspaper – though setters and 
editors of course still consider tone, which is why, despite its immaculate 
wordplay, you don’t now expect to see clues like this vintage piece by 
crosswording forefather Ximenes ...

I have most of the time to stitch – then I iron (9)
[ most of a measure of time + word for ‘stitch’ + I + symbol for ‘iron’ ]
[ most of HOUR, then SEW + I + FE ]

... for the vintage term HOUSEWIFE. And when, inevitably, a published clue or 
answer raises a question of tone (see theupdates from the Guardian crossword 
editor Hugh Stephenson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/2004/feb/02/crossword-editor-update>), 
we’ve been able to discuss it without a two-camps, no-YOU’RE-the-idiot flurry 
of brickbats. Let’s keep it that way?

Incidentally, I thought that Graham might be interested in this paper’s clue, 
by Rufus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/shortcuts/2012/feb/21/guardian-crossword-setter-rufus-80>
, for that same word HAREM: “Pound of sultanas”.
Ruth Graham (@publicroad) 
@alanconnor <https://twitter.com/alanconnor> Clever! I wonder if the 
irreverence might bug some people, but definitely not me.
 <https://twitter.com/publicroad/status/749221501786791936> July 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/publicroad/status/749221501786791936> 
A measured take. I tend to agree.
 