
Some solvers start the week with one of its more straightforward puzzles. 
Instead, here are two that are unusual – and both deeply enjoyable.

Paul’s Masterclass puzzle

The Guardian setter Paul 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crosswords+profile/paul> (who we got to 
know in this Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2011/sep/22/crossword-blog-meet-the-setter-paul>
) has just finisheda Guardian Masterclass teaching the art and craft of setting 
cryptics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses/2016/may/13/how-to-write-a-cryptic-crossword-a-three-week-course-at-the-guardian>
.

The first half of the course was on choosing good words for the grid entries: 
Paul himself finds that word selection is a more and more important part of his 
job (“if only,” he adds, “I listened to my own advice outside of working 
hours!”).

Then the class cracked on with clues, resulting in a puzzle that you can 
download here as a PDF 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/09/19/paul_masterclass_puzzle.pdf> (solution 
next week). Each student, following Paul’s guidance, wrote a clue, although 
Paul warns that a couple got deleted on his homeward train journey, so he has 
reconstructed them – from memory and with apologies.


And if you’re interested in the kind of courses run by setters including Paul 
and Boatman (see therecent referendum puzzle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2016/jun/24/crossword-blog-boatmans-referendum-puzzle>
), a forthcoming post here will tell you more.

A four-dimensional puzzle

Regular readers will be aware that many Guardian setters contribute to 
collections ofthe three-dimensional puzzles dreamed up by the indomitable Eric 
Westbrook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/feb/10/three-dimensional-cryptic-crosswords>
 as a new kind of puzzle that’s also part-calendar, part-charity initiative, 
part-mental challenge. For irregular readers, you read that right: crosswords 
in three dimensions.

And so, just as we’re getting used to the idea, they’ve added a fourth. 
Intimidating, perhaps, but Eric insists that the actual solving is easier than 
for a regular puzzle, because every time a setter adds a dimension, every 
answer has more “checking” letters offered up by the others.

You can see what this means in practice with this puzzle (PDF again) 
<http://www.calendarpuzzles.co.uk/download.php?file=57d01692d05d7.pdf>, 
overseen by the setter known to Guardian solvers as Puck (andhis Q&A is here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/crosswords/crossword-blog/2012/apr/26/meet-the-setter-puck>
). Eric reckons that its theme (of course, it has a theme as well) “will be 
very familiar to most solvers”:

It looks scary but the solver finds familiar steps to start on the road 
getting a feel for what the puzzle is about. Then at some magical point, the 
solver takes a leap into the unknown.

I can attest that that leap is enjoyable. If you want to submit your attempt 
(and cause £1 to find its way to charities), your deadline is midnight on 30 
September.
 