
For a moment, I thought the ascent of fake news might shock, maybe even shame, 
political debate back to facts and reality. Silly me.

Crying “fake news” has become just another tactic to avoid a fact-based 
argument.


The US president-elect, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, did it this week after the 
revelation of the Russian intelligence dossier. It is true the allegations in 
the dossier had not been verified. There is a legitimate debate in the media 
about whether, and how fully, it should have been published.


But it was not fake news. Its was a real dossier and its contents were 
considered sufficiently crediblefor the Republican senator John McCain to pass 
it to the FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
and for federal officials to append a summary to their report to the president, 
Barack Obama, and Trump about claims of Russian hacking of Democrat emails 
during the 2016 election. It was a legitimate subject for questioning.


But the man who denies ever having said things that are actually in print, or 
recorded, and whoroutinely asserts things that are obviously and verifiably 
untrue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/how-does-donald-trump-lie-fact-checker>
, had found one more way to avoid being pinned down by questions. Just call it 
“fake news”.


John McCain passes dossier alleging secret Trump-Russia contacts to FBI
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
On a much smaller scale, a similar tactic was employed in Australia over the 
summer break by the resources minister, Matt Canavan.


The ABC had run a series of stories about the Indian mining conglomerate 
Adani, to which the government is considering giving a $1bn subsidised loan to 
help build a rail line to what would be the biggest coal mine in Australia.It 
reported on the network of companies and trusts, many ultimately owned in tax 
havens 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-21/adani-corporate-web-spreads-to-tax-havens/8135700>
, that lie behind the operation,as well as a number of continuing 
investigations by Indian authorities into alleged corruption 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-12-22/adani-companies-facing-multiple-corruption-probes/8140100>
 –allegations denied by the company.


The minister appeared on the public broadcaster’s flagship morning radio 
program to claim the stories were “fake news” and lambast the ABC for even 
reporting them.


The presenter Kim Landers started by asking: “Were you aware of this 
investigation into the Adani group?” Canavan got straight to his point. “Well 
before I get to that question Kim, can I just thank you for having me on your 
program because I have been very disappointed in the ABC’s coverage of this 
issue in the past week. Your reports have been nothing but fake news.”


He didn’t actually answer many questions, after he’d finished sharing his 
views about the ABC’s journalism, saying only that the Indian investigation had 
not yet produced findings and that he had confidence in the board of the 
Northern Australian Infrastructure Facility, which would decide on the loan.


By alleging “fake news” and attacking the ABC, Canavan minimised the extent to 
which he had to engage with the issues raised. And the next day, many follow-up 
articles handilyfocused on the fake news claims 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/news/nation/abc-accused-of-using-fake-news-on-adani/news-story/e6d473087cff7722f21a1876f4bab39d>
 rather than the substance of what had been reported.

Washington gunman motivated by fake news 'Pizzagate' conspiracy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/gunman-detained-at-comet-pizza-restaurant-was-self-investigating-fake-news-reports>
But fake news is not any opinion with which a politician or publication 
disagrees, 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/cutandpaste/where-would-we-be-without-rn-warning-about-danger-of-fake-news/news-story/326ede558efe733736eb04f02cc7360d>
or any article that presents information they don’t like or that emphasises one 
part of a report when a minister would prefer to concentrate on another. It 
does not even refer to articles where a journalist may have made an error.


It is a term for fiction deliberately dressed up as fact. It’s stories 
manufactured for profit in Macedonia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/24/facebook-clickbait-political-news-sites-us-election-trump>
.It’s the manufactured child abuse allegations in the ‘Pizzagate’ conspiracy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/gunman-detained-at-comet-pizza-restaurant-was-self-investigating-fake-news-reports>
 The Guardian’s readers’ editor, Paul Chadwick, defines it this way: “fictions 
deliberately fabricated and presented as non-fiction with intent to mislead 
recipients into treating fiction as fact or into doubting verifiable fact.”


But instead of helping efforts to keep fact and fiction clearly separate, the 
charge of “fake news” is now being used to blur the delineation between them 
even further.


It used to go without saying. Facts and research would inform the arguments 
politicians used to try to convince people that one policy was better than 
another. They’d use emotion and rhetoric, and other methods of persuasion too, 
but their case had to be grounded in facts, and if it was shown not to be, they 
were usually toast.


Then we encountered “post-truth” politics, where politicians tried to explain 
away backflips or broken promises with implausible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/15/can-you-believe-tony-abbott-joe-hockey?CMP=twt_gu>
convolutions orwhere their rhetoric didn’t match their policies or widely 
accepted facts. 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-opinion/a-bit-liberal-with-the-truth-20110603-1fkuq.html>
 But at least for the most part, there were still widely accepted facts to 
define the debate’s parameters.


Now we seem to be teetering on the verge of another phase altogether, where 
facts are fleeting whispy things that can change or disappear from one 
soundbite to another or be dismissed without discussion and, most alarmingly, 
where some voters no longer seem to care, because politics has become like 
reality television, which everyone knows isn’t really real anyway.


Can you believe it? The truth according to Tony Abbott and Joe Hockey
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/15/can-you-believe-tony-abbott-joe-hockey>
It’s also a world where resentment of “elites” slides into a resentment of 
“experts”, 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/the-fetishisation-of-the-expert-20170112-gtpyz6>
which leaves us just a short step from the rejection of expertise, a world 
where people who know things are derided, not only when they deserve to be for 
getting things wrong, but also on the grounds that expertise is no more 
valuable, no more worth listening to in democratic decision-making than 
conclusions reached through ignorance or misinformation or hunches or just 
telling people what they want to hear.


Democracy is built on the assumption that we mediate different ideas and 
worldviews to reach a majority position or a compromise, with facts as the 
agreed starting point, as the guide rails for the discussion, the ropes around 
the edge of the ring.


As alarming and astonishing as it may seem, that assumption is looking shaky.


Obama said it best this week: “Politics is a battle of ideas; in the course of 
a healthy debate, we’ll prioritise different goals, and the different means of 
reaching them. But without some common baseline of facts; without a willingness 
to admit new information, and concede that your opponent is making a fair 
point, and that science and reason matter, we’ll keep talking past each other, 
making common ground and compromise impossible.”

We have to nail down and defend the principle that facts matter.

 