
Is your business safe from hackers? Two thirds of small businesses have fallen 
victim to cybercrime in the past two years, costing the UK economy £5.26bn, 
according toresearch 
<http://www.fsb.org.uk/docs/default-source/fsb-org-uk/FSB-Cyber-Resilience-report-2016.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
 from the Federation of Small Businesses.

The majority of attacks are phishing and spear phishing, where cybercriminals 
target individuals, rather than computer systems.


As cybersecurity software has become more sophisticated, small businesses’s 
employees have become easier targets. A common method among hackers, for 
example, is to pose as a company boss in an email and persuade an employee to 
urgently wire company money to an account.

Meanwhile, the more traditional form of cybercrime, infecting company 
equipment with malware, is still a problem. It accounts for 29% of 
cyber-attacks experienced by small businesses.

Such attacks are destructive to businesses’s finances and reputation. So how 
can small business owners and staff learn to spot – and stop – them?

In this webchat, we’ll cover the common and emerging cybercrime trends and 
discuss how small businesses can avoid them – from staff training to employing 
ethical hackers to carry out fake attacks, identifying vulnerabilities.

Put your questions to our experts from 1-2pm on Monday 21 November.

Taking part is simple: just register to comment 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/register?skipConfirmation=true&INTCMP=HEADER_GU_REG&returnUrl=https%3A%2F%2Fmembership.theguardian.com%2Fjoin%2Ffriend%2Fenter-details>
. Once you’ve signed up, you can post your questions in the comments thread 
below this article. Alternatively, tweet@GdnSmallBiz 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSmallBiz> with your questions, or email them to 
smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:smallbusinessnetwork@theguardian.com> and we will put them to the panel 
for you. Comments are currently open and we welcome questions in advance.

Our panel

James Snook is deputy director, cyber and government security directorate in 
the Cabinet Office. He has held a number of roles across the cabinet office and 
HM Treasury. His career has focused on national security, and cyber security, 
especially, in recent years.

David Jeffrey is product director, fraud and security at Barclaycard 
<https://www.barclaycard.co.uk/business/news-and-insights> payment solutions. 
He is responsible for developing products and services, aimed to protect 
customers against fraud and payment security threats.

Jamie Randall is chief technology officer of IASME Consortium 
<https://www.iasme.co.uk/>, a company that helps organisations protect their 
information. IASME was closely involved in the development of cyber essentials, 
a basic information security standard developed with the government. Randall is 
also the founder of The Friendly Nerd, a startup specialising in cyber and data 
security training.

Jenny Radcliffe is an independent security consultant 
<http://jennyradcliffe.com/> and trainer who specialises in social engineering, 
in which people, rather than IT systems, are the target of cyber criminals. She 
trains businesses in how to protect themselves, and is the host of The Human 
Factor podcast.

Del Heppenstall leads KPMG’s <http://www.kpmg.com/uk/en/pages/default.aspx> 
cyber security teams across the UK’s southern and midlands regions. With nearly 
20 years’ experience in information protection and cyber security, his 
expertise ranges from security strategy through to technical security 
implementation.

Paula Barrett is head of data privacy and partner at Eversheds law firm 
<http://www.eversheds.com/global/en/index.page>. She has been advising on the 
legal aspects of data protection and cyber security for over 20 years.

Cindy Ng is a security and privacy expert at Varonis <https://www.varonis.com/>
, an American software company that offers software solutions to protect data 
from insider threats and cyberattacks.


Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.

 