
The transport secretary, Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, has been accused of 
showing “an astonishing lack of knowledge” of his brief after arguing in the 
House of Commons that cyclists do not count as road users.

Grayling, shown in a video last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/15/chris-grayling-sent-cyclist-flying-with-his-car-door-video-shows>
 knocking a rider off his bike by suddenly opening the door to his ministerial 
car outside Westminster, madethe comment  
<http://parliamentlive.tv/event/index/c229fd92-c029-49de-b7e0-a16d74252123?in=10:24:04&out=10:25:00>
 on Thursday morning.

Grayling was questioned by the Labour MP Daniel Zeichner about an interview he 
gave late last year 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/politics/chris-grayling-i-use-a-phone-to-buy-lunch-so-why-do-we-still-queue-for-rail-tickets-a3413296.html>
 warning that London’s new protected cycle lanes “perhaps cause too much of a 
problem for road users”. Were cyclists not also road users, Zeichner asked.

“What I would say to him, of course, is where you have cycle lanes, cyclists 
are the users of cycle lanes,” Grayling responded. “And there’s a road 
alongside – motorists are the road users, the users of the roads. It’s fairly 
straightforward, to be honest.”

The explanation prompted concern and bafflement from cycling groups and 
others, as well as Zeichner, wholater retweeted 
<https://twitter.com/WeAreCyclingUK/status/819566022298628096> a section of the 
1888 Local Government Act, which formalised the status of “bicycle, tricycles, 
velocipedes and other similar machines” as what were then still known as 
“carriages”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftransport-secretary-chris-grayling-knocks-over-cyclist-as-he-opens-his-car-door-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transport%20secretary%20Chris%20Grayling%20knocks%20over%20cyclist%20as%20he%20opens%20car%20door%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftransport-secretary-chris-grayling-knocks-over-cyclist-as-he-opens-his-car-door-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transport%20secretary%20Chris%20Grayling%20knocks%20over%20cyclist%20as%20he%20opens%20car%20door%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Ftransport-secretary-chris-grayling-knocks-over-cyclist-as-he-opens-his-car-door-video&media=>
Transport secretary Chris Grayling knocks over cyclist as he opens car door 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/15/transport-secretary-chris-grayling-knocks-over-cyclist-as-he-opens-his-car-door-video>
Chris Boardman, the former Olympic and Tour de France cyclist who is now 
British Cycling’s policy adviser, said he was amazed at the comments.

“The transport secretary’s comments demonstrate an astonishing lack of 
knowledge about how 7 million people regularly use the roads in this country,” 
he said. “I feel embarrassed for him. If he truly thinks the roads are not for 
cyclists then what am I paying my taxes for?”

Boardman pointed out that the government had committed to double cycling 
levels, but was still spending less than £1 per person per year on making it 
possible compared with more than £20 in bike-friendly nations such as the 
Netherlands and Denmark.

“If there was ever anyone who needed to actually get on a bike and hear about 
the true state of cycling infrastructure, it is Chris Grayling and I’d be 
delighted to go on a ride with him,” Boardman said.


A Department for Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
spokesman said Grayling had explained himself in parliament and the department 
had nothing to add to it.

Grayling faced criticism in December after footage was passed to the Guardian 
showing the incident in which his door knocked over cyclist Jaiqi Liu.

Grayling checked with Liu to see if he was unharmed, but he did not offer his 
details. He was only identified after another cyclist, whose on-bike camera 
filmed the incident, recognised the minister from coverage of the interview 
where he complained about bike lanes.

Ian Austin, another Labour MP, wrote to Grayling’s department asking why he 
did not pass his details to Liu.

The answer, from junior transport minister Andrew Jones 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-question/Commons/2016-12-19/58090/>
, said: “This was an unfortunate accident. My Rt Hon friend the secretary of 
state got out of the car, checked the cyclist was okay and waited until he was 
back on his feet. He spoke to the cyclist and apologised; they shook hands. No 
details were requested at the time by either party. The secretary of state has 
since been in contact with the cyclist and the matter is closed.”
 