
Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, will lead the UK delegation to the 
Cyprus peace talks in Geneva on Thursday, but if the talks go well it is 
possible Theresa May will also attend alongside the Turkish president,Recep 
Tayyip Erdoğan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/recep-tayyip-erdogan>, and 
the Greek prime minister, Alexis Tsipras.

Britain is critical to the talks on future security guarantees for the former 
British colony in the event of an agreement on other issues such as political 
equality, future boundaries and compensation.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
Britain’s prime minister spoke with Tsipras last week, and on Saturday with 
Erdoğan. Following the Erdoğan call, May’s office said the talks were “a real 
opportunity to secure a better future forCyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> and to guarantee stability in the 
wider region”.

May has kept in close touch with the talks process, seeking detailed memoranda 
from officials, but will only travel to Geneva if it is thought her presence 
could help clinch a framework agreement, the most British officials expect from 
the three-day meeting.

It would be a considerable feather in May’s cap if she was able to help 
preside over a peace settlement in the eastern Mediterranean, as the island has 
been afflicted by inter-communal tension ever since its independence from the 
UK in 1960.

Successive prime ministers and UN secretary generals have seen a peace deal 
elude them, most recently in 2004 when the then UN secretary general, Kofi 
Annan, saw his plan accepted in Turkish northern Cyprusbefore being heavily 
defeated by a referendum in Greek Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/apr/22/eu.cyprus>.

Britain regards an agreement as critical not just to end a 43-year 
post-colonial conflict, but also to improving wider Greek-Turkish cooperation 
on migration in the region.

An option exists for the Geneva talks to reconvene perhaps in a couple of 
weeks, but the British, along with the EU and UN, will be pressing the Turks 
and Greeks at least to reach a conclusion since the window for a referendum on 
the framework reunification agreement is relatively narrow.

The Greek-Cypriot government faces elections next year, and a referendum as 
early as April is feasible.

The UK, one of the three guarantor powers under the 1960 Zurich agreement that 
granted Cyprus independence, recognises that the outcome of the talks is highly 
unpredictable, and even the makeup and status of the delegations is up for 
discussion.

In the peace talks led by Annan in 2004, the UK offered to relinquish 49% – or 
117 sq km (45 sq miles) – of the territory its sovereign military bases hold in 
Cyprus, and the UK has repeated the offer in the hope that the release of land 
will make it easier for the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots to reach an 
agreement on land swaps.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fcyprus-peace-talks-theresa-may-ready-attend-deal-in-sight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e500f933996c034e5a5e89de0f443b391dfc2ee%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cyprus%20peace%20talks%3A%20Theresa%20May%20ready%20to%20attend%20if%20deal%20in%20sight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fcyprus-peace-talks-theresa-may-ready-attend-deal-in-sight%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cyprus%20peace%20talks%3A%20Theresa%20May%20ready%20to%20attend%20if%20deal%20in%20sight&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fcyprus-peace-talks-theresa-may-ready-attend-deal-in-sight%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e500f933996c034e5a5e89de0f443b391dfc2ee%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 A Tornado jet lands at RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus. Britain has offered to give up 
49% of the territory its military bases hold on the island. Photograph: Nick 
Ansell/PA 
The remainder of the military base – critical as an intelligence listening 
centre and much prized by the Americans – is not up for discussion in the 
talks, as the British claim the UK sovereignty of the base was agreed in the 
treaty founding Cyprus. British officials are confident that the issue of the 
British bases will not be raised at the summit.

But the future role of the UK as a security guarantor for the island will be 
at the heart of the talks.

The UK has said it is willing to be flexible about relinquishing this role if 
the other parties seek this. At present the UK, Turkey andGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> are guarantors, alongside a UN 
peacekeeping presence. But the Greek Cypriots would prefer the security 
guarantor role be handed to the EU now Cyprus is a member state. It is argued 
that the individual rights of Turks on the island are best protected through 
the European court of justice and a balanced constitution.

So far the Turkish Cypriots have insisted Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> must remain as a guarantor. It is 
possible Britain could offer it a greater role in the UN peacekeeping force.

Turkey has about 30,000 troops on the island, and no deal is likely unless the 
unpredictable Erdoğan agrees to a Turkish timetable for their drawdown and a 
pact on non-interference. Russia,increasingly close to Turkey on foreign policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/erdogan-russia-turkey-foreign-policy>
, has argued that Britain should abandon its guarantor status, along with 
Greece and Turkey.

The UK has been probing the Turks on security guarantees, but it is likely 
Erdoğan will wait for offers made on land swaps, compensation, political 
equality and EU funding.

The Turkish prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, said last month: “If there will 
be a solution in Cyprus, it must be a solution based on a just administration, 
a rotating presidency under which the rights of both people and property are 
respected and which assures Turkey’s active guarantorship.”

Although relations between the two communal leaders on the island are probably 
the best in the island’s history, that goodwill would have to be tested in a 
referendum. And no one in European politics knows more thanBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris> and Theresa May how unpredictable 
referendums can be.
 