
In the London of the early 1980s, when Zaha Hadid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/zaha-hadid>, who has died aged 65 
after a heart attack, first opened her own office in a small room in a 
redundant Victorian school in Clerkenwell, the idea that she might one day 
become one of the world’s most celebrated and successful architects would have 
seemed far-fetched. At a time when most architects were still under the lash of 
the Prince of Wales, camouflaging their work with a constipated brick and tile 
skin, or decorating their facades with fragments of postmodern confectionery, 
Hadid was not building anything. She was working night after night, essentially 
living in the drawings that flowed from her pen in an apparently unstoppable 
flood. They conjured up glimpses of a world she had imagined but which did not, 
as yet, exist. For those who didn’t get it, her work was seen as just too 
difficult. And she wasn’t going to try to ingratiate herself with those who did 
not understand her.

The most visible results of that period are a series of huge paintings that 
hinted at what she might build if she had the chance. They did not depict 
anything that could be conventionally identified as a building, but instead 
showed jagged landscapes in which walls and roofs, inside and outside, ground 
plan and cross section, merged seamlessly one into another. They were more like 
Piranesi dreamscapes than rational proposals for orthogonal buildings. But 
these were not abstractions or fantasies: they were the product of Hadid’s 
exploration of new ways to imagine how space might work, inspired in part by 
the drawings of the Russian artist Kazimir Malevich, whom she discovered when 
she was still a student.

Zaha Hadid's 10 best buildings in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-10-best-buildings-in-pictures>
The most famous of them were made for the competition she won in 1983 to 
design a resort complex in Hong Kong, known asThe Peak 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/the-peak-leisure-club/>. A series of 
overlapping cantilevers jutted out into space, providing layers of 
accommodation, bars and restaurants, as well as hotel rooms. The eminent 
engineer Peter Rice, who had worked on the Pompidou Centre in Paris, endorsed 
them as entirely buildable, but the client turned out not to have the cash. It 
was a failure to launch that is common in most architectural careers, where 
unbuilt schemes outnumber built projects by a large margin. But in Hadid’s case 
it was the start of what became a persistent theme for her critics. Hong Kong 
was not built; neither, 10 years later, was theCardiff Bay Opera House 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/cardiff-bay-opera-house/>. Most 
recently, her competition-winning design for Tokyo’s Olympic stadium wasscrapped
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/17/japan-scraps-zaha-hadids-tokyo-olympic-stadium-design>
. She was blamed for all these, unfairly attacked for her personality as well 
as her competence.

The ideas that she was working through in the 1980s were most convincingly 
realised in the Heydar Aliyev centre, thecultural complex 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/heydar-aliyev-centre/> that she built 
in Baku, Azerbaijan, 30 years later. It resembles a gravity-defying snow-white 
iceberg that erupts from the ground like a twisting rollercoaster. And unlike 
some of her projects in which corners have been cut by builders in a hurry, 
Baku was beautifully finished, inside and out. Her critics saw this building as 
the glorification of a repressive and sinisterly authoritarian regime. For 
Hadid, it was the product of the negotiation with power that has always been 
part of the practice of architecture.

The Guardian view on Zaha Hadid: reluctant queen of the 3D curve | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/01/the-guardian-view-on-zaha-hadid-reluctant-queen-of-the-3d-curve>
Hadid belonged to the last generation of architects to work with tracing paper 
and T-squares. She talked about the care with which she would use a Rotring pen 
and a ruler to draw. The trick, she said, was to ensure that there was no 
overlap when she joined two lines to make a sharp point at the corner of a 
rectangle. Despite these beginnings, she built a modern architectural office 
equipped with ranks of computers, and sophisticated parametric modelling 
software, in which rows of assistants sit working at screens plugged into 
headphones.

She was able to navigate a huge jump in the scale of her office. When she 
started out, a large architectural practice was 25 people. With her 
architectural partnerPatrik Schumacher, 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/people/patrik-schumacher/> she built a practice of 
400. She took over the entire school building in which she had started, spread 
into a second building, and had plans to set up in the US. It is an operation 
that will certainly continue to make a mark: as Schumacher once said, the only 
way to be relevant against a background in which architecture is being defined 
by ever larger buildings is for an architectural practice to grow.

Skyscrapers and airports do not get built by lone geniuses; they require 
depths of complex administrative and professional expertise. Hadid was able to 
create one of the world’s most important architectural practices, one that, at 
the time of her death, was working in China, the Middle East, America and 
Russia. She built an extraordinary range of buildings: the Olympic Aquatics 
Centre in London, the Maxxi art museum in Rome (the RIBA Stirling prize winner 
in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/04/zaha-hadid-maxxi-stirling-prize>
), a car factory for BMW in Leipzig, Germany, a skyscraper complex in Beijing, 
an opera house in Guangzhou, anexhibition centre in the middle of Seoul 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/dongdaemun-design-park-plaza/>. She was 
asked to work on projects from Libya to Saudi Arabia, and even on the Central 
Bank of Iraq.

Zaha Hadid: creator of ambitious wonders – and a fair share of blunders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/31/zaha-hadid-maverick-architect-designer-appreciation>
She was able to make architecture that, though it had its roots in what was 
once called the avant garde, was genuinely popular. When the Design Museum in 
London gave Hadid her first British retrospective in 2007, it was the most 
successful architecture show the museum had ever staged. She went with 
remarkable speed from being regarded as unbuildably radical to the mainstream. 
In 2004 she became the first woman to win the Pritzker prize for architecture 
and this year the first to be awarded the RIBA royal gold medal in her own 
right. She was appointed CBE in 2002, and in 2012 she was made a dame.

Daughter of Mohammad Hadid and Wajiha al-Sabunji, she was born in Baghdad. Her 
father was a liberal politician who sent Zaha to a convent school despite being 
a Muslim. One of her brothers,Foulath 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/foulath-hadid-writer-and-expert-on-arab-affairs-8207992.html>
, became an Oxford academic – Zaha later builta library for his college, St 
Antony’s 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/middle-east-centre-st-antonys-college/>
. She grew up in a secular, modernising Baghdad at a time when Le Corbusier had 
been commissioned to build a sports complex, Frank Lloyd Wright was working on 
a cultural centre, and Walter Gropius had built a university campus. These were 
projects that she acknowleged might have inspired her choice of career, and 
certainly gave her a sense of the transformative power of architecture.

Later she went to an English boarding school, gained a maths degree at the 
American University of Beirut, and then, most importantly, studied at the 
Architectural Association school in London. The AA had become a hothouse, a 
licensed opposition in which dissidents and dreamers created an architecture, 
mainly on paper, that had nothing to do with the bleak architectural climate of 
the time.

The school in those days was led by Alvin Boyarsky, whom Hadid always cited as 
one of her most important influences. Her two most important teachers, 
apparently at the opposite ends of the architectural spectrum, wereLeon Krier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jun/28/communities.guardiansocietysupplement>
, who went on to become a close adviser to the Prince of Wales, and Rem 
Koolhaas, who uses the world brutal as a compliment. For many years, both Krier 
and Koolhaas presented building as a kind of sell-out. Hadid matched their 
reluctance to compromise but was always determined to build.

Hadid was given her first chance to make architecture on her own terms by Rolf 
Fehlbaum, owner of the Vitra furniture company. She designed a small building 
in Weil am Rhein, on the German border with Switzerland, to house the fire 
engine for the company’s volunteer fire brigade. It was a dynamic composition 
based on seemingly razor-sharp shards of concrete. When the fire brigade 
disbanded, the building was converted for a new role as part of the company’s 
museum. But the changes gave rise to an entirely inaccurate story that its 
shape had made it impractical.

As time went on, her buildings became less characterised by sharp lines, and 
turned more fluid, often taking forms that looked like spilt mercury. The 
change was in part a reflection of the transformation of the building industry 
made possible by new digital modelling programmes and new technologies. The 
engineers she worked with on such projects as thePhaeno Science centre 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/phaeno-science-centre/>, in Wolfsburg, 
Germany, were doing things with steel that would have been impossible a 
generation earlier. She was ready to explore the design of the smallest of 
objects, from cutlery to wine bottles, to the largest urban masterplans.

Her breakthrough project in Britain should have been the Cardiff Bay Opera 
House, a commission that she won against 400 entrants in an international 
competition in 1994. She proposed a design that ingeniously managed to be 
appropriately monumental for a national institution, but at the same time 
provided an injection of urbanity to what at the time was an empty wasteland. 
It was torpedoed by the Millennium Commission which, when invited to fund it, 
hilariously declared it to be insufficiently distinctive. Years later, it was 
replaced by an unmemorable design that had little to recommend it – except that 
it was not by Hadid.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fzaha-hadid-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca852576b9037530ae9885e68a7014dc7e09241%2F315_0_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dame%20Zaha%20Hadid%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fzaha-hadid-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dame%20Zaha%20Hadid%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fapr%2F01%2Fzaha-hadid-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ca852576b9037530ae9885e68a7014dc7e09241%2F315_0_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
 Zaha Hadid was celebrated for her fluid buildings, which often took forms 
resembling spilt mercury. Photograph: Brigitte Lacombe/Zaha Hadid Architects 
Hadid was caricatured by those who did not know her as difficult, and too 
ready to build for despotic regimes. The most bizarre claim was made by Martin 
Filler in the New York Review of Books in 2014. He suggested that many workers 
had died on the site of one of her projects for a stadium in Qatar. It was an 
accusation that bothmagazine and writer were forced to retract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/aug/26/zaha-hadid-magazine-critic-issues-retraction>
 when it was pointed out that work had not yet started. Nevertheless the claim 
was repeated by an inadequately briefed BBC interviewer. In what was presented 
as an interview to celebrate her nomination for theroyal gold medal for 
architecture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/23/zaha-hadid-from-baghdad-global-ubiquity-and-the-riba-gold-medal>
, an honour that involved having her name carved in the walls of the RIBA, she 
wasasked about the deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/ng-interactive/2015/sep/24/zaha-hadid-radio-4-interview-sarah-montague-qatar>
. Hadid rebutted the claim, andlost her composure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/sep/24/architect-zaha-hadid-cuts-short-bbc-today-programme-interview>
 only when asked why it was that people thought she was difficult.

Hadid was not afraid to show her feelings. When she did not like what an 
employee, or even a client, had done, she did not hold back from telling them 
what she thought. But when she liked someone, she was an unconditional, warm 
and loyal friend, with a sharp wit. Dinner with Hadid was like a session with 
Dorothy Parker at the round table. She was an accomplished mimic, with an 
interest in gossip. Those who left the table too early ran the risk that they 
would become the subject of the conversation.

She was fascinated by fashion, and had a spectacular dress sense, quickly 
graduating from Issey Miyake to Miuccia Prada. She celebrated her birthdays in 
style. One year, she laid on a display of synchronised swimming – a skill in 
which she suggested she had once been proficient – in the Olympic pool that she 
had designed. Another year, she produced belly dancers, and a dining table 
running from one end of the Burlington Arcade to the other.

Hadid’s architectural output reflected the shifting global landscape, which at 
the close of the 20th century was moving beyond northwest Europe and America, 
where modern architecture began. She was one of the first to build on a large 
scale in China, where she completed two extraordinary complexes in Beijing, 
involving a mix of high-rises and lower blocks.

She would, however, certainly have liked to build more in Britain. Her Olympic 
Aquatics Centre, now shorn of the unsightly banks of spectator seating grafted 
on for the duration of the Games, has been transformed into a bustling and 
successful neighbourhood swimming pool. There is theMaggie’s Centre on the edge 
of Kirkcaldy <http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/maggies-centre-fife/>, the 
Glasgow Riverside Museum of Transport 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/glasgow-riverside-museum-of-transport/>
on the banks of the Clyde, a school in south London (theEvelyn Grace academy 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/evelyn-grace-academy/>, Brixton, which 
won theStirling prize in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/oct/01/stirling-prize-zaha-hadid-brixton-school>
), and arestaurant and exhibition space 
<http://www.zaha-hadid.com/architecture/serpentine-sackler-gallery/> for the 
Serpentine Gallery, London.

Throughout her career, she was a dedicated teacher, enthused by the energy of 
the young. She was not keen to be characterised as a woman architect, or an 
Arab architect. She was simply an architect.

She is survived by a brother, Haytham.

• Zaha Hadid, architect, born 31 October 1950; died 31 March 2016
 