
Even now, days later, the very thought of Daniel Barenboim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/daniel-barenboim> leaves me exhausted. Over 
the course of a week, I trotted behind as he charged across the world’s widest 
avenue – the Avenido 9 de Julio in Buenos Aires, 110 metres and four red lights 
across – wafting a large Cuban at the oncoming traffic. I was press-ganged into 
his campaign to eat more pudding than the waiters thought absolutely wise. Only 
one of us came out a happier man. Even the adjectives were explosive: in 
Barenboim-world, nothing is merely fine – it is “fun-TUSS-tic”. At 73, he is 
among the most venerated of all classical musicians. He is also as relentless 
as a stag weekend.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07cc1bda9e440caa267e0ef37339daa5d0dd9260%2F0_255_1920_1918%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07cc1bda9e440caa267e0ef37339daa5d0dd9260%2F0_255_1920_1918%2F1920.jpg>
 Barenboim aged 13 at his Royal Festival Hall debut in 1956. 
“To be famous young and to make fame last – the secret of combining the two is 
glandular,”Kenneth Tynan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/arts/critic/feature/0,,567652,00.html> wrote of 
Noël Coward <http://www.noelcoward.com/>. “It depends on energy.” The same goes 
for Barenboim. Born in Buenos Aires in 1943, he gave his first piano recital 
there at seven, was making records by 11, anddebuted, age 13, at the Royal 
Festival Hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/gallery/2016/jan/14/daniel-barenboim-60-years-in-london-in-pictures#img-1>
. At the end of this decade, he will mark 70 years on stage. The celebration 
plans are already being drawn up.

The rest is mythology. How the great Wilhelm Furtwängler declared, “The 
11-year-old Barenboim is a phenomenon.”His marriage at 24 to cellist Jacqueline 
Du Pré 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/from-the-archive-blog/2015/dec/01/jacqueline-du-pre-daniel-barenboim-interview-1969>
 and their stint as a golden couple, before multiple sclerosis forced her to 
give up playing. The friendship the Argentine-Israeli pianist and conductor 
formedwith the American-Palestinian literary theorist Edward Said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/apr/05/classicalmusicandopera.artsfeatures>
 that led to them founding theWest-Eastern Divan Orchestra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/aug/17/features.review57>, a 
forum for “Israeli, Palestinian and other Arab musicians” tomeet, talk and play 
alongside each other 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2003/aug/25/classicalmusicandopera.proms2003>
.

But to meet the conductor in Buenos Aires, hammering out the programme that he 
will bring tothe Proms on 17 August 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/proms-2016/prom-43-martha-argerich-daniel-barenboim-and-the-west-eastern-divan-orchestra/>
 was to see something less stately and more volatile. It was to witness how a 
legend is maintained.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c508e67d9f2b5c12f7bc4d8ac2dd977ddc6c6cb%2F26_0_1873_1872%2F1873.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6c508e67d9f2b5c12f7bc4d8ac2dd977ddc6c6cb%2F26_0_1873_1872%2F1873.jpg>
 Daniel Barenboim and Jacqueline du Pré at their London home in 1973. 
Photograph: Erich Auerbach/Getty Images 
My introduction began at 10.30 sharp on a Tuesday morning. The musicians of the
West-Eastern Divan Orchestra <http://www.west-eastern-divan.org/> are gathered 
onstage at the Teatro Colon opera house. In jeans and sweatshirts, the eldest 
among them were still only half the age of Barenboim, who perched on his 
conductor’s podium in a crisp black shirt and navy trousers. He’s been 
performing here since 1960.

They began with Siegfried’s Funeral March 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=yXonlYzpT-0> from Wagner’s Götterdämmerung. 
And for the rest of the morning, they just kept beginning. Over and over. The 
first few low bars of menace would fill the hall, then the conductor would 
shout: “STOP STOP STOP. It must be absolutely claustrophobic. EEE-vil!”

Again.

“STOP. What is with you today?”

Again.


“STOP.” It had not been apparent before how suitably built Barenboim is to 
convey anger. But his hooded eyes were flashing, the barrel chest and jutting 
arms thrust out.


The cellists were beaten up for a full 20 minutes. Accusations of laziness 
were flung around, of musicians having skipped “hotel-room practice”.


Over half an hour Barenboim did not allow the orchestra more than 30 seconds 
into the March. In two days’ time, this piece would be performed here as part 
of a sequence of Wagner excerpts stitched into a kind of symphony. “We haven’t 
even begun to hear how it’s going to sound!” he bellowed, as if this was news.


Again.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db85d6179785b47c540fdb5e4f2e09c512053ee%2F0_53_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2db85d6179785b47c540fdb5e4f2e09c512053ee%2F0_53_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Barenboim rehearsing with the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra at the Teatro 
Colon. Photograph: Alejandro Kirchuk for the Guardian 
“STOP.”


The longer this went on, the more the ensemble wilted. After two weeks of 
concerts and rehearsals, they were already “really exhausted,” one said to me. 
“A lot of music in the head and a lot of problems.” Finally, on being allowed 
to progress on to the next few bars, the players burst into an ovation of 
pent-up frustration.

“The greatness of a musician is measured by the degree of fanaticism he brings 
to his playing,” writes Barenboim inhis memoirs A Life in Music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/aug/23/nonfiction.music.books>. If, as 
a violinist, you fail to produce just the right accent on a note: “It should 
cause you almost physical pain.”

Now, at one such pang of pain, Barenboim wheeled around to his assistant, who 
had led earlier rehearsals. Two days ago, the shaven-headed and sharp-suited 
Julien had sat on the stage as a page-turner in Barenboim’s duet withMartha 
Argerich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/26/staatskapelle-berlin-daniel-barenboim-martha-argerich-lisa-batiashvili-royal-festival-hall-review>
. As the two legendary pianists sprang through Brahms’ Haydn Variations, Julien 
had leaned forward to flip the score – only for Barenboim to slap him away, in 
front of 3,000 people. This time, the assistant sat a few rows back in the dark 
of the stalls.

Daniel Barenboim: unstuff your shirts
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/apr/17/daniel-barenboim> 
Evidently, not far enough back. “JULIEN,” Barenboim yelled. “What have you 
been doing? They have no clue.” Throughout the rehearsal, the polymath had 
hopped between English, Spanish, Italian and French – but for 24-carat 
bollockings he preferred German. His shout “keine Ahnung” carried through all 
seven storeys of the gilt and red plush of the Colon.

Visiting that week was a conductor at the national conservatory, Rodrigo 
Gonzalez Jacob. From his box seat, the 35-year-old marvelled at the last of a 
previous epoch of conductors. Like the late Georg Solti and Herbert von 
Karajan, Barenboim had made his name during the long boom of the record 
industry, when classical music could command private budgets on top of public 
handouts and the term “maestro” was used without irony.

“Some in my generation see him as despotic, monarchical,” Gonzalez Jacob said. 
“I don’t think any musicians would stand me screaming at them the whole 
rehearsal, the whole day.” But then, he wasn’t Barenboim. “I’ve learned more in 
a week of watching than I have in my last five masterclasses.”

That Tuesday, the session concluded three-and-a-half hours later with the 
warning: “I’m afraid you won’t be ready in time.” Musicians headed back to 
their hotel for a short rest, before another long rehearsal in the afternoon. 
Barenboim now had to endure a Guardian interview. On learning I was of Bengali 
origin, the lifelong friend of Mumbai’s Zubin Mehta regaled me with his 
headwaggling Indian accent. “Kul-kutta. Vot are you saying?” He has somehow a 
reputation as a skilled mimic, but this was Peter Sellers. Then came another 
voice: “Waare’s me boonch of flaars?” This, he assured me, was “the North 
Coon-try” accent of opera singer Dame Janet Baker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7037d90d39b74f456eb729ac887cb8bdeb8547d7%2F1661_1137_2539_1523%2F2539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7037d90d39b74f456eb729ac887cb8bdeb8547d7%2F1661_1137_2539_1523%2F2539.jpg>
 Barenboim speaks with Aditya Chakrabortty backstage at the Teatro Colon. 
Photograph: Alejandro Kirchuk for the Guardian 
In the five-minute walk between theatre and restaurant, the classical musician 
was stopped four times by strangers who wanted to shake his hand, touch his 
arm, thank him. One woman strode up, clapping loudly. “Muy bueno! Muy BUE-no! 
Felicitaciones.”

It was near here that Barenboim’s own performing career began. On Fridays, he 
would play chamber concerts at a businessman’s house. “I loved to go mostly 
because his wife made the best apple strudel.” There, aged seven, he met an 
eight-year-old Argerich. “We used to play under the piano.”

Both parents were piano teachers, and would take him to see the great 
musicians touring Buenos Aires. The young Barenboim saw Furtwängler, violinist 
Adolf Busch and virtuoso pianist Arthur Rubinstein. “You used to queue for 
three days and two nights for tickets for Rubinstein. People stayed in the 
queue for the whole day.” The child prodigy enjoyed a “double life. I would go 
to school, come home and play football, then give a concert.”

Some see no point in the orchestra’s philosophical dialogues: 'There’s a lot 
of heat, but they never resolve anything'

As Julien and the cellists would be glad to hear, he also committed plenty of 
his own gaffes. Take his first-ever recital in Britain, in Bournemouth. The 
name was rolled around his mouth, like a glug of Malbec: Bawn-mouf. He was into 
the final strait of a Mozart concerto in E-flat and the “last movements of 
Mozart concertos are sometimes quite similar in rhythm and speed. Even the 
melodies.” All of a sudden, “I mistakenly landed in another concerto, this time 
in B-flat.” Luckily, his conductor had all Barenboim’s humour and none of his 
temper. “He said, ‘It’s OK – as long as you don’t charge double for playing two 
different pieces.’”

Having picked the restaurant – a barbecue with a giant firepit in the front 
window and a corrugated-iron ceiling – Barenboim was now ordering platters of 
meat, pumpkin and chips. Even as he did so, waiters kept bringing complimentary 
dishes: metal trays of grilled pork and empanadas. While forking food towards 
me and his chief executive, Tabaré Perlas, the conductor discussed the members 
of the Divan Orchestra. He and Perlas could name all 100 of them, from more 
than 10 countries. They told me where X lived, whether Y was clever. Barenboim 
works with four orchestras regularly, but it is the Divan musicians that he 
calls “my people”. While touring, they live in “The Sovereign Independent 
Republic of the West-Eastern Divan”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkq3aRicsvH0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkq3aRicsvH0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dkq3aRicsvH0&media=>
When it began in 1999, “the Palestinians from Nazareth had never met the 
Palestinians from the territories, let alone an Egyptian or a Syrian.” As 
Barenboim has written, the hope is that by “hearing the painfulness of the 
other side for the first time” they “think about the past and the suffering 
that has lasted so long.” Through sharing a music stand, occupier and occupied 
could share their histories and their politics. It is an idea that has 
captivated journalists, film-makers and audiences. Yet over 16 years, the Divan 
has changed from a youth orchestra to one with its fair share of 
thirtysomethings with less time and patience for seminar-room discussions. 
“They need to check on their own children,” one member told me. “Or get a bit 
more sleep”.

I find these theological states very, very dangerous – in this respect Israel 
and Iran are twin brothers

Even more striking is the cooled enthusiasm among the musicians themselves. 
Some, especially those from Israel, would still vouch for how having colleagues 
from neighbouring territories has made them more loving of their neighbours. 
But others saw no point in the orchestra’s hallmark philosophical dialogues: 
“There’s a lot of heat, but they never resolve anything.”


While admiring of Barenboim, Palestinian violinist Tyme Khleifi 
<http://www.west-eastern-divan.org/news/musician-spotlight-tyme-khleifi/> 
acknowledged that whenever tensions rose in the Middle East, they were 
magnified in the orchestra. She recalled the Lebanon war of 2006. “The Lebanese 
musicians couldn’t come and the Syrian musicians weren’t allowed to come by 
their government – out of solidarity with Lebanon. So who did you have? A few 
Palestinians, a few Egyptians [compared to many Israelis] … even the numbers 
were imbalanced. There were people whose families were getting bombed on the 
Lebanese side; there were people whose families were getting bombed on the 
Israeli side. While all of this was going on, we were rehearsing. The 
atmosphere was very charged. In Arab culture, music is for celebration. You 
don’t play music at funerals. And so there were questions about what we were 
doing here, whether we should be playing at all.” Eventually, Barenboim 
persuaded the ensemble to play as a “simple statement”.

Reading that story, a cynic could say it shows up Barenboim as a latter-day 
Quixote. Why does he keep trying to reconcile the irreconcilable? Others might 
find evidence of moral courage, cleaving to an ideal even as others ditch it.

Holding both Israeli and Palestinian nationalities, and owning a house in 
Jerusalem, Barenboim has got in ever-deeper trouble in Israel. Its president
accused him of “cultural rape” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/jul/09/ewenmacaskill> for performing 
music by Wagner, an antisemite, during a concert there. A government minister 
called him “a real Jew hater”. For his part, the musician has called the 
Israeli occupation of Gaza and the West Bank “immoral” and backed a boycott of 
the Israeli government.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5defb7a938789758464baee1999995a02f43ad70%2F0_75_1972_1183%2F1972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5defb7a938789758464baee1999995a02f43ad70%2F0_75_1972_1183%2F1972.jpg>
 Barenboim conducts the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra, rehearsing ahead of their 
Proms debut in 2003. Photograph: Sheila Rock/EMI Classics 
He admits to “one cousin” in Buenos Aires who is “very upset with me”. His 
voice takes on a pompousness: “I am a Jewish traitor! Champion of the 
Palestinian cause!”

Germany must talk straight with Israel | Daniel Barenboim
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/09/germany-israel-history-peace-daniel-barenboim>
Last year, he announced plans to take the Berlin Staatskappelle to Tehran. 
That provoked fury in Israel –before being blocked by Iran on the grounds that 
it would not grant entry to an artist of “the Zionist regime” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/01/iran-bars-daniel-barenboim-israeli-citizenship>
. To me, Barenboim claimed: “We’re still planning to go. The concert was not 
cancelled, only postponed”. But how did he feel under political artillery from 
both sides?

“The Iranian government still denies the Holocaust – so you can’t take them 
seriously. And the Israeli government spreads rumours and disinformation about 
Iran – because it needs to for the creation of panic. I find these theological 
states – and in this respect Israel and Iran are twin brothers – very, very 
dangerous.”

To contrast with that polarisation, Barenboim told a story that began in 1966, 
with him playing the Prague Spring festival. When he got to the stage door, two 
young men were waiting. They were from Syria and they wanted to see his 
rehearsals. “I’d never met a Syrian in my life.”

They had coffee and hung out, “a wonderful time”. Then they asked for tickets 
to the next day’s performance, featuring Arthur Rubinstein with the Czech 
Philharmonic. Barenboim, who was leaving before the concert, could do nothing. 
But he did take them in to the rehearsal, then went backstage to mention them 
to Rubinstein. At first, the legendary pianist thought this was another of 
Barenboim’s “silly jokes”, before getting excited: “I’ve never met an Arab 
musician!” All four went for lunch, before Barenboim had to go.

Music can teach you about life, about how to make passion and discipline 
co-exist

When the West-Eastern Divan orchestra formed in 1999, seven Syrians joined. “I 
was so curious. How did they manage to come? For Syrians it was against the law 
to have any contact with Israelis.” He got talking to two “pretty girls” and 
“after a little flirt”, one of them said, “Sooll-key”. What was Sooll-key?

She tried again: “Soulkhy. He met you in Prague.”

One of those young men waiting at the stage door had gone on to become 
director of one of the most prestigious conservatories in the Middle East. 
Thirty-three years later, he wrote to the Syrian minister for culture about a 
workshop for young musicians in Germany. No word of Israeli involvement, just 
an assurance of Mr Barenboim’s reputation and a request for a few students to 
go. “Can you believe that? After 33 years.”

More than a happy ending, it is a tale of the triumph of Barenboimian virtues: 
improvised cultural exchange, institution-building and a bit of cheek. “I don’t 
consider myself a political person – I don’t try to make contacts or get the 
cellular number of a minister,” he says.

But he can do politics – and he can win. Later that week, a violinist from 
Damascus, Nouras Hanana, told of how he had heard from Barenboim that he had 
been lobbying the government of Argentina to take in Syrian refugees. “I wanted 
to hug him,” he said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04f5b42a929031808f421520ed0cce2c3511fcfe%2F0_164_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04f5b42a929031808f421520ed0cce2c3511fcfe%2F0_164_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Daniel Barenboim conducts the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra at the Teatro 
Colon. Photograph: Alejandro Kirchuk for the Guardian 
Barenboim confirmed that he had rung the new president of Argentina, Mauricio 
Macri, straight after his election victory in late November. The call was also 
on behalf of Martha Argerich, he said, since both their grandparents had 
benefited from the generosity of Argentina in accepting refugees and immigrants.

Macri came to Berlin in July, when Barenboim pressed him again. In the 
conductor’s telling, the president said it was “a little problematic” but that 
“I think we can do 3,000”. (Argentina’s Foreign Office confirmed that Macri and 
Barenboim met in Berlin, but would not provide details of the conversation.) 
That same week, Buenos Aires announced it would accept 3,000 Syrians. Amid 
rehearsals at the Colon, Barenboim had also visited foreign minister Susana 
Malcorra. It is hard to think of another classical musician anywhere in the 
world who would have put in such an effort – or been taken seriously by a 
country’s leadership.

Barenboim still boils over with plans. He wants to tackle the gulf between a 
class of musicians who are technically skilled but ignorant of their society, 
and a wider society that can’t understand classical music. This autumn his 
Barenboim-Said Academy in Berlin begins teaching a degree course in music, 
coupled with twice-weekly philosophy lessons. He is also looking for a primary 
school in Germany to follow a programme of music education set by him and the 
Berlin Staatskapelle.

There comes a point when your brain wants to think of tomorrows and your body 
reminds you of yesterday

He has already opened a music kindergarten in Berlin and Ramallah. “But when 
the children go to primary school, most of them forget.” After that will come a 
secondary school “so if you are an intelligent parent” your child can be taught 
music “from day one of kindergarten until the Baccalaureate at 18”. Barenboim 
has two sons with his second wife, Elena Bashkirova: the youngest, Michael, is 
a successful violinist; the eldest, David used to manage a German hip-hop 
outfit. They all live in Berlin.

“Music can teach you about life, about how to make passion and discipline 
co-exist,” cries the maestro. It all comes back to girls – again. “You get 
madly in love with somebody and you have to continue working and [he claps] it 
doesn’t work! Then the passion is gone, the girl disappears and you are left 
only with the work. Then you get only discipline and you get dry and in a bad 
mood. But in music you cannot play two notes without learning the co-existence 
of passion and discipline.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F108adf8c1db3d836b65a06918050fc331669a761%2F0_262_2717_3938%2F2717.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Daniel%20Barenboim%20on%20ageing%2C%20mistakes%20and%20why%20Israel%20and%20Iran%20are%20twin%20brothers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fdaniel-barenboim-on-ageing-mistakes-and-why-israel-and-iran-are-twin-brothers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F108adf8c1db3d836b65a06918050fc331669a761%2F0_262_2717_3938%2F2717.jpg>
 ‘You cannot play two notes without learning the co-existence of passion and 
discipline’ … Daniel Barenboim. Photograph: Alejandro Kirchuk for the Guardian 
Undercutting all this is a newer fragility. Throughout the week he complains 
of being “shattered”. He was driving himself as hard as the young musicians, 
who in turn told stories of how at one rehearsal he had fallen off the podium 
and cut his leg. At one performance, he had shouted so hard at the violins that 
his conductor’s baton had snapped and he gouged his own hand.

Asked about his hopes for the future, his first response is: “One thing only: 
I don’t want to age in such a way that the quality of my life is reduced. There 
comes a point when you have a separation between brain and body – a brain who 
wants to think of tomorrows and the body who reminds you of yesterday.” He 
talks repeatedly of how he can no longer put on his socks standing up. More 
than once I found myself inspecting him as if he were an elderly relative, for 
early warnings of issues to be dealt with. This cut on his cheek, that gash 
running behind his ear.

But on my last night, he and the orchestra are performing to a packed house. I 
watch backstage. Before going on to perform Liszt, Martha Argerich stomps on 
the red carpet and growls. In between turns, Barenboim perches on a stool, 
observing in semi-seriousness to me “the finest girls” in the orchestra. Then 
the Wagner and the concert are all over and he comes off stage to a standing 
ovation. On the other side of the curtain are nearly 3,000 people – from the 
fur-wearer in the stalls to the T-shirt-clad up in the cheap seats – all on 
their feet applauding this man of a more expansive, optimistic time. He slides 
off the stool and goes back on stage for another encore.

•Daniel Barenboim conducts the West-Eastern Divan Orchestra at the Proms on 17 
August 
<http://www.royalalberthall.com/tickets/proms/proms-2016/prom-43-martha-argerich-daniel-barenboim-and-the-west-eastern-divan-orchestra/>
. The concert will be live on Radio 3 and online, and available on iPlayer for 
30 days.

• This article was amended on 14 December 2016 to correct the name of one of 
Daniel Barenboim’s sons.
 