
Until the last, David Bowie, who has died of cancer, was still capable of 
springing surprises. His latest album,Blackstar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/07/david-bowie-blackstar-review-a-spellbinding-break-with-his-past>
, appeared on his 69th birthday on 8 January, and showed that his gift for 
making dramatic statements as well as challenging, disturbing music had not 
deserted him.

Throughout the 1970s, Bowie was a trailblazer of musical trends and pop 
fashion. Having been a late-60s mime and cabaret entertainer, he evolved into a 
singer-songwriter, and a pioneer of glam-rock, then veered into what he called 
“plastic soul”, before moving to Berlin to create innovative electronic music.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42faaf3b5e5e1926179a8241cef8d894afc649d9%2F0_592_2707_2337%2F2707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42faaf3b5e5e1926179a8241cef8d894afc649d9%2F0_592_2707_2337%2F2707.jpg>
 Davie Jones in 1965, playing a Framus 12-string acoustic guitar. Photograph: 
CA/Redferns 
In subsequent decades his influence became less pervasive, but he remained 
creatively restless and constantly innovative across a variety of media. His 
capacity for mixing brilliant changes of sound and image underpinned by a 
genuine intellectual curiosity is rivalled by few in pop history. Blackstar was 
proof that this curiosity had not diminished in his later career.

Bowie was born David Robert Jones in Brixton, south London. His mother, Peggy, 
had met his father, John, after he was demobilised from second world war 
service in the Royal Fusiliers. John subsequently worked for the Barnardo’s 
children’s charity. They married in September 1947, eight months after David’s 
birth, when John’s divorce from his first wife, Hilda, became absolute.

In 1953 the family moved to Bromley, Kent, where David attended Burnt Ash 
junior school and showed aptitude in singing and playing the recorder. Later, 
after he passed his 11-plus exam, he turned down a place at a grammar school 
and went to Bromley technical high school and studied art, music and design. 
His half-brother, Terry Burns, nearly a decade older than David, introduced him 
to jazz musicians, such asJohn Coltrane <http://www.johncoltrane.com/> and 
Miles Davis <https://www.milesdavis.com/>, and in 1961 David’s mother bought 
him a plastic saxophone, introducing him to an instrument that would become a 
recurring ingredient in his music.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%E2%80%98An%20extraordinary%2C%20alien%2C%20otherworldly%20creature%E2%80%99%3A%20David%20Bowie%201947-2016%20-%20video%20tribute&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute&media=>
‘An extraordinary, alien, otherworldly creature’: David Bowie 1947-2016 - video 
tribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-1947-2016-video-tribute>
After a 1962 schoolyard punch-up, the pupil in David’s left eye remained 
permanently dilated, having the serendipitous effect of lending him a vaguely 
unearthly appearance (the thrower of the punch,George Underwood 
<http://www.georgeunderwood.com/>, remained a close friend and later designed 
Bowie’s album artwork).

At 15, David formed his first band, the Kon-rads, a primitive rock’n’roll 
combo that contained a fluctuating number of members, including Underwood. He 
quickly became disillusioned with his band’s lack of ambition and quit to form 
a new outfit, the blues-influenced King Bees. They released a single calledLiza 
Jane <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KNNfqh-iJXs>, but when it disappeared 
without trace, David jumped ship again and joined the Manish Boys. Named after 
a Muddy Waters track, they too were blues-orientated. Their singleI Pity the 
Fool <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bUXj2aZPXrA> proved no more 
chart-friendly than Liza Jane had done, after which the restless Davy Jones was 
on the move once more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e53806c44ce5666554e24afe5658f2d535215f1%2F0_294_2218_2753%2F2218.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e53806c44ce5666554e24afe5658f2d535215f1%2F0_294_2218_2753%2F2218.jpg>
 A promotional shoot for the Kon-rads in 1963. Photograph: Roy Ainsworth/V&A/PA 
His next port of call was the Lower Third, an R&B band from Margate, Kent. The 
group thought they were auditioning for a singer and equal member, but once 
they had hired David, they were taken aback when he issued a press statement 
saying: “This is to inform you of the existence of Davie [sic] Jones and the 
Lower Third.” Moreover, David, abetted by his new manager Ralph Horton, a 
former tour manager for the Moody Blues, decreed that the band should be decked 
out in fashionable mod attire, in emulation of the Who. Fellow members of the 
Lower Third could not help noticing David’s flamboyant, even effeminate 
performing style. They released a Jones-penned single, the aptly namedYou’ve 
Got a Habit of Leaving <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LQE1QoidlIg>, but 
despite receiving a handful of radio plays, it failed to chart.

It was clear that David’s talents and ambition dictated that he should go 
solo, and Horton provoked a split with the Lower Third by announcing that there 
was not enough money to pay their fees. David now adopted the name Bowie to 
avoid confusion withDavy Jones of the Monkees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/feb/29/davy-jones>, and put together a 
new group via an advertisement in Melody Maker, specifying that he wanted 
musicians “to accompany a singer”. The new band was named the Buzz.

He dropped Horton after a botched music publishing deal, and in his place 
hired Ken Pitt, a far more substantial figure who had had success withMel Tormé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/jun/07/guardianobituaries> and Manfred 
Mann. Pitt secured an album deal for Bowie with Decca’s Deram label, which 
resulted in an LP entitled simply David Bowie, released in June 1967. It was 
preceded by the novelty singleThe Laughing Gnome 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5SQdBxVjZx4>, a flop at the time but a top 10 
hit when reissued in 1973. Bowie later said of his debut album: “I didn’t know 
if I was Max Miller or Elvis Presley.” But within its disjointed mix of styles, 
it found Bowie reflecting on issues such as childhood, sexual ambiguity and the 
nature of stardom. By the time the album was released, Bowie had already got 
rid of the Buzz, again citing lack of money.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f045cbc2dc37f60632c22317951bffa78d75613%2F0_280_2940_3944%2F2940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4f045cbc2dc37f60632c22317951bffa78d75613%2F0_280_2940_3944%2F2940.jpg>
 Bowie during the Laughing Gnome period in 1968. Photograph: Ray Stevenson/Rex 
Features 
For a time he studied theatre and mime with the dancer Lindsay Kemp, and in 
1969 he started a folk club at the Three Tuns pub in Beckenham, Kent. This 
developed into the Beckenham Arts Lab, and a variety of future stars, including
Peter Frampton <http://www.frampton.com/>, Steve Harley 
<http://www.steveharley.com/>, Rick Wakeman <http://www.rwcc.com/> and Bowie’s 
future producer Tony Visconti, performed there.

In July 1969 Bowie released Space Oddity 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cYMCLz5PQVw>, the song that would give him his 
initial commercial breakthrough. Timed to coincide with the Apollo 11 moon 
landing, it was a top five UK hit. The accompanying album was originally called 
Man of Words / Man of Music, but was later reissued as Space Oddity.

The following year was a momentous one for Bowie. His brother Terry was 
committed to a psychiatric institution (and would kill himself in 1985), and 
his father died. In March, Bowie married Angela Barnett, an art student. He 
dumped Pitt and recruited the driven and aggressive Tony DeFries, prompting 
Pitt to sue successfully for compensation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36d844fb175a4abc8bd70712f1b07fe9666da26b%2F0_0_2638_2883%2F2638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36d844fb175a4abc8bd70712f1b07fe9666da26b%2F0_0_2638_2883%2F2638.jpg>
 David Bowie promoting Space Oddity in November 1969. Photograph: Michael Ochs 
Archives/Getty Images 
Artistically, Bowie was powering ahead. The Man Who Sold the World was 
released in the US in late 1970 and in the UK the following year under Bowie’s 
new deal with RCA Victor, and with its daring songwriting and broody, hard-rock 
sound, it was the first album to do full justice to his writing and performing 
gifts. The title track remains one of his most atmospheric compositions, and 
songs such asAll the Madmen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jb7Xdu7STx8> and 
The Width of a Circle <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=s2L4hL2IvUk> were 
formidably inventive and accomplished. The album’s themes included immortality, 
insanity, murder and mysticism, evidence that Bowie was a songwriter who was 
thinking way beyond pop’s usual boundaries.

The Man Who Sold the World was significant in other ways too. Its producer, 
Visconti, became a long-term ally, and in the guitaristMick Ronson 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-mick-ronson-2320790.html> 
and the drummerWoody Woodmansey <http://www.woodywoodmansey.co.uk/>, Bowie had 
found the core of what would become the Spiders from Mars. The UK cover 
pictured Bowie lounging in a long dress and bearing a striking resemblance to
Lauren Bacall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/aug/13/lauren-bacall-obituary>, playing 
on the theme of sexual ambiguity that he would exploit so successfully.

He followed it with Hunky Dory (1972), a mix of wordy, elaborate songwriting (
The Bewlay Brothers <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8a82arE0JSQ> or Quicksand 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oP2SS8ggLtU>), crunchy rockers (Queen Bitch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=S5P63qGTm_g>) and infectious pop songs (Kooks 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EsSlOGzPM90>). It was an excellent collection 
that met with only moderate success, but that all changed with The Rise and 
Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars later that year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F828c6f86c34c14c32254e9c417be0c29dd3df02c%2F0_29_2336_1543%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F828c6f86c34c14c32254e9c417be0c29dd3df02c%2F0_29_2336_1543%2F2336.jpg>
 Bowie applying the Ziggy Stardust makeup in 1973. Photograph: Roger Bamber/Rex 
Features 
This time, Bowie emerged as a fully fledged science-fiction character – an 
intergalactic glam-rock star visiting a doomed planet Earth – and the album 
effectively wrote the script for his own stardom. The hit singleStarman 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4B5zmDz4vR4> brought instant success for the 
album, while Bowie’s ravishing stage costumes and sexually provocative 
performances (following his carefully timed claim in a Melody Maker interview 
that he was gay) triggered fan enthusiasm unseen since Beatlemania. Seeing 
Bowie perform as Ziggy on Top of the Pops was a life-changing experience for a 
generation of pop listeners in glum 70s Britain.

Everything Bowie touched turned to gold, such as his song All the Young Dudes 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VkqQj8Z_aVY> which provided a career-reviving 
hit for Mott the Hoople, orLou Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2013/oct/28/lou-reed>’s album Transformer, 
which he co-produced with Ronson. He scored his first UK No 1 album with 
Aladdin Sane (1973), which generated the hit singlesThe Jean Genie 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGQo6zpVzt8> and Drive-in Saturday 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zGcLw_bkh9U>. But Bowie was already planning 
fresh career moves, and in July 1973 he shocked his audience at the Hammersmith 
Odeon by announcing the retirement of Ziggy Stardust.

He made Pin Ups, a transitional album of cover versions, before embarking on 
the sinister concept album Diamond Dogs, intended as a musical version of 
George Orwell’s 1984. Bowie’s commercial instincts remained in fine working 
order, however, and the album brought further hit singles with the title track 
andRebel Rebel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=U16Xg_rQZkA>.

He took his new music to the US in 1974 with the elaborately theatrical 
Diamond Dogs tour, which was filmed by the BBC’s Alan Yentob for the documentary
Cracked Actor <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FsPVrsZcbZU>. However, 
professional pressures and an escalating cocaine habit were making Bowie 
paranoid and physically emaciated.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bowie%20in%20his%20own%20words%3A%20highlights%20from%20his%20TV%20interviews%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bowie%20in%20his%20own%20words%3A%20highlights%20from%20his%20TV%20interviews%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdavid-bowie-television-interviews-video&media=>
Bowie in his own words: highlights from his TV interviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-television-interviews-video>
His increasing interest in funk and soul music came to the fore on the 
deliciously listenable Young Americans (1975), which gave him a US chart-topper 
withFame <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J-_30HA7rec> (featuring John Lennon 
as a guest vocalist) and earned him a slot on the American TV show Soul Train. 
This was Bowie’s so-called “plastic soul” album, which he described as “the 
squashed remains of ethnic music as it survives in the age of Muzak, written 
and sung by a white limey”.

But once again, Bowie’s frantic creativity was accompanied by crises in his 
business life. He fired Defries, which spurred long and tortuous litigation and 
cost Bowie millions, then hired his lawyer, Michael Lippman, as his manager. A 
year later he went through the sacking-and-lawsuit process all over again with 
Lippman.

Yet he was still breaking new musical ground. Station to Station (1976), a 
euphoric dose of what might be called synthetic art-funk, introduced a new 
persona, the Thin White Duke, which Bowie had carried over from his headlining 
performance as Thomas Jerome Newton, the melancholy space traveller, in Nicolas 
Roeg’s film The Man Who Fell to Earth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbcb05f308b2478faf9117b422681d13f09b27c8%2F0_451_2999_1799%2F2999.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdbcb05f308b2478faf9117b422681d13f09b27c8%2F0_451_2999_1799%2F2999.jpg>
 David Bowie appearing in The Man Who Fell To Earth in 1976. Photograph: 
Allstar/British Lion/Studiocanal 
But Bowie’s own connection to terra firma was looking increasingly shaky. He 
told Rolling Stone magazine about his admiration for fascism, and provoked 
outrage when his wave to the crowd while arriving in an open-topped Mercedes at 
Victoria station in London was interpreted as Nazi salute.

He found some breathing space by buying a home in Switzerland, where he 
rediscovered his interest in art and drawing, but by the end of 1976 he had 
taken up residence in Berlin, where he was accompanied by Iggy Pop – with whom 
he was working on Iggy’s album, The Idiot – and Brian Eno, who would be the 
catalyst for another of Bowie’s musical leaps forward.

The upshot was the so-called “triptych” of Low, Heroes (both 1977) and Lodger 
(1979), where Bowie mixed Krautrock influences with Eno-driven synthesizer 
mood-music, with at least some pop accessibility for good measure (such as Low’s
Sound and Vision <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GYEOlxcirX0> or Lodger’s Boys 
Keep Swinging <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UMhFyWEMlD4>). Lodger, though 
recorded in Montreux and New York, used the same personnel as the previous two, 
with Eno once again acting as creative ringmaster. Meanwhile, Bowie found time 
to film another leading movie role, appearing as Count Paul von Przygodski in 
Just a Gigolo (1978).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71d543da66c69606d290620ecffccb7184c5e82a%2F0_333_3444_3567%2F3444.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71d543da66c69606d290620ecffccb7184c5e82a%2F0_333_3444_3567%2F3444.jpg>
 Bowie with wife Angie and son Zowie in 1974. Photograph: Alamy 
Bowie’s relationship with his wife had been disintegrating under the pressures 
of success and the couple’s hedonistic, promiscuous lifestyle, and they would 
divorce in 1980. This was a year of further creative triumph, bringing a fine 
album, Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps) and its spin-off chart-topping single, 
Ashes to Ashes, followed by Bowie’s well-received stint as John Merrick in The 
Elephant Man on the Broadway stage. To make the accompanyingvideo for Ashes to 
Ashes <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CMThz7eQ6K0>, he went to the Blitz club 
in London and recruited several leading lights from the New Romantic movement, 
a collection of bands including Visage and Spandau Ballet, who owed much of 
their inspiration to Bowie.

With hindsight, Ashes to Ashes can be seen as the point where Bowie’s cutting 
edge began to lose its sharpness, and he was never again quite the cultural 
pathfinder he had been in his heyday. This process expressed itself in the way 
he restlessly bounced between collaborators.

He bagged a No 1 single with his 1981 partnership with Queen, Under Pressure 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YoDh_gHDvkk>, while becoming increasingly 
involved in crossovers between different media. He appeared in the German movie 
Christiane F (1981) and wrote music for the soundtrack, and his lead role in 
the BBC’s production of Bertolt Brecht’s Baal (1982) was accompanied by his 
five-track EP of songs from the play. He registered another chart hit withCat 
People (Putting Out Fire) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YWX_MFNOL_Y> from 
Paul Schrader’s movie Cat People (1982).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7ed58ce78b51c8dade3e427dbb22a6a056ba72%2F20_37_3453_2071%2F3453.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2a7ed58ce78b51c8dade3e427dbb22a6a056ba72%2F20_37_3453_2071%2F3453.jpg>
 David Bowie and Catherine Deneuve in The Hunger. Photograph: Allstar/MGM 
Bowie continued to make progress as a screen actor with appearances in The 
Hunger (alongside Catherine Deneuve) and the second world war drama Merry 
Christmas, Mr Lawrence, both released in 1983. Musically, this was the year in 
which he marshalled his forces for an all-out commercial onslaught with the 
album Let’s Dance and follow-up concerts. With co-production from Chic’s Nile 
Rodgers, Let’s Dance moulded Bowie into a crowd-friendly global rock star, with 
the album and its singlesLet’s Dance 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=N4d7Wp9kKjA>, China Girl 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VrERLeFseDA> and Modern Love 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1hDbpF4Mvkw> all becoming huge international 
hits.

This was the heyday of MTV, and Bowie’s knack for eye-catching videos fuelled 
this commercial splurge, while the six-month Serious Moonlight tour drew 
massive crowds. It was to be the most commercially successful period of his 
career.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4b48a4a4a7c116ef2260be9af81f7a82fd675b%2F0_435_5767_4595%2F5767.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fce4b48a4a4a7c116ef2260be9af81f7a82fd675b%2F0_435_5767_4595%2F5767.jpg>
 Bowie on the Serious Moonlight tour in 1983. Photograph: Ray 
Stevenson/Rex/Shutterstock 
Tonight (1984) could not repeat the trick, though it delivered the hit Blue 
Jean <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LTYvjrM6djo>, whose short accompanying 
film Jazzin’ for Blue Jean earned Bowie a Grammy. But his profile gained 
another boost from hisappearance at the 1985 Live Aid famine relief concert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bDQkaI6DT3s> at Wembley stadium, where he was 
one of the standout performers. In addition, he teamed up with Mick Jagger to 
record the fundraising singleDancing in the Street 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9G4jnaznUoQ>, which sped to No 1.

Bowie then returned to the multimedia trail with an appearance in Julien 
Temple’s shambolic film Absolute Beginners (1986), from which he salvaged some 
personal kudos by supplying the winsome title song. He also wrote five songs 
for Jim Henson’s fantasy film Labyrinth, as well as taking the role of Jareth 
the Goblin King.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698073b0d9e5a733f0c9ef8bcf59b8131806f330%2F0_951_2020_1211%2F2020.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F698073b0d9e5a733f0c9ef8bcf59b8131806f330%2F0_951_2020_1211%2F2020.jpg>
 Bowie with, Patsy Kensit and Eddie O’Connell in Absolute Beginners in 1986. 
Photograph: Allstar/Orion Pictures 
In 1987, a solo album, Never Let Me Down, performed reasonably well 
commercially, but poor reviews were endorsed by Bowie himself (he described it 
as “an awful album”). The follow-up Glass Spider tour was castigated for its 
soulless over-production.

After playing Pontius Pilate in Martin Scorsese’s film The Last Temptation of 
Christ (1988), Bowie’s next move was the heavy-rock band Tin Machine, with 
which he sought to appear as a band member rather than as a solo star. Their 
album Tin Machine (1989) and tour earned a mixture of modest acclaim and howls 
of outrage. However, by the time they released a second album, Bowie had 
abandoned the pretence of being “one of the boys” by undertaking 1990’s 
greatest hits tour Sound + Vision, unashamedly designed to promote the reissue 
of his back catalogue. Tin Machine dissolved in 1992.

A few days after his appearance at the Freddie Mercury tribute concert 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=quAvfChhWDE> at Wembley stadium in April 1992, 
Bowie married the Somalian model Iman, whom he had met 18 months earlier, and 
the couple bought a home in New York. This new start in his private life 
coincided with a search for fresh musical inspiration.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab50be8438dc7d93157a810a5ecc0753294bf353%2F0_140_2256_1353%2F2256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-11%23img-11&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab50be8438dc7d93157a810a5ecc0753294bf353%2F0_140_2256_1353%2F2256.jpg>
 Bowie and Iman in 1993. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
For the album Black Tie White Noise (1993), he reunited with Rodgers and 
sprinkled elements of soul, electronica and hiphop into the mix. It topped the 
UK album chart and yielded a top 10 single,Jump They Say 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hZSWZLJeIzI>.

However, Bowie’s quest for new sounds to plunder began to evince an air of 
desperation. Outside (1995) found him reunited with Eno and was another 
commercial success, despite its laborious concept and clumsy adoption of 
grungy, industrial sounds, while Earthling (1997) borrowed elements of the 
drum’n’bass style practised by such UK artists as Goldie and Asian Dub 
Foundation. One of the album tracks wasI’m Afraid of Americans 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gPVrFIP0CMs>, originally written for the movie 
Showgirls but remade under the auspices of Trent Reznor from Nine Inch Nails. 
Released as a single, it sat on the US Billboard Hot 100 for four months.

Bowie was demonstrating unexpected forms of creativity in other areas. In 1997 
he made history of a sort by launching his Bowie bonds, whereby he netted $55m 
upfront by surrendering his royalties over the bonds’ 10-year term. In 2000, he 
delved into online banking with BowieBanc, giving customers an international 
banking service as well as cheques and debit cards with his picture on them.

New media and technology influenced his recordings too. His 1999 album Hours… 
was based around music he had written for a computer game called Omikron, in 
which Bowie and Iman appeared as characters. Some listeners detected a return 
to the Hunky Dory days in the album’s reflective, self-analytical musings, 
though the songs could not match those former glories.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2399de784754d16b0b27e5c938a0221ac6ab277%2F0_87_1965_1259%2F1965.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-12%23img-12&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff2399de784754d16b0b27e5c938a0221ac6ab277%2F0_87_1965_1259%2F1965.jpg>
 David Bowie performs at the Brit Awards in 1999. Photograph: SWNS.com 
As an adopted New Yorker, Bowie was the opening act at the Concert for New 
York City in October 2001, where he joined Paul McCartney, Jon Bon Jovi, Billy 
Joel, the Who and Elton John in a benefit show six weeks after the 9/11 
attacks. Bowie sang Paul Simon’s song America and his own Heroes.

He played himself in Ben Stiller’s fashion industry spoof Zoolander (2001). 
The following year, he was artistic director of the Meltdown festival on the 
South Bank in London, opening the event by performing the first concert of his 
own Heathen tour, in support of his album of the same name. The work reunited 
Bowie with Visconti for the first time since Scary Monsters, and sold 2m copies 
worldwide. It was nominated for the annual Mercury prize.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5059fc773efed47a692184b4ac5adb881f2e0a40%2F0_0_3192_2133%2F3192.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Bowie%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobituary-david-bowie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-13%23img-13&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5059fc773efed47a692184b4ac5adb881f2e0a40%2F0_0_3192_2133%2F3192.jpg>
 Bowie appearing in Zoolander in 2001. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock 
A re-energised Bowie was back in the studio with Visconti the following year 
for Reality, another successful outing welcomed for its energy and musical 
freshness. However, in the midst of his Reality tour in 2004, Bowie was 
stricken with chest pains while performing at the Hurricane festival in Germany 
and underwent an emergency angioplasty procedure in Hamburg to clear a blocked 
artery.

He took the medical emergency as a warning and reduced the pace of his 
activities. He made a handful of guest appearances, including a couple of live 
shows with the Canadian band Arcade Fire, then in 2006 announced he would be 
taking a year off from touring and recording.

Despite this, shortly afterwards he appeared with Pink Floyd’s David Gilmour 
at the Royal Albert Hall, singing the Floyd classicsArnold Layne 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g9NivaKUFME> and Comfortably Numb 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=BkN7qyaFEUU>. In February that year he was 
given a Grammy lifetime achievement award, having been inducted into the Rock 
and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996. In The Prestige (2006), Christopher Nolan’s film 
about two battling magicians, Bowie featured as the inventor Nikola Tesla. 
Nolan said he cast Bowie because he wanted somebody “extraordinarily 
charismatic”.

In 2007 Bowie was curator of the eclectic High Line festival in New York, and 
included among his choices Arcade Fire, Laurie Anderson and the comedian Ricky 
Gervais. In 2008 he contributed vocals to a couple of tracks on Scarlett 
Johansson’s album of Tom Waits cover versions, Anywhere I Lay My Head.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lazarus%2C%20from%20David%20Bowie's%20last%20album%2C%20Blackstar%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lazarus%2C%20from%20David%20Bowie%27s%20last%20album%2C%20Blackstar%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjan%2F11%2Flazarus-david-bowie-blackstar-video&media=>
In 2010, a live double CD, A Reality Tour, was released on Bowie’s own ISO 
Records. Recorded in Dublin in 2003, it was a survey of most of the key moments 
in his musical career. Reviewers were enthusiastic, but could not help noticing 
the valedictory feel of the album. “Nobody really knows if Bowie is hanging up 
the spacesuit for good,” said Rolling Stone. “But if so, this is one hell of an 
exit.”

But there was more to come. In 2011 he released the album Toy, which dated 
back to 2001 and comprised tracks from Heathen and their B sides plus versions 
of older material. Of far greater significance was The Next Day (2013), his 
first album of new material in a decade. Produced by Visconti, it was preceded 
by the singleWhere Are We Now? <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QWtsV50_-p4>, 
which gave him his first UK top 10 hit since 1993. The album topped charts in 
Britain and around the world, reaching No 2 in the US. In 2014 Bowie was given 
the Brit Award for Best British Male, making him the oldest recipient in the 
awards’ history.

He is survived by Iman, their daughter, Lexi, his stepdaughter, Zulekha, and 
his son, Duncan (formerly known as Zowie, then Joe), from his first marriage.

• David Bowie <https://www.theguardian.com/music/davidbowie> (David Robert 
Jones), singer, songwriter and actor, born 8 January 1947; died 10 January 2016

• This article was amended on 13 January 2016. An earlier version said that 
David Bowie failed his 11-plus exam. This has been corrected to say that he 
passed this exam, and was offered a place at both a grammar school and a 
technical school.

 