
With Theresa May off in Bahrain painting her Turner prize-losing Brexit red, 
white and blue, the short straw of standing in for her at prime minister’s 
questions fell to the leader of the house. It was David Lidington’s bad luck to 
have found himself up against a forensicEmily Thornberry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry> rather than the 
haphazard Jeremy Corbyn; it was his misjudgment to come to the house almost 
totally unprepared.

The shadow foreign secretary doesn’t normally cover herself in glory at the 
dispatch box, often managing to antagonise as many in her own party as she does 
on the government benches. But for her promotion toPMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs>, she had come unusually 
well-primed. Her plan was nothing less than Lidington’s assassination.

Could the leader of the house give a simple answer to a simple question? Was 
Britain planning to stay in the customs union? Yes or no? Lidington appeared 
startled. Whatever instructions the prime minister had left him on her Post-it 
note, it hadn’t included this. He waved his arms around theatrically, as if 
hoping to drag up an answer with a little method thinking. Nothing. Nada. 
Customs union was well above his pay grade, but he was sure the government had 
a great plan.

Thornberry pressed him a little harder. Did he remember saying back in 
February that leaving the customs union would be a total disaster? “Does the 
minister still agree with himself?” she inquired, twisting the stiletto. The 
look of panic that crossed Lidington’s face suggested he remembered it only too 
well.

“Um, er,” he mumbled. “Things have changed a lot since then.” Certainly they 
had for Lidington, who was now entering a possible career-ending parallel 
universe. Someone passed him a note, which he eagerly opened. “The customs 
union is not a binary issue. There’s at least four possible outcomes.” He had 
no idea whether this was true, no idea of what it meant, but it was all he had 
to offer. The next time Theresa went away, she could get someone else to do her 
dirty work; up in the gallery, the prime minister’s advisers were having much 
the same thought.

Theresa May’s clever holding position has caught remainers off guard | Matthew 
d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/theresa-may-remainers-brexit-concession>
Customs union was also on the agenda as part of the opposition day Brexit 
debate. Faced with the certainty of being defeated, the government had quickly 
tabled an amendment promising to publish some kind of plan before triggering 
article 50 in March next year, so the shadow Brexit secretary,Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>, tried to pin down the 
parameters of what might be in the plan. Could the government offer any clue 
about what sort of Brexit it had in mind?

“No plan survives engagement with the enemy,” Crispin Blunt snapped. Branding 
the EU as the enemy before negotiations have even started may not be the best 
way of securing the best possible deal.

David Davis, the Brexit secretary, tried to be a little more accommodating. He 
had been falling over himself in the past few months to let parliament know 
what the government plans. It was just that no one had been listening to him. 
His plans were to get the best possible deal for the country once someone had 
got round to working out what the best possible deal was. Whatever the 
government managed to come up with would de facto turn out to be the best 
possible deal.

When Conservative Dominic Grieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dominicgrieve> pointed out that if the 
supreme court upheld the divisional court’s ruling on parliamentary involvement 
in article 50, then the government would be obliged to introduce primary 
legislation, Davis grandly announced: “We will obey the rule of law.” It says 
something for post-truth politics in 2016 that Davis managed to make that sound 
like a concession.

What Davis didn’t say was what the plan the government would present to the 
Commons would look like. Would it be a few gentle hints written on the back of 
an envelope? He couldn’t say for certain. Though probably it would be nothing 
that detailed.

Thereafter the debate rather fell apart. The Eurosceptics, once the strongest 
defenders of parliamentary sovereignty, were now adamant that Brexit was far 
too important to be left to MPs and insisted that anyone who said otherwise was 
just trying to thwart the will of the people. As if they had a hotline to what 
that will was. The remainers were equally certain that allowing the government 
to stumble into any old Brexit within an arbitrary timeframe was asking for 
trouble.

“Would anyone in this house sign up to an agreement without knowing the 
details?” Starmer asked. “If so, please put your hand in the air.”

Jacob Rees-Mogg put his hand up. There’s always one.
 