
Sir David Clementi, the author of a report calling for the BBC Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-trust> to be scrapped, is expected to be 
named chair of the corporation this week.

Theresa May is expected to reveal the government’s preferred candidate to lead 
theBBC’s new unitary board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/22/queen-of-quangos-deirdre-hutton-emerges-as-bbc-chair-contender>
 in the coming days, with the official appointment then made by the Queen.

Clementi is the preferred candidate of Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, 
who has put forward his name to May for approval. The prime minister is 
understood not to have made her final decision, but is expected to approve 
Bradley’s recommendation.

The culture, media and sport select committee is understood to have scheduled 
a pre-appointment hearing with the government’s choice next Tuesday.

John Nicolson, a Scottish National party MP and member of the committee, said 
Clementi would receive a “proper grilling” on topics including the BBC’s 
independence, and was “highly likely” to be asked for his views on media 
plurality, givenFox’s proposed takeover bid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/rupert-murdochs-fox-agrees-deal-to-buy-sky>
 for Sky.

“The committee is going to want to be assured that he will defend the BBC’s 
independence from political interference,” he said. “We want to make sure he is 
appointed properly, independently and that he guaranteesBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> editorial independence. All of us want 
to make sure he is the right man for the job.”

Bradley put forward the name of her preferred candidate, from a shortlist of 
three 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/22/queen-of-quangos-deirdre-hutton-emerges-as-bbc-chair-contender>
, to May over the Christmas and new year break.

Clementi, the former deputy governor of the Bank of England, and former 
chairman of Prudential and Virgin Money,published a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/16/ex-bank-of-england-deputy-governor-to-lead-review-into-bbc-regulation>
 in March calling for the BBC to have a unitary board consistent with the model 
used by large publicly listed companies.

The government adopted the recommendations of his report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/01/bbc-regulation-ofcom-trust-david-clementi>
, which described the existing BBC Trust as “flawed” and said it should assign 
oversight to media regulator, Ofcom.

The other two on the shortlist were John Makinson, the former chairman of book 
publisher Penguin Random House, and Dame Deirdre Hutton, the chair of the Civil 
Aviation Authority.

Clementi and Hutton were understood to have been the final two candidates 
considered by Bradley.

Sources say Clementi was considered to have the edge. Hutton has little 
relevant media industry experience, although the “Queen of quangos” has held a 
number of senior roles at various regulators, including the Food Standards 
Agency.

The former BBC Trust chairman Sir Michael Lyons said while Clementi had proven 
himself astute in the City, he needed to recognise that the BBC was not the 
same as a publicly listed company.

“What’s important is that Clementi focuses on making sure BBC serves the 
people who pay for it – the British public,” he said. “That means recognising 
it is not simply a big communications company. That it has an obligation to 
challenge power – economic or political – and most of all that its future 
depends upon the extent to which the British public trust it.

“All those things are entrusted to the new chairman. It is more complex than a 
simple business [with] a profit and loss sheet to be reflected on. That is 
[the] agenda for him.”

The holder of the role will in effect replace the BBC Trust chair, Rona 
Fairhead, who was due to take up the position but announced thatshe would stand 
down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/rona-fairhead-to-stand-down-as-bbc-chair>
 after the prime minister asked her to reapply for the role.

Fairhead was the first female candidate to be appointed to the role in a 
process which, according to reports at the time, included a government desire 
for a woman if other qualifying criteria were equal.
 