
David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> has pledged 
to try to make non-military national service “a rite of passage” for every 
British teenager in his first job since resigning as prime minister.

A month after stepping down as an MP, Cameron has announced that he is to 
chair a panel of patrons on the expanded National Citizen Service (NCS) – a
summer camp initiative he set up in his first months in office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jul/22/david-cameron-national-service>
 designed to instil social responsibility in young people as part of his “big 
society”.

 Cameron said the service was an example of the big society in action 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/11/david-cameron-ive-found-my-first-job-after-politics-building-the/>
. But critics say there is little evidence that the scheme works. It has also 
emerged that one of the key funders of the initiative was a tycoon who backed 
Brexit.

Cameron said he wanted to offer every 16- and 17-year-old the chance to take 
part in the four-week camps and to embed the initiative “in our national 
fabric”.

Writing in the Telegraph, Cameron said: “That should be our goal – not 
necessarily a compulsory programme, but one that is universally available and 
becomes a normal part of growing up for every teenager.”

Under the initiative, teenagers from all backgrounds take part in a voluntary 
project aimed at putting something back into their community. Cameron said that 
if the idea was widely adopted it would give every generation “a greater sense 
of purpose, optimism and belonging”.

One of the founding patrons of the NCS was the former Conservative treasurer 
Peter Cruddas, who went on to become one of the key financial backers of the 
Vote Leave – a campaign that ultimately led to Cameron’s resignation as prime 
minister. The Peter Cruddas Foundation confirmed it donated £601,346.47 to help 
set up the NCS in 2010.

Lord Ashcroft, the Brexit-supporting former deputy chairman of the 
Conservative party, noted the irony in a tweet.
Lord Ashcroft (@LordAshcroft) 
. @David_Cameron <https://twitter.com/David_Cameron> ..no doubt thanking Peter 
Cruddas for putting up around £600000 to help you get National Citizen Service 
off the ground..
 <https://twitter.com/LordAshcroft/status/786150066516070400> October 12, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LordAshcroft/status/786150066516070400> 
Cameron thanked his successor, Theresa May, for backing the programme in the 
form of a national citizen service bill, which was introduced to parliament on 
Tuesday. The bill will create a royal charter to put the NCS on a permanent 
legal footing.

But Andrew Mycock, a senior lecturer in politics at the University of 
Huddersfield, said the evidence for the effectiveness of the scheme was “paper 
thin”. He said: “There are huge questions about its value for money. There is 
no evidence to suggest it has changed behaviour or created a new mindset 
amongst young people – there is no longitudinal data to prove it. It has been 
expanded without any real data to suggest that it is improving the rates of 
volunteering or changing people to become more civically minded.

“Socially and economically disadvantaged groups are not being bought in in the 
numbers that were promised. Every year it has failed to meet its target for 
recruitment. It has never realised those targets.”

Mycock argued that the scheme failed to promote civic values. He said: “It 
doesn’t encourage critical citizenship. It has turned more into a CV-enhancing 
service, to help people get a job or university place. It isn’t making young 
people more democratically engaged. It seems to be wanting to create a 
generation of rather inert citizens who accept austerity and are resilient to 
its many manifestations, but it is not encouraging them to change things.”

Cameron’s new unpaid role was approved by the advisory committee on business 
appointments, a watchdog tasked with overseeing the revolving door between 
Whitehall and the private and voluntary sector. But in a letter its chair, 
Angela Browning, reminded Cameron of the rules preventing former ministers from 
lobbying the government.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fcameron-ive-decided-the-right-thing-to-do-is-to-stand-down-as-mp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%3A%20'I've%20decided%20the%20right%20thing%20to%20do%20is%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20MP'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fcameron-ive-decided-the-right-thing-to-do-is-to-stand-down-as-mp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%3A%20%27I%27ve%20decided%20the%20right%20thing%20to%20do%20is%20to%20stand%20down%20as%20MP%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F12%2Fcameron-ive-decided-the-right-thing-to-do-is-to-stand-down-as-mp-video&media=>
Cameron: ‘I’ve decided the right thing to do is to stand down as MP’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/12/cameron-ive-decided-the-right-thing-to-do-is-to-stand-down-as-mp-video>
She wrote: “The restriction on lobbying means that former ministers ‘should 
not engage in communication with government – including ministers, special 
advisers and officials – with a view to influencing a government decision or 
policy [including applications for awards or grants] in relation to their own 
interests, or the interests of the organisation by which they are employed, or 
to whom they are contracted’.”

The NCS is run by Michael Lynas, a former civil servant from the No 10 policy 
unit. Its operations director is Will Gallagher, a former special adviser to 
Chris Grayling when he was justice secretary.

Stephen Greene, the chair of the NCS’s governing body, pointed out that 
Cameron would perform an ambassadorial role for the charity, but not be 
involved in its governance. One of his first roles would be to help recruit the 
panel of patrons he will chair.

Greene said: “Mr Cameron has been involved in the programme from its very 
beginning. No one knows the programme better. It is really a job to support the 
programme and grow it and expand it. It was a natural fit.

“The great thing about the NCS is that it has enjoyed incredible cross-party 
support. David Blunkett sits on the board with me. NCS was in the Labour 
party’s manifesto.”


Asked how much time Cameron would devote to the post, Greene said: “He is 
clearly here to serve. It is not a ceremonial post. This is a working position. 
I know he will put everything into it to give NCS the additional support and 
oomph it needs. Mr Cameron is able to engage people from all sorts of sectors. 
If he is able to do that a day a month then fantastic. But it is really about 
the output not the amount of time.”

The Labour MP and former soldier Dan Jarvis said he would welcome an expansion 
of the scheme.

He said: “Giving teenagers the opportunity to serve can both help lay the 
foundations for adult life and improve society. If expanded, The National 
Citizen Service – a vision of the last Labour government – could grow to become 
a key part of our communities and an important aspect of many young people’s 
lives.”

When Cameron resigned as MP for Witney he said he wanted to “start to build a 
life outside Westminster” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
 prompting speculation that he would pursue lucrative corporate opportunities.

In his Telegraph article Cameron urged businesses, charities and MPs from all 
parties to get behind the idea. “We can continue to build this special movement 
– empowering our young people to be united in their diversity, with the skills 
to get on in life and the compassion to support each other,” he wrote.
 