
David Tennant <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/david-tennant> will bring 
the curtain down on this year’s Glasgow film festival (GFF) with the world 
premiere of his latest movie about a pioneering Scottish psychiatrist.


Starring Michael Gambon, Elisabeth Moss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/elisabeth-moss> and Gabriel Byrne, Mad to 
Be Normal is about the life of RD Laing, who was seen as a radical when he set 
up a medication-free community for psychiatric patients in London in the 1960s.

The 13th annual festival opens on 15 February with a screening of Handsome 
Devil, starring Sherlock actor Andrew Scott.

Tennant will attend the closing gala at the Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> film theatre on 26 February with 
director Robert Mullan and other cast members, to be announced later.

GFF co-director Allison Gardner said: “I am so excited to share the news about 
our great opening and closing galas. Handsome Devil is a real crowdpleaser with 
a joyous spirit that makes it a perfect film to launch the festival.

“David Tennant gives an absolutely stunning performance as RD Laing in Mad to 
Be Normal, and it seems only fitting that Glasgow should have the honour of 
hosting the premiere of a film about one of the city’s most complex, 
charismatic figures.”

A documentary series about the influential art writer John Berger, titled The 
Seasons in Quincy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/16/the-seasons-in-quincy-four-portraits-of-john-berger-review-tilda-swinton-berlin-2016>
, has also been added to the GFF schedule after his death on 2 January.

The documentary is the result of a five-year project by Tilda Swinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/tilda-swinton>, Colin MacCabe and Christopher 
Roth, in collaboration with the composer Simon Fisher Turner. Comprising four 
films on different aspects of Berger’s life, it will be shown on 24 and 25 
February.

The full festival programme is to be detailed later in January, but events 
already announced include a live music performance involving Franz Ferdinand’s 
Alex Kapranos and singer-songwriter Stuart Braithwaite.

The ABC show will follow a special screening of the documentary Lost in 
France, looking at the rise of Scotland’s independent music scene and bands 
such as Mogwai, Arab Strap and Franz Ferdinand.

The 2017 GFF programme is also to celebrate Canadian cinema and the role of 
women in thrillers.

Glasgow city council leader Frank McAveety said: “GFF is a highlight on the 
city’s cultural calendar. The opening gala is always an exciting event, 
heralding the beginning of 11 packed days of film in the UK’s cinema city. It’s 
particularly great to see that a famous Glaswegian will be depicted on screen 
for this year’s closing gala film.”
 