
I grew up in northern Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> but 
left nine years ago after becoming disenfranchised. I felt that the elite that 
run the country were deliberately underfunding education and the health system 
to undermine young people from humble backgrounds so that they do not have the 
opportunity to change the country. I left for the UK to study at theUniversity 
of Sussex <https://www.theguardian.com/education/universityofsussex>, where I 
completed an undergraduate degree in economics and international relations, 
before embarking on a master’s degree. I had an audacious dream to return to 
Nigeria and use the knowledge I acquired at university to fight for social 
justice.

Getting to the UK in the first place was not easy. Like the majority of people 
who apply to visit or study in the UK from an African country, my initial 
application was rejected and it was only after three appeals that the Home 
Office finally granted me permission to study here. Had I not been so 
passionate about education I may not have persevered with fighting against all 
the roadblocks the Home Office placed in my path.

I have so much to contribute: I want to work and pay my taxes and make a 
positive difference to the UK

In 2008, while in the UK, I began to feel unwell. After a series of tests I 
was diagnosed with the blood-borne virushepatitis B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hepatitis-b>. I have no idea how I 
contracted it although it might have been from sharing razor blades back in 
Nigeria. Tragically my two brothers also contracted the disease and died from 
it. It is hard to describe what a huge impact their loss has had on my life.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhome-office-please-dont-deport-death-luqman-onikosi-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00273642205011260e150c8b8a25995e618a7a04%2F0_36_960_576%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dear%20Home%20Office%2C%20please%20don%E2%80%99t%20deport%20me%20to%20my%20death%20%7C%20Luqman%20Onikosi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhome-office-please-dont-deport-death-luqman-onikosi-nigeria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dear%20Home%20Office%2C%20please%20don%E2%80%99t%20deport%20me%20to%20my%20death%20%7C%20Luqman%20Onikosi&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F14%2Fhome-office-please-dont-deport-death-luqman-onikosi-nigeria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F00273642205011260e150c8b8a25995e618a7a04%2F0_36_960_576%2F960.jpg>
 A protest against Onikosi’s deportation. 
Everything changed after I was diagnosed. Unfortunately my condition is quite 
advanced and so my only option for long-term survival is a liver transplant. In 
the meantime my condition needs to be closely monitored. The treatment I need 
to keep me alive is not available inNigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>.

My student visa expired in 2011 and I applied to remain in the UK on medical 
grounds. Since then I have been involved in a series of unsuccessful appeals 
with the Home Office who issued me with a deportation notice earlier this year.

The Home Office is tightening immigration rules all the time. My university 
cannot support me to finish the final part of my master’s because if it does so 
it will be in breach of the immigration rules and might have its licence 
revoked. In 2013,a campaign was launched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/sussex-university-protesters-occupation-student-deportation-luqman-onikosi>
 to appeal to the Home Office to let me remain in the UK. Some of the students 
at the university who support me recently occupied one of the university 
buildings in protest against my threatened forced removal from the UK.

Luqman Onikosi’s deportation shows we’re all being asked to become border 
guards | Alana Lentin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/19/luqman-onikosi-deportation-shows-being-forced-to-become-border-guards>
I am not a health tourist who has parachuted into the UK in search of free NHS 
treatment. I became ill part-way through a legitimate course of study and a 
legitimate stay in the UK approved by the Home Office. The thought of returning 
to Nigeria to my mother, who has already endured the emotional and 
psychological torture of losing two sons so that she can watch her third son 
die too, is unbearable.

I now consider the UK to be my home. I have laid down roots here and have 
incredible support from friends, colleagues and tutors. Thanks to my excellent 
experience at university I am well placed to work hard and get skilled 
employment here. I have so much to contribute: I have drive and ambition, I 
want to work and pay my taxes and make a positive difference to the UK. If I 
return home my deterioration will be rapid and I will not survive as the 
medical treatment I need to keep me alive is not available there.

The Home Office exercises discretion about who it decides can stay and who it 
forces to leave. In my case, it has the power over life and death. I am 
appealing to the Home Office to let me stay and be a useful and positive member 
of society here. In short I am asking the Home Office not to send me back to my 
death but to save my life.

• Sign the petition opposing Luqman Onikosi’s deportation here 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/121206>

As told to Diane Taylor
 