
For 30 minutes after she was hit, Archana Pandya lay bleeding on a road in the 
busy Mumbai suburb of Goregaon. The 22-year-old, who had just started a new 
job, was on her way home from work when she was the victim of a hit-and-run. 
She died of her injuries. “There were a lot of people there, and it happened 
right opposite a police station, but no one came forward to help,” says her 
brother Siddharth Pandya. “It’s not the roads; inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, it’s the people that are unsafe.”

Pandya was one of 586 people killed in road accidents in Mumbai 
<http://pibphoto.nic.in/documents/rlink/2016/jun/p20166905.pdf> in 2015, the 
equivalent of one death every 15 hours. Another 2,034 were seriously injured. 
The long response times of ambulances and emergency vehicles, coupled with the 
unwillingness of bystanders to help road victims for fear of being detained by 
police and hospitals, contribute to slow, painful deaths for hundreds of people 
every year. As a result, Mumbai – a city with roughly the same number of cars 
as London, but more thanfour times the number of road fatalities 
<http://content.tfl.gov.uk/casualties-in-greater-london-2015.pdf> – has become 
known as India’s “crash capital”. In 2015 there were 23,468 recorded traffic 
collisions: the highest in the country.

The city’s urban geography has helped breed a culture of reckless driving. 
Cars zigzag through dense traffic jams, cutting lanes, overtaking from the left 
or zipping past red lights. Drivers know that the penalties are small and the 
chances of getting caught are low. Many scoff at the idea of wearing a 
seatbelt, while others casually take phone calls and answer text messages as 
they navigate through the maze of cars.

These lax attitudes and dangerous driving habits are spawned right from the 
driving test, which exists mostly as a formality and is easily smoothed with a 
small bribe. Aditi Deopujari, a Mumbai resident who got her driving licence in 
2000, explains: “I was part of a driving school that had a setup with the Motor 
Vehicles Department [which issues licences]. I showed up and had some practice 
rounds, but never had to sit the exam or had any written test regarding the 
rules. I just got handed the licence.” Another resident, who asked to remain 
anonymous, says: “I literally had to drive five metres forward, and then five 
metres reverse. That was it, I passed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1fff34ab07464d07c88fe83872189c5d659429%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b1fff34ab07464d07c88fe83872189c5d659429%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Mumbai has thehighest density of cars 
<http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/Too-many-cars-clog-Mumbais-roads/articleshow/52884375.cms>
 in India. Photograph: Alamy 
In an attempt to get a grip on the chaos, Milind Bharambe, the head of the 
traffic police, is presiding over a new traffic control experiment. The city 
has given all traffic cops electronic devices to issue fines, and has installed 
4,000 CCTV cameras at junctions and signals. “After five violations, we are 
going to start taking away licences,” says Bharambe, whose plan to digitise the 
traffic control system takes cues from Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s“digital 
India” programme 
<http://www.narendramodi.in/shri-narendra-modi-shares-his-vision-for-digital-india-5944>
.

The unwillingness of bystanders to help road victims … contributes to slow, 
painful deaths for hundreds of people a year

“Watch,” says police officer Prashant Prabhu, motioning towards a traffic 
light at a busy junction on the Mumbai marina. Across the road, the light is 
about to go from green to red. But just as he predicts, cars accelerate 
through, hoping to cross the signal as the yellow flashes. Some keep driving 
even after the light goes red.

“Signal jumping is the biggest offence at this junction,” he says. “Everyone 
thinks, the light has just turned red, let me try to get through. Nobody wants 
to wait.”

Prabhu jumps out and flags down a motorbike that has just sped through the red 
light. He asks for the rider’s licence, then pulls out a calculator-like 
device, and fumbles trying to enter his password into the new machine. 
Eventually he punches in the licence number and asks for a credit card to pay 
the 200 rupee (£2.40) fine.

“Sometimes people refuse to give their driving licence. OK, no problem, we 
just put their licence plate number into the machine, and it will automatically 
send a fine to their phone,” he says. “This way we have a record of all the 
traffic offences each driver has committed.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e11e91aa190140ac143cd682175859e9a420164%2F179_1091_2402_1441%2F2402.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e11e91aa190140ac143cd682175859e9a420164%2F179_1091_2402_1441%2F2402.jpg>
 Milind Bharambe in his office 
Until last month, traffic fines for even the most serious errors were issued 
on paper, with no way to check if a driver was a repeat offender, says 
Baharambe. “We’ve been running the programme for just one month, and already 
we’ve given out over 150,000 fines.”

Bharambe seems a credible candidate for the huge task of modernising Mumbai’s 
archaic traffic policing system. His office walls feature images of the Hindu 
elephant god Ganesh as well as live streams of CCTV footage from around the 
city; on his wrist is an Apple watch. He has ablack belt in karate, a 10-year 
winning streak <https://www.dsci.in/sites/default/files/milind.pdf> in 
state-wide shooting competitions, and a solid record as a policeman – his 
achievements include setting up the rapid response team during theMumbai terror 
attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mumbai-terror-attacks> of 2008. And 
he has a history of introducing tech-based initiatives as superintendent of 
police in Sangli and Thane, two cities near Mumbai.


As well as digitising traffic offences, his plan includes the more analogue 
solution of new hydraulic towing vans, which can move 4x4s – until now, SUVs 
that had been badly parked or involved in collisions had to be left on the road 
until their driver moved them. He has also invested in digital signboards to 
warn about roadworks or accidents. “This is the first time that something like 
this is being done in the country.”

One floor below Bharambe’s office, Kishore Shinde, the traffic police’s first 
head of multimedia, is checking on pairs of uniformed police officers – these 
are the officers tasked with using the new CCTV cameras to issue tickets and 
fines remotely. Shinde also oversees a new complaints system, which receives 
more than 300 messages from frustrated drivers every day.

“The biggest issues are traffic jams, no parking, accidents, and oil spills on 
the road,” he says. “We’re making all the fines cashless, so drivers can pay 
via credit card or mobile phone. We know there is corruption and bribery even 
in our own department, like there is from top to bottom everywhere in India. 
But once you pay by credit card, that means we have a record of the 
transaction. No police officer can just take a cut for themselves.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7707d78751e526342c71aae40703dd926131a33a%2F0_12_3450_2070%2F3450.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Death%20on%20the%20road%3A%20can%20Mumbai%20shed%20its%20reputation%20as%20the%20%E2%80%98car%20crash%20capital%E2%80%99%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fdeath-road-mumbai-india-car-crash-capital%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7707d78751e526342c71aae40703dd926131a33a%2F0_12_3450_2070%2F3450.jpg>
 A man crosses in the rain in Mumbai. Photograph: Rafiq Maqbool/AP 
Although digitising Mumbai’s traffic operations is a significant shift that 
could improve efficiency and reduce corruption, Siddharth Pandya, brother of 
Archana, doubts it will have much impact on the death toll. “Nothing has 
changed,” he says. “Many of the CCTVs police installed before are not properly 
maintained or don’t work, so why would it be different now? Where Archana was 
killed there was a CCTV camera, but it was broken, so we never found out who 
hit her.”

Bharambe, for his part, argues that Mumbai’s collision statistics look worse 
than other Indian cities because the Mumbai police are better at recording 
accidents. He argues that Delhi has four times as many vehicles as Mumbai but 
barely records any no-injury accidents, in a deliberate effort to keep crash 
statistics low. He also points to mismanagement, corruption and red tape within 
a complex web of urban planning authorities. “We have to keep cleaning up their 
mess,” he says.

Harish Wahi, director of road safety NGO Equal Streets, thinks that the city’s 
traffic problems run even deeper.

The world's worst traffic: can Jakarta find an alternative to the car?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/23/world-worst-traffic-jakarta-alternative>
“South Bombay was built in British colonial times, and all of new Bombay has 
taken shape very quickly, post-1980s. Because of the speed of that growth, the 
planning and quality of roads has gone. On top of that, pavements are 
encroached upon by hawkers or shops, so pedestrians have no choice but to walk 
on busy streets.”

Prabhu, the traffic cop on Mumbai’s marina, says police are blamed unfairly 
for road deaths. “I am literally on my feet the whole day. I barely sit down. 
The problem is the public doesn’t want to drive properly – they just want to 
reach their destination as fast as possible.”

Bharambe admits that his digital drive is only like to reduce deaths by a 
small fraction. “The people also have to take some responsibility,” he says. 
“Look, two years ago, none of the people on motorbikes were wearing helmets. 
Now, since we’ve started enforcing [helmet wearing], you’ll see most of the 
drivers have their helmets. But you’ll still see men who are driving their 
motorbikes wearing helmets themselves, but the wife and children sitting behind 
them are not. Now tell me, if people themselves are taking such risks with 
their own family’s lives, then what can we do?”

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 