
Here are a couple of coming media events for your diary. The London Press Club 
andLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> School of Economics are 
jointly staging a panel debate entitled “Trump, Brexit... truth, trust and the 
news media” on 26 January.


On the panel: broadcaster and senior editor at The Economist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-economist>, Anne McElvoy; Adam Smith 
Institute communications chief Kate Andrews; Channel 4 Europe editor Matt Frei; 
and CNN’s Brian Stelter (via Skype from the US). In the chair: Charlie Beckett, 
director of LSE’s media think tank, Polis,


They will consider the media’s role in its coverage of both Donald Trump’s 
election campaign and in ther lead-up to the European referendum and its 
aftermath.

They are bound to touch on all kinds of related subjects, such as mainstream 
media’s relationship with social media. Can the traditional press compete with, 
and possibly counter,Twitter <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>? 
What can be done about fake news? Do newspapers create populism or respond to 
it?

Venue: LSE New Academic building, Lincoln’s Inn Fields. Please arrive by 
6.15pm on Thursday 26 January. It’s free to attend but reservation here 
<https://www.eventbrite.co.uk/e/trump-brexit-truth-trust-and-the-news-media-tickets-30953621114>
 is advised.

Are we facing a threat to press freedom?

The London Press Club is also holding a panel debate jointly with the Society 
of Editors, entitled “Are journalism and press freedom under threat?” on 13 
February.

On the panel: Sir Alan Moses, chairman of the Independent Press Standards 
Organisation (Ipso); Bob Satchwell, executive director of the Society of 
Editors; and Will Gore, deputy managing editor of theLondon Evening Standard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/london-evening-standard> and the 
Independent. In the chair: Roy Greenslade.

The speakers will doubtless have in mind the potential implementation of 
section 40 of the crime and courts act. The government’s consultation period on 
the matter is over, but we await the decision.


There is widespread concern among editors and their journalists about section 
40 because it would mean that media organisations not regulated by a recognised 
regulator would be forced to pay both sides’ costs in privacy and libel claims, 
even if they successfully defend such actions.

Could it therefore lead, as its critics argue, to curtailment of press 
freedom, risks to the future of investigative journalism and the potential 
closure of local and regional newspapers?

The debate is being held with the support of the Stationers and 
Newspapermakers Livery company.

Venue: Stationers’ Hall, Ave Maria Lane, (near St Paul’s) London on Monday 13 
February. Start: 6.30 for 7pm.
 