
A company that made more than1m unsolicited calls in a month offering to write 
off people’s debts has been fined £120,000 by a government watchdog.

Oxygen Ltd, a debt management company based in south Wales, played a recorded 
message claiming to be a “government awareness call”, but gave consumers no 
indication of who was actually making the calls.

After an initial 214 complaints from the public, an investigation by the 
Information Commissioner’s Office <https://ico.org.uk/> (ICO) found the company 
had made more than 1m automated calls without people’s consent during April. 
Oxygen was responsible for the marketing campaign but used another firm to make 
the calls.

The recorded message said: “This is a government awareness call. If you are 
struggling to pay your debts of £5,000 or more, you can now have up to 70% 
legally written off for free. That’s right – all of your debt written off for 
free. Press 5 now to speak to our specialist team or press 9 to opt out.”

The calls were made after changes to the law came into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/24/companies-nuisance-calls-texts-fined-500000-ico-ofcom>
 in April relating to nuisance calls and texts. Previously, the ICO had to 
prove that a company caused “substantial damage or substantial distress” in 
making such calls or sending spam text messages. The ICO now only has to prove 
the company was committing a serious breach of privacy and electronic 
communication regulations.

Steve Eckersley, the ICO head of enforcement, said: “This is a classic example 
of a company that has ignored the regulations. Companies making recorded 
marketing calls like this need permission and need to be clear who is making 
the calls. Oxygen Ltd did neither, and even falsely implied they were part of a 
government campaign.

Companies behind nuisance calls and texts to be fined up to £500,000
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/24/companies-nuisance-calls-texts-fined-500000-ico-ofcom>
“If they thought they could avoid detection by paying a separate company to 
make the calls, or by presenting the calls as coming from a mobile phone 
number, they were mistaken. The public complained about these calls, and we 
have acted.”

He warned that “any company acting the way Oxygen did can expect to be 
investigated and receive a large fine from the ICO”.

In October 
<https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2015/10/ico-issues-200-000-fine-for-unsolicited-text-messages-using-new-powers/>
, Swansea-based Help Direct UK Ltd became the first company to be issued with a 
financial penalty by the ICO using its beefed-up powers. It was fined £200,000 
for sending out thousands of unsolicited marketing text messages.

Peter Tutton, the head of policy at StepChange, said: “Nuisance calls are a 
serious problem that causes considerable anxiety and stress, so we are pleased 
that the ICO has identified such practices and is penalising the offenders. 
While this fine is welcome, there is still much more to be done.

“Our research shows that more than half of British adults have been contacted 
by fee-charging debt management companies or marketers selling high-cost credit 
and this is still a real, everyday problem.”
 