
North Korea’s nuclear weapons capabilities and ballistic missile defense 
programs constitute a “serious threat” to the United States, defense secretary 
Ash Carter said on Sunday.

 The US is prepared to shoot down a North Korean missile launch or test “if it 
were coming towards our territory or the territory of our friends and allies”, 
Carter said during an appearance on NBC’s Meet the Press.

North Korea able to test intercontinental ballistic missile this year, say 
experts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/05/north-korea-able-to-test-intercontinental-ballistic-missile-this-year-say-experts>
Earlier this week, Donald Trump voiced a less concerned attitude to North 
Korean tests of intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMS), saying in atweet 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/816057920223846400>: “It won’t 
happen!”

Trump also used Twitter to issue familiar criticism of China, writing 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/816068355555815424>: “China has 
been taking out massive amounts of money and wealth from the US in totally 
one-sided trade, but won’t help with North Korea. Nice!”

On Sunday, North Korea said it could test launch an ICBM at any time from any 
location set by leaderKim Jong-un 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kim-jong-un>, and said hostile US policy was 
to blame for its arms development. Kim said on 1 January that his 
nuclear-capable country was close to test-launching an ICBM.

“The ICBM will be launched anytime and anywhere determined by the supreme 
headquarters of the DPRK,” an unnamed foreign ministry spokesman was quoted as 
saying by the official KCNA news agency, using the acronym for the country’s 
name.

The US said on Thursday that North Korea had demonstrated a “qualitative” 
improvement in its nuclear and missile capabilities after an unprecedented 
level of tests last year. The state department said however that it did not 
believe thatNorth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea> is 
capable of mounting a nuclear warhead on a ballistic missile.

Experts have said that while North Korea may be close to testing an ICBM, it 
would likely take years to perfect the weapon. Once fully developed, a North 
Korean ICBM could threaten the continental US, which is around 9,000km (5,500 
miles) away. ICBMs have a minimum range of about 5,500km (3,400 miles) but some 
are designed to travel 10,000km (6,200 miles) or further.

North Korea has been under United Nations sanctions since 2006, over its 
nuclear and ballistic missile tests. The sanctions were tightened after 
Pyongyang conducted its fifth and largest nuclear test on 9 September.


“The US is wholly to blame for pushing the DPRK to have developed ICBM as it 
has desperately resorted to anachronistic policy hostile toward the DPRK for 
decades to encroach upon its sovereignty and vital rights,” KCNA quoted the 
spokesman as saying.

“Anyone who wants to deal with the DPRK would be well advised to secure a new 
way of thinking after having clear understanding of it,” the spokesman said, 
according to KCNA.
 