
The Affordable Care Act, which ushered in the most significant changes to the 
US healthcare system in half a century,has been placed on life support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/rand-paul-obamacare-bernie-sanders>
. But the healthcare law is not dead yet, and Democrats are turning to the 
public to save it.

Paul outlines Obamacare replacement as Sanders rallies Democratic supporters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/rand-paul-obamacare-bernie-sanders>
On Sunday, liberal groups joined congressional Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> for a “day of action”, holding 
dozens of rallies across the country in a show of support for the law that has 
come to be known, both affectionately and disparagingly, as Obamacare.

“You look great from up here,” said Senator Bernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>, marveling at the large 
turnout for the “Our First Stand” rally in Warren, Michigan, where the 
temperature hovered near freezing.

Republicans have spent years vowing to repeal the Affordable Care Act, 
President Obama’s signature legislative achievement that extended healthcare to 
anestimated 20 million people 
<https://aspe.hhs.gov/sites/default/files/pdf/187551/ACA2010-2016.pdf> and 
dropped the number of the uninsured to a historic low.

But the law has been beset by problems, including premium increases and health 
insurance companies pulling out of government-run marketplaces.

“What we are saying to the Republicans: ‘If you want to improve the Affordable 
Care Act, let’s work together,’” said Sanders, who is playing a major role in 
the coordinated effort against its repeal.

“But if you think you’re simply going to throw millions off of health 
insurance, you’ve got another guess coming.”

Democrats have long struggled to market the 2,000-page law to the public. Many 
of its major provisions, such as banning insurers from discriminating against 
people with pre-existing conditions and allowing young people to stay on their 
parents’ health insurance until 26, are popular. But polling shows a majority 
of Americans disapprove of the law as a whole.

A January poll by the Kaiser Family Foundation 
<http://kff.org/health-costs/press-release/poll-public-divided-on-repealing-obamacare-but-few-want-it-repealed-without-replacement-details/>
, however, found that just one in five Americans support repealing the law 
while three-quarters either oppose repeal altogether or prefer to wait for 
details on its alternative.

President-elect Donald Trump and Republican leaders have said they will not 
repeal the law without a replacement plan but are divided on how to move 
forward. Democrats and their liberal allies see a chance to save the law.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdemocrats-obamacare-repeal-bernie-sanders-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cec3b9b27688547141dc95a454baa580ac4871a%2F0_289_4601_2760%2F4601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Democrats%20turn%20to%20American%20people%20to%20protect%20Obamacare%20from%20looming%20repeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdemocrats-obamacare-repeal-bernie-sanders-healthcare%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Democrats%20turn%20to%20American%20people%20to%20protect%20Obamacare%20from%20looming%20repeal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdemocrats-obamacare-repeal-bernie-sanders-healthcare%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5cec3b9b27688547141dc95a454baa580ac4871a%2F0_289_4601_2760%2F4601.jpg>
 Karen Vermilya, of Onaway, Michigan, holds a sign that reads ‘save healthcare 
for our kids’ at the Obamacare rally. Photograph: Rachel Woolf/Getty Images 
“The fact is they’ve got the US House,”’ said Senator Debbie Stabenow, of 
Michigan, in front of her home crowd on Sunday, referring toRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans>. “They got the US Senate. 
They’re going to have the US presidency. If they want to rip healthcare apart, 
rip Medicare and Medicaid apart, they can do that.

“The only way that we stop this is with your voices and your energy.”

Democrats and activists have planned more action, said Ben Wikler, the 
Washington director of MoveOn.org, a progressive advocacy group involved in 
organizing support for the law. Such action will include protests, rallies and 
“call-in days” in which constituents, especially in Republican states, will 
flood politicians’ phone lines with demands to protect the law.

Activists are also targeting Trump’s choice for secretary of health and human 
services,Georgia representative Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/tom-price-senate-investigation-insider-trading-trump-administration>
, a physician who is a staunch opponent of the ACA.

“Every day that Republicans haven’t repealed Obamacare is a day that we’re 
winning,” Wikler said.


Repeal: where it stands

Republicans control Congress and the White House, but they do not have the 
votes to simply eliminate the entire healthcare law. Instead, they are using a 
parliamentary maneuver, known asbudget reconciliation 
<http://www.cbpp.org/research/federal-budget/introduction-to-budget-reconciliation>
, to hastily unwind key provisions.

Congress approves initial measures to repeal Affordable Care Act
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/congress-house-affordable-care-act-obamacare-repeal>
The tactic, which Democrats used to pass the legislation in 2010, enables 
Republicans to move forward with a simple majority, rather than the 60-vote 
supermajority. Republicans hold 52 seats in the Senate.

Last week, Congress cleared a path to repeal the ACA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/congress-house-affordable-care-act-obamacare-repeal>
, after House Republicans passed the budget measure in a largely party-line 
vote, overcoming protests from Democrats and some in their own party who raised 
concerns that the repeal process was moving ahead without a replacement 
blueprint in place.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pence%3A%20Repealing%20Obamacare%20is%20'first%20order%20of%20business'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pence%3A%20Repealing%20Obamacare%20is%20%27first%20order%20of%20business%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fpence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video&media=>
Pence: Repealing Obamacare is ‘first order of business’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/04/pence-repealing-obamacare-is-first-order-of-business-video>
The Senate passed the measure in the early hours of Thursday after a show of 
resistance by Democrats, who took turns defending the law in floor speeches 
that lasted through the night.

Now the burden is on Republicans to come up with a plan that offers broad 
coverage and controls costs. Trump has said he will replace Obamacare with 
“something terrific”, but Republicans have yet to forma consensus around an 
alternative plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/rand-paul-obamacare-bernie-sanders>
, which will require votes from Senate Democrats to enact.

Trump and Republican leaders have said they expect the “repeal and replace” 
process – which Democrats have dubbed “repeal and delay” – to happen 
concurrently. But they have offered varying timelines of when this will take 
place.

Trump has said he expects the repeal to take place as early as next week with 
a consensus replacement plan being offered “most likely be on the same day or 
the same week, but probably, the same day, could be the same hour”. He promised 
during his campaign to repeal Obamacare “on day one”.

But a repeal of the law by 20 January, day one of Trump’s presidency, is 
highly unrealistic. What “something terrific” might be is dividing the party. 
His commentsto the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-vows-insurance-for-everybody-in-obamacare-replacement-plan/2017/01/15/5f2b1e18-db5d-11e6-ad42-f3375f271c9c_story.html?hpid=hp_hp-top-table-main_trump-interview-822pm%3Ahomepage%2Fstory&utm_term=.4b7af9a1617a>
 this weekend, that he would like to see “insurance for everybody”, did not 
make the picture much clearer.

Though he provided few details, the president-elect said: “There was a 
philosophy in some circles that if you can’t pay for it, you don’t get it. 
That’s not going to happen with us.”


The House speaker, Paul Ryan, meanwhile, told reporters last week: “We’re not 
holding hard deadlines, only because we want to get it right.” He said the 
party would use their annual retreat at the end of the month to discuss how to 
repeal and replace the law.

The budget resolution was just a first step. In the coming weeks, four 
congressional committees will draft legislation to repeal the major provisions 
of the ACA. The legislation is expected to be introduced by 27 January, but the 
deadline is not binding and Republicans have signaled that it will not be met.

That bill will eventually be voted on by both chambers. It needs only a simple 
majority to be approved and is immune from a Democratic filibuster in the 
Senate. At that stage, the bill would go to the president for signature and 
Trump has indicated that he expects it to be accompanied by replacement 
legislation. That is no easy demand.

Democrats can hold up the replacement process. To pass a robust package, 
Republicans will have to win over enough Democrats to reach the 60 votes needed 
in the Senate. Democrats have shown no signs of cooperating.

“We’re willing to look at making it better but we sure as hell ain’t going to 
repeal it,” the minority leader, Senator Chuck Schumer, of New York, said at 
the Michigan rally on Sunday.

“And we’re certainly not going to repeal it when our friends there don’t even 
have a plan to replace it.”
 