
European leaders and officials have had a rocky ride leading up to the EU 
referendum in the UK. First, there was complacency and denial, then a sense of 
panic, and now a muddled attempt to prepare next steps, whatever the result of 
the vote.

Six months ago, when David Cameron was trying to wrap up his renegotiation 
with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/02/eu-deal-key-points-what-cameron-wanted-and-what-he-got>
, the mood in European capitals was one of barely hidden annoyance – the 
“British question” needed to be dealt with swiftly so that the EU could get 
back to addressing more serious and pressing challenges than the requests 
coming from London.

What's happening where you are on EU referendum polling day?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/23/whats-happening-where-you-are-on-eu-referendum-polling-day>
Yet later, as opinion polls in Britain narrowed, the reaction shifted to a 
mixture of panic and bewilderment that Brexit might actually happen, bringing 
far-reaching consequences for the whole EU bloc. Now, days before the vote, 
minds have started to focus on what should be done to strengthen the European 
project, whichever way the referendum goes. But the answer to the question of 
“the day after” remains blurry – not least because of the shaky state of the 
Franco-German engine, which has always been key to the EU’s solidity.

For months, EU leaders kept mostly silent. They saw the prospect of a UK 
referendum as a tedious, unnecessary sideshow distracting attention from the 
more urgent and deeper matters the continent was confronted with – the Greek 
euro crisis, dealing with Russia, terrorism, migration and asylum questions.

European officials wanted the British question out of the way as fast as 
possible. The widely shared assumption was that Britons would be pragmatic 
enough to see pulling their country out of the EU was an utterly irrational and 
self-damaging move. Cameron had discreetly asked fellow EU leaders to refrain 
from wading into the referendum debate, for fear their input would be 
counterproductive. His hopes rested on themessage Barack Obama would deliver  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
while in London. But as time passed, it became obvious that hadn’t done the 
trick.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ab96d9576b0e1ca89df22257d566589d9ea714%2F0_326_4356_2613%2F4356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denial%20then%20panic%3A%20how%20the%20EU%20misjudged%20the%20British%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denial%20then%20panic%3A%20how%20the%20EU%20misjudged%20the%20British%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F17ab96d9576b0e1ca89df22257d566589d9ea714%2F0_326_4356_2613%2F4356.jpg>
 Barack Obama in the UK in April, when he warned against leaving the EU. 
Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
When concern grew, prominent European voices started openly sending warnings. 
At an event commemorating the 100th anniversary of the Battle of Verdun, the 
leaders of France and Germany criticised opponents of the EU. “They denounce 
Europe as the source of evil, without realising that Europe was created out of 
the ravages of evil,” said François Hollande. “It is important for the survival 
of theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> that we not retreat 
within ourselves but remain open to the other,” said Angela Merkel.

Hitting an economic nerve, Germany’s finance minister made plain that if 
Britain quit the EU, it would deprive itself of access to the single market. 
Following the Swiss or Norwegian model “won’t work”,said German finance 
minister Wolfgang Schäuble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
: “In is in, out is out”. Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the EU 
commission, said that if it quit the bloc, “the United Kingdom won’t be handled 
with kid gloves”.

EU leaders have in fact been struggling to find the right balance between two 
conflicting priorities: the need to demonstrate that Brexit could not be 
painless, to discourage other member states from contemplating a special status 
or from withdrawing from the bloc; and the need to limit the damage in case of 
a British departure by stating that cooperation would be preserved regardless.


Perhaps nowhere in the EU is the geopolitical fallout of a possible Brexit 
being watched with more anxiety than in the Baltic states. Toomas Hendrik 
Ilves, the president of Estonia, a country of 1.5 million where concern over 
Russian aggression has ridden high, said last month that over the past two 
decades he’d never been less optimistic about Europe’s prospects. He listed 
“the rise of populism and serious talk of the UK leaving the EU” among the most 
worrying developments.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20would%20Brexit%20affect%20you%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F07%2Fhow-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer&media=>
How would Brexit affect you? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/07/how-would-brexit-affect-you-eu-referendum-video-explainer>
In eastern Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, “countries 
that had finished a 15-year odyssey to rejoin Europe” suddenly felt that “the 
world around us began to unravel”, Ilves said.

Britain’s withdrawal would mark a weakening of Europe’s liberal democratic 
order, many participants agreed. Some pointed to how Russian propagandists were 
trying to capitalise on European divisions, anticipating Brexit as a watershed. 
“The sands of Europe are shifting under our feet,” said one speaker. Britain is 
the only country that ever committed to carrying out an in/out referendum, but 
surveys show there are many in favour of holding similar consultations in other 
countries (53% in France; 49% of Swedes).

Last week, leaders of Europe’s largest far-right and populist parties gathered 
near Vienna to urge Britons to leave the 28-nation bloc. The meeting, called 
the Patriotic Spring, was designed to strengthen cooperation among 
anti-immigration, Europhobic movements that have been on the rise across Europe 
and see Brexit as a decisive, galvanising factor.

The leader of France’s National Front, Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>, told the crowd that “the 
peoples of Europe” should “take back their liberties” just like “the United 
Kingdom is regaining its liberty”. Hosted by Austria’s Freedom party, which 
came close to winning presidential elections in May, the event was attended by 
representatives from nine countries, including from Germany’s Alternative for 
Germany party and Italy’s Northern League party.

For many on the continent, Britain’s specific identity – being “of” Europe 
rather than fully “in” it – was never much in doubt, but there has been deep 
annoyance about how Cameron has put the very destiny of the EU at stake by 
falling into a political trap of his own making, ever since he called for a 
referendum in 2013.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f67b337a27563e84c612671731c157fabb37598%2F0_176_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Denial%20then%20panic%3A%20how%20the%20EU%20misjudged%20the%20British%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Denial%20then%20panic%3A%20how%20the%20EU%20misjudged%20the%20British%20mood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fjun%2F22%2Feu-referendum-denial-then-panic-how-the-eu-misjudged-the-british-mood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f67b337a27563e84c612671731c157fabb37598%2F0_176_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen and Austrian far-right leader Heinz-Christian Strache arrive at 
the Patriotic Spring meeting in Vienna. Photograph: Heinz-Peter Bader/Reuters 
The irony, many European diplomats and experts say, is that if it were to 
leave the EU now, Britain would be shunning a club that has arguably never been 
as “British” in its mindset. Events and crises have forced the EU to focus on 
trying to deliver concrete, pragmatic solutions to immediate problems rather 
than entertain abstract notions such as “ever closer union” that the British 
dislike.

'We'd rather talk about bananas than borders': our European neighbours on the 
EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/22/bananas-borders-european-neighbours-eu>
Once emphatic talk of deepening political integration, for example, through 
initiatives meant to strengthen eurozone governance or to work on a common 
European defence and security policy, has become cautious. That’s because 
France andGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> do not 
necessarily see eye to eye on how to proceed. Their leaders are faced with 
important elections next year and the rise of Eurosceptic movements in both 
countries is having a paralysing effect. Pro-EU statements will surely follow 
the British vote, whichever way it goes, but rapid and effective 
decision-making seems highly uncertain, say diplomats.

One widely shared sentiment is that Brexit would represent a deep danger to 
Europe’s democratic ideals because of possible domino effects and because of 
the overall popular loss of confidence in the EU it would signal. Karel 
Schwarzenberg, a former Czech foreign minister who was a close friend of Václav 
Havel, once an important voice of Europe’s moral conscience, takes the 
historical perspective: “We in Europe have had the great opportunity over the 
last half-century to create a sense of common identity and interest – why throw 
that away?”
 