
Politicians foolish enough to search for “Britishness”, those ineffable 
qualities and values that define who we think we are, conjure up strings of 
imagined characteristics, virtually all of which have turned out to be wrong.

No, we are not the tolerant, moderate folk we pretend: the Brexit vote put an 
end to that notion, as we, the country that has taken a tiny number of 
refugees, vote to keep out foreigners at any price, however self-harming. As the
Germans take a million refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/germany-on-course-to-accept-one-million-refugees-in-2015>
 and the Italians and Greeks absorb thousands a week, imagine the paroxysms of 
national hysteria if the Isle of Wight suddenly receivedLampedusa’s boatloads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/16/lampedusa-island-of-hope> of 
migrants every day.

Southern rail strike: Grayling offers to meet RMT union for talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/latest-southern-strike-fresh-chaos-rail-commuters>
What other qualities do we wrongly boast about? Phlegmatic, stiff upper lip, 
stoicism. But all too often that’s just apathy, spinelessness and lack of the 
basic gumption to stand up and refuse to take it any more, the waythe French 
regularly do 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/10/why-do-the-french-protest-so-much-google>
. We are badly governed because British government relies on supine 
acquiescence to just about everything.

“Frankly, I didn’t think we’d get away with it,” one less austerian former 
Tory minister said to me. “But there doesn’t seem to be a limit,” he said, 
contemplating the essential services stripped away and the billions in benefits 
ripped from the pockets of very “hardworking” families, disabled people or the 
elderly left with no care, without riots or rebellions.

It’s easy to see why individual families are in no position to take collective 
action. Isolated, not members of unions, they have no collective voice. That’s 
what George Osborne discovered and what Philip Hammond assumes. They can do 
just about anything to those with least, and they suffer silently, turning 
shamefacedly to food banks not to food riots.

Countless studies of what triggers revolutions suggest it’s not those with no 
bread on the table but the frustrations of an aspiring but disappointed 
bourgeoisie that cause revolt. Not hamstrung by the struggle to survive, they 
are the ones with the time and resources to organise. But no, not in phlegmatic 
Britain.

That’s a long preamble to point to something a lot more frivolous, but 
nonetheless puzzling. Today is the third successive day of yet anotherSouthern 
Rail strike by the RMT union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/latest-southern-strike-fresh-chaos-rail-commuters>
. This interminable dispute has rendered the lives of south-east commuters 
desperate. Tory MPs along the routessay people are losing their jobs 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/07/southern-rail-passengers-having-job-applications-rejected-crisis/>
. Nick Herbert, MP for Arundel and South Downswrites in the Telegraph today 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/07/southern-rail-strikes-absurd-passengers-must-not-made-suffer/>
 that employers are rejecting job applications from those relying on Southern 
to get to work, because often they won’t make it. “Major contracts in the 
region have been cancelled,” he says. Sir Nicholas Soames (MP for Mid Sussex) 
talks of “very, very angry” people who have had their “livelihoods buggered 
up.” People are being “held to ransom by an incompetent company and industrial 
action based on specious argument,” he says.

An appalling rail company famous for dreadful service with crammed carriages 
and frequent cancellations, is trying to remove guards from its trains by first 
taking away their job operating the doors. Govia Thameslink Railway, the parent 
company haseven gone to court today 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-38228208> to try to prevent the train 
drivers taking action, rather than settle it. A string of accelerating strikes 
are planned running up to Christmas and through new year.

Even a cluster of the Sussex bishops of Chichester, Horsham and Lewes 
<http://www.chichester.anglican.org/news/2016/12/06/sussex-bishops-plead-talks-end-rail-strike-which-causing-misery/>
 are waving their crosiers, calling for “someone to lead the way”, as those 
responsible have a “moral duty to alleviate the damage.” Soames even claims, 
“There is a mood of real anarchy.” Well, anarchy among south-east commuters is 
a very tame affair.

These must be among the most powerful commuters in the land, well-heeled and 
well-connected, influential enough to frighten government. Their “anarchy” is 
pathetic: a few loud hailer protests at Victoria station don’t spell rebellion 
– though the women of St Albans calling themselvesThe Train Suffererjettes 
<https://www.facebook.com/trainsuffererjettes/?fref=ts> are protesting against 
Govia Thameslink’s terrible service on 12 December.

Mostly, the commuters are a pretty spineless crew when they should be chasing 
after transport secretary Chris Grayling with Sussex pitchforks, he who refuses 
to hand over the worst London commuter routes to the capable hands of Transport 
for London for purely political reasons. TfL, after all, is a dangerous example 
of a brilliantly run nationalised transport system. Grayling is the onesetting 
out to privatise his new Oxford-Cambridge line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/06/new-fully-privatised-rail-line-chris-grayling-plans-oxford-cambridge>
, out of pure ideology. Bob Neill, Tory MP for Bromley and Chiselhurst, chair 
of the justice select committee,said on Wednesday 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/leaked-letter-reveals-transport-secretary-always-planned-to-block-labour-takeover-of-londons-a3414216.html>
 that Grayling was “not fit to hold office” and had “compromised his position 
and should resign” for his political overruling of handing over failing 
suburban services to TfL.

Southern Railway is failing customers again and again. That’s why I spoke out 
| David Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/southern-railway-failing-customers-cancellations-staff-shortages-delays>
But what action are these Sussex MPs taking to force their government to stop 
backing Govia? The commuters by and large back the RMT in opinion polls, 
rightly wanting to keep the friendlySouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> guards on their trains: why 
would Govia fight so hard on the childish issue of who opens the doors, unless 
they wanted to be rid of the guards?

But have these commuters no wit or imagination to devise protests that would 
force the government to take action? The very least direct action might include 
a bit of polite vandalism, such as glueing all Southern ticket machines on 
every station to deny them ticket revenue and jamming open all ticket barriers.

Meanwhile, a far more serious protest should be made by northern commuters 
against ever heavier investment in the south, leaving the miserable crammed 
infrequent squalor of their commuter lines to rot. Travelling yesterday to 
Huddersfield was a reminder of what “left behind” looks like in transport 
terms, as their vital renovations and city-to-city connections are cancelled 
while Southern-based vanity projects such asHS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> and Crossrail 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> power ahead. It’s time for commuter 
rebellions, north and south.
 