
“I don’t care what the university lobbyists say,” said Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/06/guardian-view-on-theresa-may-conservative-party-conference-speech-nasty-party>
 at this week’s Conservative party conference. And on the face of it, she 
doesn’t, preferring instead to see universities as part of Britain’s 
“immigration problem”.

International students forced to queue in their thousands to collect visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/mar/19/international-students-forced-to-queue-in-their-thousands-to-collect-visas>
However, she might be more rattled by how the media, business groups and some 
of her colleagues reacted to her speech on immigration. The Telegraph described 
it as “awful, ugly, misleading, cynical and irresponsible 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/immigration/11913927/Theresa-Mays-immigration-speech-is-dangerous-and-factually-wrong.html>
”. The Spectator accused May of “pandering to the basest elements of the Tory 
party 
<http://blogs.new.spectator.co.uk/2015/10/theresa-mays-immigration-speech-was-as-tawdry-as-it-was-contemptible/>
” and offering a “stale and noxious concoction of tawdry nativism”.

The question for the higher education sector is: did May’s speech live up to 
media speculation that she would make it even tougher for international 
students to find places at British universities?

The speech followed a “revelation” in the Times that David Cameron had 
abandoned support 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/news/politics/article4577400.ece> (paywall) for 
May over her insistence that overseas students continue to be included in the 
government’s net migrant target and a claim in the Sunday Times that she wason 
a collision course 
<http://www.thesundaytimes.co.uk/sto/news/uk_news/article1615053.ece> (paywall) 
with universities over plans to slash the number of foreign students coming to 
Britain by at least 25,000 a year – by setting tougher English language tests.

The new language tests, the paper claimed, “are expected to be tougher than 
those in place in Australia and America, putting Britain’s top universities at 
a disadvantage”.

But May elected not to go into the detail of her plans for stricter language 
requirements for international students, or even visa thresholds.

Get UK students out of comfort zone and engaging with international peers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/11/get-uk-students-out-of-comfort-zone-and-engaging-with-international-peers>
In fact, her speech has been widely judged as a leadership bid. It certainly 
wasn’t an economic argument. Her claims about the impact of immigration on 
houses, jobs, wages were a clear pitch for political advantage well to the 
right of the other likely runners.

On the face of things then , little has changed. Proposals on language 
thresholds, refusal rates and students remaining in the migration figures are 
still on the table and, no doubt, in various Home Office drafts of an imminent 
immigration white paper. So we’re not there yet. But for the first time in 
years, there may be reason to be optimistic.

George Osborne knows he might have to upset universities by cutting some of 
their cash in the November spending review. But alongside Philip Hammond at the 
Foreign Office and more recently Sajid Javid at the Department for Business, 
Innovation and Skills, he is keen to allow them to make this up via increased 
international recruitment.

He and the Treasury know what economic benefits that both migration and 
international students bring to the economy. Furthermore, Osborne won’t want to 
lose any political tussle with a leading rival for the leadership.


International students: where do they go to study? – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/ng-interactive/2014/jul/17/international-students-where-do-they-go-to-study-interactive>
So where do we go from here? In the immediate future, this only leads us 
directly to what David Cameron is thinking. Thus far he has stood by his home 
secretary - immediately after the May general election, the Conservatives 
reiterated their target to bring net migration down to the tens of thousands. 
This week he claimed to agree with every word of May’s speech, including her 
view that ‘immigration makes it impossible to build a cohesive society.’

But Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has powerful 
new opponents in the media, business and among her own colleagues. On this 
issue, it is only Cameron’s support that matters. Will he change his mind? 
Osborne, Hammond, Javid and Johnson want him to do so. But none are the leader 
yet.

As May ramps up measures against international students and anti-immigration 
rhetoric, it gets more difficult for the prime minister to remain neutral. It 
is time to make his choice.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.
 