
Hugh Muir <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hughmuir>: A confident Corbyn a 
world away from last year

To the victor, all of the spoils. That’s why an ebullient, confident Jeremy 
Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> was able to 
calibrate before conference the precise nature of the relationship he will have 
with those who cackhandedly sought to depose him.

We will do as you wish, he told them right at the outset. We will, under my 
leadership, actually identify the goal of winning an election. Most of all, he 
said, the party was about “winning power in local and national government to 
deliver the real change our country so desperately needs”.

But if Corbyn confirmed for them a pleasing destination, he also made it clear 
that they would be undertaking the journey on his route. If their brand of 
unity depended on Corbyn listening to them and adapting his line on immigration 
or defence to assuage their fears, that, it became clear, wasn’t going to 
happen.

Still, there was much they could sign up to. They might balk at the 
renationalisation of the railways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/labour-promises-to-renationalise-english-railways>
 and the politically difficult repeal of the Trade Union Act, but he threw in 
crowd-pleasers for right and left: a national education service, a national 
investment bank, more housing, curbs on tax avoidance and aschool pupil arts 
premium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/aug/25/jeremy-corbyn-arts-pupil-premium-primary-schools-reverse-spending-cuts>
.

This was a Corbyn a world away from the hesitancy of his speech last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/sep/12/jeremy-corbyns-victory-speech-as-labour-leader-video>
. He joshed with the audience. He connected with the campaigners of 
Hillsborough. He deployed a talent for comedic pauses and shrugs.

There was Tory-bashing, during which his smooth tone ascended to a growl. 
There was personal testimony, about his parents and his time spent in Jamaica. 
Here was a man who doesn’t do normal politics – but this looked very much like 
it.

But above all there was a message: a repeated rebuttal of the claim that 
Corbynism, by definition or perhaps design, equals electoral oblivion. I can 
win; I want to win; I see the need to win, he said. If critics believe that, 
they may acquiesce yet.

Jonathan Freedland <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jonathanfreedland>: A 
missed chance to address leave voters

Jeremy Corbyn’s great hero Tony Benn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/mar/14/tony-benn-dies-establishment-insider-turned-leftwing-outsider>
 always decried the media’s interest in personality and style, wishing they 
would concentrate instead on substance and policy – the things he was teased 
for calling “the ishoos”. So, in that spirit, the proper focus for any analysis 
of Corbyn’s speech to the Labour party conference should be on the detail of 
what he said rather than the way he said it.

Which is a pity, because it was in the previously vexed matter of presentation 
that the leader did rather well. This was easily the most confident Corbyn 
performance to date, his delivery fluent and strong. Only occasionally did the 
emphasis stray on to the wrong syllable. Most of the time he looked relaxed in 
front of the Autocue rather than terrified, as he had this time last year. 
There was an (admittedly brief) personal passage about his upbringing, a couple 
of stirring quotations, even something close to a joke. All those appearances 
before adoring crowds over the summer have clearly helped.

Jeremy Corbyn speech: 'rampant inequality has become the great scandal of our 
time' - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-speech-labour-conference-jeremy-corbyns-today-interview>
But as a good Bennite, Corbyn will obviously be uninterested in such trivia. 
So on to the substance. The speech was aimed chiefly at theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> tribe, hoping to unite those who 
have been fighting each other so bitterly.

He did that by reminding dissidents of the size of his renewed mandate, of the 
fact that Labour is now the biggest party in western Europe and by urging them 
to be a ready for a general election that could come at any moment. (He also 
warned the bigger beasts that their temporary replacements in the shadow 
cabinet may not be so temporary after all – that they could be the future.)

He also sought to remind those in the hall of what they had in common, hitting 
those ideological notes that are more or less uncontroversial. So he played the 
reliable keys of opposition to grammar schools; rail nationalisation; giving 
councils the power to borrow to build homes; and investment in manufacturing, 
engineering and innovation. There were some new policy nuggets that he knew 
would go down well too, such as an arts pupil premium for lessons in music, 
dance or painting.

What was missing was the presentation of a case to the wider Labour 
electorate, let alone to those people who voted Tory in 2015 and who will have 
to be won over if Labour is ever to return to power again.

Corbyn barely addressed himself to the Labour voters who voted leave in the 
referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, except for 
telling them that they are wrong to be so opposed to immigration, and the 
source of their woes lies elsewhere. That’s a legitimate case to make – of 
course it is. But it takes more than a few paragraphs – and it meant his later 
insistence that “we must hear [the] concerns”on immigration of those 
left-behind voters rang hollow.

So Corbyn’s team can congratulate themselves on a good afternoon. But the task 
confronting them is so much larger.

Ellie Mae O’Hagan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/ellie-mae-o-hagan>: 
Corbyn is the only game in town

The speech confirmed two things about Jeremy Corbyn. The first is that he is 
not a great orator. He stumbled a few times on the Autocue and looked awkward 
at times. Presentation really needs to be improved if he is to reach out to the 
wider electorate. The second is that, right now, he is the only game in town.

One of the things the Brexit vote revealed is that for millions of people in 
this country the status quo has become intolerable. Corbyn represents the only 
strand of the Labour party that can respond to that sentiment; it’s the only 
one radical enough.

And respond Corbyn did. He said the system was broken. He channelled people’s 
anger. He promised an ambitious new settlement for the 21st century.

The policies he listed were genuinely exciting: from renationalising the 
railways to a humanitarian foreign policy and repealing the Trade Union Act. 
Here was a leader on the side of the little guy, a leader who at least 
understands the challenges of the era.

Of course, one of the biggest tasks for Corbyn in the coming months is to 
convince a jaded and angry electorate that he will make good on his stated 
ambition. The public is suspicious of politicians after decades of broken 
promises, and pessimistic about the possibility of politics to change the world 
after having their expectations lowered by the Cameron government’s austerity 
rhetoric. And yes, Labour infighting and bad media management means the public 
will have questions about Corbyn’s competence too.

But Corbyn and his team should rise to these challenges with gusto. We haven’t 
heard a mainstream politician talk like this for years. I even dared to feel a 
little optimistic.

Aditya Chakrabortty <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adityachakrabortty>: 
A real reverse takeover of the Labour party

More fluent than last year, but miles off actual oratory; snappier lines, but 
hardly an epigrammatist – Jeremy Corbyn is never going to conform to the 
lobby’s platonic ideal of what a politician should be. No memorised speeches or 
walkabouts on stage here. I always suspected that Ed Miliband psyched himself 
up for a big speech by watching box sets ofThe West Wing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-west-wing>. I’d be surprised if 
Corbyn has even heard of Jed Bartlet.

But at the heart of today’s speech Corbyn was making a big new argument, one I 
haven’t heard from a Labour leader’s speech in my entire working life. In just 
over a year, the Labour party has gone from a being desiccated husk of 
worn-down old leftists and elbows-out young Blairites to being a mass movement. 
At half a million members, it is the biggest party in Europe – at a time when 
other political parties are dying. To use business terminology, we have 
witnessed something akin to a reverse takeover of the Labour party. It is 
incomplete and it is certainly contested, but it is real.

And what the head of this new movement – confirmed as its leader twice in 12 
months – was sketching out today was the potential for a social movement in 
electoral politics. By invoking the victories ofSadiq Khan in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/16/sadiq-khans-first-100-days-as-london-mayor-how-is-he-doing>
 andMarvin Rees in Bristol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/12/marvin-rees-the-bristolian-bearing-the-weight-of-labour-hopes>
, he was showing that a social movement can yield victory at the ballot box.

This will be the central argument within Labour until the next general 
election. The press and politicians have spent the past year asking whether 
this hitherto obscure backbencher can actually lead a party. Well, they’ve got 
their answer now, even if it’s not the one they’d have liked. The question is: 
how far can a social movement go? It’s what I kept hearing this week at the 
Momentum gathering in Liverpool, and sooner or later the keepers of the old 
orthodoxy will have to start grappling with it.

One last point: in 2016, Corbyn is one of a handful of prominent politicians 
willing to defend migrants. That in itself is a commendation for the man – but 
it’s also an indictment of the rest. When bright people within Labour are 
making their ownRivers of Blood 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rivers_of_Blood_speech>-style speeches, I really 
do despair.

Polly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>: The best of 
Corbyn – and the worst

Well-delivered, it was the best of Corbyn; and it was the worst of Corbyn. His 
followers will see the best, in the unbending principles of an unworldly leader 
refusing to stoop for mere electoral advantage – and never more honourably than
over immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/28/jeremy-corbyn-speech-labour-conference-jeremy-corbyns-today-interview>
.

Even if it tops voter concerns, here was no truck with populist, 
anti-foreigner sentiment, despite the foghorn Brexit vote: no immigration 
controls, no arbitrary limit on numbers. “It isn’t migrants that drive down 
wages. It’s exploitative employers.” Quite right.

But he takes his party with him on a jaw-dropping kamikaze mission, in the 
current climate. Where his wiser MPs talk of reasonable controls without 
courting Ukippery, Corbyn goes for martyrdom. A lifetime spent in Islington’s 
liberal multicultural haven, he sees less than they of the wrath, the sense of 
loss, the patriotic identity crisis of Labour voters who feel their culture and 
good nature is imposed on. He is right: in places most afraid of immigration, 
numbers are mainly lowest – and voters wrongly blame migrants for all the 
effects of austerity cuts to schools, NHS and housing. But being right won’t 
stop his party being blown down by a hurricane of contrary public opinion.

That’s just the tailwind of Britain’s great national crisis. Where was 
Corbyn’s plan – even a vague outline – of how Britain should negotiate Brexit? 
As the government splits into fragments over this, Labour needs a forensic and 
united strategy for holding Theresa May to account for delivering the best 
possible terms. But with nothing from the leadership, his MPs are all over the 
place too on Brexit and immigration.

Now for the worst of Corbynism: he calls for party unity – and there was 
plenty here for all to rally round on housing, schools, investment and much 
more. But demanding no “trench warfare” from his opponents, he offered not one 
word of protection to MPs beleaguered by his shock troops in their 
constituencies. The man of peace should have called off thedogs of deselection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/25/jeremy-corbyn-most-labour-mps-should-not-fear-deselection>
.
 