
“It only needs one bad driver to spoil your day,” says Gwyneth Pedler, a 
scooter user, in London. “You set off in a morning and you’re worrying. You get 
to one place and you’re worrying. You’re never free of worry.”

At 91 years old, Pedler, who has rheumatoid arthritis, has been using a 
scooter on buses and trains for more than a decade, first in Oxford and now in 
London, after moving nearer to her family two years ago. For Pedler, public 
transport is a way to keep social in retirement: day trips to Kew Gardens and 
Southend or a night at a restaurant or the theatre. “I’ve no intention of being 
a little old lady who sits inside,” she says.

But despite some good experiences, she ends up in regular battles to even be 
allowed on a bus. “Sometimes I persuade them [to let me on],” she says. 
“Sometimes they shut the door.”

After a recent night at the theatre, she tried to get a bus home only be told 
by the driver that scooters weren’t allowed. “So he left me on the pavement. At 
11.30 at night,” she says. “Five people got off in protest. The driver didn’t 
care.”


Britain’s equality watchdog recently warned that many disabled people are still
being treated as “second-class citizens” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/19/people-with-disabilities-treated-like-second-class-citizens-says-watchdog>
, citing inaccessible transport, among other areas, as a key “badge of shame”. 
Public transport can be a lifeline to disabled people – 60% have no car 
available to their households, compared to27% of the overall population 
<http://www.papworthtrust.org.uk/sites/default/files/Facts%20and%20Figures%202013%20web.pdf>
, in part because they’re more likely to be on a low income – but multiple 
barriers exist that mean they’re still routinely excluded from it.

Mo Onyett, a student adviser at the University of York, uses the train to 
commute to work from her home in Leeds, and regularly travels to London for 
meetings. But because she’s a wheelchair user, the 38-year-old can’t book 
online like everyone else; instead, she has to call up to buy a ticket, as well 
as to book assistance from staff to help her off the train with a ramp.

Still, in rush hour, she’s been left on the train in York when staff “forgot 
her”, with the same thing happening twice in one week at King’s Cross. “If it 
hadn’t been for the fact I have a loud voice I’d have been on my way to the 
next station,” she says.

Small changes, like train companies keeping ramps on the train, would make “a 
huge difference” to both train staff and passengers, Onyett says. The 
introduction of some folding seats that could then be removed for wheelchair 
users may also provide easier access for disabled commuters trying to get to 
work, she adds.

Mohammed Mohsanali, who has a visual impairment and uses a cane, cites 
something as simple as bus drivers making sure they pull up to the actual bus 
stop – rather than pulling in behind another bus – as a way to make it easier 
for him to visit friends. As it stands, Mohsanali, unable to see the bus has 
arrived and too far away to ask the driver to ask which bus it is, is often 
left stranded


Keen to get to friends in other parts of the city, Mohsanali describes the 
underground as “part of my daily life”. But staff cuts mean a lot of the 
smaller stations no longer have anyone there to help him, he says. Without any 
staff to point him towards the right train, he has to ask members of the public 
for help.

“They often try and grab your arm which isn’t safe,” Mohsanali says. It’s 
caused him to fall down the escalators. “He [the helper] was walking so fast 
and didn’t warn me an escalator was coming up. I’ve injured my knee like that a 
couple of times.”

For Pedler, now she’s not in Oxford, the tube is another way to stay social 
but with only a small portion of theunderground accessible to wheelchairs and 
scooters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/oct/29/disabled-man-tube-challenge-london-underground-accessibility>
, she relies on help fromTransport for All <http://www.transportforall.org.uk>, 
an organisation that provides advice for disabled travellers in London, to plan 
her routes. Sometimes she gets off the tube only to find the lift isn’t 
working. “You then have to go back to another station to get out,” she says. 
Better communication, such as widely publicising at all stations when other 
lifts are down, seems vital to help navigate such a system.

When it comes to buses, Pedler stresses useful measures already exist to 
enable access – for example, a button the driver can press that announces a 
wheelchair is coming on board so pushchairs can be moved – but drivers need to 
be told to follow through on them.

“Every day disabled people are being refused entry,” she says. “It stops us 
being independent.”

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 