
I’ve often said 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2015/08/five-most-dangerous-myths-about-sickness-and-disability-benefits>
 the Conservatives proposing support for disabled and chronically ill workers 
is much like a great white shark advocating vegetarianism. It would mean more 
if they didn’t currently have blood on their teeth. As the government released 
its long-awaited review into disability and unemployment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
 on Monday, for some reason, that thought came to mind again.

Government aims to halve disability employment gap in UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
Amid the jargon and vague claims, the green paper appears to contain some 
decent – if highly overdue – ideas. For one, the bid to examine changes to the 
work capability assessment, the “fit-for-work” test that’s been alleged tomake 
people physically sicker 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/government-fitness-for-work-test-is-making-disabled-people-sicker-report-claims-10082452.html>
, and damage theirmental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/16/fit-for-work-tests-serious-toll-mental-health-work-capability>
, while being so inaccurate that, at last count, 60% of appeals by disabled 
people rejected for benefits have thedecision overturned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/online-benefits-appeals-tribunals-disabled>
. The report also talks of more tailored support for disabled jobseekers – 
dubbed anew personal support package 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/work-and-health-plan-to-help-disabled-people-into-employment>
 – and better links with employers, such as a trial voluntary work experience 
programme for young disabled people (emphasis on voluntary, we can only hope) 
and ministers working with business leaders.

It would not be churlish for disabled people to be sceptical at this point. 
It’s fairly difficult to trust the government has your best interests at heart 
when it comes to health and work if you’ve just had to go to a food bank 
because the jobcentre sanctioned your benefits when you were too ill to get out 
of bed, or you’re still battling the anxiety condition you developed from the 
sight of brown Department for Work and Pensions envelopes on your doormat.

Yes, the previous attempts by the Conservatives to close the disability 
employment gap have been outright failures, be it theDisability Confident scheme
 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/disability-confident-attracts-just-40-mainstream-private-sector-partners-in-three-years/>
 or theWork Programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/17/welfare-to-work-programme-failing-disabled-and-ill-jobseekers-say-charities>
. But more than that, their treatment of disabled and chronically ill people 
pushed through the out-of-work sickness benefit system has been defined by some 
of the most pernicious policies in modern politics – from the increase of 
sanctions, the “time limiting” of sickness benefits, to the push to repeated 
retesting – while overseeing the birth of a culture of suspicion, fear, and 
outright cruelty.

As I wrote last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/27/dont-stigmatise-disabled-people-workshy>
, employment, at its best, can provide value to many disabled people. But 
listen to the work and pensions secretary, Damian Green, launch the 
consultation by declaring that a job is better than “sitting at home living on 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/sitting-at-home-on-sickness-benefits-is-bad-for-health-damian-green>
”, and it sounds at best patronising – as if this was new information to 
someone who had to quit work from the tremors of Parkinson’s disease – and at 
worst dangerous ideology. If “sitting at home on benefits” is bad for disabled 
people, being pressured by the jobcentre to return to work too soon or take a 
job you’re too ill for is not exactly beneficial either.

Similarly, when the report talks of employment packages that focus on what 
disabled and chronically ill people “can do rather than what they cannot”, what 
in other hands could be a positive, sensible pledge feels like yet more 
conservative individualism that turns a blind eye to the structural problems. 
This fear is only increased by the hint ofending the separation of people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
 found to be so ill or disabled that they’re unable to take a job – and will 
always need the security of out-of-work benefits – from those deemed “able”. If 
years of supposedly “fit-for-work” disabled people abandoned to the labour 
market has taught us anything, it’s that there is a big difference between a 
disabled person being able to work in theory and a job existing in reality that 
they will be hired for. I may be able to work for three hours a day – orpick up 
a pound coin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/24/benefits-system-disabled-people-ken-loach-daniel-blake>
 – but it doesn’t mean anyone will pay me for it.

There are a host of measures that are needed to tackle the disability 
unemployment problem: building a flexible benefit assessment that doesn’t 
penalise people from taking work for short periods based on their fluctuating 
health; developing any policy from the understanding disability and illness 
(both short term and chronic) can’t be conflated but also don’t sit neatly 
separate; and working with employers to not only displace “prejudices and 
misunderstandings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/31/government-aims-to-halve-disability-employment-gap-in-uk>
” but to also introduce workplace change that will make work physically 
possible, such as flexible hours and working from home. The solutions are not 
simple, nor are the problems the fault of one government or group of 
politicians.

Will disability benefits appeals become less fair? | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/12/online-benefits-appeals-tribunals-disabled>
But if the Conservatives were genuine about supporting disabled people into 
work, they would do well to remove the obstacles they themselves have created. 
Perhaps they could start by not going ahead with taking £30 a week from many 
people too ill to work – a policy that it’s been found will actuallyreduce 
disabled people’s chance to find a job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/cutting-disabled-benefits-wont-work>
 – andsome backbench Tory MPs are planning to rebel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/tory-mps-join-call-to-postpone-disability-benefit-cuts>
. Or they could pull back numerous cuts to social care and social security. 
After all, a job is little good if your local council has cut the personal 
assistant who helps you get dressed in the morning or theDWP have removed your 
mobility car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
. While they’re at it, they could push funding into theAccess to Work scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/20/disabled-people-lose-jobs-access-to-work>
, rather than continuing to gut it.

Disabled and chronically ill people in this country have had six long years of 
the Conservatives’ insight into health, benefits, and unemployment. Some – 
quite literally – have the scars to show it. If the government is surprised its 
latest pledges are being greeted with little trust or optimism, it can now have 
the job of proving us wrong.
 