
Being a head chef in a hotel, compared with a restaurant, brings with it 
additional tasks – there’s breakfast, which doesn’t really happen in a 
restaurant, and other different situations to cater for, such as private dining 
and room service, so there’s a lot to do. But I have a strong team behind me 
and that is the most important thing. There’s no typical day for me – sometimes 
I start work very early, at other times I have to work late – it depends on 
what there is to do for that day.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmarriott-travels%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdiscover-the-kitchen-philosophy-of-a-top-berlin-chef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a63c3df83ed6dd2d3798eb290ec245092632c60%2F0_0_1730_2600%2F1730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discover%20the%20kitchen%20philosophy%20of%20a%20top%20Berlin%20chef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmarriott-travels%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdiscover-the-kitchen-philosophy-of-a-top-berlin-chef%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discover%20the%20kitchen%20philosophy%20of%20a%20top%20Berlin%20chef&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmarriott-travels%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdiscover-the-kitchen-philosophy-of-a-top-berlin-chef%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5a63c3df83ed6dd2d3798eb290ec245092632c60%2F0_0_1730_2600%2F1730.jpg>
 Marcus Zimmer: ‘I enjoy immersing myself in the techniques of cooking. It is 
important for a chef to never stop learning.’ Photograph: HolmBieraeugel 
At Restaurant am Steinplatz 
<http://www.marriott.com/hotels/hotel-information/restaurant/berak-hotel-am-steinplatz-autograph-collection/>
 we change our menu every month and the creative process for menus begins with 
me speaking with my team of 12 about our food. Our philosophy is that we try to 
use as many ingredients as possible from local sources in Germany – there’s no 
shellfish or lobster, for example. We stay in season and focus on bringing out 
the flavours of each ingredient to add something new to the plate with our 
food. Cooking to high standards while keeping our feet on the ground is key.

We do a lot of planning ahead. Right now, as well as making the most of 
ingredients that are currently at their best, we are using preservation 
methods: some of the day is spent pickling, boiling and fermenting vegetables, 
for use later in the winter. This planning means we can bring different seasons 
to the plate, which people enjoy, without compromising our philosophy.


I sometimes visit local markets to get inspired, to meet producers and 
sometimes set them up as suppliers. Two good markets in Berlin are Markthalle 
Neun and the weekly market on Winterfeldtplatz. I also enjoy the Turkish 
markets – we have a large Turkish community in Berlin and at the markets you 
see interesting ways of preparing food and the use of different ingredients.

We try to create a different take on traditional German cooking. Preservation 
is a good example of a method that is a part of traditional German food, 
sauerkraut is a staple, for example, and we have a red cabbage kimchi (Korean 
slaw) with German spices on the menu at the moment.

Another really delicious dish we offer is pork knuckle with kohlrabi, 
dandelion leaves, apple mustard and beetroot leaves. It is a signature dish and 
stays on the menu even when the rest of the menu changes because it has become 
so popular.

I enjoy immersing myself in the techniques of cooking. It is important for a 
chef to never stop learning. You have to really get into the process: you have 
to read about it, to involve trial and error and make those mistakes to truly 
know how to use the technique. The thinking is important.


Seven surprising facts about the world's largest hotel group
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/marriott-travels/2016/nov/15/seven-surprising-facts-about-the-worlds-largest-hotel-group>
I try to bring some of my philosophy to the guests – we have to change our way 
of eating as the world around us changes. This means putting less meat on the 
plate, not using fish that is on the red list and not using shark or eels, for 
example. In the past, people would only eat common cuts of meat, such as 
tenderloin, but now they are open to trying lesser-used cuts, such as knuckle. 
I like to focus on using those cuts, and on the principles of nose-to-tail 
cooking.


I also try to create an experience for the guests, not just something that 
they’ve never had before: that is a shallow form of an experience, but for them 
to taste some truly delicious food.

 