
The inquiry into historical sex abuse of children was never fit for purpose 
and should be dismantled. Something may then be salvaged from the wreck. Like 
too many inquiries into past history, it was flawed from the start. The reason 
is that it confused two separate issues, a public interest in the failings of 
public administration, and a desire from a group of specific victims for 
justice. The home secretary responsible, Theresa May, clearly never understood 
the distinction.

No one reading of the suffering of victims of past sex abuse, as of Bloody 
Sunday, the Hillsborough tragedy or the Iraq war, could do other than 
sympathise. The survivors have a clear right to know what went wrong, including 
in their cases. But consideration has to be given to proportionality.

This child abuse inquiry debacle shines a harsh light on Theresa May | Gaby 
Hinsliff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/theresa-may-child-abuse-inquiry>
The sex abuse inquiry has become 13 separate inquiries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/2012/nov/06/north-wales-abuse-inquries-live-blog>
 costingtens of millions of pounds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/27/child-sex-abuse-inquiry-to-focus-on-churches-and-politicians>
. Some have effectively become retrospective trials, but with the victims 
allowed in effect to vet the judges and the terms of reference. No statute of 
limitation applies. The inquiries have spawned so much police activity that it 
is reported that a third of police time in some forces is devoted to it. Is 
this in the public interest? These inquiries have become monuments to the 
collapsing self-confidence of British public administration. This cannot be in 
anyone’s interest, least of all the victims.

The right to justice is absolute. But as soon as it is recognised it is 
qualified. Historical sex abuse by its nature suffers from the passage of time, 
from witness reliability, the difficulty of collecting evidence and changed 
attitudes to sexual behaviour – however welcome that change has been. The 
impact on an individual of wrongs suffered decades ago is undeniable. But 
justice for the accuser has to be balanced with justice for the accused. The 
yearning for individual justice for a past injury is not the same as learning 
lessons and putting in place today the means of preventing them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fchild-sexual-abuse-victims-inquiry-theresa-may-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Child%20sexual%20abuse%20inquiry%20must%20continue%2C%20says%20May%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fchild-sexual-abuse-victims-inquiry-theresa-may-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Child%20sexual%20abuse%20inquiry%20must%20continue%2C%20says%20May%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F30%2Fchild-sexual-abuse-victims-inquiry-theresa-may-video&media=>
Child sexual abuse victims at heart of inquiry, says May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/30/child-sexual-abuse-victims-inquiry-theresa-may-video>
The reality is that time hands judgment for past injury into the hands of 
history. By the time they reported, theBloody Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bloodysunday> and Chilcot reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/06/iraq-inquiry-key-points-from-the-chilcot-report>
 were of comfort to few but the historians. It is 10 years since a House of 
Commons committee pleaded for a curb on the use of public inquiries to remedy 
historical wrongs. It pleaded for them to concentrate on learning lessons for 
the future. It was ignored.

Child protection <https://www.theguardian.com/society/childprotection> in 
Britain is desperately in need of resources. Yes, it should benefit from 
understanding the failings of the past. Yes, some inquiry is merited. But the 
priority for money and concern should be with today’s needs and tomorrow’s 
victims. That is the public interest.
 