
Four weeks ago Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>
 declared that the chief joy of no longer being Ukip leader was not “having to 
deal with low-grade people every day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/nigel-farage-scathing-attack-ukip-low-grade-people>
”. This week Nigelannounced that he will be taking calls from the public every 
day from Monday to Thursday on the radio station LBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
.

Whether the public are “low-grade people” or something else will doubtless be 
one for the HOT TOPIC DEBATE section of the nightly running order on Nigel’s 
new show. As someone who once saw himblow out a pub full of his own crestfallen 
supporters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/08/nigel-farage-seems-nervous-even-his-supporters-cant-ask-questions>
 to go and have fish and chips with reality TV dimbulb Joey Essex – and lack 
even the courtesy to tell them – I have my suspicions that Nigel doesn’t say 
what he really thinks quite as much as he says he does.

Nigel finds it hard to hand over, so consider the possibility that he will 
broadcast continuously until he gets an American job offer

Certainly, his stand-in stints on LBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> 
hitherto have hinted at a frustration with the calling public. During one, at 
the end of November, a listener’s insistence on contradicting Farage with his 
own previous statements caused him to ask: “Can more people ring in to say how 
much they dislike Tony Blair, John Major and Tim Farron?” A politician whose 
chief refrain is that politicians have stopped listening to ordinary people, 
Nigel may like to remind ordinary people that their call is important to him, 
as long as they agree with him.

As for the bizarre suggestion that this new gig will interfere with Nigel’s 
work as a serving MEP, how could it possibly? It is widely assumed he turns up 
to Strasbourg only to do his expenses and make a biannual speech in the chamber 
in which heaccuses his MEP colleagues of never having done a day’s work in 
their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/28/is-nigel-farage-right-meps-have-not-done-proper-jobs>
. You may remember theclassic reaction shot to one of these 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/29/eu-health-commissioner-explains-farage-facepalm-vytenis-andriukaitis>
, where the EU official with his face in his hand just behind Nigel turned out 
to be a cardiac surgeon born in the Siberian gulag to which Stalin deported his 
parents, who began his political career in the underground anti-Soviet social 
democrat movement. Shoulda been a very average metals trader, mate.

Other details about Nigel’s radio show? LBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/lbc> says it’ll end with Farage’s Final 
Thought, and will last an hour. But we know that Nigel finds it hard to hand 
over to people, so do consider the possibility that he will unresign the 
microphone and simply broadcast continuously until he gets an American job 
offer, at which point he’ll promptly do one across the Atlantic and tell 
everyone what a relief it was to escape this septic isle and its low-grade 
people.

Until then, he joins the growing ranks of figures literally using staff jobs 
in the mainstream media to claim they are bypassing the mainstream media. Just 
as his LBC stablemateKatie Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> ridicules the commentariat 
from a column in the world’s best-read online English language newspaper,Mail 
Online <https://www.theguardian.com/media/mail-online>, so Nigel will suggest 
he’s somehow detached from the mainframe and broadcasting outside the matrix, 
despite toddling in daily to LBC’s fully staffed studios in central London, 
except when he’s on the road in Europe or the US. Try to think of him asMorpheus
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Morpheus_%28The_Matrix%29>, only wearing his 
trustycovert coat <https://www.gentlemansgazette.com/covert-coat/> instead of a 
leather trench.

Which brings us to the shifting concept of prestige. There is a suggestion in 
some quarters that Nigel might be settling for second best by taking the 7pm 
slot on a talk radio station – or even 17th or 18th best. After all, it was 
only a few weeks ago that he was enthusiastically thrusting himself forward for 
a major role in international diplomacy. When Donald Trump was elected, Nigel’s 
initial thought was: “I would quite like to be his ambassador to the European 
Union.” Instead of taking him up on this offer, Trump manfully hit the ball 
into Theresa May’s court,declaring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
: “Many people would love to see Nigel Farage represent Great Britain as their 
ambassador to the US. He would do a great job!” It was left to Downing Street 
to sniff that “there is no vacancy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-will-not-be-ambassador-to-us-say-no10-and-foreign-office-donald-trump>
”.

Farage’s next tack was to cast himself as someone whose skillset was 
tailor-made for fixing the world’s most intractable problems. The Middle East 
was earmarked as an area of interest, with Nigel reasoning “I’m quite good at 
bringing people together”. You may laugh. But let’s face it: for all its comic 
grotesquery, making Farage a Middle East peace envoy wouldn’t have been a tenth 
as auto-satirical an appointment as making Tony Blair one.And that actually 
happened 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/16/tony-blair-middle-east-envoy-quartet-business-palestinians-israelis>
.

These days, though, the mistake is to imagine that a talk radio gig is a 
massive climbdown from an ambassadorial one. In the version of the free world 
Trump is effectively redesigning from the top down, the two positions 
increasingly have a malarial kind of parity. I mean, youmight be a crusty civil 
servant nobody cares less about – or you might host a radio show where you grow 
and incite your audience by floating all kinds of fringe conspiracies. In a 
sense, the latter is a better bet for advancement – it goes without saying that 
Trump places far higher value on theInfowars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/dec/06/more-terrifying-than-trump-the-booming-conspiracy-culture-of-climate-science-denial>
 community, say, than he does on theCIA’s intelligence-gathering community 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-attacks-trump-for-mindless-dismissal-of-agencies-intelligence>
.

Nigel Farage to host LBC radio talkshow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/05/nigel-farage-to-host-lbc-radio-talkshow>
So determined is the mood of so-called anti-elitism or anti-expertise that 
even the elites must play the game. The former cabinet ministerTheresa Villiers 
was at it this very week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/give-us-brexit-detail-or-risk-losing-support-tory-moderates-tell-may>
, describing Britain’s resigning EU ambassador, Sir Ivan Rogers, as 
“emotionally needy”, which made her sound like a pundit offering a verdict on 
Calum Best’s behaviour in the Big Brother house.

Who would want to be a diplomat now? Civil servants are judged as though they 
are reality TV contestants, while reality TV stars have inherited the Earth. 
There are no mountains left to climb for the genre now that the Apprentice host 
will become president of the United States. Small wonder that Farage should be 
far more interested in a media career, and one on the same roster as our own 
highest-profile Apprentice graduate,Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/04/katie-hopkins-lbc-radio-show>.

For all his faults, Farage has always been a quick study. He has learned the 
short-term lesson of an age hopelessly hooked on the short term: those who want 
to get on in Trump’s world should aspire to jobs that run on the same fuel the 
president-elect does – conflict and the emotional incontinence that is the best 
route to repeatedly sparking it. Consequently,Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> will be taking your calls.
 