
Ukip does not intend to contest the Richmond Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/ukip-backs-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
 triggered by Zac Goldsmith’s petulant resignation. There is something 
delightful in the news, since it means that, were Goldsmith elected as an 
independent, he would be, in our hearts and minds if not on paper, Ukip’s 
second MP, which chimes nicely with hisracist and narrow-minded mayoral campaign
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/07/zac-goldsmith-racist-campaign-london>
, and works well with Ukip’s stance on the environment (which is to contradict 
each other wildly).

Endorsed by Ukip, backed by the Tories, independent Zac is a fake | Andrew 
Rawnsley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/29/endorsed-by-ukip-backed-by-tories-independent-zac-goldsmith-is-a-fake>
Even though my ardent hope is for Richmond Park’s former Tory MP to lose, 
disgracefully, there is still much to learn from this moment. If the right 
knows one thing, it’s how to cooperate. On the left, meanwhile, we feel our way 
towards a progressive alliance much more timidly, even when we know we’re sunk 
without it. The Tory chaos surrounding Brexit is the point at which we realise 
how many fundamental values the left shares – on a spectrum from the shadow 
chancellor, John McDonnell, to the architect of NewLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, Peter Mandelson (on the single 
market); and from Caroline Lucas, for the Greens, to the Lib Dems’ Paddy 
Ashdown (on freedom of movement). The Richmond Park byelection is the moment 
for us to decide where exactly our mouth is, so we can put our money there.

Should the left unite in the Richmond Park byelection? | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/should-the-left-unite-in-the-richmond-park-byelection>
This has opened up divisions in the Labour party already. On one side are Lisa 
Nandy and Clive Lewis 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/uk/2016/10/after-year-division-new-centre-emerging-labour>
, as well as Compass, calling for Labour to step aside completely, leaving the 
fight open for theLiberal Democrat, Sarah Olney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/lib-dems-pin-hopes-on-richmond-heathrow-brexit>
. On the other, Red Labour scotches this idea and wants to field Barnaby 
Marder, with the enviable slogan “Feel the Barn”. I personally favour the open 
primary over the electoral stitch-up – when the candidate is chosen only by the 
abdication of the other candidates, and voters have had no hand in it. The 
result may be an alliance, but the process hasn’t been very progressive.

Which of those two options we end up with is an important question. But first, 
we on the left need to kill off some ghosts. Halloween may mean Haribos to you; 
to me it means paying tribute to the noble dead notions of leftwingery gone by.

When it comes to speaking and acting in unison, what is it that we’re so 
afraid of? Well – zombies, obviously. Just when you think the politics of Tony 
Blair and Mandelson have finally perished, they pop back up again:Blair on the 
Today programme last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/28/tony-blair-remain-voters-to-mobilise-against-brexit>
,Mandelson in the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3886074/LORD-MANDELSON-Call-Bremoaner-single-market.html>
. This is Blair at his most dangerous: when he is organised, and when he makes 
sense. “If it becomes clear,” he said, “that this is either a deal that doesn’t 
make it worth our while leaving, or, alternatively, a deal that is going to be 
so serious in its implications that people may decide they don’t want to go, 
there’s got to be some way, either through parliament, through an election, 
possibly through a referendum, in which people express their view.”

This cannot be written off as tyrannical egomania, the final twitching of a 
corpse who hates democracy: it is true. A vote was cast in which a majority of 
people expressed their will for something, but nobody said what. It is not 
undemocratic to want a little more detail, to worry about the long-term 
feasibility of having to bribe companies to stay here, to think that the single 
market is no small thing from which to exile oneself. We must learn to take 
allegiance wherever we find it, because the alternative is, frankly, what lost 
the remain side the referendum: arguments in silos, all caveat and no driving 
purpose.

There is a continuing terror of politicians in disguise. Is Olney a true Lib 
Dem, or is she a Tory in liberal clothing? Didn’t she once tellTwitter that she 
found Theresa May impressive? 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jimwaterson/richmond-park-lib-dem-candidate-said-theresa-may-is-impressi?utm_term=.hykrVWX4x#.nbr5L1w8y>
 Why doesn’t she just join the Conservatives, if she finds them so competent? 
Come to that, hasn’t Marder called himself a socialist before, which is a 
little bit like being a Trotskyist, which is a lot like wanting a Soviet 
society of state-run industries and gulags, if you remove all considerations of 
proportionality and meaning?

We have to let politicians vary quite widely in their views on personalities, 
issues and ideas, on the understanding that we’re all tacking in the same 
direction. If that sounds unsettling and weak, again, consider the alternative: 
to keep on losing.

Perhaps the most understandable fear is that any alliance, between any 
combination of centre-left to green-left parties, spells the end for Labour, 
whose internal tensions are only ever alleviated when it can promise electoral 
dominance. It may be comprehensible, but it’s yesterday’s politics, and traps 
us in this egregious dichotomy where either Jeremy Corbyn and his supporters 
must take the whole country with them, or he must be obliterated to make way 
for “sensible” Labour. It’s time to start considering a new reality in which 
the two wings of Labour, whether as two separate parties or within the same 
party, draw energy from one another and the vision they share.

There isn’t so much a fear as a love affair, on the left, with intractable 
difference, the reassurance of a stalemate

Finally, there isn’t so much a fear as a love affair on the left with 
intractable difference, the reassurance of a stalemate. We can see this with 
Heathrow: the unions and the greens on opposite sides, one fighting for jobs, 
the other for the climate. Differences of this sort are inevitable. Indeed, 
underneath them is one of the most profound questions dividing all politics: 
whether we should keep on chasing growth indefinitely – so that each generation 
may be richer than the last, in perpetuity – or whether we should start 
modelling for ourselves a future of no growth, where generations reap different 
rewards, of leisure or community or peace.

It’s a sound and reasonable question, but the developments of today’s politics 
threaten jobs and climate, growth and the future, trade and equality. The 
strongest and most coherent voices of hard Brexit are openly seeking a bonfire 
of regulations. They are laying this fire in our sitting room while we fight 
over whether to save the sofa or the curtains. There is something fascinating 
in the comfort we take from the familiarity of irreconcilable differences.

This love of division cannot be discarded lightly – loyalty, to a leader or a 
party, is a powerful galvanising force and it’s unclear, on the progressive 
side, how it will function without its guiding principle: hating all the other 
parties.

Yet now, with the Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> in the grip of their most 
awful ghouls, we have an opportunity without precedent to lay our own fears to 
rest.

 * This article was amended on 1 November 2016. The byelection is in the 
Richmond Park constituency, not Richmond. This has been corrected.
 