
A quick glance at the bank balance, let alone a credit card bill or mortgage 
statement, is enough to throw many middle-aged people into a crisis. Money just 
seems to disappear. Whatever happened to the spacious home you dreamed about? 
The pension pot? The fund you were going to set up for the children’s 
university fees?

Despite wages peaking between the age of 40 and 49, according to Friends Life, 
having children later in life – births among women aged 45-plus have more than 
doubled in the past decade, and births among women aged 40-44 have risen by 
just over a third – means this can be a cash-strapped time for families. Many 
in this age bracket are also supporting elderly parents. And that’s when things 
are going well.

On ITV’s hit drama Cold Feet, late-40s Pete (played by John Thomson) is in the 
grip of a full-blown midlife crisis. He was made redundant, is juggling two 
minimum-wage jobs – a minicab driver and care home worker – and has been 
struggling with depression. It is not uncommon for employees in their late 40s 
and 50s to find themselves at risk of redundancy, says Kerry Garcia, partner at 
law firm Stevens & Bolton: “It often takes employees in this age bracket longer 
to find another job at commensurate pay, which is stressful when their 
outgoings are higher, too.” And during your 40s you are more likely to get 
divorced, according to the Office for National Statistics, which means any 
assets you do have may be split.

No wonder, then, that an ONS wellbeing survey issued earlier this year 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/wellbeing/articles/measuringnationalwellbeing/atwhatageispersonalwellbeingthehighest>
 found that “anxiety ratings” peaked between 45 and 59. However, even if you 
have hit a midlife financial crisis, there are ways to turn it round. “It’s not 
too late,” says Philippa Gee of Philippa Gee Wealth Management. “But this could 
be your last real chance to change things and work out how to finance what you 
want out of life.”

Property

The age we think we will move into our “for ever” home – that spacious family 
house that is close to good schools and transport connections – is 44, 
according to research by Tepilo. However, the online estate agent also says 
that by the time we reach 55 nearly a third of us no longer think such a thing 
exists.

“If you want to move up the property ladder at this age, be realistic,” says 
David Hollingworth at London & CountryMortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages>. “Consider house prices and the 
cost of the move, and assess your income and expenses. Use these figures to 
shape your expectations.”

One way to lower monthly mortgage payments is by opting for a longer repayment 
term. Some lenders will do 35- or even 40-year loans, and an increasing number 
are prepared to lend well beyond retirement age. Traditionally, many lenders 
would only grant a mortgage up to an individual’s planned retirement date – so 
for someone aged 45 who expects to retire at 67, that meant a maximum mortgage 
term of 22 years. But things are changing, and a number of building societies 
in particular will let you have a mortgage until you are 85-plus. In July, 
Nationwideupped its “maximum age at maturity” 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/about/media-centre-and-specialist-areas/media-centre/press-releases/archive/2016/5/9-may-mortgage-lending>
 from 75 to 85, whilethe Halifax raised its maximum  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/06/halifax-raises-mortgage-borrower-age-limit-80>
 from 75 to 80.

If you are happy to live in a new-build, the help to buy equity loan scheme 
will see <https://www.helptobuy.gov.uk/equity-loan/equity-loans/> the 
government lend you up to 20% of the cost.

Pensions

Investing in a pension is important – don’t overlook it due to other 
middle-aged financial commitments

Positivity about having enough for retirement reaches its lowest ebb between 
the ages of 45 and 54, according to a study by Skipton building society, when 
nearly two in five (39%) people say that they feel their preferred lifestyle 
for retirement is out of reach.

However, if you’ve accrued various money purchase (defined contribution) 
workplace pensions, get them to work harder. Bringing them all under one roof 
may make sense financially, and will make it easier to keep track of them.

“There is a danger that long-forgotten plans will end up festering in 
expensive, poorly performing funds, and the paperwork alone can be enough to 
put you off becoming more proactive,”says consumer body Which? 
<http://www.which.co.uk/money/retirement/guides/should-i-consolidate-my-pensions/>
. There are advantages to switching your pensions, but also pitfalls, such as 
exit penalties. So check what the deal is first. If you’re not completely sure 
what you’ve got where, thePension Tracing Service 
<https://www.gov.uk/find-pension-contact-details> can help with finding “lost” 
pensions

Many pensions offer additional voluntary contributions (AVCs). If you can 
afford to, these could be one of the best financial decisions you make. The 
best AVCs see employers paying in as well as employees – for example, they 
might cough up 50p for each £1 you put in.

Danny Cox, chartered financial planner at Hargreaves Lansdown, says: “Think 
about the age you want to retire and how much is needed to fund your lifestyle. 
Investing in a pension is important – don’t overlook it due to other 
middle-aged financial commitments, such as savings and paying off debts.”

Debts

Credit cards <https://www.theguardian.com/money/creditcards>, overdrafts, 
personal loans, mortgages, student debts, store cards … many middle-aged people 
have racked up some serious debt. It can be harder to make more than the 
minimum payments at this time: SunLife found that as a percentage of income, 
those aged 45-54 have more than half of their income allocated to fixed costs.

“Many people experience significant money problems in middle age, when 
pressure on finances can often come from both directions in the family tree,” 
says Jane Tully, a spokeswoman for theMoney Advice Trust 
<http://www.moneyadvicetrust.org/Pages/default.aspx>. “Seeking free advice is 
the first step – you can start to consider setting aside any surplus income for 
these needs.”

The cost of children

By middle age some of the early childcare costs are over – but there’s plenty 
still to pay. For those with children in private education, average fees per 
term for boarding are £10,317, while average day fees per term are £4,541,
according to the Independent Schools Council 
<https://www.isc.co.uk/media/3179/isc_census_2016_final.pdf>. Many parents go 
for a longer mortgage term, and lower monthly payments, to release some cash 
for this, says Cox.

As for university, the typical graduate of an English university, under the 
£9,000 fees regime, owes an average of around £44,000,according to thinktank 
the Sutton Trust 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/newsarchive/graduates-in-england-facing-debts-of-44000/>
. And after graduation, and a boomerang back into the family home, getting them 
on to the property ladder is a concern. The Halifax issued data showing that 
the average deposit paid by a first-time buyer increased by 13% in 2015 to 
£32,927.

“One of the best ways to save for university and a deposit is a tax-free 
Junior Isa,” says Cox. “Do this as early as you can, and by the time your child 
is 18 they can access the funds. However, parents should only do this once they 
have their own debts under control and their retirement savings in place.”
 