
Spoiler alert: this blog contains details of the Doctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> Christmas special, The 
Return of Doctor Mysterio.


‘Mrs Lombard, there are some situations which are too stupid to be allowed to 
continue.’

“Doctor Who does superheroes.” As elevator pitches go, it’s easy to see why 
this one stuck around in Steven Moffat’s mind-elevator. (Oh, and merry 
Christmas!) There was a worry that the lack of aDoctor Who 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/doctor-who> series this year might 
leave us bereft. In the event, there was so much else to get upset about that 
this was a trauma that barely touched the sides. But if 2016 left us both 
needing a Doctor and holding out for a hero, the helpful show-runner has 
provided us with both.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37d464eafe394fa4b2a30a0e860f0bd03ee8989e%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F37d464eafe394fa4b2a30a0e860f0bd03ee8989e%2F0_0_4281_2569%2F4281.jpg>
 Young Grant is accidentally gifted with superpowers thanks to a spot of 
‘classic Doctor’ clumsiness. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
After 12 years as a BBC1 cornerstone, Christmas Doctor Who has become a genre 
all of its own, and a tricky thing to get right. My personal favourites – The 
Christmas Invasion and Last Christmas – put the festivities front and centre. 
But you can’t do that every year. As such, there are only scant, functional 
references to Christmas in The Return of Doctor Mysterio. Rather, it channels 
the classic 3.10pm movie of yore – specifically, the Richard Donner/Christopher 
Reeve Superman films. And for that, it ranks in my personal top five of 
Christmas Doctor Whos.

Moffat has said in pre-publicity interviews that the hero is not in fact 
Superman, but Clark Kent – or in this case, the hero is not The Ghost but 
Grant. It’s a neat bit of writing that superheroes actuallydon’t exist in the 
Whoniverse, but superhero comic booksdo. So young Grant (with echoes of young 
Amelia Pond) is accidentally gifted with superpowers thanks to a spot of 
“classic Doctor” clumsiness, and an obsession with comic books.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9a8f75d4e30efbfd711a1c660041c294088bfa%2F0_23_4376_2627%2F4376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a9a8f75d4e30efbfd711a1c660041c294088bfa%2F0_23_4376_2627%2F4376.jpg>
 This is more romcom than superhero caper, and no worse for it … Lucy and 
Grant. Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
And so the Doctor once again takes a backseat in his own story, making way for 
proxy-companions Grant and Lucy. This, in turn, gives Moffat a chance to flex 
the muscle that was his strongest before Time Lords came along – the romcom 
with a twist. Comparisons with his sitcom Coupling are inevitable when we reach 
the farcical centrepiece, in which the two-way love triangle between 
Grant/Lucy/The Ghost plays out. “You’re jealous of you,” the Doctor tells 
Grant. “Technically she’s jealous of her,” he retorts, quite accurately. Moffat 
is unafraid to play on quite how crappy a disguise it is simply to wear glasses 
– even the Doctor finds this a ridiculous situation. And Lucy’s interrogation 
of the Doctor and torture of Mr Huffle is a thing of exquisite cruelty. This is 
more romcom than superhero caper, and no worse for it.

‘Everything ends, and it’s always sad. But everything begins again too, and 
that’s always happy.’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa71d4b4226993a5c4d250f72c081227eda0174e%2F0_242_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa71d4b4226993a5c4d250f72c081227eda0174e%2F0_242_4185_2511%2F4185.jpg>
 A bonus new companion! Matt Lucas returns as Nardole. Photograph: Simon 
Ridgway/BBC 
A bonus new companion! The other issue of note in this special is the return 
of Matt Lucas as android-butler Nardole. I wasn’t the only one to lament the 
casting of a talent like Lucas in such a minor role last year. Moff and co 
clearly felt the same, so Nardole – the show’s new comic relief – returns not 
only here, but for a good chunk of the forthcoming series. Taking the companion 
role for Christmas, Nardole gets to play more than the 
only-idiot-robot-in-the-village. He has insight and empathy and knows how to 
fly the Tardis, and he also made a decent fist of ruling “firmly but wisely” in 
12th-century Constantinople (a comic strip or audio play of this off-screen 
storyline, please).

Meanwhile, the difficult, obstinate 12th Doctor that Clara first got freaked 
out by is a distant memory. Having settled into the role, Capaldi’s Doctor is 
as reliably daft as the brush the actor’s hair resembles. Amen to that.

Fear factor

Keen viewers will remember the returning monsters from ... the very last 
episode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/25/doctor-who-christmas-special-2015-the-husbands-of-river-song>
. (There’s probably a statistic somewhere regarding the speed of baddies 
returning.) The creatures with the diagonally-opening-skulls were last seen in 
The Husbands of River Song as the Shoals of the Winter Harmony, conquered in 
that story by King Hydroflax. It’s not a bad idea – those chilling zip-heads 
deserve more than one outing. But, it has to be said, their plan to entrap all 
world leaders in New York by means of their inherent selfishness wasridiculously
 convoluted.

Christmas continuity
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4eafc389ee426e433b0234383641e18267d26a0c%2F0_0_4591_2755%2F4591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doctor%20Who%20Christmas%20special%202016%3A%20The%20Return%20of%20Doctor%20Mysterio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fdoctor-who-christmas-special-2016-the-return-of-doctor-mysterio%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4eafc389ee426e433b0234383641e18267d26a0c%2F0_0_4591_2755%2F4591.jpg>
 Capaldi’s Doctor is as reliably daft as the brush the actor’s hair resembles. 
Photograph: Simon Ridgway/BBC 
It may have been a year, but Moffat was careful to join the dots. Nardole’s 
resurrection got explained in a roundabout way. The Doctor’s antics in 1992 New 
York represent a bid to remedy the damage done to the city inThe Angels Take 
Manhattan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/sep/29/doctor-who-angels-take-manhattan>
 (potentially an attempt to find the Pond-Williams’, now he’s on his own 
again?). But with his memory of Clara still erased (and her still presumably 
hurtling round the universe with Maisie Williams), the big emotional thump 
comes from the memory of River. It’s made pretty clear that these events come 
directly after that final, 24-year dinner at the Singing Towers – and that’s 
what makes him sad. Too much backstory for Christmas Day? You decide.

Deeper into the vortex

• Doctor Mysterio <http://www.whoguide.com/mysterio.htm> is what the show is 
called in Mexico. Peter Capaldi was so enamoured with the name he kept reciting 
it with a theatrical flourish. Moffat named the episode so he could recite it 
with a flourish on camera.

• “Brains with minds of their own? No one’ll believe that – this is America!”

• The Angels Take Manhattan episode was filmed in the actual New York, but 
this time, the cast were shipped toBulgaria’s Nu Boyana backlot recreation 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jordanzakarin/9-eerily-realistic-nyc-movie-sets-located-nowhere-near-nyc?utm_term=.pxL7AQ5vQY#.mh3PpX1dXE>
 of the city.

• The Doctor eats sushi now. It’s hardly jelly babies, but these are 
health-conscious times. Sushi at Christmas though? Wrong.


• “You’re kind of wet.” “I prefer mild-mannered.” I do hope Mr Huffle remains 
a companion in his own right.

• Another alias! To add to John Smith, Merlin and Doctor Disco, the Doctor now 
has Dan Dangerous from Scotland Yard, Scotland in his arsenal of pseudonyms.

Next time!

And what about that trailer for the next series? The first big take-away is 
thatPearl Mackie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/05/doctor-who-pearl-mackie-new-series-companion-interview>
’s Bill works in a chippy – something Clara Oswald would surely have turned her 
nose up at. Not long now, folks. Happy new year!
 