
Sixteen years ago, I sat in court 73 of the Royal Courts of Justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/feb/05/uk.irving> in London and felt 
the ground crumble beneath my feet. I was following the libel trial brought by 
David Irving, the Holocaust denier and “pro-Nazi polemicist” – to quote the 
judge’s eventualverdict 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/apr/12/uk.irving> – against Penguin 
Books, which had dared publish a text which told the truth about him.

I watched as Irving discarded the usual rules of evidence. The eyewitness 
testimony of survivors was dismissed as lies. Confessions by the guilty were 
waved away as fake. Inconvenient documents were written off as forgeries. All 
that was left was what he wanted to believe.

At the time, it struck me that Irving was threatening something greater even 
than the memory of the Holocaust: he was undermining the very idea of facts, 
history and truth. If every item of evidence could be rubbished as bogus, then 
how could anyone ever prove anything? How would we know that Henry VIII had six 
wives or that Napoleon fought at Waterloo?

Donald Trump says CIA charge Russia influenced election is 'ridiculous'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
Hence the queasy sensation the ground was falling away. As I wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2000/feb/05/uk.irving> at the time: “If we 
start to doubt corroborated facts, how can we prevent ourselves being swallowed 
up in doubt, unable to trust anything we see? It might all be a conspiracy, a 
legend, a hoax. This is the bizarre, never-never world inhabited by David 
Irving. Now the court has to decide: is this our world too?”

That feeling returned to me this week, brought back by a screening of the film 
Denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/12/denial-review-rachel-weisz-holocaust-david-irving-toronto-film-festival>
, released next month, which dramatises the Irving trial of 2000. But it was 
also prompted by the reaction to events in Aleppo and, more widely, by the way
2016 has punched truth in the face 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
, leaving it bruised and bleeding.

As Aleppo endured its final agonies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/aleppo-evacuation-suspended-as-blasts-heard-at-departure-point>
, the simple act of circulating any account – a video, a photograph, a news 
report – would trigger an unnerving response. Someone, somewhere would reply 
that the photograph was doctored, the source was a stooge, therescued child 
<https://twitter.com/ArtWendeley/status/809364226871558144> was not really a 
child or not really rescued.

Of course, we’re used to people taking different sides on conflicts far away, 
arguing bitterly over who is to blame. At its most extreme, it results in a 
newspaper like theMorning Star 
<https://medium.com/@RA_Sikdar/why-i-will-no-longer-write-for-the-morning-star-80f8f1bd59de#.3fymjmux4>
 sinking so low that it hails the human devastation of Aleppo – where every 
hospital was bombed and where the slaughter of civilians became routine – not 
as a crime, butas a “liberation” 
<https://twitter.com/IanAustinMP/status/808433938721112069/photo/1?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
.

But this is about more than assigning blame for this death or that bombing. 
This is about refusing to accept that the death or bombing occurred at all. 
This is about defenders of Bashar al-Assad, and his Russian and Iranian 
enablers, coming on television to say that what is happening on the ground is 
not happening, that it is all an illusion. The late US senator Daniel Patrick 
Moynihan used to say: “You’re entitled to your own opinion, but you’re not 
entitled to your own facts.” But that distinction seems to have broken down. 
Now people regard facts as very much like opinions: you can discard the ones 
you don’t like.

This problem is not confined to Syria. This week the CIA joined 17 other US 
intelligence agencies inconcluding that Russia was behind the hacking of 
Democratic emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
, adding its conclusion that Moscow had done so in order to tilt the US 
election towards Donald Trump. “Ridiculous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
,” said Trump, who has not looked at the CIA’s evidence and has refused to 
receive the daily intelligence briefing provided for all incoming presidents on 
the grounds that he is “like, a smart person”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20'flying%20blind'%20if%20he%20ignores%20intelligence%2C%20warns%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20%27flying%20blind%27%20if%20he%20ignores%20intelligence%2C%20warns%20Obama%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftrump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video&media=>
Trump ‘flying blind’ if he ignores intelligence, warns Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/13/trump-flying-blind-if-he-ignores-intelligence-warns-obama-video>
After Iraq and the weapons of mass destruction that never were, plenty are 
understandably wary of accepting the word of the intelligence agencies. But 
Trump’s scepticism – cynicism is a better word – operates on a different level. 
“Nobody really knows,” he says about the hacking charges, the very words he uses
about climate change 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/11/politics/donald-trump-climate-change-interview/index.html>
, in the face of a vast body of evidence. Recall that he also says that he won 
theUS popular vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/27/donald-trump-scam-recount-jill-stein-hillary-clinton>
 “if you deduct the millions of people who voted illegally”, a flagrantly false 
claim for which there is no evidence whatsoever.

We’ve been calling this “post-truth politics” but I now worry that the phrase 
is far too gentle, suggesting society has simply reached some new phase in its 
development. It lets off the guilty too lightly. What Trump is doing is not 
“engaging in post-truth politics”. He’s lying.

Worse still, Trump and those like him not only lie: they imply that the truth 
doesn’t matter, showing a blithe indifference to whether what they say is 
grounded in reality or evidence.

Back in 2000, such a posture left you isolated in that never-never world 
inhabited by Irving. Today you’ll have a US president, aBritish foreign 
secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/boris-johnson-and-michael-gove-betrayed-britain-over-brexit>
 (never forget the £350m Brexit bus), as well as a ready army of fake news 
consumers to keep you company.

How has this happened so quickly? Technology has clearly played a part. Social 
media allows fact deniers to spread their anti-history fast and wide. Distrust 
in elites is also central. People are no longer prepared to take their leaders’ 
word on trust. Iraq poisoned that relationship, but its roots go deeper. In the 
US, Watergate broke public faith; some suspect the rot set in even earlier, 
with the Kennedy assassination.

But a crucial shift is surely the trend towards deeper and more bitter 
partisanship. Once people have aligned themselves with a tribe, studies show 
their first instinct will be to believe what favours their side and disbelieve 
what favours their opponent. One tellingpoll 
<https://twitter.com/williamjordann/status/809067195082883076> this week found 
Vladimir Putin’s approval ratings have shot up among US Republicans. They once 
hated him, but now their guy Trump is Putin’s buddy, they’re ready to see the 
Russian autocrat in a favourable light – and to ignore all evidence to the 
contrary.

Post-truth? My word of the year is normalisation – as applied to Trump | Peter 
Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/16/post-truth-normalisation-us-politics-trump>
This is making our public sphere a dizzying place. Without a common, agreed 
set of facts, we can hardly have any kind of public conversation at all. Writer
David Roberts 
<http://grist.org/politics/2011-04-28-policy-in-an-age-of-post-truth-politics/>
, who has a good claim to have coined the phrase “post-truth” [see footnote], 
says that these days: “There are no more referees. There are only players.”

We have no group of non-partisan arbiters, trusted to define at least the 
factual basis for our collective discussion. When actual judges enter the 
picture, as they have in the Brexit article 50 case, one side rushes to 
discredit them, branding them as biased, ideological partisans, no less tainted 
and untrustworthy than everyone else:enemies of the people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

What’s so odd about this is that we are happy to accept that there are facts, 
and judges of fact, in every other aspect of our lives. Philosopher Quassim 
Cassam notes if a car mechanic says your brakes have broken, you don’t denounce 
him as biased and drive on: you listen. If a doctor says you have a tumour, you 
don’t mock him as a member of the medical elite. We even accept expert judgment 
on reality TV: no one minds Mary Berry deciding who should win Bake Off.

Only in the political realm have we somehow drifted into a world in which no 
one can be trusted, not on questions of judgment, nor even on questions of 
fact. But we cannot live in such a world. Evidence, facts and reason are the 
building blocks of civilisation. Without them we plunge into darkness.

• This footnote was added on 20 December 2016. Oxford Dictionaries dates the 
first use of “post-truth”, with the implication that truth has become 
irrelevant, to a 1992 essay by the playwright Steve Tesich in The Nation 
magazine.
 