
To be disabled and need money to live in modern Britain: this week brings two 
insights into just what that means.

On the one hand, there is I, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/23/i-daniel-blake-ken-loach-review-mark-kermode>
, Ken Loach’s blistering film about a jobseeker who, after a near-fatal heart 
attack, can get neither work nor benefits. And on the other, the prospect that 
proposed Conservative cuts mean that soon 45,000 fewer disabled people willhave 
help to find a job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/24/employment-support-cuts-could-affect-45000-disabled-jobseekers-says-report>
. That comes ahead of a long-touted governmentgreen paper on health and 
employment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/22/disabled-jobseekers-facing-dramatic-fall-off-support>
: a list of “promises” – at best, ideas – to help disabled people into work.

In excruciating pain. Unable to sleep. Yet John is still ‘fit for work’ | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fit-for-work-disability-cuts-bureaucracy-daniel-blake>
“Help disabled people” into work. Even that seemingly innocent phrase is 
loaded now. How could it not be in an era when the long-term sick have their 
benefit sanctioned for “not applying for enough jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/11/benefit-sanctions-hurting-low-paid-vulnerable-people>
”, where thousands of sick and disabled people die after being judged “fit for 
work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/aug/27/thousands-died-after-fit-for-work-assessment-dwp-figures>
”, and where jobcentres have “six-point suicide guidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/27/death-britains-benefits-system-fit-for-work-safety-net>
” mounted on the wall.

To believe that a job, at its best, has value isn’t to say that “work sets you 
free <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Arbeit_macht_frei>”. A job is a way to pay 
the bills, interact with the world, and feel fulfilled. But that isn’t what 
work is to many disabled people nowadays. It’s something to fear, whether 
that’s in the humiliation of being called to the jobcentre to explain why 
you’ve not found work – when your doctors know you can barely sleep,let alone 
hold down a job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fit-for-work-disability-cuts-bureaucracy-daniel-blake>
 – or the worry that sits in your stomach each morning when you’re in too much 
pain to drag yourself out of bed and into the office, but have no idea how the 
rent will get paid if you don’t.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20real%20Daniel%20Blakes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20real%20Daniel%20Blakes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fmeet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video&media=>
Meet the real Daniel Blakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/21/meet-the-real-daniel-blakes-ken-loach-video>
I’ve been lucky enough to have almost always been able to work. I say “lucky” 
because I doubt anyone who’s disabled or chronically ill doesn’t feel some sort 
of relief, even gratitude, for that. I’m writing this in pyjamas, exhausted and 
blinking. And I am conscious of the reality that, no matter how difficult it 
may be at times, if I didn’t have a relatively flexible job, I would probably 
not have one at all. As disabled and chronically ill readers have often put it 
to me: “I would love a job. If I could find an employer who didn’t mind if I 
came in at 11am/worked from my bed/took a day off every week.”

Social security has to provide a decent standard of living for people whose 
disability or illness means they have no chance of working, no matter what 
support they’re given. That thought is not as radical or difficult as this 
government appears to think it is. But it’s time we got to grips with the other 
side of the coin: the disabled and chronically ill people who could flourish at 
work but have no real chance in a political climate that’s simultaneously 
failing to provide them with specialist employment help while shaming them for 
being unemployed.

We, Daniel Blake: readers on the UK benefits system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/welfare-sanctions-ken-loach-uk-benefit-system>
Progress is going to come about not only through policies that understand the 
complexity of health and work, and the need for more funding rather than 
counterproductive cuts, but by unpicking the culture that says it’s not the 
structure that’s locking disabled people out of work but the individual: lazy, 
workshy, awkward.

I’ve never understood how quickly the “scrounger” rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/feb/08/disabled-people-abuse-peoples-panel>
 took hold in this country. I understand it on one level: it’s a well-tested 
method of rightwing governments to find a scapegoat during tough economic 
times, or to set one marginalised group against another. But still, it’s a 
particularly cruel – and stupid – bit of mythology considering the reality. 
Find me one person who enjoys being too ill or disabled to work; who genuinely 
thinks living off £100 a week after jumping through the ever-shrinking hoops of 
the Department for Work and Pensions is an easier way to pay the bills than 
working eight hours a day.

Chronic illness is not a week off with the flu, a short break catching up on 
Netflix while your salary continues to land in your bank account. Debilitating 
disability is not a lifestyle choice disabled people are tempted with at 
school: doctor, teacher, or lifelong benefit claimant. Bad health happens by 
chance, and to any of us.

When it does, human needs – an income, self-respect, or hope – don’t 
disappear. There are countless disabled people in this country who are 
desperate to work, but who will only get there with real support. The sooner 
politicians, and the voters they court, understand that, the better.
 