
There is one week to go and all is confusion. Next Friday Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will take the oath of office 
and be sworn in as president of the United States. But still no one has the 
first clue how to handle what’s coming. Politicians, journalists and diplomats, 
in the US and around the world, are searching for guidance, desperately 
flicking through the pages of the rulebook, a manual full of past precedents 
and norms that they have spent their careers mastering – but that Trump burned 
and shredded months ago.

John McCain passes dossier alleging secret Trump-Russia contacts to FBI
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
In normal times, even those few parts of this week’s “dirty dossier” affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 that are firmly established would be enough to undo an incoming president. Put 
aside the lurid details of what went on in Moscow hotel rooms. Assume they’re 
untrue. Focus instead on the fact that the US Department of Justice sought and 
eventually gained secret court warrants to investigate two Russian banks and 
their links with a series of Trump associates.

Remember how much damage it did to Hillary Clinton for the FBI to be looking 
(again) at her use of a private email server. Regardless of what they found – 
nothing, as it happens – the mere fact that she was under investigation wounded 
her badly, perhaps even denying her the presidency. Yet now we know that 
federal investigators were keen to probe Team Trump not over its email habits, 
but something much more serious: possible links with a hostile foreign power.

We’ve learned too that the dossier included a claim of secret meetings between 
Trump aides and Russian officials. Now, that claim has not been proved and 
could of course turn out to be, as Trump insists, “garbage”. But it comes from 
a document deemed sufficiently credible by US intelligence agencies that they 
briefed both President Obama and Trump on its contents.

In the same vein, and in an astonishing development, the Israeli press has 
reported that its country’s intelligence officials have been advised by their 
US counterpartsnot to share intel with the Trump administration 
<http://www.ynetnews.com/articles/0,7340,L-4906642,00.html>, lest that 
information find its way to Moscow, and from there to Tehran. In effect those 
US spooks have said that their own incoming president cannot be trusted with 
secrets, because Vladimir Putin has “leverages of pressure” over him.

In normal circumstances just the fact of these investigations would be enough 
to hobble a president. But nothing about these circumstances is normal. Indeed, 
the lesson of the past year is that what would destroy a normal politician 
often leaves barely a scratch on Trump. Sometimes it even makes him stronger.

Israel has reportedly been advised by US intelligence not to share intel with 
the Trump administration

In this particular case, there is no guarantee, in a clash between the 
intelligence agencies and media, on the one hand, and Putin on the other, that 
Trump’s supporters wouldn’t side with Putin. After all,a poll last month 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/gop-russia-putin-support-232714> showed 
Republicans with a favourable view of the Russian leader outnumbered those who 
approved of Obama by 37% to 17%.

If Trump turns his full rage on the spooks – and he has barely got started – 
reminding Americans of the debacle of the Iraqi weapons of mass destruction 
that never were, conveniently omitting to mention the pressure the Bush 
administration put on the spies to produce the answers it wanted to hear – 
who’s to say that’s a battle he won’t win?

The price will be an American public who won’t believe the intelligence 
services even when they warn of genuine dangers to national security – but 
Trump won’t care about that. He does not mind trampling over the republic’s key 
institutions, as long as it helps him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in first press conference as 
president-elect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
The mistake is to project on to Trump the standards that would normally apply. 
Take this week’s parallel drama, as several of his nominees came before the 
senate to have their appointments confirmed. They all offered sweet words of 
reassurance: the would-be attorney general insisting he was no racist; the 
prospective secretary of state avowing that he was no patsy to Putin. Official 
Washington seized on these morsels of comfort, especially when Trump tweeted an 
apparent admission that his senior team wereat odds with him on several core 
issues <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819858926455967744>: “I want 
them to be themselves and express their own thoughts, not mine!”

But what if such licensed independence is all for show? Maybe Trump has no 
plan to use these cabinet members for anything but window dressing. On foreign 
policy, Rex Tillerson could turn out to be a glorified ambassador, says Robin 
Niblett, the director of Chatham House. Real decision-making power might reside 
with Trump, son-in-lawJared Kushner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/09/jared-kushner-senior-adviser-donald-trump>
, Breitbart founderSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
, and firebreathing national security adviserMike Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/michael-flynn-will-be-a-disaster-as-national-security-adviser>
. That would fit Trump’s style, says Niblett, with “Power concentrated ever 
closer around the chief executive.”

Or maybe Washington was simply looking through the old lens? Surely it is just 
as possible that Trump’s team gave his nominees permission to say whatever they 
had to say to get confirmed, true or false. For Trump, consistency and truth 
are for losers. Much simpler to lie, if that’s what gets results. So Tillerson 
didn’t need to get tangled up in a long debate over US policy on Russia: he 
just had to say that he and Trump had never even discussed it, implausible as 
that might sound. Job done.

For critics, this poses a conundrum. Too often they deal with Trump as if he 
is a normal politician, constrained by the usual conventions, including 
embarrassment at being caught in a lie. But Trump is not a normal politician. 
He has no shame. While most politicians blush if exposed as inconsistent, let 
alone dishonest, Trump is unembarrassable. Even Nixon tried to squirm and 
wriggle his way into a sentence that could be parsed as truth. Trump, hailed as 
the God Emperor by his supporters, simply attacks whichever little boy dares 
say he’s wearing no clothes – before going on to accuse the child of being a 
“failing pile of garbage”.

There is no precedent to guide the media or policymakers, because there has 
been no US president remotely comparable to Trump. Sticking to the old 
rulebook, now charred and in tatters, will be a grave mistake. Nowhere more so 
than Britain.

London’s default setting since 1945 has been to be as close to Washington as 
humanly possible. That’s what the manual, handed to every diplomat and every 
new occupant of No 10, demands. Sure enough, Theresa May is following it – 
dispatching herjoint chiefs of staff, rather than the UK ambassador, to Trump 
Tower 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
 to beg for an early meeting between the two leaders, amid all the familiarly 
needy, unrequited talk of a “special relationship”.

This is certainly what you’d expect of a British prime minister if a normal 
American president were about to take over on 20 January. But May has not 
sufficiently absorbed that Trump is an aberration, and therefore the usual 
rules should not automatically apply. (Angela Merkel has been much more wary.)

Theresa May is repeating the same mistake so fatefully made by Tony Blair in 
2001

Instead, May is repeating the same mistake so fatefully made by Tony Blair in 
2001. He thought he should be as close to George W Bush as he’d been to Bill 
Clinton, failing to appreciate that the two men were entirely different, that 
Bush was surrounded by ideological obsessives who werebent on war with Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2004/jan/12/usa.books> from the very start. 
May is being similarly undiscriminating. In her post-Brexit longing for friends 
and trading partners, she is getting ready to cosy up to a man who makes Bush 
look like Abraham Lincoln. It may prove to be her costliest error.

But you can see why it’s happened. She and her officials know no other way to 
operate. Along with everyone else, they keep clinging to the hope that Trump is 
about to transform himself into a politician they can recognise and understand.

But he hasn’t and he won’t. They, and we, need to stop deluding ourselves – 
and work out how to deal with Trump just the way he is.
 