
The terrorists are winning. Why pretend otherwise? The crimes of Ankara 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
 andBerlin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/berlin-truck-crashes-into-christmas-market>
 – where families sharing festive joy were deliberately targeted and murdered – 
should rightly shock and appal. Such atrocities are harbingers. Millions have 
now watched Mevlut Mert Altıntas, an off-duty police officer whomurdered 
Russia’s ambassador to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
, ranting at the camera, a slick and staged political broadcast disseminated to 
a mass audience. Berlin’s interior senator Andreas Geisel strikes a defiant 
note. “This is a horrific event,” he says.“But it won’t change the way we live 
life here in Berlin.” <https://twitter.com/lars_scho/status/810959821398753281> 
Berlin will indeed prove more resilient to this kind of atrocity than many 
European cities, but we are deluding ourselves if we pretend terrorism has not 
already dramatically changed our way of life.

Russian ambassador to Turkey shot dead by police officer in Ankara gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/19/russian-ambassador-to-turkey-wounded-in-ankara-shooting-attack>
Islamist terrorist fanatics and the west’s ascendant populist right are now 
working in tandem. They are feeding off each other. They are interdependent. 
Their fortunes rise with each other. This morning Nigel Farage tweeted: 
“Terrible news from Berlin but no surprise. Events like these will be the 
Merkel legacy.” What kind of contemptible individual mixes horror with 
vindication? From Donald Trump to France’s Marine Le Pen to the Netherlands’ 
Geert Wilders, the populist right will now be carefully plotting how they will 
extract political dividends from the horror. Muslims as a whole will fall under 
ever greater suspicion.

That is, of course, exactly what the fanatics want. Don’t listen to me: heed 
the words ofNicolas Hénin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/nicolas-henin>, 
a Frenchman who survived being taken hostage by Isis. After the Bataclan 
atrocity <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, he wrote that his 
captors would be scanning social media and celebrating: “‘We are winning’, 
they’d say. They will be heartened by every sign of overreaction, of division, 
of fear, of racism, of xenophobia; they will be drawn to any examples of 
ugliness on social media.”What he wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/16/isis-bombs-hostage-syria-islamic-state-paris-attacks>
 is so depressingly, glaringly obvious to anyone who ponders it for more than a 
moment: and yet still the script written by the fanatics will be followed to 
the letter.

Yes, lessons need to be learned. Turkey’s besieged opposition HDP party – in a 
country rapidly degenerating into dictatorship – “harshly condemn” the 
ambassador’s murder. They also say this murder demonstrates that“Turkey is 
unfortunately no longer a secure country due to recent domestic and 
international policies” 
<https://www.hdp.org.tr/en/english/statements/we-extend-our-condolences-to-the-government-of-russian-federation-and-the-people-of-russia/9565>
. Turkey’s regime hasbacked fundamentalist rebels 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/syria-crisis-turkey-and-saudi-arabia-shock-western-countries-by-supporting-anti-assad-jihadists-10242747.html>
 who hijacked what began as a Syrian cry for freedom. We do not yet know 
exactly what drove Altıntas to commit his crime: but look at how the western 
media accept that foreign policy could be a factor, noting as they do that his 
expressed motive was vengeance for Aleppo and Syria. As journalistMehdi Hasan 
puts it <https://twitter.com/mehdirhasan/status/810915295116279809>: “Western 
pundits are happy to link terror attacks with Russian foreign policy, but never 
with western foreign policy.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Germany%20issue%20arrest%20warrant%20for%20suspect%20in%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Germany%20issue%20arrest%20warrant%20for%20suspect%20in%20Berlin%20attack%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fgerman-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report&media=>
Germany issue arrest warrant for suspect in Berlin attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/21/german-police-berlin-lorry-attack-video-report>
Here is the danger of what now beckons. More Islamist terrorist attacks will 
come. The populist xenophobic right will continue to surge, and it will 
capitalise on the atrocities. Hatred against Muslims – and demands for 
collective punishment – will grow. Civil liberties will be rolled back. Those 
on the left who oppose racism and support compassion for refugees will 
increasingly be regarded as the enemy within. Democracy will be chipped away. 
The west will continue its inexorable decline, not because of the threat of 
“Islamisation”, but partly because of political consequences arising from the 
fear of Muslims and foreigners. Picture how Donald Trump will respond after the 
first major terrorist attack. If, in a century’s time, historians ask why the 
west fell into a spiral of decline, the answer will not be that we were overrun 
by fanatics, but that we succumbed to their wishes.

It doesn’t have to be like this, no. But unless reason and common sense trump 
hatred, 2016 will mark the beginning of a new, dark era.
 