
Nissan stays, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/nissans-post-brexit-deal-could-lead-to-colossal-bills-for-taxpayers>
 and the country breathes a great sigh of relief. Hundreds of thousands of jobs 
may now be saved and British car manufacturing rescued from Brexit calamity. 
The symbolism of Nissan disinvesting from Sunderland and turning away to France 
or Spain would have been shattering politically and crippling economically, a 
great clanging shutter coming down on us all. Any government would move heaven 
and earth to prevent it.

Nissan deal: Chuka Umunna asks for 'letter of comfort' to be revealed
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/nissan-deal-chuka-umunna-asks-letter-of-comfort-to-be-revealed>
What did it take? The Nissan chief drove into Downing Street in his Qashqai 
<http://news.sky.com/story/may-meets-nissan-boss-for-downing-st-talks-after-brexit-demand-10616698>
 in mid-October to be greeted with the warmest prime ministerial inducements 
and reassurances.Greg Clark, the business secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/31/nhs-spending-will-fall-on-a-per-head-basis-before-2020-says-health-committee-chair-politics-live>
, dashed to Tokyo to offer Nissan’s board fulsome guarantees that the company 
will suffer no adverse effect from Brexit: terms will “remain competitive 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37795464>”. Clark says the same 
assurances have now been given to other carmakers.

Nissan demanded a “letter of comfort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/nissan-deal-chuka-umunna-asks-letter-of-comfort-to-be-revealed>
” to insulate it from risk, so precise it had to be redrafted several times. 
This hard-headed company is making a heavy investment in two new models: 
soothing words, a prime ministerial tea ceremony, devout hope and good 
intentions would not be enough for them. It’s nice to be offered more money for 
research and development, skills training and local regeneration, but that’s 
not enough. So what else is in that letter?

No “compensation” for future tariffs was offered, Clark told Andrew Marr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/greg-clark-brexit-negotiations-andrew-marr-show-nissan-auto-industry>
. If it was offered, sweeteners are illegal under all trade rules. Besides, the 
precedent would mean astronomical costs to compensate every firm affected by 
Brexit. tonight, in a Commons statement, Clark gave away nothing more. As Clive 
Lewis, the shadow business secretary, demanded repeatedly, “Show us the letter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/government-signals-it-will-not-release-letters-sent-to-nissan-a7389841.html>
”, Clark hid behind commercial sensitivity. But if there is no sweetener, 
what’s the secret?

The deal has raised high hopes with all who never wanted to leave the EU. Ask 
EEF <https://www.eef.org.uk/>, the association of engineering and manufacturing 
employers, and like many others they conclude only one thing: “The speculation 
has to be that they were told we would stay inside the customs union and avoid 
punitive tariffs. With supply chains going back and forth across borders, 
staying in the single market is equally important.”

The mystery remains: how can they know what we will get from years of 
negotiations with 27 EU states –and the Walloons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/shortcuts/2016/oct/21/wallonia-eu-latest-rogue-element-walloons>
? A wish list is light years from a done deal. And if May, contrary to her 
public rhetoric, really wants to stay tariff-free in a single market with no 
adverse effect, then with what compromises over free movement and payment to 
the EU?

Pro-leave MP Nadhim Zahawi’s article in the Mail on Sunday 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3886348/Why-leading-Brexiteer-NADHIM-ZAHAWI-believes-8-5billion-price-worth-paying-year-stay-single-market-MAIL-SUNDAY-COMMENT-young-six-year-old.html>
 was remarkable, suggesting we should keep paying our full £8.5bn annual EU 
contribution after Brexit, in exchange for “tariff-free access to the single 
market”. Here was transparent government kite-flying to prepare Mail readers 
for the many compromises to come, as implied in the Nissan deal.

UK seeking tariff-free EU deal for carmakers, Nissan told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/30/nissan-eu-tariff-free-brexit-sunderland>
The greatest compromise must be over free movement. One plausible route is a 
subtle reinterpretation of free movement to mean “free movement of labour” not 
“people” – admitting only those with a job offer. Will the EU accept it – and 
will UK voters? Recent opinion polls suggest people may, as they now put worry 
about living standards ahead of immigration.

If that’s what Nissan was told then parliament should know – and many would 
celebrate a monumental shift in direction to stay as close in to the EU as 
possible. If that’s what’s in the letter, we should know whatNissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> knows.

But plainly the cabinet is nowhere near agreeing any such gentle-Brexit plan. 
Only last Friday Liam Fox, the international trade secretary, ignored his 
leader’s prohibition on briefings as he impertinentlywarned Philip Hammond not 
to exaggerate the risks of Brexit 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/uk/726943/Liam-Fox-Philip-Hammond-Brexit-fallout-government-autumn-statement-project-fear?utm_source=feedburner&utm_medium=feed&utm_campaign=Feed%3A+daily-express-uk-news+(Daily+Express+%3A%3A+UK+Feed)>
 in his autumn statement, not to create “Project Fear Mark II”. Peace has not 
broken out in the cabinet.

We want our currency back where it was, no price rises for food, petrol and 
holidays, no shocks

Nick Clegg, Keir Starmer and Andrew Tyrie, Tory chair of the treasury 
committee, call for the government to lay out its plan before triggering 
article 50. But this deeply divided cabinet would be incapable of agreeing any 
such document. Fear of Brexit fury is what keeps the Nissan letter under wraps.

A letter of comfort has a wonderful ring to it. Every industry, every company 
and all of us will want one: a painless Brexit for everyone. Threats press in: 
theFrench government has set up a high-powered hunting team 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/brexit-banks-france-team-to-lure-away-financial-hub-london-uk-eu-a7388881.html>
 backed by the Paris mayor to bag UK industries, especially City finance. The 
British Bankers’ Association warns its members’ hands are “quivering over the 
relocate button 
<http://www.businessinsider.com.au/bba-boss-warns-banks-will-leave-britain-in-early-2017-over-brexit-2016-10>
”. British universities already find a 9% drop in foreign applicants.

As time goes by each of us deserves a Nissan letter to reassure us that what 
the leavers promised before the referendum will come to pass. We want our 
currency back where it was, no price rises for food, petrol and holidays, no 
shocks. Our comfort letters need to give us those sunlit uplands still being 
promised by Fox, Davis and Johnson.

Lest anyone forget, the Open Britain campaign has kept a useful tally of what 
those Vote Leavers pledged to us all. 
<http://www.open-britain.co.uk/leave_campaigners_try_to_drop_their_false_promises>
Here are just a few: trade will “continue … similar to current circumstances” 
(David Davis). “We can maintain free trade, stop sending money and also have 
control of our borders” (Michael Gove). That £8.5bn Zahawi now says must still 
be paid to the EU was promised by the leavers to buy all these good things 
instead: “hundreds of new schools”, “pioneering health and scientific 
research”, “give junior doctors that pay settlement they are looking for”, and, 
according to Gisela Stuart, “abolishing prescription charges”. There would be 
“state of the art hospitals”, while “maintaining all current EU spending” on 
the UK”, “lower taxes”, and Chris Grayling pledged to “abolish VAT on fuel and 
tampons”. Daniel Hannan promised “a 60% cut in council tax”, while “wages will 
be higher and fuel bills lower” (Boris Johnson, Gove and Stuart).

If it is “undemocratic” to question the will of the people, remember the 
people were promised all this and much more. So give us our comfort letters 
too, to guarantee no one is harmed by an impossible Brexit the leavers lied 
about. If that’s not, after all, on offer, people will reasonably demand the 
chance to think again.
 