
We seem to love the working class as long as it is a) white and b) passive. 
The real working class is neither. It is multi-ethnic and, fromSouthern Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 toBritish Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/18/talks-agreed-bid-avert-british-airways-christmas-strikes-unite>
, it is set to strike.

Predictably, the Conservatives are calling for more legal restrictions on 
strike action. Theresa Mayaccused strikers of “contempt for ordinary people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/no-10-accuses-striking-workers-of-contempt-for-ordinary-people>
. And – as always – the neck veins of TV reporters are bulging as they express 
outrage on behalf of those affected.

Union leader says No 10 demonising working people in strikes row
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/union-leader-len-mccluskey-says-no-10-demonising-working-people-in-strikes-row>
Yet, try as they might, the politicians and journalists have failed to stir up 
mob hatred againstthe strikers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/17/baggage-handlers-down-suitcases-as-britons-get-ready-for-wave-of-strikes>
, some of whom – such asthe Southern Rail drivers and guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 – have been taking industrial action for weeks. And the reasons for this are 
obvious: they are ordinary people.

While the miners and steelworkers of the 1980s worked in relatively insular 
steel and mining towns, everybody knows a BA cabin steward, a train guard, a 
baggage handler or aPost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> counter worker. What’s more, 
because so much of our work has become modular, low-paid and deskilled, many 
people know, or can guess, exactly what they are going through.

We have near full employment yet near wage stagnation. The strikes taking 
place over Christmas are happening among workers who have not seen a pay rise 
for years. BA’s onboard customer service managers, for example, have been 
stripped of their union negotiation rights and had their pay frozen for six 
years.

One of the most pitiful things about the political class, and the economists 
who whisper certainties in their ear, is their distance from the actual 
experience of work. As trade union rights have become eroded throughout the 
private sector, and large chunks of the public sector become privatised, a 
culture of coercion has taken root at work.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdont-complain-about-the-strikers-theyre-only-doing-what-we-all-should-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff8b4351c08ab56f001fc62ba2b0dc683eb7b50b%2F0_0_3096_4096%2F3096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20complain%20about%20the%20strikers%20%E2%80%93%20they%E2%80%99re%20only%20doing%20what%20we%20all%20should%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Mason&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdont-complain-about-the-strikers-theyre-only-doing-what-we-all-should-in-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20complain%20about%20the%20strikers%20%E2%80%93%20they%E2%80%99re%20only%20doing%20what%20we%20all%20should%20in%202017%20%7C%20Paul%20Mason&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdont-complain-about-the-strikers-theyre-only-doing-what-we-all-should-in-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fff8b4351c08ab56f001fc62ba2b0dc683eb7b50b%2F0_0_3096_4096%2F3096.jpg>
 A commuter protests in support of Southern Rail staff. at Victoria Station in 
London. Photograph: Andy Rain/EPA 
It does not have to be as bad as the leading fast-food cafe chain where a 
secret shopper deducts the bonus of an entire shift if one person does not 
smile. But it is pervasive.

Generally, you are supposed to smile, supposed to exhibit happiness for your 
seven quid an hour, obey orders without question, to hit meaningless targets or 
scam them on the instruction of your line manager – and, increasingly, you’re 
supposed to pretend you are self-employed.

You can spend entire days, if you think about it, being served only by people 
with no actual employment status: the Uber driver, the hairdresser, the 
physiotherapist. Even businesses where you’re paying a limited company through 
your credit card now routinely require their “associates” to be self-empolyed.

The result looks like a fake-tan version of Downtown Abbey with all the same 
levels of deference but zero paternal responsibility. And deep down, people who 
work for a living understand the modern “contract” between worker and employer 
is barely worth the paper it is written on.

That’s why workers with union rights and relative job security use the strike 
weapon. It’s never pleasant. But every cabin worker at BA and Virgin knows 
that, without the unions, they would see their pension rights stolen and their 
conditions eroded to the same levels enjoyed by their counterparts at the 
budget airlines.

And what’s driving the attacks is always the same familiar, financial 
pressure. Public services, once privatised, are forced to enter a race to the 
bottom in terms of pay, conditions and pensions for their workers. Once 
financial logic overtakes the logic of providing a service as efficiently as 
possible, you get the stupidities ofSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> Rail, which cut its services to 
passengers in order to provide itself with an achievable target.

Jeremy Corbyn has been condemned for failing to condemn the strikes – and for 
attending a Christmas party with the Aslef union 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4047478/Brothers-arms-unions-bankroll-Jeremy-Corbyn-REFUSES-condemn-strikes-bringing-Christmas-misery-millions.html>
. If it were up to me, Corbyn would actually throw a Christmas party, not just 
for the Aslef strikers but for all the workers toiling on basic pay, fictitious 
contracts and unachievable targets over the festive period.

Those of us in unions – and there are still millions of us – know they make a 
massive and positive difference. Because workers on London Underground are 
unionised, there is a guard at my local tube station who refuses to wear any 
other name badge than one with “Lenin” on it.

No 10 accuses striking workers of 'contempt for ordinary people'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/no-10-accuses-striking-workers-of-contempt-for-ordinary-people>
Although I do not recommend this level of resistance for everybody, it is a 
physical symbol of the fact that unionised workers are people you do not mess 
around with.

The Southern strikers, the BA crews and the Post Office workers are showing a 
different side of what it means to express your collective identity at work. So 
did thejunior doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/10/junior-doctors-remove-threat-of-further-strikes-over-contract-bma>
, whose determined action got them a better deal than their leaders originally 
thought they could achieve.

Coming on top of the strikes by Deliveroo riders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/deliveroo-workers-strike-again-over-new-pay-structure>
 and a union-ledcourt victory for Uber drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/uber-uk-tribunal-self-employed-status>
, these are signs that even the heavily casualised workforce of the 21st 
century will not suffer indignity for ever.

In economics, it has become common to hear that one of the main failings of 
the current system is wage stagnation; even theBank of England would like to 
see more inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live>
. So don’t complain about the posties, train drivers, cabin crews and baggage 
handlers – they’re only doing what we all should in 2017.

Ask for a pay rise, defend your pension rights, insist that work conditions 
are respectful and safe – and demand your employer negotiates with a real trade 
union and pays the rate for the job.
 