
To Germany, Europe, where the freedom of movement of Jeremy Clarkson has been 
impeded by an elitist official on an airport departure gate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/jeremy-clarkson-row-airport-disputes-argentinian-claim-falklands>
 – and just in time to publicise his new show, too. Jeremy’s mad as hell, and 
you should be, too. Woke Clarkson is your favourite Clarkson.

By way of background, Jeremy and his Grand Tour co-stars and production team 
were flying back from Germany on Monday evening, where I assume they had been 
filming a brilliant sketch in a VW with the numberplate “H1T LER”or whatever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/oct/29/argentinian-court-orders-jeremy-clarkson-criminal-case-reopened>
. Silly old Hun! By the time Jerry gets the joke, Clarkson will be back at 
base, probably havinga glass of organic rose with his mate David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2011/sep/15/day-the-festival-dream-died>
. #massivelegendz.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Clarkson%2C%20May%20and%20Hammond%20reunite%20for%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20%E2%80%93%20video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Clarkson%2C%20May%20and%20Hammond%20reunite%20for%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20%E2%80%93%20video%20trailer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F07%2Fclarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer&media=>
Clarkson, May and Hammond reunite for The Grand Tour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/oct/07/clarkson-may-and-hammond-reunite-for-the-grand-tour-video-trailer>
Alas, Jeremy et al were prevented from boarding a BA flight just about to take 
off, apparently by a Stuttgart airport staff member who claimed to be 
Argentinian, and was therefore tacitly assumed to be acting in revenge for that 
Top Gear episode entitled something like Las Malvinas Son Clarkson’s.

I should say from the get-go that significant portions of what happened at the 
gate are disputed by various parties – not least by the worker in question, who 
is in fact Spanish. But given itappeared on the front page of the Sun 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2193124/jeremy-clarkson-slams-ignorant-little-worm-kicked-off-flight-falklands-rant/>
, Clarkson’s version had gone half way round the world before Stuttgart airport 
officials had time to get their jackboots on.

Still, let’s permit Jeremy to chuck up his take first. “I said to this little 
bald guy,” Clarkson recalled, “‘What’s the problem?’ He had a big smile on his 
face. He said: ‘You’ve missed it.’ We said we had left the lounge when we were 
told, and he said: ‘I’m from Argentina, so fuck you.’ It was disgraceful.”

There, there. Oh wait – there’s more? You cough another lot up, Jeremy – I’ll 
hold your hair back for you. “He marched off looking pleased with himself, no 
doubt to enjoy a disgusting dinner of refried beans. But he’s not heard the 
last of this.”

Better out than in. Any more? “His colleagues were suggesting we were too 
drunk. But we’d had one can of beer. The police met us and could see we were 
sober and promised they would sort him out. They’re horrified. He’s toast.”

All finished now? “He’s a stupid, bitter and twisted little man who can’t get 
it into his head that Argentina’s armed forces are completely useless.”

There it is. All better now.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdont-cry-foul-play-jeremy-clarkson-the-truth-is-the-plane-left-without-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcc93e6d92ac036f882a7b6169bf8ed3aa7001a%2F0_0_3359_4203%2F3359.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Don%E2%80%99t%20cry%20foul%20play%2C%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%2C%20the%20truth%20is%20the%20plane%20left%20without%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdont-cry-foul-play-jeremy-clarkson-the-truth-is-the-plane-left-without-you%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Don%E2%80%99t%20cry%20foul%20play%2C%20Jeremy%20Clarkson%2C%20the%20truth%20is%20the%20plane%20left%20without%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Fdont-cry-foul-play-jeremy-clarkson-the-truth-is-the-plane-left-without-you%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbcc93e6d92ac036f882a7b6169bf8ed3aa7001a%2F0_0_3359_4203%2F3359.jpg>
 The front page of Wednesday’s Sun has all the details. Photograph: 
crichardson/The Sun 
Hang on. One last heave. “This ignorant little worm made us miss our plane and 
he will pay for it. The police said it was a hate crime and he would be 
arrested. Yes, even the Germans were on our side – for once.”

Oh Jeremy! Surely “your side” is any side that doesn’t describe something that 
clearly isn’t a hate crime as “a hate crime”? By all means go after him for his 
jobsworthery. But if you’ve been about anything in your life, it’s about not 
policing freedom of bantz. In fact, I am SHOCKED you didn’t make this point of 
principle when the policeman allegedly said it to you, preferring instead to 
travel in its PC slipstream in the hope it would bring even more shit to bear 
on this guy.

And so to the other versions of events. The Spanish airport worker in question 
disputes them entirely. “Mr Clarkson thinks he is very important and that the 
flight is going to wait for him,” he says. “Even if it’s the Queen, we don’t 
wait.” “I said: ‘You were in the lounge drinking, you were told we were 
boarding, you didn’t move.’” TheStuttgart airport spokesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/16/jeremy-clarkson-row-airport-disputes-argentinian-claim-falklands>
 seemed to back this up: “Mr Clarkson and his team missed several calls in the 
lounge while the other passengers have already been boarded,” he reveals. “Due 
to airline policy, after a certain time of absence the luggage will be removed 
from the aircraft and the missing passengers will be withdrawn from the 
passenger list. From this point there is no chance for boarding, even if the 
passengers show up.”

As for Stuttgart police, they declared themselves unaware of any “hate crime” 
allegations.

Of course, there will be some point-missing liberals who will look at Jeremy’s 
diatribe about an incident that was easily resolved when his production team or 
security guys purchased him another ticket for a flight that ended up landing 
ahead of the BA one anyway. And those liberals will conclude that if anyone can 
be said to have come over a bit bigoted and nationalistic, it’s him. Dear dear. 
Once again it falls to Lost in Showbiz to point out that They Still Don’t Get 
It, Do They?

What people need to remember is that Jeremy has long represented a primal 
scream of anti-elitism, even if he is best buds with the former PM and the 
chairman of Rupert Murdoch’s News UK and so on. Furthermore, it is very 
important for us to understand WHY Jeremy says these things. Could it be 
economic anxiety? (He is rumoured to be on just the £10m from Amazon.) Could it 
be that he is feeling rather “left behind” – not just by the BA flight – and he 
is going to flex what little power he has left by staging insurgencies against 
the establishment, in the form of airline gate staff? I’m serious. This is anAPB
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/All-points_bulletin> to all academics not 
currently deployed in the Rust Belt: can someone please look at the data and 
explain why these upsets with uppity underlings keep happening as far as Jeremy 
is concerned?

In the meantime, do enjoy the show. It’s certainly the best Argentine-tinged 
car promotion since Private Eye spoofed the Sun with the classic: “Kill an 
Argie, win a Metro”, and we shall mark its official status as “developing”.
 