
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> would have 
burst a blood vessel, had he only had the chance to listen in. What could be 
more metropolitan liberal elite than last week’sGuardian Christmas telethon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-2016>
, as readers called in to journalists tomake a donation for child refugees 
<https://guardian.charitiestrust.org/guardianappeal.aspx?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=donateseriespage>
? Just imagine it, all those Islington luvvies and bleeding hearts, ringing in 
from one part of London N1 to another, the Bollinger chilling nicely in the 
fridge, as they salved their well-paid consciences and congratulated themselves 
on being leftier than thou. How utterly Guardianista.

We’re marching towards a mad Brexit. Someone must speak for the 48% | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/marching-mad-brexit-someone-speak-48-per-cent>
Except it was nothing like that. The calls came from all over the country, 
with perhaps an over-representation from the north of England. In my two and a 
half hours on the phones, I heard from Barrow-in-Furness, Hull, Lancaster, 
Leeds, Swansea and a string of small towns and villages from Devon to Cumbria. 
Colleagues reported the same pattern. True, I took a call from my own small 
part of north London – but it was the only one. However else you’d want to 
describe this group of people, metropolitan they weren’t.

Nor were they the elite. Pensioners called to give the fiver or tenner they 
worked out they could spare, or, asPolly Toynbee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/2016-brexit-trump-hopeful>
 has recounted, their entire winter fuel allowance.Gary Younge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/garyyounge> took a call from an unemployed 
Asian man, living with his parents in northern England, who gave £1.33: he 
chose that precise sum because he had £1.34 in his account. Meanwhile, and by 
coincidence,Stuart Heritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/stuart-heritage> spoke again to Sam, the 
same teenager whose call he took last year. Sam isn’t old enough to have a 
credit card, but each year he has raised money at his school for the Guardian 
appeal.

Not many of these people fit the Guardianista stereotype. I wonder what Farage 
and his friends would make of the lifelong reader who described the recent 
funeral of a 94-year-old friend: a retired major and veteran of the second 
world war whose devotion to the Guardian was so great that a copy of the paper 
was placed on top of his coffin.

And yet, because of their sympathy for refugees and their presumed support for 
British membership of the EU – with 91% in favour, Guardian readers were the 
country’smost solidly pro-remain demographic 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/features/5050-britain-european-union-polling>
, more reliably anti-Brexit than Green party voters, the young, university 
graduates and Scots – these people would be casually, and falsely, dismissed by 
the likes of Farage as the metropolitan liberal elite.

Indeed, in a year brimming with dishonesties, this phrase represents one of 
the great myths of 2016. In August, serving as warm-up man at a Mississippi 
rally for Donald Trump, the then Ukip leader hailed the Brexit result as a 
victory for what he called the “little people 
<https://twitter.com/duncanrobinson/status/768704729975226368>, the real people 
... the ordinary, decent people”. The implication was that those who had voted 
remain were unreal and indecent, that they were the big people, the 
representatives of the mighty and powerful.

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> played the same 
trick in her party conference speech in the autumn, casting the opponents of 
Brexit (forgetting, of course, that during the referendum campaign she was one) 
as members of an exclusive, global club, denizens of Davos comfortable in the 
first-class lounge and utterly devoid of national allegiance – people who were, 
in her memorable phrase, citizens of the world and therefore citizens of 
nowhere.As I wrote then 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/07/marching-mad-brexit-someone-speak-48-per-cent>
, she sought to rebrand the 48% as the 1%.

But it’s an absurd lie. Of course, more Britons voted to leave the EU than to 
stay, but nearly half of those voting chose remain. That is not a tiny 
metropolitan elite. In the US,2.9 million more people 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/21/politics/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-popular-vote-final-count/>
 chose Hillary Clinton than chose Donald Trump. That too is not an elite. In 
most democratic systems, such a margin would have been hailed as a victory and 
a mandate; only under the arcane rules of the electoral college could such a 
result have brought defeat.

So enough of this fraudulent talk of elites, metropolitan or otherwise. But 
what of that middle word, the meat in this rhetorical sandwich? What of 
“liberal”?

After this year, especially, I think the word should be worn with pride. 
If liberal means wanting to help children fleeing a dictator’s barrel-bombs, 
then call me a liberal. If liberal means believing that the peoples of a 
continent that for centuries was torn apart by war and bloodshed have found a 
new, peaceful mechanism for resolving their differences, and that Britain 
should play its part in that, then call me a liberal.

If liberal means holding true to the values of the Enlightenment, including a 
belief infacts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/not-post-truth-simpler-words-lies-aleppo-trump-mainstream>
 and evidence and reason, then call me a liberal. And if liberal means 
cherishing the norms and institutions that protect and sustain democracy, from 
a free press to an independent judiciary, then call me a liberal. For those 
values are under assault just now, in a way few of us ever imagined.

So when it comes to “liberal”, we have nothing to apologise for. Sure, the 
remainers’ most public faces could fairly be described as both “metropolitan” 
and “elite” – columnists for London-based newspapers among them. But the same 
is self-evidently true of the other side, too. Michael Gove and Boris Johnson 
are not exactly members of the lumpen proletariat, are they? There is no 
definition of elite or metropolitan that does not include those two.

The US has elected its most dangerous leader. We all have plenty to fear | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
And the same is true of that other dread phrase of 2016, “the bubble”. As if 
the only people who live in a bubble are liberal, anti-Trump, anti-Brexit 
types, while their opponents are rooted in the earthiness of the real world. 
What garbage. Stockbroker Farage paid homage to billionaire Trump in the 
latter’sgold elevator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/farage-trump-buddy-photo-ukip>
; that’s the same Farage who confessed his relief that vacating the Ukip 
leadership meant he no longer had to deal with “low-grade people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/nigel-farage-scathing-attack-ukip-low-grade-people>
” and who said his £85,000 MEP’s salary, excluding abundant expenses, meant he 
was “poor”.

Those who truly live in a bubble are those who cannot begin to imagine the 
lives of – still less empathise with – those outside their own first-world 
realm of safety, comfort and prosperity. When Tory MP and Dorset landowner
Richard Drax 
<http://www.dorsetecho.co.uk/news/14969106.Richard_Drax___Charity_begins_at_home_and_we_could__and_should__dip_into_the_overseas_aid_budget_/?ref=mrb&lp=12>
 objects to an overseas aid budget of 0.7% of national income, insisting 
“charity begins at home” – as if 99.3% of our “charity” isn’t already being 
spent at home – then it’s he who’s living in a bubble.

But in this season of goodwill, let’s not play their game – competing over 
which side is less detached, less metropolitan or less elite. Instead, let’s 
think of those people who were so moved by the plight of their fellow human 
beings they gave what they had, even when they could barely spare it. Call them 
names if you like, but they are the very best of us.
 