
As east Aleppo falls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-civilians-plea-as-airstrikes-resume-syria>
 to Bashar al-Assad’s murderous regime, the postmortem has begun. How could 
this sickening onslaught and its miserable human cost have been avoided? All 
too predictably, fingers point back at the culprits of 2013, those who 
prevented the west frombombing Assad’s forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/aug/30/cameron-mps-syria>. Those who 
backed the wars in Iraq and Libya feel tainted by the bloodshed in the 
calamities that followed. They accept that the killing fields of Iraq and the 
disintegrated state of Libya substantially weakened the moral case for western 
intervention. The horror of Aleppo presents the counter-argument: the cost of 
inaction. Those who opposed intervention are also stained with blood, goes the 
argument. It feels grubby to enter such a debate as Aleppo burns, but the 
revision of history demands a response.

Aleppo civilians plead for help as airstrikes resume: 'Save us'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/aleppo-civilians-plea-as-airstrikes-resume-syria>
Let us be clear. Assad and Vladimir Putin are responsible for heinous crimes. 
Social media abounds with their apologists, those who think they are so 
radical, the arch-critics of western imperialism, but who are actually both 
hypocrites and a moral disgrace. Yesterday’s front page of the Morning Star 
rightly provoked revulsion when it described Aleppo’s fall as a “liberation”. 
When the US pummels countries with bombs, such apologists would never dream of 
denying civilian casualties. When Russia and its allies are responsible, they 
echo the language of the most ardent neocon: that the dead in Aleppo are not 
civilians but terrorists; that civilian deaths are either inventions or 
entirely the responsibility of rebel militia; that civilians are all rejoicing 
at their “liberation”. On Tuesday Syria’s ambassador to the United Nations, 
Bashar Jaafari, held up a photograph of a kindly soldier helping a woman from a 
truck. “This is a Syrian soldier,” he claimed. “She is a woman fleeing eastern 
Aleppo.” In the age of the internet, such lies are unwise.It was swiftly 
discovered that this was, in fact, a woman in Falluja, in neighbouring Iraq, 
being helped by state militia 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/rosebuchanan/syrian-ambassador-to-the-un-iraq-photo?utm_term=.lhE21xkgQ#.skvXBb86g>
.

Falluja itself is a reminder of the moral bankruptcy of those who 
criticise western imperialism but apologise for Russia. They were the first to 
– rightly – denounce US forces who assaulted the city in 2004, using white 
phosphorus as they did so, a substance that can burn down to the bone. And yet 
they deny an even worse atrocity today, because it is not being committed by 
the US. The UN has received credible evidence of up to 82 Aleppo civilians 
being shot dead where they stood. Amnesty Internationalspeaks of 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/latest/news/2016/12/syria-reports-of-execution-style-killings-in-aleppo-point-to-war-crimes/>
 “reports that civilians – including children – are being massacred in cold 
blood”, and that Russian-backed Syrian forces “have repeatedly displayed a 
callous disregard for international humanitarian law”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Faleppo-civilians-paying-brutal-price-says-un-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aleppo%20civilians%20paying%20brutal%20price%2C%20says%20UN%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Faleppo-civilians-paying-brutal-price-says-un-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aleppo%20civilians%20paying%20brutal%20price%2C%20says%20UN%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Faleppo-civilians-paying-brutal-price-says-un-video&media=>
Aleppo civilians paying brutal price, says UN – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/13/aleppo-civilians-paying-brutal-price-says-un-video>
Up to 100,000 civilians are said to be crammed into an area of no more than 
two square kilometres:Lina Shami, an activist in Aleppo, reports there are “no 
safe areas” <https://www.facebook.com/hmf5h/videos/2181499828741096/>and that 
civilians are “threatened with field executions or are dying under bombing”. 
Russian bombing has been indiscriminate, annihilating local infrastructure. 
Yes, what began as a democratic struggle in Syria more than five years ago has 
been sabotaged by Islamist extremists – such as Islamic State, which came in 
from post-invasion Iraq – but Aleppo had a democratically elected council and 
independent civil society, now lost.

Are those who opposed military intervention against Assad in 2013, before the 
west turned its firepower on his Islamist extremist opponents, to blame? Here 
is what the then prime minister,David Cameron, told the House of Commons in 2013
 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201314/cmhansrd/cm130829/debtext/130829-0001.htm>
in the debate before proposed intervention. “It is not about taking sides in 
the Syrian conflict, it is not about invading, it is not about regime change, 
and it is not even about working more closely with the opposition: it is about 
the large-scale use of chemical weapons and our response to a war crime – 
nothing else.” Whatever the argument for larger-scale intervention – and why it 
would have been opposed, because of Iraq and Libya, because of the ascendant 
extremist groups in Syria’s conflicts – it wasn’t even on the table.

Neither was it proposed by the US president, Barack Obama. As the New York 
Times reported in August 2013, action was considered to “deter and degrade” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/08/28/world/middleeast/obama-syria-strike.html> 
Assad’s “ability to launch chemical weapons” – but it was explicitly not about 
regime change or even “forcing him to the negotiating table”.

Nothing about specific areas of Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>
, nothing about the rebels. It was explicitly sold as a limited operation 
focused entirely on chemical weapons. Yes, there was the obvious fear that this 
would mean creeping direct military involvement, and there is no precedent of 
western military intervention in the Arab world ending in anything other than 
disaster. It was, nonetheless, not what was debated.

There are, however, concrete actions that the west could be undertaking now. 
As Mark Boothroyd from Syria Solidarity Movement UK tells me, the case for 
British humanitarian airdrops inAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> and elsewhere is overwhelming. These 
would show support for people who are besieged, whom Assad and his Russian 
backers are trying to starve out. A UN-monitored evacuation plan needs to be 
put in place. Russia needs to come under pressure for its criminal behaviour in 
Syria – with further sanctions considered.

Aleppo’s people are being slaughtered. Did we learn nothing from Srebrenica? | 
Nedžad Avdić
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/aleppo-people-slaughtered-srebrenica-genocides-atrocities-syria>
Syria is a reminder of the need for consistency. Those of us who passionately 
opposed the disastrous western wars in Iraq and Libya are not apologists for 
Putin or Assad. Similarly, those who denounce the opponents of western 
intervention should have far more humility about Iraq and Libya: the hundreds 
of thousands dead, the sectarian conflict, the millions displaced and 
traumatised, the extremist groups flourishing in the chaos. They should speak 
out about the west’s alliance with a head-chopping dictatorship such as Saudi 
Arabia, which exports extremism - including to Syria - and which is butchering 
Yemeni civilians with British-made bombs.

If you oppose war crimes, if you oppose the murder of innocent civilians, you 
should speak out about whoever is responsible. There is no contradiction in 
opposing the crimes of western or Russian foreign policy, or in denouncing both 
the bombs of Syria and of Saudi Arabia. As I say, call it consistency. Or 
perhaps a better word is humanity.
 