
Donald Trump has praised Britain as “smart” for opting out of a European Union 
that he believes is dominated by Germany and on the brink of collapse, inan 
interview with former Tory leadership contender Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-uk-interview-tory-times>
.

Gove's Trump interview is another headache for Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-donald-trump-interview-another-headache-theresa-may-revenge>
The president-elect promised to draw up a trade deal with the UK “quickly” 
after Brexit and said he could understand why voters chose to leave in last 
year’s referendum. “You look at theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and it’s Germany. Basically a vehicle 
for Germany. That’s why I thought the UK was so smart in getting out,” he told 
Gove.

Gove, the first senior Conservative to meet Trump, spent an hour chatting to 
the president-elect in what he called his “glitzy, golden man cave” in Trump 
Tower, New York, for an interview with the Times.

Trump stressed his fondness for the UK and said other countries could follow 
its lead and leave the EU,something Gove predicted during the referendum 
campaign 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/662384/EU-referendum-Brexit-Michael-Gove-speech-liberate-Europe-Brussels-Vote-Leave>
. “I believe others will leave. I do think keeping it together is not gonna be 
as easy as a lot of people think,” said Trump.

Asked whether he would press ahead with a trade deal with the UK that would 
come into force after Brexit, Trump told the former justice secretary: 
“Absolutely, very quickly. I’m a big fan of the UK. We’re gonna work very hard 
to get it done quickly and done properly. Good for both sides.”

He said he was keen to meet the prime minister after his inauguration, which 
will take place on Friday. “I will be meeting with [Theresa May]. In fact if 
you want you can see the letter, wherever the letter is, she just sent it. 
She’s requesting a meeting and we’ll have a meeting right after I get into the 
White House and … we’re gonna get something done very quickly.”

But Trump also underlined that he is likely to be a tough negotiating partner, 
threatening to slap a 35% import tax on BMW cars ifthe German company sticks to 
a decision to build a plant in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/fear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers>
. Such protectionism would risk retaliatory measures from Germany, which was 
the target of many of the most combative comments in the interview.

Trump blamed the decision of the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, to welcome 
refugees fleeing war in the Middle East, for jeopardising the stability ofEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. “I think she made one very 
catastrophic mistake and that was taking all of these illegals, you know taking 
all of the people from wherever they come from. And nobody even knows where 
they come from.

“People, countries, want their own identity and the UK wanted its own 
identity. But I do believe this: if they hadn’t been forced to take in all of 
the refugees, so many, with all the problems that it … entails, I think that 
you wouldn’t have a Brexit.”

In a separate but simultaneous interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
 with the German paper Bild, Trump said he might contemplate tightening 
restrictions on Europeans wanting to travel to the US. “That could happen, but 
we’ll see. I mean, we’re talking here about parts of Europe, parts of the world 
and parts of Europe, where we have problems, where they come in and cause 
problems. I don’t want to have these problems.”

The president-elect also made a series of provocative comments about foreign 
policy, reiterating thathe could do a deal with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-to-hold-summit-with-vladimir-putin-within-weeks>
 that would result in sanctions being lifted. And he said he believed the Nato 
military alliance is obsolete and needs reform. “They have sanctions on Russia 
– let’s see if we can make some good deals with Russia. For one thing, I think
nuclear weapons should be way down and reduced very substantially 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
, that’s part of it. Russia’s hurting very badly right now because of sanctions 
but I think something can happen that a lot of people are gonna benefit.”

He said he would appoint Jared Kushner, his son-in-law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
, as a Middle East peace envoy.

Trump’s blunt remarks underlined how radically different his approach will be 
from that of his predecessors, who have traditionally sought to build a close 
relationship with the EU – and how difficult he will be to work with for his 
counterparts from other countries.

Don’t treat Donald Trump as if he’s a normal president. He’s not | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-not-normal-president-congress-theresa-may>
Gove, who is usually regarded as being on the liberal wing of the Conservative 
party – and is known for not suffering fools gladly – praised Trump’s business 
acumen, saying he “campaigned in 140-character Twitter storms and intends to 
govern by spreadsheet”. Gove added: “Intelligence comes in many forms.”

Speaking to BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday, Gove said Trump appeared 
“emotionally and financially invested” in seeing Brexit become a success.

Asked if he trusted the president-elect over his promises to seek a rapid 
trade deal, Gove replied: “I can’t make a window into Donald Trump’s soul. What 
I can tell is he was enthusiastic about Brexit. He feels, in a way, a vicarious 
sense of ownership.”

Gove said he was left with the impression Trump “wants to have something 
signature-ready at the earliest possible opportunity”, on trade with the UK.

Gove said he could not predict the specific timetable for this: “I’m not a 
trade negotiator, but the president-elect is a dealmaker. He’s confident that 
he can get a good deal, a win-win, for Britain and America relatively rapidly.”

Asked about Trump’s statements and views, Gove said he found some 
“outrageous”, and stressed he could not back all the president-elect’s policy 
positions.

He added: “But if you are making a decision about what’s in the best interests 
of this country, and what’s in the best interests of people’s jobs, I think a 
good relationship with the incoming administration is a good thing.”

By securing the interview, which took place alongside a journalist from German 
newspaper Bild, Gove stole a march on the prime minister, who has not yet 
confirmed a date to meet her US counterpart. The timing of the interview was 
awkward for May, taking place as her advisers draw up the final draft ofa 
speech on Brexit that she is due to give on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-speech-warning-eu-risk-giving-britain-raw-brexit-deal>
. The prime minister will reportedly warn her EU partners that she is ready to 
walk out of the single market and the customs union.

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, set the tone in an interview on Sunday with a 
German paper, Welt am Sonntag, saying that Britain would respond aggressively 
if it were shut out of the EU’s markets. Asked if Britain saw its future 
business model as being a tax haven, Hammond replied: “Most of us who had voted 
remain would like the UK to remain a recognisably European-style economy with 
European-style taxation systems, European-style regulation systems etc. I 
personally hope we will be able to remain in the mainstream of European 
economic and social thinking. But if we are forced to be something different, 
then we will have to become something different.”

In the early days after his election, Trump appeared keener to pose for photos 
with the former Ukip leader Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 than to build a relationship with Downing Street. He even suggested that 
Farage would be a good candidate for US ambassador.

His enthusiasm for drawing up a new trade agreement with the UK is in stark 
contrast to the warnings of Barack Obama during last year’s referendum campaign 
thatBritain would be at “the back of the queue” for trade talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
 if it voted to leave the EU.

Since being sacked by May, Gove has written a regular column for the Times. He 
worked at the newspaper before being elected as the MP for Surrey Heath and is 
known to be close to its owner, Rupert Murdoch, whose Fox News network was 
often favourable to the Trump campaign.

Trump insisted that he was determined to keep tweeting when he enters the 
White House. “The tweeting: I thought I’d do less of it. But I’m covered so 
dishonestly by the press – so dishonestly – that I can put out Twitter – and 
it’s not 140, it’s now 280 – I can go bing bing bing … and they put it on and 
as soon as I tweet it out – this morning on television, Fox – ‘Donald Trump, we 
have breaking news’.”

The interview took place as it emerged that Trump had been told by the 
departing director of the CIA to adopt a more careful approach to US national 
security, with a warning that the president-elect should not be carelessly 
“talking and tweeting” without understanding the threat posed by Russia.


In an outspoken television interview, John Brennan added that the 
president-elect’s recent criticism of the intelligence agencies was offensive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/john-brennan-trump-nazi-germany-russia>
, after Trump had accused them of allowing a controversial dossier about 
alleged contacts between his campaign and Vladimir Putin’s Russia to appear in 
press reports.

Speaking to Fox News on Sunday, the outgoing CIA director said: “Now that he’s 
going to have an opportunity to do something for our national security as 
opposed to talking and tweeting, he’s going to have tremendous responsibility 
to make sure that US and national security interests are protected.”
 