
President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/paul-ryan-donald-trump-republicans-mandate>
 has said he plans to deport as many as 3 million people once he accedes to the 
Oval Office, and that fencing will form part of his promised wall onthe border 
with Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/13/mexico-border-nogales-president-trump-joke>
.

Stephen Bannon and Reince Priebus named to lead Trump's White House
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
In an interview with CBS’s 60 Minutes 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/president-elect-trump-says-how-many-immigrants-hell-deport/>
, set to be broadcast Sunday, Trump said: “What we are going to do is get the 
people that are criminal and have criminal records, gang members, drug dealers, 
where a lot of these people, probably two million, it could be even three 
million, we are getting them out of our country or we are going to incarcerate.”


“But we’re getting them out of our country, they’re here illegally.”

On the campaign trail, Trump said he would deport all undocumented migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/21/donald-trump-deportation-immigration-plan-meeting-latino-leaders>
 living in the US, estimated to be about 11 million people. He has stressed his 
desire to deport “criminal aliens” and said that he would deport families “in a 
very humane way 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jul/28/karen-bass/mass-deportation-latino-families/>
”.

His comments to CBS stopped short of such extremes but they also contrasted 
with the words of House speaker Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/paul-ryan-donald-trump-republicans-mandate>
 in a Sunday interview with CNN.

“That is not what our focus is,” Ryan told State of the Union. “We are focused 
on securing the border before we get on any immigration. We are not planning on 
erecting a deportation force, Donald Trump’s not planning on that.”

Speaking to CBS in his first broadcast interview since he defeated Hillary 
Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
 in the electoral college and lost to her in the popular vote, Trump referred 
to undocumented migrants without criminal records as “terrific people”. He did 
not describe in detail what his policy would be toward them.

Trump uses Twitter to bash New York Times coverage and letter to subscribers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-twitter-new-york-times> 
“After the border is secure and after everything gets normalized,” he said, 
“we’re going to make a determination on the people that they’re talking about 
who are terrific people, they’re terrific people but we are gonna make a 
determination at that.”

“But before we make that determination,” he added, “it’s very important, we 
are going to secure our border.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-campaign-in-three-minutes-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Bizarre%20road%20to%20the%20election%3A%20Trump's%20campaign%20in%20three%20minutes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-campaign-in-three-minutes-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Bizarre%20road%20to%20the%20election%3A%20Trump%27s%20campaign%20in%20three%20minutes%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fdonald-trump-campaign-in-three-minutes-video&media=>
Bizarre road to the election: Trump’s campaign in three minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/08/donald-trump-campaign-in-three-minutes-video>
The day he began his presidential campaign, Trump warned about Mexican 
migrants who were“rapists” and “criminals” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
, and spent weeks saying migrants were “pouring in” across the border, although
research does not support links 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/14/world/europe/research-doesnt-back-a-link-between-migrants-and-crime-in-us.html>
 between immigration and crime, net migration hasremained level for years 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/11/03/5-facts-about-illegal-immigration-in-the-u-s/>
, andmore Mexican migrants 
<http://www.pewhispanic.org/2015/11/19/more-mexicans-leaving-than-coming-to-the-u-s/>
 are leaving the US than entering it.

The US already has a large infrastructure for arresting, detaining and 
deporting migrants. Over eight years, Barack Obama hasdeported more than 2.5 
million people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/oct/12/obama-immigration-deportations-central-america>
, morethan any other president 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/obamas-deportation-policy-numbers/story?id=41715661>
, and more thandoubled the number of border patrol agents 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2011/may/10/barack-obama/obama-says-border-patrol-has-doubled-number-agents/>
. He has alsoincreased border surveillance 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/issues/immigration/border-security>, and contracted 
the country’s largest prison company 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/inside-the-administrations-1-billion-deal-to-detain-central-american-asylum-seekers/2016/08/14/e47f1960-5819-11e6-9aee-8075993d73a2_story.html>
 to help detain migrants.

Obama pursued immigration reform but failed to press a bipartisan bill through 
Republican opposition 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/18/magazine/how-republicans-lost-their-best-shot-at-the-hispanic-vote.html>
 in Congress in 2013 and 2014. He subsequently ordered sweeping executive 
actionsto shield eligible migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/donald-trump-immigration-policy-deportations-build-wall>
, mostly young people and all without criminal records, from deportation. Trump 
has pledged to rescind those orders.

Trump backs same-sex marriage but not abortion under supreme court threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/trump-supreme-court-abortion-same-sex-marriage>
Trump also discussed his way to secure that border, the proposed wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/04/us-mexico-border-patrol-trump-beautiful-wall>
, which on the campaign trail he said would be a genuine wall made of “hardened 
concrete”, “rebar” and “steel”.

Long stretches of the nearly 2,000-mile southern border already have fencing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/01/unfinished-us-mexico-border-wall-texas-secure-fence-act>
, under a years-long project that has proven difficult and expensive to enact.

Asked if some stretches of his wall would consist of fencing, as suggested by 
congressional Republicans, he said: “For certain areas I would, but certain 
areas, a wall is more appropriate.

“I’m very good at this,” the businessman added. “It’s called construction.”
 