
Donald Trump and Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> have spoken for the 
first time since the US election. The president-elect called Scotland’s first 
minister on Friday for what aides described as “a brief introductory 
conversation”.

According to a Scottish government statement, Sturgeon and Trump discussed 
“the longstanding relationship betweenScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and the United States”.

“The first minister offered her congratulations and, reflecting on the letter 
she sent him following the election, expressed her belief in the values 
Scotland and the United States share.”

Immediately following Trump’s shock election victory last month, and echoing 
other Scottish party leaders’ misgivings about the result, Sturgeon said she 
was “not prepared to be a politician that maintains a diplomatic silence in the 
face of racism, misogyny or hatred of any kind”.

The US election result has particular significance in Scotland, where Trump’s 
heaviest overseas spending has taken place on two prominent golf resorts, in 
Aberdeenshire and in Ayrshire. He has had a volatile relationship with locals 
and with the former first minister Alex Salmond, as well as engaging in a 
lengthy legal wrangle over a windfarm development off the coast of his 
Aberdeenshire course.

Nicola Sturgeon says Trump must show he is president for everyone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/nicola-sturgeon-says-trump-must-show-he-is-president-for-everyone>
Addressing the Holyrood chamber at first minister’s questions two days after 
the US election, Sturgeon described some of the views expressed by Trump during 
his campaign as “deeply abhorrent”, and argued: “There is no doubt whatsoever 
that many people feel economically alienated, but we must never allow those 
legitimate concerns to give a veneer of respectability to racism, misogyny and 
intolerance.”

But she said that, while she regretted the result, she respected the decision 
of the American people and wanted to engage “positively and constructively” 
with thenext US administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.

Days later, she formally wrote to Trump to congratulate him on his victory and 
again emphasised the longstanding ties between Scotland and the US.

Sturgeon stripped Trump of his honorary role as a Scottish business ambassador 
last year, after his attack on Mexicans and Muslims, describing his rhetoric as 
“obnoxious and offensive”.
 