
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> triumphed in 
the Nevada caucuses on Tuesday, in a resounding win that cemented his position 
as the Republican presidential frontrunner with a lead that could soon be 
unassailable.

The billionaire reality TV star has now won three of the four early nominating 
states, after otherconvincing wins in South Carolina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/what-we-learned-from-the-south-carolina-primary-and-nevada-caucus>
 andNew Hampshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/09/new-hampshire-primary-bernie-sanders-donald-trump>
.

The Nevada <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nevada> result was called at 
9pm local time by the Associated Press. By 2.30am, when all precincts had 
reported, Trump had a remarkable 45.9% of the vote.

Marco Rubio <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> and Ted Cruz, 
the two senators best placed to challenge Trump, battled it out for second 
place, with Rubio on 23.9% edging Cruz, who got 21.4%.
Results from Nevada 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/elections/primary-pres-results-map/?date=2016-02-23&article=true>
However, their race for second place was overshadowed by the magnitude of 
Trump’s victory, which exit polls indicated was predicated upon a sweep of 
virtually every single demographic in the state, including those previously 
considered loyal to his rivals.

At his Las Vegas victory party at the Treasure Island Hotel & Casino, Trump 
described the diversity of his supporters. “We won the evangelicals. We won 
with young. We won with old. We won with highly educated. We won with poorly 
educated. I love the poorly educated. We’re the smartest people, we’re the most 
loyal people.”

He got the loudest applause when he pointed out exit polls that showed he won 
close to half the Latino vote. The exit data, from CNN, was based on a small 
sample of Latino voters, but it was nonetheless a surprising figure for a 
candidate who has called Mexicans “rapists” and “criminals”.

“Number one with Hispanics,” Trump said. “I’m really happy about that.”

Looking ahead to Super Tuesday

The Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> now look 
ahead to Super Tuesday on 1 March, when 11 states are due to hold contests that 
could have a decisive impact on the race.

Trump appears to have a lead in all the states in which recent surveys are 
available, except Arkansas and Texas, Cruz’s home state. In a sign of the 
breadth of his support, Trump is ahead of the pack in deeply conservative Super 
Tuesday states such as Alabama, Georgia and Alaska, and Democratic-leaning 
states such as Minnesota.

In Massachusetts, another left-leaning Super Tuesday state, Trump leads by 50 
percentage points,according to a recent poll 
<http://www.realclearpolitics.com/epolls/2016/president/ma/massachusetts_republican_presidential_primary-5205.html>
 that put Rubio at 16%.

Trump’s commanding victory in Nevada was expected even before the caucuses 
closed, amid complaints about caucus volunteers – those who distribute and 
count the ballots –wearing official Donald Trump apparel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/nevada-caucuses-voting-problems-trump-gear-poll-workers>
. The Nevada GOP said it was “not against the rules” for volunteers to wear 
candidate hats and T-shirts.


There were also reports of voter registration mistakes at some sites, and long 
queues at others that may have been struggling with high turnout.

Both Cruz and Rubio needed a win in Nevada to gain the momentum required to 
mount a meaningful challenge to Trump, who has confounded the political 
establishment with a presidential campaign that some are equating to outright 
demagoguery.

At an eve-of-caucuses rally in Las Vegas on Monday, one of Trump’s most 
extraordinary to date 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/23/donald-trump-nevada-caucus-republican-cruz-rubio>
, the businessman appeared fearless and unencumbered by the normal rules of 
politics. He lampooned Cruz as “sick”, said that banned torture techniques did 
not go far enough, and reacted to a heckler by saying: “I’d like to punch him 
in the face.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fted-cruz-donald-trump-nevada-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F24%2F1456312349328%2FKP_1809790_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz%20congratulates%20Donald%20Trump%20after%20defeat%20in%20Nevada%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fted-cruz-donald-trump-nevada-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Cruz%20congratulates%20Donald%20Trump%20after%20defeat%20in%20Nevada%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F24%2Fted-cruz-donald-trump-nevada-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F24%2F1456312349328%2FKP_1809790_crop_640x360.jpg>
Ted Cruz congratulates Donald Trump in Nevada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/feb/24/ted-cruz-donald-trump-nevada-video>
Although the Republican race is still at an early phase, and Trump – with 81 
delegates to Cruz and Rubio’s 17 each – is a long way off from the 1,237 
delegates needed to secure the party’s nomination, he is now the clear and 
dominant frontrunner. That is partly due to a change in the nominating rules 
introduced by the Republican National Committee (RNC) following the long and 
drawn-out race of 2012 that Mitt Romney eventually won.

The 2016 nominating contest was truncated, meaning a candidate can now secure 
the party’s backing more quickly. In another rule change, designed to prevent 
GOP outsiders from mounting long-shot challenges, a nominee must score clear 
victories in at least eight states in order to be nominated at the convention 
as opposed to five states. That change is also likely to benefit Trump.

What’s next for Trump’s Republican rivals

Currently, Rubio and Cruz are essentially vying for second place, before 
either can emerge as a challenger to Trump. However, for that to happen, many 
experts believe one of them would need to pull out to make way for the other.

That seems highly unlikely for candidates who come from opposite wings of the 
party. And even in the unlikely case it happens, it is not clear that Trump 
would not simply absorb many of their voters.

The evidence in Las Vegas, as elsewhere in the country, points to this being 
an election year in which Republican voters – disaffected with conventional 
politics, angry and fearful about a quickly changing world – want to gamble on 
Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f1d4b57807b13dd2efc4eae9259e6bd0e71976%2F0_315_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20cements%20frontrunner%20status%20after%20big%20win%20in%20Nevada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20cements%20frontrunner%20status%20after%20big%20win%20in%20Nevada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80f1d4b57807b13dd2efc4eae9259e6bd0e71976%2F0_315_3000_1801%2F3000.jpg>
 Donald Trump supporters cheer while waiting for him to speak at his victory 
rally in Las Vegas. Photograph: Ethan Miller/Getty Images 
It is remarkable how many people lured to his mega rallies say they are not 
partisan Republicans, but the kind of voters who dip in and out of elections 
during once-in-a-generation contests.

Patrick Cress, a 61-year-old businessman at the Trump rally, said that the 
last time he voted in an election was 1972, for Democrat George McGovern. “I 
was a kid in California and we wanted them to legalize marijuana,” he said. 
(McGovern never actually supported flat-out legalization, although many of his 
younger supporters thought he did.)

“You don’t have to say, ‘Who is this Trump guy’. You’ve been seeing him on the 
TV for years and years and years,” Cress said, adding that the frontrunner 
stands for “jobs, money, [not] getting ripped off by other countries”.

Cress, who owns a fireworks business in New Mexico and imports his stock from 
China, was unperturbed by Trump’s promise of tariffs on imports from the 
country. “I’m willing to pay for it. I want to see my country winning again,” 
he said. “Trump is a winner. And I’m sick of losing.”

The Nevada Republican caucuses – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2016/feb/24/the-nevada-republican-caucuses-in-pictures>
Perhaps the final deadline for Rubio or Cruz to throw a meaningful wrench in 
Trump’s path would be 15 March, when candidates enter the phase when the winner 
takes all of a state’s delegates.


But even in those big-prize states, Trump maintains a lead over rivals who 
should have a home advantage. They include Rubio, who trails Trump in Florida, 
and John Kasich, the governor of Ohio who came second in the New Hampshire race 
but is trailing Trump in his own swing state.

In Nevada Kasich, who skipped campaigning in the state, won 3.6% of the vote. 
The only other Republican left in the race is retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, 
who had 4.8%.

Even though Rubio appeared to be on course to come in second or third in 
Nevada, the results were arguably most disappointing for him. The senator from 
Florida spent part of his childhood in Las Vegas when his father worked behind 
a bar and his mother was a hotel maid. He was also baptized as a Mormon, a key 
voting demographic in the state that his campaign had pursued relentlessly.


Rubio was also hoping for a boost after a slew of senior Republican figures 
reacted to ex-Florida Jeb Bushexiting the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/20/jeb-bush-suspends-presidential-campaign-south-carolina-primary-donald-trump>
 on Saturday by endorsing Rubio. If Rubio received a lift from his former 
mentor’s withdrawal, it did not show in Nevada.

Sensing defeat, Rubio did not even stay in Nevada to see the results come 
through.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc3ddfa20a451e4a57f4b2e6fd4eeefeeb6dc3b4%2F165_0_3835_2505%2F3835.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20cements%20frontrunner%20status%20after%20big%20win%20in%20Nevada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20cements%20frontrunner%20status%20after%20big%20win%20in%20Nevada&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-wins-nevada-caucuses-results%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc3ddfa20a451e4a57f4b2e6fd4eeefeeb6dc3b4%2F165_0_3835_2505%2F3835.jpg>
 Ted Cruz stressed he was the only candidate to knock Donald Trump off his 
perch. Photograph: Mike Nelson/EPA 
Cruz, who had a torrid campaign in Nevada, and was forced to fire his national 
campaign spokesman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/22/ted-cruz-fires-staffer-marco-rubio-false-bible-attack>
 over a scandal involving false accusations he promoted about Rubio’s 
commitment to the Bible, did stay to deliver remarks after the results.

Drawing on his victory in the first-in-the-nation caucuses in Iowa, Cruz 
stressed he was the only candidate to knock Trump off his perch. “The 
undeniable reality the first four states has shown is the only campaign that 
has beat Donald Trump, and the only campaign that can beat Donald Trump, is 
this one,” Cruz told supporters.

The Iowa contest, which took place just three weeks ago, seems in the distant 
past now that the race has been commandeered by the former host of The 
Apprentice.

‘Winning, winning, winning’

Michael Steele, a former chairman of the RNC, acknowledged Trump’s rise was 
“dismaying” to political elites.


“There’s a lot that makes you shake your head, but you cannot take away from 
him the absolute enormity of coming in completely from the outside, with no 
political experience, and he has just cut through this process like a hot knife 
through butter,” he said, speaking hours before the Nevada result.

“You go into Super Tuesday and the worst case scenario for Donald Trump right 
now is winning 10 out of 14 states. At what point do you start treating him 
like the nominee?”

Trump was already behaving as such during his victory speech. On the day 
Barack Obama sent his final plan to close the detention facility on Cuba’s
Guantánamo Bay <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/guantanamo-bay>, to the US 
Congress, Trump made clear he would make a very different commander-in-chief.

“Gitmo, we’re keeping that open,” he said. “And we’re gonna load it up with a 
lot of bad dudes out there. We’re gonna have our borders nice and strong, and 
we’re gonna build the wall,” he said, referring to his flagship policy of 
building a giant wall between the US and Mexico.

Luxuriating in his decisive victory, he noted how his campaign was “winning, 
winning, winning” and reflected on the states ahead. Overstating his strength 
in Texas and Arkansas where, technically, he is trailing Cruz, the general 
thrust of his optimism was well-founded.

“We’ve had some great numbers coming out of Texas. And some amazing numbers 
coming out of Tennessee, and Georgia, and Arkansas. And then a couple of weeks 
later, Florida. We love Florida. We’re going to do very well in Ohio – we’re 
beating the governor; it is always nice to be beating the governor. And 
Michigan. The whole thing. It is going to be an amazing two months.”
 