
In comments that run counter to his previous stance on the signature issue of 
his presidential campaign,Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> told Fox News host Sean 
Hannity that although undocumented immigrants living in the United States will 
get “no citizenship”, they will pay back taxes in exchange for legal status 
provided “we get the bad ones out”.

“They’ll pay back taxes, they have to pay taxes, there’s no amnesty, as such, 
there’s no amnesty, but we work with them,” Trump said, in remarks set to air 
tonight on Hannity’s show.

Donald Trump's undocumented deportation pledge called into question
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/21/donald-trump-deportation-immigration-plan-meeting-latino-leaders>
“Now, everybody agrees we get the bad ones out,” Trump said of his immigration 
policy <https://www.donaldjtrump.com/positions/immigration-reform>, which 
heretofore hascalled for the construction of a 2,000-mile wall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/mexico-border-wall-trump-republican-platform>
 along the US southern border and a “deportation force” that would remove the 
estimated 11 million undocumented immigrants currently estimated to live in the 
country.

“But when I go through and meet thousands and thousands of people on this 
subject,” he continued, “and they’ve said, ‘Mr Trump, I love you, but to take a 
person who’s been here for 15 or 20 years and throw them and their family out, 
it’s so tough, Mr Trump’. I have it all the time! It’s a very, very hard thing.”

Trump’s current position is identical to that of primary rival Ohio governor 
John Kasich, who opposed citizenship for illegal immigrants but supported a 
path to legal status, and to the right of Texas Senator Ted Cruz, whoeventually 
endorsed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/politics/first-draft/2016/02/23/ted-cruz-takes-a-more-aggressive-stance-on-illegal-immigration/>
mass deportation and banning anyone in the country illegally from becoming a 
citizen in the course of his hard-fought primary campaign against Trump.

The remarks are further indication that Trump is reversing his previous stance 
on illegal immigration, after a meeting with Latino Republicans over the weekend
led multiple outlets to report that Trump had vowed to move beyond his pledge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/21/donald-trump-deportation-immigration-plan-meeting-latino-leaders>
 to deport all undocumented immigrants from the country.

But the Trump campaign threw cold water on those reports at the time. Steven 
Cheung, a spokesman for Trump, said on Saturday: “Trump said nothing today that 
he hasn’t said many times before, including in his convention speech – enforce 
our immigration laws, uphold the constitution and be fair and humane while 
putting American workers first.”

Since fall of last year, Trump vowed to create a “deportation force” to eject 
undocumented migrants from the US, but campaign manager Kellyanne Conway, a new 
addition to the campaign after a leadership shakeup earlier this month, waffled 
on whether the candidate still embraced that idea on Sunday.

Republican platform formalizes push for Donald Trump's Mexico border wall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/18/mexico-border-wall-trump-republican-platform>
“As the weeks unfold, he will lay out the specifics of that plan that he would 
implement as president of the United States,” Conway, aformer supporter 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/17/politics/donald-trump-campaign-manager-kellyanne-conway/index.html>
 of comprehensive immigration reform, told CNN. Asked about whether those 
specifics included a “deportation force”, Conway replied: “To be determined.”

John Weaver, former senior strategist for the presidential campaign of Ohio 
governor John Kasich, told the Guardian that Trump’s newfound openness to legal 
status for undocumented immigrants reads highly familiar – despite Trump 
decrying the position as tantamount to amnesty during the Republican 
presidential primaries.

“He has jack rabbit trailed his way to John Kasich’s correct view on 
immigration,” Weaver said. “But, alas it won’t last. It’s like George Wallace 
joining the editorial board of the New York Times. Not going to last.”

Trump’s flip-flop also drew scorn from those Republican diehards opposed to 
him. Rick Wilson, a senior adviser to independent candidate Evan McMullin and a 
hardcore #NeverTrump Republican, told the Guardian: “Donald Trump supporters, 
who flocked to him in droves for a hard line, punitive ‘deport them all’ 
promise must have whiplash. His new handler Kellyanne Conway has pushed him to 
the left of the Gang of Eight and his new amnesty plan is sure to cause 
heartache with his nervous fans.”

In contrast, Lorella Praeli, the director of Latino Vote for the Clinton 
campaign, jabbed at Trump from the left over his remarks. “Yesterday in Texas, 
Trump doubled down on his dangerous immigration policies and once again falsely 
painted Latinos as criminals. Here’s a message for Trump: Latinos can see 
through your cynical ploys – no play of words can hide the fact that you’ve 
built your entire campaign on a dangerous agenda that seeks to demonize 
immigrants, deport 16 million people, build a giant concrete wall and send a 
deportation force into our communities.”
 