
The ripples from a new American president are far-reaching, but never before 
has the arrival of a White House administration placed the livability of Earth 
at stake. Beyond his bluster and crude taunts, Donald Trump’s climate denialism 
could prove to be the lasting imprint of his unexpected presidency.


“A Trump presidency might be game over for the climate,” said Michael Mann, a 
prominent climate researcher. “It might make it impossible to stabilize 
planetary warming below dangerous levels.”

Kevin Trenberth, senior scientist at the US National Center for Atmospheric 
Research, added: “This is an unmitigated disaster for the planet.”

Trump has vowed to sweep away the climate framework painstakingly built over 
Barack Obama’s two terms. At risk is the Paris climate accord, whichonly came 
into force last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
, and Obama’s linchpin emissions reduction policy, theClean Power Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/03/obamas-clean-power-plan-hailed-as-strongest-ever-climate-action-by-a-us-president>
.
Paris explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=e0baea36-2bf8-4f56-8f46-ef7c35de261b>
At a pivotal moment when the planet’s nations have belatedly banded together 
to confront an existential threat, a political novice who calls global warming 
a “bullshit”Chinese-invented hoax 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en> is 
taking the helm at the world’s foremost superpower.

 “Millions of Americans voted for a coal-loving climate denier willing to 
condemn people around the globe to poverty, famine and death from climate 
change,” said Benjamin Schreiber, climate director at Friends of the Earth US. 
“It seems undeniable that the United States will become a rogue state on 
climate change.”

 US conservatives are already rubbing their hands in glee at the prospect of a 
bonfire of regulation. Trump wants the US to exit the Paris deal, which commits 
nations to keeping the global temperature rise below a 2C threshold, 
potentially setting off a cataclysmic domino effect where other countries also 
drop out or ease off efforts to decarbonize. The 2C limit,which was already a 
stern challenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/03/world-on-track-for-3c-of-warming-under-current-global-climate-pledges-warns-un>
, now appears perilous.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
 The Clean Power Plan 
<https://www.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/clean-power-plan-existing-power-plants>, 
the main tool to cut American emissions, is also targeted for elimination, 
along withbillions of dollars in clean energy funding 
<http://www.bna.com/trump-says-plan-n57982082131/>. Republicans will also turn 
off the tap of aid flowing to developing nationsalready struggling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/15/marshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas>
 with climate change-driven sea level rise, heatwaves and drought.

Bitterly contested fossil fuel projects such as the Keystone development and 
theDakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/dakota-access-pipeline>, which has caused 
unprecedented uproar among native American tribes, would likely be waved 
through, with Trump promising to “lift the Obama-Clinton roadblocks to allow 
these vital energy infrastructure projects to go ahead”.

Environmentalists are already aghast at Trump’s presidential preparations. He 
hasappointed 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/trump-picks-top-climate-skeptic-to-lead-epa-transition/?wt.mc=SA_Twitter-Share>
 Myron Ebell, director at a conservative thinktank, to oversee transition plans 
for the Environmental Protection Agency, which Trump has casually earmarked for 
abolition. Ebell has said global warming is “nothing to worry about” and that 
the Clean Power Plan is “illegal”.

Shortlists drawn up for key Trump administration posts have also raised alarm. 
Oil billionaire Harold Hamm is being touted as energy secretary, while former 
vice presidential candidate Sarah Palin could make a stunning comeback as 
interior secretary, putting her in charge of US public lands, including 
treasures such as Yellowstone and Yosemite national parks. Palin is an 
enthusiastic proponent of oil and gas drilling,describing 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/09/palin-eyes-energy-secretary-job-in-a-trump-administration-213371>
 the fossil fuels as “things that God has dumped on this part of the Earth for 
mankind’s use”.

Republicans have already used Congressional committees to hound 
<https://www.texasobserver.org/lamar-smith-poll-climate-science/> climate 
scientists and green groups and this badgering may escalate once climate denial 
is official White House doctrine. It’s understood that scientists at Nasa are 
already bracing themselves for cuts to climate research programs.

Predicting Trump’s plans, however, largely relies upon reading the runes from 
his discursive policy speeches, which regularly dissolved into vituperative 
diatribes while on the campaign trail.

At the heart of his energy and climate thinking is an “America first” policy 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/an-america-first-energy-plan> 
where “draconian climate rules” are repealed and the US escalates its 
production of coal, oil and natural gas. In May, Trump sported a coal miner’s 
helmet at a rally in West Virginia, a state with a long history of mining, to 
underscore his message that the “war on coal” is over and that jobs will flow 
back to the stricken industry.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03669c10b036d93c446315aadf7d6ef1dfe7c41d%2F0_0_4330_2886%2F4330.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20presidency%20a%20'disaster%20for%20the%20planet'%2C%20warn%20climate%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20presidency%20a%20%27disaster%20for%20the%20planet%27%2C%20warn%20climate%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F03669c10b036d93c446315aadf7d6ef1dfe7c41d%2F0_0_4330_2886%2F4330.jpg>
 Trump want to repeal ‘draconian climate rules’ and increase US production of 
coal, oil and natural gas. Photograph: Dominick Reuter/AFP/Getty Images 
“Under my administration,” Trump said, “we’ll accomplish complete American 
energy independence. Complete. Imagine a world in which our foes, and the oil 
cartels, can no longer use energy as a weapon. It will happen. We’re going to 
win.”

These bromides to American industrial strength helped propel Trump to the 
White House but aren’t tethered to reality. US coal productionslumped 
<http://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=28732&src=email> 10% last year, 
with mining jobs shrinking by 12%. Over the same 12-month period, the US oil 
industrylost 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/04/26/investing/oil-companies-lost-67-billion-dollars/>
 $67bn. These woes have been caused by market forces, rather than onerous 
regulation, and even Trump’s authoritarianism doesn’t extend far enough to 
change that.

“As president, Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
will pretend climate change does not exist,” said Prof Tom Lyon of the 
University of Michigan’s business school. “This is an increasingly untenable 
position, even for committed climate skeptics.

“His energy policy will encourage investment in high-carbon energy sources 
that will look foolish in retrospect. And he will anger much of the rest of the 
world by reneging on policies designed to address global challenges.”

Renewables made up half of net electricity capacity added last year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/25/renewables-made-up-half-of-net-electricity-capacity-added-last-year>
US greenhouse gas emissions have started to taper off in recent years but a 
Trump presidency would see a resurgence, with an analysis by Lux Research 
finding that carbon dioxide outputwould be 16% higher 
<http://www.luxresearchinc.com/news-and-events/press-releases/read/trump-presidency-could-mean-34-billion-tons-more-us-carbon>
 than the current trajectory should the real estate magnate complete a second 
term.

This would give the world a hefty shove towards climate disaster and fatally 
wound the US’s reputation as a global leader. Should other major emitters such 
as China, India and the European Union fail to make compensatory emissions cuts 
the planet will likely spiral into runaway climate change where tens of 
millions of people are displaced by rising seas, food insecurity and conflict, 
leading to an unprecedented international humanitarian disaster.

Major US cities including New York, Miami and Boston would face inundation. 
California, already suffering its worst dry spell in 1,200 years, may stage ‘
megadroughts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/05/climate-change-megadrought-california-global-warming>
’ that last 20 or even 30 years. The Pentagon haswarned 
<http://archive.defense.gov/pubs/150724-congressional-report-on-national-implications-of-climate-change.pdf?source=govdelivery>
 climate change poses a “threat multiplier” to US national security, to hoots 
of derision from Republicans.

The shift to a low-carbon economy already has its own momentum, however, with 
the cost of solar and wind power tumbling in recent years. Nearly 100 coal 
power plants were retired in 2015, with renewables accounting for two-thirds of 
all new electricity generation.

New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/new-york-city-emissions-sea-level-rise-climate-change>
 andCalifornia 
<http://www.climatechangenews.com/2016/08/25/california-passes-ambitious-climate-targets/>
 both have their own ambitious emission reduction plans, conservative states 
such as Iowa areembracing 
<http://www.govtech.com/fs/Iowa-Passes-Plan-to-Convert-to-100-Percent-Renewable-Energy.html>
 wind energy, and innovations from companies such as Tesla, in solar panels and 
battery storage, are being snapped up by homeowners.

Trumpian interference can only do so much to slow this trend, although 
plodding progress isn’t enough to stave off climate catastrophe. TheUN has 
warned 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/03112016/un-climate-scientists-last-chance-limit-global-warming-marrakech-morocco-cop-22>
 that global emissions must peak by 2020 and then be sharply reduced in order 
to avoid the worst. This shrinking window risks being clouded entirely if the 
US is to choke itself, and the rest of the world, on its fumes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5fd657860337639e2562bccf0eef094cb96e1ea%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20presidency%20a%20'disaster%20for%20the%20planet'%2C%20warn%20climate%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20presidency%20a%20%27disaster%20for%20the%20planet%27%2C%20warn%20climate%20scientists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Ftrump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5fd657860337639e2562bccf0eef094cb96e1ea%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Artificial turf is rolled out after digging up a lawn due to California 
suffering its worst dry spell in 1,200 years. If climate action fails under 
Trump, the US state may experience ‘megadroughts’ that last 20 or 30 years. 
Photograph: Lucy Nicholson/Reuters 
Stunned environment groups, faced with triumphant climate denialism in all 
branches of government, are trying to muster defiance. “This could be 
devastating for our climate and our future,” admitted Michael Brune, executive 
director of the Sierra Club. “But Trump must choose wisely or we guarantee him 
the hardest fight of his political life. We won’t be in a defensive crouch for 
the next four years, licking our wounds.

“If he tries to go backwards on climate change he’ll run headlong into an 
organized mass of people who will fight him in the courts, in Congress and on 
the streets.”

Others are more conciliatory, with former vice president Al Gore proffering an 
olive branch along with an enormous dollop of optimism. “Last night 
President-elect Trump said he wanted to be a president for all Americans,” Gore 
said on Wednesday. “In that spirit, I hope that he will work with the 
overwhelming majority of us who believe that the climate crisis is the greatest 
threat we face as a nation.”

Whether or not Trump becomes a belated convert to the reality of climate 
change, the physics of global warming remain unchanged.

2016 will be the warmest year on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/2016-locked-into-being-hottest-year-on-record-nasa-says>
, beating a mark set only last year. These extremes, where Indiaexperiences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/20/india-records-its-hottest-day-ever-as-temperature-hits-51c-thats-1238f>
 a temperature of 51C (123F) and the Arctic is robbed of almost allof its 
winter snowfall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/record-breaking-temperatures-have-robbed-the-arctic-of-its-winter>
, are set to become thenorm 
<https://www.sciencenews.org/article/if-you-thought-2015-was-hot-just-wait> 
within a decade. American citizens, fromAlaska 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/18/alaska-shishmaref-vote-move-coastal-erosion-rising-sea-levels>
 toLouisiana 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/louisiana-isle-de-jean-charles-island-sea-level-resettlement>
, are already being uprooted due to the rising seas, a situation that will 
become commonplace.

Trump knows enough of the gargantuan shifts underway to build 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/26/donald-trump-wants-to-build-a-wall-to-save-his-golf-course-from-global-warming>
 a seawall for his golf course in County Clare, Ireland. His Mar-a-Lago club in 
Floridamay have to be next 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/06/donald-trump-climate-change-florida-resort>
. Whether he extends his concern from beyond his own business interests to the 
rest of the world remains to be seen.
 