
Donald Trump has consistently expressed his conspiratorial and misinformed 
beliefs 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2015/06/16/3670229/president-trump-climate/> 
that global warming is a hoax.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Ice storm rolls from Texas to Tennessee - I'm in Los Angeles and it's 
freezing. Global warming is a total, and very expensive, hoax!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/408977616926830592> December 6, 
2013 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/408977616926830592> 
Trump is also the presumptive Republican Party nominee for president in 2016, 
and were he elected, would be the leader of the country with the second-highest 
net carbon pollution in the world. These are frightening thoughts.

However, as reported by Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/05/donald-trump-climate-change-golf-course-223436>
, Trump acknowledges the reality and threats posed by human-caused global 
warming when it comes to protecting his own assets, and in keeping withhis 
affinity for building walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/mexico-responds-donald-trump-border-wall>
:

The New York billionaire is applying for permission to erect a coastal 
protection works to prevent erosion at his seaside golf resort, Trump 
International Golf Links & Hotel Ireland, in County Clare.

A permit application for the wall, filed by Trump International Golf Links 
Ireland and reviewed by POLITICO, explicitly cites global warming and its 
consequences — increased erosion due to rising sea levels and extreme weather 
this century — as a chief justification for building the structure.

The permit was filed by an Irish environmental consulting company, so it’s 
possible that Trump himself denies these scientific realities. However, the 
consultants are indisputably correct about the threat that global warming and 
sea level rise pose to this golf course,and to the many other coastal 
properties owned by Donald Trump 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/peteraldhous/trump-buildings-underwater?utm_term=.lugNrm9nd#.dyrY6pZXb>
.

Is Trump playing his voters for fools?

Trump’s public comments on climate change may reflect a political calculation 
that theold, white, conservative, American men 
<http://thebulletin.org/climate-change-generation-gap9351> who comprise his 
voter base also formthe predominant segment of the climate denial movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/04/the-similarities-between-trump-support-and-climate-denial>
. Or perhaps Trump is indeed in denial about the science himself, but those who 
protect his assets, such as this Irish environmental consulting firm, are not.

Trump also has the wealth necessary to blunt some of the impacts of climate 
change, for example by building sea walls, whereas poorer countries,which will 
bear the brunt of the consequences of climate denial 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=15>, do not possess these 
resources. These poorer countries also contribute the least to the problem, 
whereas Trump opposes“so-called green energy” 
<http://www.foxnews.com/on-air/on-the-record/2012/03/17/trump-obama-economic-ignoramus-energy-policy-complete-and-total-disaster>
 technologies like solar and wind power that are critical for wealthy countries 
to reduce their much higher carbon pollution.


In fact, Trump has fought to prevent the construction of wind farms 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2015/12/16/3732799/trump-wind-farm-ruling/> 
along the coasts of Scotland and Ireland. Yet despite his misinformed 
objections that wind energy is too costly,Trump has invested in one of the 
world’s largest generators of wind power 
<http://www.businessgreen.com/bg/news/2419819/donald-trump-invests-in-wind-power-despite-slating-technology>
.

The next president of the United States will be tasked with ensuring the 
country meets its pledge to cut carbon pollution, made during the recent
international climate negotiations in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/22/paris-climate-deal-set-signed-record-number-states-un>
. Trump hasclaimed that at a minimum he will renegotiate the agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/trump-wont-be-able-to-derail-paris-climate-deal-says-senior-us-official>
, whichwould be a disaster 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/05/18/3779417/donald-denier-destroy-paris-climate-deal/>
 if true. However, a clause in the agreement forces signatory nations to wait 
at least four years before withdrawing, anda renegotiation simply will not 
happen 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/05/18/why-trumps-idea-of-renegotiating-the-paris-climate-agreement-is-so-bizarre/>
. Trump’s threats may simply be bluster, since he’s running as the candidate 
who will make good deals for America, and the Paris climate accords are a 
“deal” (as Joe Romm put it,“a ridiculously good deal for the United States” 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/05/18/3779417/donald-denier-destroy-paris-climate-deal/>
) that he can exploit for political gain.

Or is Trump so uninformed as to believe what he says?

Or perhaps Donald Trump believes everything that comes out of his mouth. 
Social psychologist David Dunning posits thatTrump and his supporters may 
suffer from the Dunning-Kruger effect 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/05/donald-trump-supporters-dunning-kruger-effect-213904>
:

To sum it up, the knowledge and intelligence that are required to be good at a 
task are often the same qualities needed to recognize that one isnot good at 
that task—and if one lacks such knowledge and intelligence, one remains 
ignorant that one is not good at that task.

Indeed, when it comes to climate change, social science research has shown 
that American conservatives who expressthe highest confidence in their opinions 
about climate science and risks are the most wrong 
<http://sciencepolicy.colorado.edu/students/envs_5000/mccright_2011.pdf>. 
They’re confident in their denial precisely because they don’t know enough to 
realize how uninformed they are about climate science. This isthe 
Dunning-Kruger effect 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunning%E2%80%93Kruger_effect>. As Dunning wrote 
for Politico 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/05/donald-trump-supporters-dunning-kruger-effect-213904>
:

This syndrome may well be the key to the Trump voter—and perhaps even to the 
man himself. Trump has served up numerous illustrative examples of the effect 
as he continues his confident audition to be leader of the free world even as 
he seems to lack crucial information about the job ... some voters, especially 
those facing significant distress in their life, might like some of what they 
hear from Trump, but they do not know enough to hold him accountable for the 
serious gaffes he makes. They fail to recognize those gaffes as missteps.

Americans’ relative lack of knowledge about global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/04/scientists-are-figuring-out-the-keys-to-convincing-people-about-global-warming>
 appears to be helping Trump make misinformed, conspiratorial comments about 
climate change without repercussions in the polls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-wants-to-build-a-wall-to-save-his-golf-course-from-global-warming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ce404a7067a3bd98c1f1f774f63504b5b5d5fd7%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20wants%20to%20build%20a%20wall%20%E2%80%93%20to%20save%20his%20golf%20course%20from%20global%20warming%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-wants-to-build-a-wall-to-save-his-golf-course-from-global-warming%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20wants%20to%20build%20a%20wall%20%E2%80%93%20to%20save%20his%20golf%20course%20from%20global%20warming%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Fdonald-trump-wants-to-build-a-wall-to-save-his-golf-course-from-global-warming%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8ce404a7067a3bd98c1f1f774f63504b5b5d5fd7%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
 Concern about climate change (0-6 point scale) vs. average correct score on 
questions relevant to its causes in six countries. Illustration: Dana 
Nuccitelli, data from Shi et al. (2016). 
A stark contrast

Trump is now the de facto leader of one of America’s two dominant political 
parties. The other is Hillary Clinton, who understands the threats posed by 
human-caused global warming and hasa detailed plan 
<https://www.hillaryclinton.com/issues/climate/> to address them. She hired 
John Podesta 
<http://grist.org/politics/hillary-is-hiring-john-podesta-and-thats-good-for-climate-hawks/>
, astrong advocate for climate action 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/blog/author/john-podesta>, as her campaign 
chairman. 350.org co-founderBill McKibben will also help write the Democratic 
Party’s platform 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2016/5/24/headlines/sanders_names_cornel_west_bill_mckibben_to_dnc_platform_committee>
.

In November, Americans will face a stark contrast between their choices for 
the nation’s next president. One option is Donald Trump, who at best is 
confident in his complete ignorance about climate change, and at worst is 
selling out the welfare of future generations for personal gain while 
protecting his own assets. The other option isHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, who for whatever her 
flaws, acknowledges the reality and threats posed by climate change and has a 
plan to tackle them.

One of these candidates will soon lead one of the world’s most powerful and 
largest-polluting countries, just aswe’re running out of time 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/the-critical-decade-part-3-emissions-reductions.html>
 to avoid the worst consequences of climate change. This is a choice Americans 
have to get right.
 