
What is the worst thing about Donald Trump? The lies? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check> The 
racist stereotypes? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
The misogyny? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/trumps-misogyny-problem-how-donald-has-repeatedly-targeted-women>
The alleged gropings? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-women-new-sexual-harassment-stories>
The apparent refusal to accept democratic outcomes? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/donald-trump-rigged-election-poll-giuliani-gingrich-pence>
 All these are bad enough. But they’re not the worst. The worst thing about 
Donald Trump is that he’s the man in the mirror.

We love to horrify ourselves with his excesses, and to see him as a monstrous 
outlier, the polar opposite of everything a modern, civilised society 
represents. But he is nothing of the kind. He is the distillation of all that 
we have been induced to desire and admire. Trump is so repulsive not because he 
offends our civilisation’s most basic values, but because he embodies them.

Trump personifies the traits promoted by the media and corporate worlds he 
affects to revile; the worlds that created him. He is the fetishisation of 
wealth, power and image in a nation whereextrinsic values 
<http://valuesandframes.org/> are championed throughout public discourse. His 
conspicuous consumption, self-amplification and towering (if fragile) ego are 
in tune with the dominant narratives of our age.

The entire electoral process is stolen from the American people before they 
even cast their vote

As the recipient of vast inherited wealth who markets himself as solely 
responsible for his good fortune, he is the man of our times. The US Apprentice 
TV show which he hosted tells the story of everything he is not: the little guy 
dragging himself up from the bottom through enterprise and skill. None of this 
distinguishes him from the majority of the very rich, whose entrepreneurial 
image, loyally projected by the media, clashes with their histories of huge 
bequests, government assistance, monopolies and rent-seeking.

If his politics differ from those of the rest of the modern Republican party, 
it is because he is, in some respects, more liberal. Every vice, for the 
Republican trailblazers such as Ted Cruz and Scott Walker, is now a virtue; 
every virtue a vice. Encouraged by the corporate media, the Republicans have 
been waging a full-spectrum assault on empathy, altruism and the decencies we 
owe to other people. Their gleeful stoving in of faces, their cackling 
destruction of political safeguards and democratic norms, their stomping on all 
that is generous and caring and cooperative in human nature, have turned the 
party into a game ofMortal Kombat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/apr/23/mortal-kombat-x-review-violent-but-charmingly-hammy>
 scripted byBreitbart News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/19/reading-breitbart-news-steve-bannon-donald-trump>
.

Did Trump invent the xenophobia and racism that infuse his campaign? Did he 
invent his conspiracy theories about stolen elections and the criminality of 
his opponents? No.They were there all along 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/elizabeth-warren-trump-didnt-invent-the-rigged-election-myth-republicans-did/2016/10/18/921ac368-953b-11e6-9b7c-57290af48a49_story.html?utm_term=.c179cfb12635>
. What is new and different about him is that he has streamlined these 
narratives into a virulent demagoguery. But the opportunity has been building 
for years; all that was required was someone blunt and unscrupulous enough to 
take it.
 The fourth US president, James Madison. Photograph: White House/Reuters 
Nor can you single out Trump for ignoring, denying and deriding the key issues 
of our time, such as climate change. Almost all prominent Republicans have been 
at it. In fact, across the four presidential debates,not one question about 
climate change was asked 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/10/19/13342250/presidential-debates-climate-change>. 
Even when politicians and journalists accept the science, it makes little 
difference if they avoid the subject like the plague.

America’s fourth president, James Madison, envisaged the United States 
constitution as representation tempered by competition between factions. In the
10th federalist paper <http://avalon.law.yale.edu/18th_century/fed10.asp>, 
written in 1787, he argued that large republics were better insulated from 
corruption than small, or “pure” democracies, as the greater number of citizens 
would make it “more difficult for unworthy candidates to practise with success 
the vicious arts by which elections are too often carried”. A large electorate 
would protect the system against oppressive interest groups. Politics practised 
on a grand scale would be more likely to select people of “enlightened views 
and virtuous sentiments”.

Instead, the US – in common with many other nations – now suffers the worst of 
both worlds: a large electorate dominated by a tiny faction. Instead of 
republics being governed, as Madison feared, by “the secret wishes of an unjust 
and interested majority”, they are beholden to the not-so-secret wishes of an 
unjust and interested minority. What Madison could not have foreseen was the 
extent to which unconstrained campaign finance and a sophisticated lobbying 
industry would come to dominate an entire nation, regardless of its size.

Elizabeth Warren is the US president we need, but can’t have – this time | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/elizabeth-warren-us-president-workers-rights-wall-street>
For every representative, Republican or Democrat, who retains a trace element 
of independence, there are three sitting in the breast pocket of corporate 
capital. Since the supreme court decided that there should be no effective 
limits on campaign finance, and, to a lesser extent, long before, candidates 
have been reduced to tongue-tied automata, incapable of responding to those in 
need of help, incapable of regulating those in need of restraint, for fear of 
upsetting their funders.

Democracy in the US is so corrupted by money that it is no longer recognisable 
as democracy. You can kick individual politicians out of office, but what do 
you do when the entire structure of politics is corrupt? Turn to the demagogue 
who rages into this political vacuum, denouncing the forces he exemplifies. The 
problem is not, as Trump claims, that the election will be stolen by ballot 
rigging. It is that the entire electoral process is stolen from the American 
people before they get anywhere near casting their votes. When Trump claims 
that the little guy is being screwed by the system, he’s right. The only 
problem is that he is the system.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eleven%20women%20who%20have%20accused%20Trump%20of%20sexual%20misconduct%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eleven%20women%20who%20have%20accused%20Trump%20of%20sexual%20misconduct%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fdonald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video&media=>
Eleven women who have accused Trump of sexual misconduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/18/donald-trump-sexual-allegations-nine-women-video>
The political constitution of the United States is not, as Madison envisaged, 
representation tempered by competition between factions. The true constitution 
is plutocracy tempered by scandal. In other words, all that impedes the 
absolute power of money is the occasional exposure of the excesses of the 
wealthy. What distinguishes Trump’s political career is that, until recently, 
his scandals have done him no harm.

Trump disgusts us because, where others use a dog whistle, he uses a klaxon. 
We hate to hear his themes so clearly articulated. But we know in our hearts 
that they suffuse the way the world is run.

Because this story did not begin with Trump, it will not end with Trump, 
however badly he may lose the election. Yes, he is a shallow, mendacious, 
boorish and extremely dangerous man. But those traits ensure that he is not an 
outsider but the perfect representation of his caste, the caste that runs the 
global economy and governs our politics. He is our system, stripped of its 
pretences.
 