
President-elect Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
has risked further inflaming US relations with China, after he used Twitter on 
Saturday to accuse China of an “unpresidented [sic] act” in its seizing of an 
unmanned American submarine this week.

Senior adviser on Trump's diplomacy: 'I can't keep up with the tweets'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/senior-adviser-on-trumps-diplomacy-i-cant-keep-up-with-the-tweets>
“China steals United States Navy research drone in international waters – rips 
it out of water and takes it toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
in unpresidented act,” Trump said, misspelling “unprecedented”.

The tweet was later reissued 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/810121703288410112> with the 
correct spelling of “unprecedented”. The tweet containing the error was deleted.

His message – itself without precedent given his status as a president-elect 
commenting on an international incident before assuming power – was likely to 
worsen fears of increased US-China tensions under his presidency that have 
grown over his rhetoric on trade and policy towards Taiwan.

Hours later, Trump suggested the US tell China it no longer wants its property 
returned.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
We should tell China that we don't want the drone they stole back.- let them 
keep it!
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/810288321880555520> December 18, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/810288321880555520> 
Trump’s initial tweet was issued shortly after China’s foreign ministry said 
it was negotiating with the US over the vehicle, a “glider” used to collect 
unclassified scientific data.

A Pentagon spokesman said it was being operated by civilian contractors when it
was seized on Thursday in international waters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/16/china-seizes-us-underwater-drone-south-china-sea>
, about 57 miles north-west of Subic Bay, near the Philippines, in the South 
China Sea.


The unmanned vehicle was deployed by the USNS Bowditch, an oceanographic and 
surveillance ship. A diplomatic complaint was issued by the US after its 
seizure, and its return demanded.

The area in which the submarine was taken is claimed by China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> virtually in its entirety. China has 
been building islands, and this week it wasreported to have installed 
“significant” weaponry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
 on them – including anti-aircraft and anti-missile systems.

On Saturday, the Chinese foreign ministry said that American “hyping up” was 
not conducive to a smooth resolution of an incident that began when a Chinese 
naval vessel discovered a piece of “unidentified equipment” and checked it to 
prevent any navigational safety issues, before discovering it was a US drone.

Donald Trump faces Senate backlash over ‘cabinet of billionaires’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/donald-trump-senate-backlash-cabinet-of-billionaires>
“China decided to return it to the US side in an appropriate manner, and China 
and the US have all along been in communication about it,” a statement on the 
ministry website said.

“During this process, the US side’s unilateral and open hyping up is 
inappropriate, and is not beneficial to the smooth resolution of this issue. We 
express regret at this.”

Pentagon spokesman Peter Cook later said in a statement: “Through direct 
engagement with Chinese authorities, we have secured an understanding that the 
Chinese will return the UUV [unmanned underwater vehicle] to the United States.”

On Friday, in a press conference at the White House, Barack Obama cautioned 
Trump against allowing relations with China to slip into “full conflict mode 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/17/dont-let-china-ties-slide-into-full-conflict-mode-obama-urges-trump>
”.


Trump took a congratulatory phone call from the Taiwanese president earlier 
this month, breaking with nearly 40 years of US foreign policy orthodoxy, and 
then used a Fox News interviewto question US “one China” policy on Taiwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-questions-us-commitment-to-one-china-policy>
, a breakaway island state which is not recognised by Beijing.

“The idea of ‘one China’ is at the heart of their conception as a nation,” 
Obama said, “and so if you are going to upend this understanding, you have to 
have thought through what are the consequences.

“Because the Chinese will not treat that the way they will treat some other 
issues. They won’t even treat it the way they treat issues around theSouth 
China Sea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea>, where we have 
had a lot of tensions. This goes to the core of how they see themselves and 
their reaction on this issue could end up being very significant.”

On Thursday, Bonnie Glaser, director of the China Power Project at the Center 
for Strategic and International Studies, told the Guardian the seizure of the 
drone looked “like signalling from the Chinese in response to Trump’s Taiwan 
call”.

“It is in China’s interest to send signals before Trump is inaugurated,” she 
said, “so that he gets the message and [will] be more restrained once he is 
office.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f054a77b100fca1636c94d46ef5e5b75ac1a26b%2F0_0_621_323%2F621.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20accuses%20China%20of%20'unpresidented'%20act%20over%20US%20navy%20drone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20accuses%20China%20of%20%27unpresidented%27%20act%20over%20US%20navy%20drone&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fdonald-trump-china-unpresidented-act-us-navy-drone%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f054a77b100fca1636c94d46ef5e5b75ac1a26b%2F0_0_621_323%2F621.png>
 Trump’s tweet. Photograph: Twitter 
Observers have suggested that both during the presidential campaign – in which 
Trump offered belligerent rhetoric against China over trade – and after his 
election victory, he has used outlandish statements on Twitter as a means of 
distraction when under pressure from the media and opponents.


White House faces exodus of foreign policy experts ahead of Trump's arrival
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/18/national-security-council-exodus-foreign-policy-michael-flynn>
He is currently facing the belief of the White House, the CIA, the FBI and 
other intelligence agencies that Russiasought to influence the election in his 
favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
 – claims he has rejected and ridiculed – and questions about his business 
holdings and conflicts of interest that will arise when he takes office.

Trump has also failed to stage a press conference since winning the election, 
instead embarking on a “thank you” tour of rallies in states which voted for 
him.


The electoral college, in which Trump beat Hillary Clinton 306-232 despite 
losing the popular vote by more than 2.8m ballots,meets on Monday to decide the 
election victor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/electoral-college-final-vote-republican-electors-trump>
.

Some electors have indicated an intention not to vote for Trump, but not the 
38 Republican electors it would take to send the decision to the House of 
Representatives.

Also on Saturday morning, Trump’s transition team released a statement 
announcing thenomination of the South Carolina congressman Mick Mulvaney 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/16/us/politics/mick-mulvaney-office-management-budget-trump.html?_r=0>
, a budget “hawk” who has advocated deep federal spending cuts, as director of 
the Office of Management and Budget.
 