
The Republican candidate for the presidency, Donald Trump, now reacts to 
any terrorist incident with crude cynicism. While the incessant killings of 
Americans by Americans prove only that America needs more guns,a failed killing 
by an American Muslim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/20/ahmad-khan-rahami-charged-bombings-new-york-new-jersey>
 is “a terrible thing that is going on in our country 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/election-us-2016-37413278> … an attack on America”.

After the New York bomb, Muslim Americans are braced for a backlash | Faiza 
Patel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/new-york-bomb-muslim-americans-backlash>
The hamfisted New York bombing suspect, Ahmad Khan Rahami, was to Trump not 
just guilty before trial but a “foreign enemy combatant 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/09/trump-rally-new-york-new-jersey-bombings-refugees>
”, to be detained indefinitely until the end of hostilities. America should 
“knock the hell” out of such “Islamics” and stop being “gentle”.

Trump complained that the United States “will now give [Rahami] amazing 
hospitalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/19/trump-ahmad-khan-rahami-new-york-bombing-immigration>
, the best doctors in the world, and probably room service”. Worst of all his 
“punishment will not be what it once would have been”. As for Trump’s opponent, 
Hillary Clinton, he accused her immigration policy of being directly 
responsible. He said: “We now know why terrorists want her so badly to be 
president.”

In the potential leader of a great democracy, this is alarmist drivel. 
We should also be careful, since the exploitation of existential fear has long 
been a feature of America’s isolated political culture. In 1950, a little-known 
American senator,Estes Kefauver <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Estes_Kefauver>, 
achieved national fame by holding televised hearings into America’s “organised 
crime”, drawing on blood-curdling fantasies of a Sicilian-American “mafia”. 
This mafia was, Kefauver claimed, holding American cities to ransom. 
Communities lived in fear of it. The national economy was menaced by it.

The televised hearings were at times ludicrous. One hoodlum after another was 
dragged to Washington to protest that all he was running was a few protection 
rackets on the Lower East Side. Try as Kefauver might to find a Mr Big to 
justify his extravagant hearings, he found only a disorganised trail of 
small-time hoods. He still demanded a new Washington bureaucracy to “crack down 
on organised crime” – and ran unsuccessfully for president. The search for “a 
mafia” was subcontracted to Hollywood.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-on-terror-mccarthyism-for-new-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9da9202eb1883265c97948a818c1ec4e447912%2F111_0_3279_1968%2F3279.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20on%20terror%20is%20just%20McCarthyism%20for%20a%20new%20age%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-on-terror-mccarthyism-for-new-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20on%20terror%20is%20just%20McCarthyism%20for%20a%20new%20age%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fdonald-trump-on-terror-mccarthyism-for-new-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7d9da9202eb1883265c97948a818c1ec4e447912%2F111_0_3279_1968%2F3279.jpg>
 A still from WABC TV showing a man believed to be the New York bombing 
suspect. Photograph: WABC-TV/Reuters 
Two years later another senator, Joe McCarthy, decided to exploit a different 
“existential” scare. His committee investigated what he claimed was the 
“massive” penetration of the government and military by communists and 
homosexuals. Fear of a spurious threat to the state was turned into a 
witch-hunt by McCarthy and his aide, a certain Richard Nixon. There was a red 
under every bed – and a blackmailer in it. McCarthy, until his mental collapse, 
became a national celebrity. Americans have seemed to get a frisson from being 
told they are threatened, perhaps because they never have been.

Likewise with Trump. The New York bomber was no more attacking America than, 
in Britain,Lee Rigby’s killers <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/lee-rigby> 
were “attacking Britain”. Why lend them such glory? These are pathetic groups, 
sometimes just individuals, committing nasty crimes. For better or worse, it 
happens every day. That the criminals occasionally yell, “Allahu Akbar” should 
be neither here nor there. That they may have travelled to the Middle East 
or downloaded jihadi tracts is a legitimate concern to the police. It is not a 
threat to the stability, let alone the existence, of the state. Yet such is the 
current hysteria that he is to be prosecuted for having a “weapon of mass 
destruction”, namely a pressure cooker.

New York and Minnesota show how DIY terrorism is the new normal | Aki Peritz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/diy-terrorism-new-normal-new-york-minnesota>
How often need we state that such exaggeration is precisely what the terrorist 
wants? It turns the impossible into the rhetorically plausible. Trump last week 
dusted a backstreet bomb-maker with the glory of war. He afforded him the 
gigantic kudos of political status.

The west’s response to jihadi terrorism since 9/11 has been wholly 
counter-productive. Under the pretext of “public reassurance”, it has sown the 
seeds of fear in the hope of harvesting votes of gratitude. Just as there was 
once a mafia round every corner and a red in every bed, so nowJoseph Conrad’s 
terrorists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/16/the-secret-agent-joseph-conrad-novel-new-bbc-adaptation-timely-suicide-bomber-divided-london>
 lurk “like pests in every street of men”. If one harvest has come in votes – 
George Bush and Tony Blair did very well from 9/11 – the gourmand at the feast 
has been terrorism itself. Osama bin Laden’s tiny cabal has been turned into a 
global movement, drenched in blood, retribution and violent glamour.

Clinton’s reaction to the New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> explosions may have seemed 
pedestrian, but it was correct. It was to counsel responsibility, “smart 
law-enforcement and good intelligence in concert with our values”. It reminded 
us of the response of mayor Rudy Giuliani after 9/11, when he told New Yorkers 
not to panic but to go to the park, see a show, buy a pizza and “continue with 
your normal lives”. This was the opposite of Blair’s response, which was to 
declare that 9/11 “changed the world” and “rewrote the rules of the game”. I 
could hear Bin Laden cheering.

As Richard English shows in his new study, Does Terrorism Work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/24/does-terrorism-work-history-review-richard-english>
, we need to remind ourselves what this -ism sets out to do. Its rational 
ambition is to change the world around it. Nor does it always fail, as some 
might argue in the case of the IRA. Violence in a political cause is as old as 
history. Civil terror is a classic tool of the weak against the strong.

In the case of modern jihadism, brutal mayhem has yet to deliver it a stable 
caliphate. But it has laid its groundwork in ethnic and religious polarisation 
between Muslim and non-Muslim. It has undermined the tolerance of western 
democracies. From America’s detention without trial toTheresa May’s snooper’s 
charter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/14/snoopers-charter-apple-fbi-bill-hacking-gagging>
, it has slit open the soft underbelly of liberalism.

Such a gain for terrorism is the result of foolish politicians looking for 
cheap votes – and the media looking for cheap headlines. Scaremongering, the 
search for a foe against whom to pretend to defend the state, may be as old as 
terror itself. But given the absolute security of modern America and Britain, 
it is a dangerous self-indulgence. It should be excoriated.

It is not the bomb that is the terrorist’s accomplice but the response to the 
bomb. It is not Rahami but Trump’s response to Rahami that we should fear.
 