
US president-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is known for boasting: “The 
beauty of me is that I am very rich.” It’s a comment that he hoped underline 
his independence from corporate lobbying and his prowess at making money.

Since his victory, most of America appears to be believe his property industry 
wheeler-dealing will turn an already fast-moving economy – it waszipping along 
at a 3.2% annualised rate in the third quarter of 2016 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/business/economy/us-economy-grew-at-3-2-rate-in-3rd-quarter.html>
 – into the stellar performer it was in the 1990s.

As an appetiser to this feast of growth, the US is about to get a rise in 
interest rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/federal-reserve-interest-rate-hike-december>
 courtesy of the Federal Reserve, from the current 0.25%-0.5% target range to 
0.5%-0.75%.

For the savers who form the backbone of the Trump electorate, it could be the 
first of many if the economic growth rate accelerates in 2017.

Fed chief Janet Yellen, who was once in Trump’s sights as a Washington swamp 
dweller, will probably be declared a hero of the thrifty common man and woman 
when she makes the announcement on Wednesday. Yellen will talk of the 
strengthening manufacturing sector and the gathering momentum in the 
housebuilding industry. Retail sales are also buoyant, which is no surprise 
after surveys showed consumer confidence spiking in November.

To illustrate the faith consumers have in a Trump presidency, the Conference 
Board consumer confidence index shook off a dip in October to regain 
pre-recession levels. And theCNBC All-America Economic Survey 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/09/optimism-on-economy-stocks-surges-since-trump-election-cnbc-survey.html>
 found that the percentage of Americans who believe the economy will get better 
in the next year climbed by an unprecedented 17 points to 42% – the highest it 
has been since Barack Obama was first elected in 2008.

During the election campaign, Yellen was circumspect about further interest 
rate rises, fearing that any green shoots would wither and die. This reticence 
dates back to the decision to raise interest rates last December – the first 
increase in almost a decade – whenminutes of the Fed’s meeting 
<http://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomcminutes20151216.pdf> 
revealed it had beena “close call” for some policymakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/06/federal-reserve-interest-rate-hike-close-call-minutes>
.

The new year brought a plunge in oil and share prices, and signs that global 
trade was weakening. Analysts scratched further rises from their forecasts.

Trump’s win alters the character of the coming year. His nominee for Treasury 
secretary, Steven Mnuchin (pronounced Mi-new-chin) has already declared he 
wants to cut taxes as much for middle-income earners as for big business. The 
former Goldman Sachs deal-maker also wants to tear up business regulations to 
spur growth of 3% to 4%, year in, year out.

If the consumer confidence figures are anything to go by, a burst of 
high-street spending will trigger a mini-boom, with the tax cuts kicking in 
later in the year to keep the momentum going into 2018. But what then? The 
prospect is that inflation will take off, the dollar will soar and a rush of 
imports will send the balance of payments further into deficit.Inflation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/inflation> will hurt consumers, while an 
even stronger dollar depresses exports. USA Inc is already squealing about the 
dollar. To say they will be furiously lobbying the White House if it heads any 
higher must be an understatement.

Trump will want a scapegoat. Rather than Yellen, it’s likely to be the Chinese 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LUjERP2esbk> and any other trading partner 
deemed to be somehow ripping off US households. The Chinese, in Trump’s map of 
global villains, get full access to US markets at artificially low prices 
following several years of currency manipulation. US companies also – the 
president-elect alleges – have their patented secrets stolen, and access to 
Chinese markets blocked.

He has so far backed away from a confrontation with Beijing, except for his 
acceptance of a call from the Taiwanese premier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/trump-foreign-policy-faces-scrutiny-as-team-defends-taiwan-phone-call>
. But a trade war with China is a card he could still play if his mini-boom 
gets out of hand.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-us-economy-boom-inflation-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf2b592da3c88c1b4d2734eb0ff55cead4d7a4a%2F0_67_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20has%20a%20handy%20scapegoat%20when%20economic%20clouds%20appear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-us-economy-boom-inflation-china%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20has%20a%20handy%20scapegoat%20when%20economic%20clouds%20appear&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ftrump-us-economy-boom-inflation-china%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffbf2b592da3c88c1b4d2734eb0ff55cead4d7a4a%2F0_67_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Not a soft touch then: Financial Conduct Authority chief Andrew Bailey. 
Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Not the time to go soft on RBS

Andrew Bailey looks like everyone’s favourite uncle. But if the events of 
recent days are anything to go by, the chief executive of theFinancial Conduct 
Authority <https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> 
represents proof that looks can be deceiving.

In the space of a week, Bailey has cracked down on spread-betters, 
crowdfunders and peer-to-peer lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/fca-fund-management-fee-investment-consultant>
 as well as. He has also sent a warning shot to the banks that they could be on 
the hook for even more claims for mis-selling payment protection insurance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/fca-fund-management-fee-investment-consultant>
.

This is not what was expected of Bailey when he was cajoled out of the Bank of 
England this year into his new job by the then chancellor, George Osborne. Last 
summer Osbornechose not to renew Martin “shoot first ask questions later” 
Wheatley’s contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/17/city-watchdog-chief-quits-fca-george-osborne>
 as FCA head in what was regarded as a signal that the Conservative government 
intended to take a more conciliatory approach to the City.

On the latest evidence, any comfort the City took from Bailey’s appointment 
was misplaced. In the post-Brexit world, Europe’s financial centre might have 
had reason to hope for an easier ride from its regulators as it battles to 
prevent financial business moving to the US or Europe. Bailey’sswipe last month 
at fund managers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/fca-fund-management-fee-investment-consultant>
 – just one of many financial industries now at risk – and their “sustained, 
high profits” showed that he is not yet ready to listen to special pleading.

So, Bailey is off to a good start. But it too early to offer applause. There 
is plenty to do. One of the items near the top of his to-do-list isRoyal Bank 
of Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup>. 
Bailey should ensure that the bailed-out bank is not let off the hook for any 
mistreatment of small business customers. He has warned MPs on the Treasury 
select committee that the crucial report into how small business were handled 
could be subject to Maxwellisation. This means individuals mentioned get a 
chance to respond to what is said about them prior to publication. Bailey 
should ensure this does not stop the RBS report being published in full.

Will we ever see a normal Sports Direct?

Mike Ashley really doesn’t get it, does he? Last week Sports Direct unveiled a 
57% slump in half-year profits, together with details of a new deal that could 
eventuallyhand big rewards to his 20-year-old daughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/08/sports-direct-profits-mike-ashley-brexit-vote>
.

Oh, and the company is about to take delivery of a new $50m corporate jet 
which will “facilitate efficiencies” relating to management time.

One of the main grievances shareholders have with Sports Direct is that Ashley 
runs it like a private company.

There are other deviations from conventional listed-company behaviour. SD has 
not had a proper finance director for some three years. Ashley’s number two, 
Karen Byers – who he says actually runs the firm – is not on the board either. 
Chairman Keith Hellawell is widely regarded as a patsy by independent 
shareholders. They voted for him to go.

Will Sports Direct ever be run according to accepted norms? Not while Ashley 
is in charge.
 