
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> offered renewed 
support on Tuesday for the use of torture while repeatedly comparing a proposed 
free trade agreement to rape.

Trump, who has often praised the use of waterboarding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/24/donald-trump-on-waterboarding-even-if-it-doesnt-work-they-deserve-it>
 and has spoken positively aboutalleged war crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/19/trump-appears-to-endorse-executing-terrorists-citing-questionable-history>
 committed by American troops, said at a campaign rally, “We have to fight fire 
with fire”, after referencing the penchant for beheadings by Isis.

The presumptive Republican nominee claimed that while the terrorist group 
committed a range of atrocities including beheadings and drowning prisoners, 
the US was afraid to even use waterboarding. In Trump’s opinion, this left Isis 
believing that the US was weak and stupid and it needs to “fight so viciously 
and violently” to combat the threat.

Trump also renewed his praise of waterboarding, which was banned by the Bush 
administration in 2006 as both potentially illegal and ineffective. “What do 
you think about waterboarding?” Trump asked the crowd. They cheered as he gave 
his answer: “I like it a lot. I don’t think it’s tough enough.”

His comments came just hours after a terrorist attack on the Istanbul airport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/turkey-airport-explosions-ataturak-istanbul>
 that caused dozens of deaths. Prior to taking the stage, Trump’s campaign 
issued a measured statement on the attack: “Our prayers are with the families 
of those killed and injured in Istanbul. The whole world is stunned and 
horrified.” At his Ohio rally, he said: “There is something going on that’s 
really, really bad.”

Trump also repeatedly compared the controversial Trans Pacific Partnership 
(TPP) trade deal to rape. The remarks came just hours after Trumpdelivered a 
speech on trade policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-foreign-policy-speech-tpp-china-free-trade>
 outlining his populist protectionist views on America’s economic role in the 
world. Unlike in that speech, Trump didn’t use a teleprompter on Tuesday and 
three times compared TPP to “the rape of our country”.

The remarks were not the first time Trump has referenced rape on the campaign 
trail. In May, the real estate developersaid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/02/donald-trump-in-indiana-accuses-china-of-raping-the-us-over-trade-video>
 “we can’t continue to allow China to rape our country”, and at his 
announcement speech in June 2015 he accused the Mexican government of 
deliberately sending rapists across the border into the US.

The rally was Trump’s first appearance in the crucial swing state of Ohio 
since its March primary. No Republican presidential candidate in American 
history has won the White House without winning the Buckeye State. The event 
was held in the traditionally DemocraticOhio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ohio> Valley, an economically depressed 
area that is increasingly trending Republican in federal elections.
 