
Doon Mackichan has just moved to Hastings with her third child, the only one 
left young enough – at 12 – to make move places with you. She lives in dinky, 
seaside-Regency elegance, and I keep expecting something dark and unexpected, 
like a wolf, to lope in. Mackichan is a true original, subversive, very fast 
and witty, slightly surreal, with a straight-backed gangly mien, like a teenage 
clown.

Something as normal as a sofa just seems too normal, yet here we are on a 
sofa, discussing her recent documentary for Radio 4,Body Count Rising 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07wtggz>, a profound, textured, definitive 
consideration of violence against women on television – what it does to the 
viewer, the actor and the culture. “I was getting really quite angry about what 
I was watching,” she says. “I hadn’t been involved in anything since I was at 
uni: Reclaim the Night, shaved head, monkey boots, nought-to-60 radicalisation 
in about two weeks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d09da6669451a74a519a4e395615d8e0007a8e4%2F0_0_4480_6720%2F4480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20'We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20%27We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d09da6669451a74a519a4e395615d8e0007a8e4%2F0_0_4480_6720%2F4480.jpg>
 Mackichan on the Hastings funicular. Photograph: David Levene for the Guardian 
It was a great time to be at uni, says the actor, who studied drama at 
Manchester. “When I finished, I joinedViolence Against Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/13/hidden-rise-violent-crime-growth-violence-against-women>
 in London. We used to meet at the Embankment and graffiti at night.” (I 
actually remember their graffiti. On a bridge in Wandsworth, in huge white 
letters, it said: “Women say NO to male violence.” And underneath, smaller, it 
said: “Men say no to graffiti.” This was back in the day, when funny people 
were serious and serious things were funny.)

The sight of “porn bleeding into entertainment”, “women being pulled by their 
hair down the stairs, followed, raped” galvanised her, and the documentary did 
the same for me. “The bit that people mention,” she says, “is an interview with 
an actress about what it’s like to film a rape scene. She’s done two and she’s 
only 27.” The testimony was striking and the conclusions irresistible: it’s not 
nothing, to have to do this for your job. It is a failure of compassion, 
collective and individual, that prime time relies so heavily on brutalising 
young women, make-believe or not.

“And I’m worried about 14 or 15-year olds who are watching Game of Thrones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/game-of-thrones>. What would it feel 
like to watch men and boys being raped the whole time? They just wouldn’t watch 
it.” In the interests of devil’s advocacy, I point out that Theon gets his dick 
cut off. “That’s a one-off. If it were most of the time, they’d feel like we do 
most of the time: profoundly exhausted and deflated by the whole experience.” 
Mackichan’s CV is short on sexual violence. “I would go up for dramas and say, 
‘Why is there nudity in this?’ and then not get the part. I remember directors 
looking crestfallen, ‘Oh really, poor you for being so repressed.’”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37c6a5d390dbad7e197e7ce928207d65de7a25b%2F197_288_2643_1585%2F2643.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20'We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20%27We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37c6a5d390dbad7e197e7ce928207d65de7a25b%2F197_288_2643_1585%2F2643.jpg>
 ‘She drinks too much, she’s a hysteric’ … Mackichan as Cathy in Two Doors Down.
The show we should be talking about is Two Doors Down 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b03n2w1n>. About to start its second series, 
this endearing, ensemble BBC comedy about a set of Scottish neighbours has 
something-for-everyone humour, sometimes a bit random, always very warm. She 
plays Cathy, “channelling a lot of women in my life. The panic, which is all 
around me now, with the menopause, and people so terrified about having perfect 
faces, the obsession with looking good. She can’t have children, so who is she? 
She drinks too much, she’s a hysteric. Luckily, she’s got a husband who loves 
her and she loves him, so deep down, they’re going to be OK. That’s what I like 
about it, deep down they really love each other.”

Two Doors Down was torture – I had to wear a wig that made me feel like I'd 
been stung by bees

She’s fascinated by her character, but clearly doesn’t love playing the 
enthusiast. “It’s a really good cast, very good actors, and we do good acting 
in it,” she says drily, before relaxing into all the things she hates about it. 
“And the days were very long and hard and brutal and grim – 11 hours on camera, 
in the most uncomfortable outfit with pleather trousers, and a wig that makes 
me feel like I’ve been stung by bees on my head, and a lot of make up which I 
never wear, and very high heels. So it’s like torture.”

She’s always had a sceptical, outsiderish relationship with “straight” drama, 
probably also “straight” conversations. While studying, she devised a standup 
act, and brought it to London.Armando Iannucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/armandoiannucci> saw her and this led, 
circuitously, to The Day Today and thenSmack the Pony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/jan/12/how-we-made-smack-the-pony-sally-phillips-doon-mackichan>
, the sketch show that everybody assumes started with three friends – 
Mackichan, Sally Phillips and Fiona Allen – but didn’t start like that at all.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9646f4b630e301dc8e404b52ea9ae040ee77fab2%2F0_0_1536_1221%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20'We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20%27We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9646f4b630e301dc8e404b52ea9ae040ee77fab2%2F0_0_1536_1221%2F1536.jpg>
 ‘We were women being foolish and there wasn’t a tradition of that’ … Smack the 
Pony. 
“Armando said, ‘Watch the pilot – if you like it, they need a third person.’ 
Sally did a sketch with a parking attendant, who had no friends so just 
gatecrashed funerals. It was hilarious. I hadn’t seen people deal with these 
issues, women and loneliness. I loved the tone. But then I met them and it was 
like, ‘Who are these people?’”

Phillips is a born-again Christian and Allen – for reasons we don’t get to the 
bottom of – was “even more different to me”. Usually, when I remember sketch 
shows, it’s in broad characters (Harry Enfield 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-enfield>) or creative 
atmosphere (The Day Today). But Smack the Pony, I can recall at the level of 
the facial expressions they made, all three but Mackichan in particular 
possessing a mime-like physical hilariousness that bit you without warning. She 
has, as comedians say sagely about much-admired peers, funny bones. It was very 
popular, but never really recognised, or rather siloed as “women’s comedy”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59675fe507e7906c23b049bc7f0cfdcbed6ed8a9%2F1704_1090_3602_2161%2F3602.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20'We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Doon%20Mackichan%3A%20%27We%20were%20sexy%2C%20funny%20women%20%E2%80%93%20perhaps%20that%20was%20a%20bit%20much%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fnov%2F20%2Fdoon-mackichan-sexy-funny-women-interview-two-doors-down-smack-the-pony%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59675fe507e7906c23b049bc7f0cfdcbed6ed8a9%2F1704_1090_3602_2161%2F3602.jpg>
 ‘On the surface, I’m quite nice – but underneath, I’m no longer tame’ … 
Mackichan dives in to the water in Hastings. Photograph: David Levene for the 
Guardian 
“I really don’t care about awards,” says Mackichan, “but we were never 
nominated in this country for best comic, best comedian. It’s never mentioned 
on the 100 best comedies, it’s never in the round-up. Even when we’d won two 
Emmys, we still didn’t get our Smack the Pony DVD. I just don’t know what 
that’s about. We were funny and we weren’t doing jokes about fatness or periods 
or chocolate or men. We were doing women being foolish, which there wasn’t a 
great tradition of. And we looked quite attractive sometimes, we were quite 
sexy and funny. Perhaps that was a bit too much.”

The show ended when “we’d done four series and I literally couldn’t write 
another quickie. We had no punchlines left in us. You cannot sit in a basement 
with the same women for four years.” They remained very close, and went through 
a huge amount together: “My son had cancer,Sally’s boy has Down’s syndrome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/06/world-without-downs-syndrome-review-straight-from-heart-problem>
. We’ve all had problems at home.”

I've stopped being afraid of saying the wrong thing

Mackichan had a career break to care for her son, but his recovery was 
followed swiftly by a divorce from her husband, actor Anthony Barclay. She 
wrote all this devastation into a show at the Edinburgh fringe in 2010. Then, 
she was commonly agreed to be darkly hilarious about it; six years later, 
there’s a relieved lightness, as she talks about having her own house for the 
first time since the divorce, and her mother’s reservations aboutHastings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/10/hastings-east-sussex-weekend-break>
. “She said, ‘Darling, don’t move there. You’ll never meet anyone. You’ll be 
buried alive.’”

A lot of people, perhaps most, say they don’t care what people think, but Doon 
Mackichan has the charisma of genuine nonchalance. “I’ve stopped being afraid 
of saying the wrong thing, or trying to be a good girl. We’re overdomesticated: 
there’s a whole other side of our natures – a need to be properly seen to. That 
sounds rude! ‘Addressed’ not ‘seen to’.” This momentary derailing resolved, she 
concludes: “On the surface, I’m quite nice – but underneath, I’m no longer 
tame.”

 * Two Doors Down <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b083xpwr> is on BBC2 from 
21 November.
 