
Downing Street has distanced itself from calls by the transport minister, 
Chris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, and Tory 
backbenchers for new anti-strike laws as unions plan a wave of industrial 
action this week and over the festive period.

Southern rail strikes: driver says 'lifesaver' guards have to stay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
A spokesman for No 10 said the laws governing industrial action cannot be 
changed to halt current disputes, which are a matter for unions and employers.

Grayling angered many union leaders last week by saying he would “not rule 
anything out” when asked if he might change the law to prevent future rail 
strikes.

Former cabinet ministers Lord Heseltine and Lord Tebbit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lord-tebbit> are among the Tory figures 
who have called on Theresa May to take a tough line on trade unions.

A Downing Street source said there were no plans to change current union laws, 
which remain under review. “Any changes to union laws would not be able to 
solve the current disputes. They will be solved by mediation and we would urge 
the unions to get round the table.

“In this parliament, we have already passed legislation to provide people with 
better protection from undemocratic industrial action. Of course, we will keep 
under review how these measures are working in practice,” the source said.

Industrial action by conductors in the RMT union on the Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail franchise – coupled with a 
continuing ban on overtime by drivers in the Aslef union – is expected to bring 
a second week of havoc to 300,000 passengers between London and the south coast 
on Monday and Tuesday.

The RMT strikes are part of a long-running dispute over the role of 
conductors, with further walk-outs planned for next month. Aslef has joined the 
RMT dispute, striking forthree days last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 and entirely shutting down theSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> network. 

British Airways and Virgin Atlantic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginatlantic> are also facing walkouts 
over Christmas. Talks aimed at averting strikes by British Airways cabin crew 
over Christmas will be held at Acas on Monday. Members of Unite are due to walk 
out on Christmas Day and Boxing Day in a dispute over pay.

There will be talks on Tuesday between the airport services company Swissport 
andUnite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite>, aimed at averting a 
48-hour strike due to start on Friday by 1,500 baggage handlers and other 
airport staff in a dispute over pay.


The Post Office <https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> is facing 
possible shutdowns of branches as members of the Communication Workers Union 
(CWU) strike in a pay dispute.


Last week, Grayling told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-38296623> that he would look at all 
options to stop rail unions from striking, and while he wasn’t “ruling anything 
in” he wasn’t “ruling anything out” either.


Heseltine told the Sunday Telegraph: “You cannot have small groups of people 
holding society to ransom, regardless of personal inconvenience or cost.”

It was reported that about 20 MPs had called on Grayling to take action 
against strikes.

MPs in seats across Southern’s network have faced angry demands for action 
from their constituencies, although the Department for Transport has declined 
to get involved in the long-running dispute between Southern’s operator, Govia 
Thameslink Railways (GTR), and Aslef and theRMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt>.

Labour MPs, however, appear to be split over how to approach the dispute. The 
shadow home secretary,Diane Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>, has defended unions 
planning to strike. “Of course these strikes are going to be very disastrous if 
they all go ahead for the public over Christmas, but people do have a legal 
right to strike,”Abbott told the Sky News presenter Dermot Murnaghan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/diane-abbott-defends-series-of-strikes-planned-in-run-up-to-christmas>
 on Sunday. She added: “It’s not my role to second-guess the decisions of trade 
union leadership.”

But Meg Hillier, the Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> MP 
who chairs the public accounts committee, warned on the same programme that 
unions could be “shooting themselves in the foot” by opting for industrial 
action over the festive season. “There needs to be a wake-up call about the 
impact on hard-working people trying to get to work or go on holiday,” she said.

The RMT’s general secretary, Mick Cash, was forced to deny that the union was 
part of a “Trot conspiracy” after theSunday Times published a video 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/rail-union-boss-vows-to-topple-tories-c0hm3r3sh>
 showing the RMT union president, Sean Hoyle, at a rally saying trade unions 
were working together to “bring down this bloody working-class-hating Tory 
government”.


Cash said: “We are a serious trade union dealing with serious issues around 
safety on the railways. That is our absolute priority.RMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> is not party to any Trot conspiracy 
to bring down government.”

RMT has spent months locked in a bitter dispute with GTR over the company’s 
plans to introduce driver-only trains, which would allow some services to run 
without a second staff member on board. The company says this would reduce 
delays and cancellations when a second staff member is not available. The union 
says it would pose a safety risk.

On Friday Aslef’s general secretary, Mick Whelan, wrote to members that talks 
at mediation service Acas had been unsuccessful, and “at no time during the 
course of discussions did the company make any kind of formal offer” to end the 
dispute. A GTR spokeswoman said no further talks were planned but “our door 
remains open”.

The Royal Mail has said it does not anticipate trouble for postal services in 
the run-up to Christmas despite a planned strike on Monday, Tuesday and 
Saturday by Post Office staff belonging to the CWU.

A spokeswoman for the Post Office said the strike would only affect the 300 
branches it directly manages, as the majority of the country’s 11,000 branches 
are managed through franchise arrangements.
 