
Swiss police detained 32 Tibetan and Swiss nationals protesting against a 
visit by Chinese presidentXi Jinping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/xi-jinping> on Sunday, a spokesman has said.

Swiss authorities had given a two-hour time limit to the protest in the centre 
of Bern to avoid the kind of confrontation that marked the last visit by a 
Chinese president 18 years ago.

Several people near a security zone set up for the state visit reportedly 
failed to comply with police instructions. Arrests were made and police also 
prevented a man from setting himself on fire, before handing him to doctors for 
treatment.

Fourteen activists were detained near the Swiss parliament building in the 
afternoon as they continued to protest past the time restriction, waving 
posters saying “Free Tibet” and “Don’t Deal With Killers”, according to the 
association of Tibetan Youth inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

“The situation inside Tibet is getting worse day by day. Our people are being 
oppressed, our people are being imprisoned,” the association’s spokeswoman 
Mimpara Dhakyel said. “We are really concerned (about) how our government, our 
own government treats us … doesn’t permit us to demonstrate.”

Swiss police said they made the arrests “to secure safety”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdozens-arrested-swiss-protests-chinese-presidents-visit-xi-jinping-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2421529026c47e0ea7016ff1dd31ffb3d9740bde%2F0_0_3284_1971%2F3284.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Dozens%20arrested%20during%20Swiss%20protests%20against%20Chinese%20president's%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdozens-arrested-swiss-protests-chinese-presidents-visit-xi-jinping-switzerland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Dozens%20arrested%20during%20Swiss%20protests%20against%20Chinese%20president%27s%20visit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fdozens-arrested-swiss-protests-chinese-presidents-visit-xi-jinping-switzerland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2421529026c47e0ea7016ff1dd31ffb3d9740bde%2F0_0_3284_1971%2F3284.jpg>
 After arriving, the Chinese president gave a speech to Swiss dignitaries, 
including president Doris Leuthard (far left). Photograph: ARND WIEGMANN / 
POOL/EPA 
Up to 800 Tibetans and Swiss had gathered in the city centre and protested 
peacefully against the Tibet policies of China, with most of them leaving 
before noon as agreed, Tenzin Nyingbu, president of the Tibetan Community in
Switzerland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/switzerland> & Liechtenstein, 
told Reuters.

The Chinese leader arrived in the Swiss capital for a gala dinner on Sunday 
afternoon. After holding talks with Swiss officials on Monday,he will attend 
the annual meeting of the World Economic Forum in Davos on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
, a first for a Chinese president.

In 1999, demonstrators took to roofs overlooking the Swiss parliament with 
banners demanding “Free Tibet” during a visit by China’s then-president Jiang 
Zemin.

Police intervened when people tried to throw eggs at the Chinese delegation. 
Jiang questioned Swiss leaders’ control over their country and remarked that 
they risked “losing a good friend”.
China and Switzerland forged a free trade agreement in 2014 and Swiss 
companies countChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> among their most 
important markets.
 