
If someone offered you a glass of mild poison, you’d decline. If they said 
“drink this, it’ll make it harder to walk, speak and remember things, and 
you’ll feel awful tomorrow”, you’d be even less keen. If they expectedpayment 
for it, you might even get annoyed at their audacity. You certainly wouldn’t be 
grateful for it, then buy yourself and them several more doses over the course 
of an evening. Nonetheless, this happens all the time.

Alcohol does all the things described above and more 
<https://www.niaaa.nih.gov/alcohol-health/alcohols-effects-body>. Nonetheless, 
many peopledon’t let that put them off 
<http://alcalc.oxfordjournals.org/content/37/2/109.short>. With the festive 
season kicking off, alcohol consumption goes up. The parties (work and 
otherwise), time-off, social visits, the breakfast champagne, and so on. All 
these “festive tipples” add up to an increase in our intake of something that, 
if the dose is high enough,counts as a toxin 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_dose_makes_the_poison>. 

Admittedly, that’s a misleading statement. Via that logic, anything can count 
as a toxin (e.g. oxygen 
<https://www.diverite.com/articles/oxygen-toxicity-signs-and-symptoms/>). 
However, the effects of alcohol are far more potent at lower doses. Nobody ever 
tells us not to breathe and drive.

The unpleasant biological/neurological effects of alcohol are well known, but 
as a society we’ve clearly decided (for the most part) that these down-sides 
are “worth it”. Sure, alcohol makes us feel wretched the next day, but at the 
time it’s great!

Why? Ignoring long-term results like supposed health benefits (still a hotly 
debated subject 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2013/jan/08/alcohol-friend-foe-consequences-health>
), what positives do we get from alcohol that overrules all the negatives?

The mechanisms of alcohol intoxication are quite confusing. We’re talking 
about a relatively small molecule (ethanol) that ends up presentthroughout the 
whole brain <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17979660>. Ethanol disrupts 
the cell membranes of neurons <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/3526990>, 
mildly and temporarily, but neurons are complex and delicate, so this still 
affects their functioning. Given that all the brain’s functions depend on 
neurons, alcohol potentially affects the entire brain, all at once. You can see 
why it would be tricky to pin down the exact causes of drunken antics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fc37096f33548ab09859fd083f79b7d8d9e864d%2F0_206_3198_1918%2F3198.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drink%20and%20be%20merry%3A%20why%20alcohol%20makes%20us%20feel%20good%2C%20then%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drink%20and%20be%20merry%3A%20why%20alcohol%20makes%20us%20feel%20good%2C%20then%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fc37096f33548ab09859fd083f79b7d8d9e864d%2F0_206_3198_1918%2F3198.jpg>
 “I’m never drinking again” may be the most commonly broken promise in history. 
Photograph: David Jones/PA 
Luckily, science doesn’t shy away from a challenge, so we do know a bit more 
these days.Ethanol <https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/ethanol> 
interferes with the actions of various neurotransmitters, the chemicals neurons 
use to send signals to each other. It inhibits theaction of glutamate 
<http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh21-2/120.pdf>, the main “excitatory” 
transmitter <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Excitatory_synapse> (i.e. it turns 
things on, increases their activity). It also amplifies effects ofGABA, 
<http://thebrain.mcgill.ca/flash/d/d_04/d_04_m/d_04_m_peu/d_04_m_peu.html> the 
most potent “inhibitory <http://www.bristol.ac.uk/synaptic/basics/basics-4.html>
” neurotransmitter (i.e. it lowers/prevents activity in target areas, like a 
light switch or volume knob), specificallyvia a certain type of GABA receptors 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17591543>. Drugs like Valium work in the 
same way <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benzodiazepine>, hence you’re told to 
avoid alcohol while taking them; it’s increasing the effects of an already 
potent drug.

What’s this all mean? While it’s true that alcohol acts as a “depressant”, the 
varied and widespread effects on the brain means it’s not so straightforward. 
Alcohol may depress activity in one area of the brain, but that may connect to 
another area,specifically to stop it activating 
<http://knowingneurons.com/2014/11/05/inhibitory-neurons-keeping-the-brains-traffic-in-check/>
, ergo alcohol is indirectly increasing activity by depressing something. The 
workings of the brain are confusing enough while sober, in fairness.

Some of the more “classic” effects seem based around this depressant effect. 
Alcohol suppresses activity inthe prefrontal cortex 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3593065/> and temporal lobes 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/what-are-the-effects-of-a/>. The 
prefrontal cortex is responsible for rational thought, planning, assessment, 
anger suppression, all the complex things that go out the window after the 6th 
pint. The temporal lobes are where memory processing regions are located, and 
we know how alcohol affects memory (well,most of the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/16/alcohol-improve-memory-recall>
). This would explain why we become more incoherent and forgetful, and less 
restrained, while inebriated.

This doesn’t explain why we enjoy alcohol though. That aspect seems to stem 
from the fact that alcoholincreases activity in the dopamine neurons in the 
mesolimbic reward pathway, as well as opioid cells that release endorphins 
<http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/arh313/185-195.htm>. Both produce 
feelings of joy, pleasure, euphoria, depending on the type of activation. 
That’s why drinking can be so pleasurable. At least at first.

It’s a familiar sight. Or experience. At the start of a night out, after the 
first drink or two, everyone’s relaxed, laughing, getting on swimmingly, a lot 
of fun is had. You’re around others you approve of, inhibitions are lowered, 
the parts of your brain that worry about stress and unpleasantness are 
suppressed, so everyone’s happy and interacting nicely. Coupled with the 
euphoric effects of alcohol, why wouldn’t you keep drinking?

Then, after a certain point, things change. People slump over, suddenly 
fatigued. Speech is hard. Fights flare up over nothing. Someone’s sitting on a 
step crying over some possibly-imagined slight. The atmosphere is now a lot 
bleaker.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3af9c25ae598c2859603a34c4e6a45d8a508e24%2F0_147_3166_1898%2F3166.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Drink%20and%20be%20merry%3A%20why%20alcohol%20makes%20us%20feel%20good%2C%20then%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Drink%20and%20be%20merry%3A%20why%20alcohol%20makes%20us%20feel%20good%2C%20then%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fdrink-and-be-merry-why-alcohol-makes-us-feel-good-then-doesnt%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3af9c25ae598c2859603a34c4e6a45d8a508e24%2F0_147_3166_1898%2F3166.jpg>
 “I’ve lost my phone, thrown up in strange man’s hat, and I’ve no idea where I 
am or where I’m going”
“Same time next week?” 
“Absolutely” Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty Images 
Obviously there are many possible variables that contribute to this, but one 
important thing to remember is that alcoholhas a “biphasic” effect 
<http://mthetgi.sae.net/TheTrueGentlemanInitiativeLibrary/104/Module?module=biphasic_effects_alcohol>
. Put simply, alcohol makes you feel both better and worse, but these effects 
occur at different levels of intoxication. According to evidence, the euphoric 
effects of alcohol peak at around ablood alcohol level 
<http://www.brad21.org/bac_charts.html> of 0.05-0.06%. After this point, the 
positive effects of alcohol diminish while the negative effects increase, 
darkening your mood, impairing your faculties and sapping all your energy.

The myth is that you should “drink through it”, but science doesn’t back this 
up. It suggests there literally is a “sweet spot” where you’re drunk enough, 
but nottoo drunk. If you can maintain this level, maybe you’d have a better 
time of it?

It’s very difficult though, alcohol effects and tolerance vary massively from 
person to person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2016/feb/09/does-this-hurt-subjectivity-mental-health-medicine>
 so determining your own thresholds subjectively is very difficult. That’s even 
if your rational thinking wasn’t hampered. Which, as we’ve established if 
you’re drinking, it is. And subjectively, it’s also quite counterintuitive. 
“This stuff I’ve been consuming that induces pleasure, well it’s not changed at 
all but it now makes you feel wretched”. That doesn’t happen often, it’s like a 
delicious cake suddenly being laced with sour milk andbin juice 
<http://www.urbandictionary.com/define.php?term=bin%20juice> when you’re half 
way through eating it.

And that’s without the social pressure. Alcohol is a big element of our social 
interactions <http://www.sirc.org/publik/drinking6.html> (in the UK at least) 
so not drinking, or stopping drinking, is normally met with criticism or 
mockery, which we want to avoid,even at a subconscious level 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Normative_social_influence>. It can be extremely 
powerful, this social influence. If you’re allergic to alcohol, you’ve likely 
been pressured to have a drink anyway because “just one won’t hurt”, when it 
literally will. Clearly.

So as with most things linked to the brain, drinking alcohol is a lot more 
complex than it may seem. But there’s one positive; some studies suggest that 
an awareness of low-level intoxication can actuallyimprove performance at tasks,
 because individuals know they’re compromised soconsciously become more alert 
and attentive than normal to compensate 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1403295/>. This suggests that 
Mitchell and Webb’s “Inebriati” sketch 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-Zj50DmBFp0> is scientifically valid. 

So, next time you’re advised to “drink responsibly”, at least now you have an 
idea of how to do that. Good luck.

Dean Burnett was at a stag party last weekend, as it happens. His book The 
Idiot Brain 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=sr_1_1_twi_pap_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1461961162&sr=1-1>
, is available now in the UK 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/>
, USA 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/idiot-brain-dean-burnett/1122688091?ean=9780393253788#productInfoTabs>
, Canada <http://www.harpercollins.ca/9781443450065/the-idiot-brain> and many 
other countries.
 