
We’ve all read news stories about the hazards of driving while using a mobile 
phone, butaccording to the Institute of Advanced Motoring 
<http://iamstaging.cdd-design.com/media-and-research/media-centre/news-archive/20442-one-in-ten-crashes-caused-by-distractions>
, the most common distraction for drivers is, in fact, having children in the 
car.

Keeping kids entertained while on the road is not only about making your 
festive break or trip to visit family over Christmas more pleasant; it is also 
essential for ensuring your family’s safety. These tips will keep your 
passengers happy, leaving you to watch the road.

How to achieve five-star car safety
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/nov/23/how-to-achieve-five-star-car-safety>
Charge entertainment devices

Avoid tantrums from toddlers and teens, by fully charging any electronic 
devices – tablets, mobile phones, portable DVD players – that are going to see 
you through your journey. Ensure no one is left out: it isn’t easy for kids 
strapped into car seats to share devices and quarrels can get out of control.


Start with the toilet 

No matter how much your children tell you they don’t need a wee, get them to 
at least try before you leave the house. And don’t send them into the car with 
a two-litre bottle of pop.

Plan regular breaks …

You may have grown up laughing at your parents for their selection of maps 
with carefully plotted routes and highlighted service stations, but planning 
regular stops will ensure that your kids get to escape from the back seat for a 
precious half an hour. Seek out services that have outdoor play areas.

… But expect the unexpected

Build in some time for emergency stops, so that you don’t have to worry about 
being late to reach your destination. Try not to get cross if your child 
realises they need a wee when you’ve just passed a service station. Travelling 
with children will always involve some mini diversions, and they at least give 
the person driving a short break from concentrating on the road.

Tidy the car before you leave

Keep your vehicle free of distracting clutter – so that you don’t feel 
squashed and children have room to move their legs and get comfortable.

Travel safely and comfortably

Safety and comfort go a long way in reducing parents’ stress levels, so before 
setting off check that the child’s car seat is fitted properly, using the car’s 
seat-anchoring points. Ensure the seatbelt fits snugly against the body and 
that the airbag is disabled if the child seat is installed in the front 
passenger seat. Javier Rodriguez, an engineer at the SEAT Technical Centre 
recommends that the air conditioning temperature is set to a comfortable 22 
degrees: “That way children don’t get cold and fuel consumption does not take 
too big a hit.”

Keep them occupied …

Traditional car games such as I-spy may be less appealing than an addictive 
app, but you can engage children by asking them to create their own version, 
such as players having to select something colourful, or from the natural 
world. Make sure your fellow passengers play along with them – they will 
appreciate attention.

… But minimise distractions

Portable DVD players and tablets can be a great way of entertaining children, 
especially if they can operate them without assistance. But make sure your 
children use headphones, so they don’t distract the driver or cause arguments 
with siblings.

Use in-car entertainment systems

Audio books are a great way of keeping kids entertained (if you can get them 
to agree on the story!). If your car has Full Link technology, like the Ateca, 
then you can simply connect your mobile and play the books through the audio 
system. Sing-a-long albums are another great way of keeping everyone in a good 
mood, providing they don’t annoy the person behind the wheel.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdriving-safely-with-kids-an-essential-checklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2053b31aa0fbd6b18fee4bb0cf460ce7b911bd71%2F0_0_5150_3091%2F5150.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Driving%20safely%20with%20kids%3A%20an%20essential%20checklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdriving-safely-with-kids-an-essential-checklist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Driving%20safely%20with%20kids%3A%20an%20essential%20checklist&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fdriving-safely-with-kids-an-essential-checklist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2053b31aa0fbd6b18fee4bb0cf460ce7b911bd71%2F0_0_5150_3091%2F5150.jpg>
 Keep travel snacks healthy - fruit is good. Photograph: Robert Houser/Getty 
Images/Uppercut 
Pack some healthy snacks

Giving snacks and drinks is a good distraction for bored children and will 
stop them getting overtired, but avoid anything that will give them a sugar 
rush. Fruit and breadsticks are good options, along with water to sip. You 
could tell them you are saving the treats for when you arrive at the 
destination, which helps promote good behaviour in the back seat.

Give them an arrival time

While it’s impossible to avoid the “are we there yet” question, giving your 
passengers a specific timeframe can help. Saying: “We will be there before the 
end of the movie you’re watching” is more likely to halt the questions than 
telling them: “It won’t be long now.”

Keep a surprise up your sleeve

If you’re on a long journey, surprise your kids with an activity pack mid-way 
through the trip: a sticker book, snack and small toy can work wonders in 
suppressing dissent when you still have a few hours of travelling ahead.

Stay calm, folks

If the passengers in the front of the car are chilled out, then it should rub 
off on those in the back. Children absorb stress around them so, to avoid 
arguments about directions and make the mood in the car as light as possible, 
make use of a satnav system. Many new cars, including the SEAT Ateca, have one 
fitted as standard.

Make bedtime journey time

Failing all this, if you’re comfortable driving at night and have been well 
rested through the day, then you can always travel when your children are 
asleep. That’s one way to ensure you won’t struggle with any backseat 
distractions.
 