
After being hunted to near extinction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/southern-right-whale-recovery-in-doubt-after-being-on-brink-of-extinction>
 and threatened with climate change, drones are giving southern right whales in 
the Great Australian Bight a much-needed health check.

Sponsored by WWF-Australia, researchers at Murdoch University 
<http://mucru.org/> are measuring the size of individual whales and monitoring 
how that changes during the calving season, with plans to track their weight 
each year.

Work done this year reveals how much weight mothers lost as they fattened up 
their calves – shrinking by as much as 43cm in two months.

WWF-Australia whale researcher Chris Johnson said southern right whales 
journey thousands of kilometres from the Antarctic where they feed to South 
Australia’s Head of Bight to give birth. They stay there for about three months 
to fatten their calves before returning toAntarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica>.

Johnson said the whales don’t eat for four months, relying only on their fat 
reserves. He said one mother they watched, named Scooter, was 2.85 metres 
across her belly on 3 July but only 2.42 metres across two months later.

Southern right whale recovery in doubt after being on brink of extinction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/16/southern-right-whale-recovery-in-doubt-after-being-on-brink-of-extinction>
Another mother, Bella, lost 31cm in the same period, while her calf grew from 
5.84 metres long to 7.67 metres.

Johnson said this dramatic loss of weight the mothers undergo makes them more 
susceptible to other threats.

“These include getting tangled in marine debris, disturbance from oil and gas 
development, and global ocean warming which could reduce their food supply in 
Antarctica,” he said.

“That’s why this project is so important. If the condition of the whales 
changes in the future it could be a sign that human activities are having an 
impact.

“Nurturing a calf is already tough enough for the mothers without humans 
adding to the pressure.”

Murdoch University researcher Fredrik Christiansen said because of the weight 
loss the mothers undergo, they could only give birth every three or four years.

“When they arrive they have significant fat reserves, they are wide all along 
their body. When they leave they look like giant tadpoles. They have a head 
which is still big and robust, but the rest of the body is skinny and you can 
even see the spinal cord showing up,” Christiansen said.


“There is still so much unknown about whales. My long-term goal is to 
understand how human impacts, both lethal and sub-lethal, affect behaviour, 
health and ultimately the recovery of whale populations,” he said.

WWF <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wwf> is launching a campaign, 
asking for donations to fund the research.
 