
If you have got this far through 2016 without thinking about living and dying, 
it seems safe to assume that you don’t read much and you definitely won’t be 
reading this (unless maybe by some spooky coincidence I peg out on the long 
walk I am about to set off on, and there is a macabre interest in the 
serendipity of my last thoughts. In 2016, nothing can surprise). For the rest 
of us, the year’sslowly unfurling scroll of the dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/the-guardian-view-on-celebrity-deaths-a-dramatic-meaning>
, and above all of the dead too young, has been a stop-start conversation about 
the lethal genius of creativity, about good lives and, above all, avoidable 
deaths.

Not much united those unwittingly cast in the biopic of 2016, the Year of 
Dying Too Soon, subtitle: a cautionary tale about the consequences of prolonged 
substance abuse, but I am willing to bet my walking boots that most of them had 
one thing in common. Despite its solipsistic appeal, not one would ever have 
taken the trouble to fill in Public Health England’shealthy lifestyle 
questionnaire <https://www.nhs.uk/oneyou/#HXDElFecA4V1esO8.97>.

There are several reasons for this confident assertion, but one is 
acknowledged in the way the One You questionnaire, titled, “How are you? 
<https://www.nhs.uk/oneyou/how-are-you>” – there’s a hint there – tries to 
sneak round the great big dilemma that usually sabotages even the least 
ambitious of New Year resolutions. That might be called the “why should I stop 
doing something that makes me feel good now just because it might make me ill 
(defined in a very broad not-well kind of way) sometime much, much later on in 
my life” dilemma.

Eight in 10 middle-aged Britons 'are overweight or exercise too little'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/middle-aged-britons-overweight-exercise-too-little-exceed-alcohol-guidelines-public-health-england>
Everyone has a chain-smoking aunt who lived until she was 90, and some of us 
have hard-drinking rellies who kept at it for as long as they could get to the 
shops; and we all know of individual tragedies, of people who ran marathons and 
never deviated from a life of sober moderation and still got carried off by a 
lethal and incurable cancer at a cruelly youthful age.

The only certainty in life is death. When and how you die can (but doesn’t 
necessarily) indicate how well you lived; that makes it a political concern, 
though not half as much of a concern as what the process of our dying is going 
to cost the survivors who are paying for the NHS.

Public Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> England (PHE) – an 
outfit whose admirable purpose is, well, encouraging public health – tries to 
weasel round this with a cheery note of positivity that hints at a degree of 
self-awareness. It knows that the people visiting its site and working through 
its questionnaire are theirs already. Because presumably – just guessing here – 
the people it most needs to reach are the people who don’t think about their 
health and are much less troubled by the possible link between their lifestyle 
choices and their future wellbeing than the moment they are in. I can say this 
confidently because it is a feeling I strongly identify with.

Poor old PHE. There it stands in all its gleaming white-tiled purpose, about 
as relevant as a clean, scrubbed public convenience standing among the 
fast-food joints and the cut-price booze outlets, a beacon of community values 
in a world that has been modelled to pee up against a lamp-post.

PHE, like its sister organisations elsewhere in the UK 
<http://www.healthscotland.com/resources/networks/scotphn/about.aspx>, is the 
party pooper in a world where no one wants to deny that the party’s the thing. 
But that’s only the most obvious of its problems. Like an economics faculty at 
a university, it is an expert in a very uncertain world of expertise. It can 
map probabilities, it can trace cause and effect, it can make big predictions. 
But it cannot tie them with any degree of accurate particularity to you or me. 
Nor (and there’s a hint of this in the survey too) can it disentangle lifestyle 
from much more nebulous aspects of health, like why do you want to be healthy 
and who do you want to be healthy for.

It is working in a world where physical wellbeing is (and we’re talking big 
picture stuff here) the product of economic wellbeing, where better-off people 
lead healthier lives and live years longer enjoying them.

Forget the gold bikini. For people with mental illness Carrie Fisher was a 
queen | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/carrie-fisher-bipolar-dies-mental-illness-princess-leia>
It’s to escape the impact of the stonking great class divide on the national 
health that PHE has come up with its eye-widening assertion that80% of middle 
aged people are living bad lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/middle-aged-britons-overweight-exercise-too-little-exceed-alcohol-guidelines-public-health-england>
: they are obese (a condition that is highly visible and quite closely 
associated with poverty) or guilty of the invisible sins of the better-off – a 
failure to exercise, or drinking too much alcohol. Oh, sorry, drinking alcohol 
at all.

It is challenging us all to do that thing that almost none of 2016’s scroll of 
lost talent ever did. Except perhaps for a few, like Carrie Fisher, one of the 
greatest and surely almost the last name to be engraved on the scroll of the 
dead-too-soon. In her semi-autobiographical novel,Postcards from the Edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/21/star-writer-carrie-fisher-shines-brightest-in-her-books>
, she wrote about realising she was a drug addict, and that she would have to 
give up: “From here on out, there’s just reality. I think that’s what maturity 
is: a stoic response to endless reality.” Fisher lived that maturity with 
lacerating savagery, just as we all must, whether we give up our pleasures or 
not.
 