
The European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank> has left interest 
rates in the eurozone unchanged, but kept the door open for more cuts in the 
months ahead and renewed calls to politicians to do more to support the bloc’s 
economic recovery.

Amid signs that the UK’s vote to leave the EU is having little immediate 
impact on the eurozone economy, the ECB held the single currency area’s main 
interest rate at zero. But ECB presidentMario Draghi warned that uncertainty 
stemming from the vote for Brexit was among the factors dampening the 
eurozone’s growth 
<https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2016/html/is160908.en.html> and he 
unveiled a slightly weaker economic outlook for the bloc.

The Frankfurt-based ECB also decided to continue to buy €80bn (£68bn) of bonds 
a month under its quantitative easing (QE) programme. But it advised markets 
that the scheme would likely come to an end in just six months. The statement 
that QE would run until March 2017, “or beyond, if necessary”, disappointed 
those investors who had hoped for a more explicit extension of QE.


ECB press conference after leaving interest rates unchanged - live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/08/ecb-mario-draghi-stimulus-qe-euro-brexit-business-live>
Draghi repeated recent assertions that the ECB stands ready to pump more 
stimulus into the economy as needed to get inflation back up to its target of 
below, but close to, 2%. He said interest rates were expected “to remain at 
present or lower levels for an extended period of time”.Eurozone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/eurozone> inflation stands at 0.2%.

Eurozone interest rates are already at a record low after the ECB used its 
March meeting to launch anunprecedented package of growth-bolstering measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/10/european-central-bank-cuts-interest-rates-zero-mario-draghi>
. It cut borrowing costs, expanded its QE programme, and reduced a key bank 
deposit rate further into negative territory.

Draghi used his latest news conference on Thursday to insist that his support 
package was “effective” while promising there was more ammunition left to 
deploy if inflation refuses to budge upwards. “If warranted, we will act by 
using all the instruments available within our mandate,” he said.

Draghi also said the ECB was looking at ways to ensure “a smooth 
implementation” of its QE scheme, by which it electronically creates money to 
buy bonds. However, he said policymakers had not discussed expanding the scheme 
to buy stocks, and nor had they mulled “helicopter money”, under which central 
banks print money so that finance ministries can hand it out to citizens or 
spend it on big infrastructure projects.


The ECB’s outlook for eurozone growth was slightly more pessimistic than when 
forecasts were last published in June. It now expects GDP to expand by 1.7% 
this year, compared with 1.6% previously. But for both 2017 and 2018 the growth 
forecast was trimmed to 1.6% from 1.7%.


The UK’s vote to leave the EU was mentioned only briefly, with Draghi 
commenting: “The economic recovery in the euro area is expected to be dampened 
by still subdued foreign demand, partly related to the uncertainties following 
the UK referendum outcome, the necessary balance sheet adjustments in a number 
of sectors and a sluggish pace of implementation of structural reforms.”

In a fresh dig at politicians, Draghi said that to reap the full benefits from 
the ECB’s monetary policy measures, “other policy areas must contribute much 
more decisively, both at the national and at the European level.” He said that 
changes to how economies work “need to be substantially stepped up to reduce 
structural unemployment and boost potential output growth in the euro area”.

 