
On the eastern edge of the moor, granite sleepers mark part of the Kilmar 
railway <http://www.aditnow.co.uk/Mines/Kilmar-Railway_10335/>, used in the 
second half of the 19th century by trucks carrying moorstone destined for the 
port of Looe via theLiskeard and Caradon railway 
<http://www.photofilecornwall.co.uk/cornwall-mineheritage/liskeardcaradonrailway/liskeard-caradon-kilmar-railway.htm>
. Turfy hummocks mask mine workings beside the way, which weaves between 
flowering gorse bushes and hawthorn trees draped in bearded lichen. Blue sky 
reflects in puddles and frost crystals sparkle in cold hollows.

Dumps of wasted stone interspersed with tall conifers tower above the track as 
it passes beneath disusedCheesewring quarry 
<http://www.aditnow.co.uk/mines/Cheesering-Granite-Quarry/>; ahead, above 
sunlit sheep pastures,Sharp Tor 
<http://moorweather.co.uk/Dartmoorwalker/tor.php?id=254> is fringed with orange 
bracken.


On this bright winter day a few walkers make for the rocky top and gaze back 
towards the shadowy side of Stoweâ€™s Pound, its summit group of tors edged in an 
ancient boundary of tumbled boulders. Northwards, in sight of distantBrown Willy
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/13/brown-willy-cornwalls-highest-point-up-for-sale-at-28m>
 and the cheese factory atDavidstow 
<http://www.iwalkcornwall.co.uk/walk/tremail_to_davidstow>, wind sweeps across 
the tawny grasses and splashy rushes of Langstone Downs.

Related: In the shadow of the arsenic factory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/21/shadow-arsenic-factory-cornwall-country-diary>

Even here, seemingly remote from farmsteads and settlement, scattered boulders 
show evidence of past working. Tons of loose rock, the moorstone, was split in 
situ, dragged towards ramps for loading along the final section of the railway 
that curved around hillsides to its terminus amid the clitter ofKilmar Tor 
<http://www.westcountryviews.co.uk/bodminmoor/kilmartor/kilmar.htm>, some 1,150 
feet above sea level.

Now this moorland is deserted, apart from a herd of belted galloway cattle 
<http://www.cattleforsale.org/belted-galloway/belted-galloway-cattle/> spread 
across the rough grazing. Sheep have trodden the shallow embankments and 
cuttings leading gradually downhill towards Wardbrook, past degraded field 
boundaries, prehistoric hut circles and rough-hewn lumps of granite studded 
with tufts of emerald moss.

Close to Minions (known as Rillaton or Cheesewring Railway in the early days 
of the mining boom) people and dogs stroll away from the village, its car park, 
pub and cafe. In afternoon sun they linger in the Hurlers stone circles and 
skirt around a placid group of long-haired cows towards the derelict quarry of
Gold Diggings <http://www.mindat.org/loc-1211.html>. 

A loud buzzing sound is not a hornet but a drone, flying away from its 
controllers towards Witheybrook Marsh.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 