
It is official. Figures for the past six months show that the forecasts of 
instant Brexit catastrophe from the Treasury and the Bank of England were 
garbage. The Bank’s economist, Andrew Haldane,admitted yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
 that it was a repeat of the failure to predict the 2008 crash. It was another “
Michael Fish moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/24/bbc-weather-gaffes-michael-fish-tomasz-schafernaker-met-office>
”, when meteorologists failed to forecast the 1987 hurricane.

Chief economist of Bank of England admits errors in Brexit forecasting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
Haldane is unfair on Fish. The Met Office in 1987 was victim of a tiny nudge 
of air deflecting the course of the hurricane north of its expected path over 
the Atlantic. It had no interest in being wrong, any more than polling science 
has an interest in getting elections wrong, which it increasingly does.

The Brexit forecast was in a different category. It was like the “dodgy dossier
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/may/12/iraq-dossier-case-for-war>” of 
the intelligence community on Saddam’s weapons arsenal. It was experts 
distorted by politics, consciously or unconsciously saying what they or their 
paymasters wanted to hear. It was “sexed-up” science.

The reasons given by economists for their Brexit forecast are feeble. It did 
not take account of “inherent momentum”, of international factors or of 
government remedial action. That is surely inadequate. The true reason is that
Project Fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/project-fear-how-hope-got-sidelined-in-eu-vote>
, the Treasury-orchestrated attempt to frighten voters into the remain camp, 
consumed the political and intellectual establishment. It blighted the judgment 
of social scientists. It not only failed in its purpose of instilling fear, it 
appeared to validate a bogus reason for voting Brexit – that all experts are 
mendacious toffs.

After the debacle of 2008, academic economists made a few half-hearted 
attempts to answer theQueen’s famous LSE question, “Why did nobody notice?” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/nov/12/queen-economy-recession-lse>
 But there was no official or professional inquiry. No one took any 
responsibility or blame for a forecasting failure that led to a policy 
disaster. As now, it became the topic for a few jokes at a thinktank seminar.

I studied economics and respect its attempts to explain a turbulent world. But 
each of these fiascos in a profession that purports to be scientific should 
receive a subsequent inquest.Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> is plagued by the spurious 
exactness of mathematics. It neglects human behaviour and grovels before its 
paymasters in government and commerce. Its forecasting is as much use as Mystic 
Meg and the astrologers.

Predicting economic disaster may not be as crucial as predicting war, but its 
consequences can be massive. The essence of any science is relentless 
self-criticism. Economics should suffer what the intelligence community did 
after Iraq. It should be asked, in public, to explain how it came to make so 
blatant a professional error.
 