
Families are expected to run up £40bn of debt this year, sparking fears about 
Britain’s economic recovery.


Labour raised concerns that millions of households would face “serious 
hardship” if interest rates rise and warned the borrowing trend could harm the 
economy.

The latest Office for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> (OBR) 
forecasts have found that households have moved from a surplus of £67bn in 
2010, the year the coalition took power, to a £40bn deficit this year.

Unsustainable borrowing is on course to near the levels reached in the run-up 
to the 2008 financial crash, according to Labour.

Seema Malhotra, the shadow chief secretary to the Treasury, said: “George 
Osborne <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> is relying on 
millions of British families going further into debt to hit his growth targets.

George Osborne’s economic miracle is built on a mountain of personal debt | 
Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/george-osborne-uk-personal-debt-failed-economic-model>
“This is risky behaviour from a chancellor whose policy decisions are hurting, 
not helping, British families. Alarm bells should be ringing. There is a real 
risk that millions of families will face serious hardship if interest rates 
start to rise.

“Of course families need access to credit and the ability to borrow to invest 
for the future.George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> should be seeking to 
rebalance the economy away from an over-reliance on borrowing and debt.

“Labour is clear about the need for a strong and sustainable economic 
recovery. Osborne’s short-term political decisions risk real long-term damage 
to the finances of millions of British families and the nation’s economy.”

The former business secretary Sir Vince Cable warned Britain was returning to 
“old and unhappily discredited” methods of economic growth.

He told the Independent: “We’re back on the treadmill of growth being 
sustained by personal borrowing. Much of it is against an inflating housing 
stock.

“Taken together with other indicators like the very weak external deficit 
position, it suggests we’re getting back to the old and unhappily discredited 
forms of economic growth.”
 