
Ecuador has confirmed 
<https://twitter.com/MFAEcuador/status/788511494296272896> that it has 
temporarily cut off internet access in its embassy in London to Julian Assange, 
the founder of the whistleblowing site WikiLeaks, over fears that he was using 
it to interfere in the US presidential election.

The move followed the publication of leaked emails by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>, including some from the 
Democratic National Committee (DNC) released just before the party’s convention 
in July, and more recently a cache of emails from the account of Hillary 
Clinton campaign adviser John Podesta.

On Tuesday, officials released a statement saying that the government of 
Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> “respects the principle of 
non-intervention in the internal affairs of other states” and had cut off the 
internet access available to Assange because “in recent weeks, WikiLeaks has 
published a wealth of documents, impacting on the US election campaign”.
Assange explainer box 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=19e4c3a8-0a8d-4710-ad8e-9ee37c06c41a>
The statement also reaffirmed the asylum granted to Assange and reiterated its 
intention “to safeguard his life and physical integrity until he reaches a safe 
place”.

Assange’s internet access was cut off on Monday morning. It was not 
immediately clear who was responsible, though a tweet from the site’s official 
account claimed it had been “intentionally severed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/17/ecuador-julian-assange-internet-access-wikileaks>
” by a “state party”.


It is not known who perpetrated the hacks that brought the emails to 
WikiLeaks. Assange’s organization styles itself a whistleblowing outfit and 
claims not to do or encourage any hacking itself.

Yet cybersecurity experts have linked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/14/russian-dnc-hack-donald-trump-files-us-election>
 the hack of the DNC emails to hackers tied to the Russian government, leading 
many – including Clinton’s campaign manager, Robby Mook –to allege 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
 that Russia is using both hackers and Assange as tools to help rig the 
presidential election in favor of Donald Trump.

On Saturday, the anti-secrecy organisation released three transcripts of 
Clinton’s paid Goldman Sachs speeches, which her campaign team had long refused 
to release. The transcripts show how she bantered with the investment bank’s 
executives, which is likely to fuel fears among liberalDemocrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> that she is too cosy with Wall 
Street.
Foreign Affairs Ec (@MFAEcuador) 
Official Communiqué | Ecuador respects the principle of non-intervention in 
the internal affairs of other states ➡️https://t.co/4F7R5Iktsd 
<https://t.co/4F7R5Iktsd> pic.twitter.com/5FtbLViMEo <https://t.co/5FtbLViMEo>
 <https://twitter.com/MFAEcuador/status/788511494296272896> October 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MFAEcuador/status/788511494296272896> 
WikiLeaks was responsible for the release, in collaboration with several news 
organizations including the Guardian, of an explosive set of documents leaked 
by US army private Chelsea Manning,including a video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/apr/05/wikileaks-us-army-iraq-attack> 
titled Collateral Murder that showed a US air crew killing Iraqi civilians.
Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning>, who leaked the 
information, is currently in military prison.

From liberal beacon to a prop for Trump: what has happened to WikiLeaks?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/wiileaks-from-liberal-beacon-to-a-prop-for-trump-what-has-happened>
Assange has been confined to the Ecuadorian embassy in London since June 2012, 
when he sought and was granted asylum by Ecuador. Assange is wanted for 
questioning in Sweden over an allegation of rape in August 2010, which he 
denies. The Australian WikiLeaks founder has claimed he could be transferred to 
the US to face potential espionage charges arising fromWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>’ publishing activities.

Swedish prosecutors had been due to question Assange at the embassy this week, 
but last weekEcuador’s attorney general said the long-awaited interview would 
be delayed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/oct/12/questioning-of-julian-assange-by-swedish-authorities-postponed>
 until 14 November to ensure that Assange’s legal team could attend. The 
interview will be conducted by an Ecuadorian prosecutor, based on a list of 
questions from the Swedish chief prosecutor and a police investigator, who will 
be present. The Ecuadorians will later report the findings toSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>.
 