
The body of an indigenous leader who was opposed to a major mining project in 
Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> has been found bound and 
buried, days before he planned to take his campaign to climate talks in Lima.

The killing highlights the violence and harassment facing environmental 
activists in Ecuador, followingthe confiscation last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/dec/03/green-activists-ecuador-climate-change>
 of a bus carrying climate campaigners who planned to denounce president Rafael 
Correa at the United Nations conference.

The victim, José Isidro Tendetza Antún, a former vice-president of the Shuar 
Federation of Zamora 
<http://www.ecuadortimes.net/topic/shuar-federation-of-zamora-chinchipe-and-sucumbios/>
, had been missing since 28 November, when he was last seen on his way to a 
meeting of protesters againstthe Mirador copper and gold mine 
<http://amazonwatch.org/news/2014/0512-chinese-banks-ignore-pleas-of-ecuador-mining-campaigners>
. After a tip-off on Tuesday, his son Jorge unearthed the body from a grave 
marked “no name”. The arms and legs were trussed by a blue rope.

Other members of the community said Tendetza had been offered bribes and his 
crops were burned in an attempt to drive him from the area.

Domingo Ankuash, a Shuar leader, said there were signs Tendetza had been 
tortured, but the full facts had yet to come to light. He said the family were 
extremely unhappy with the investigation and what they said was the reluctance 
of the authorities to conduct a timely autopsy.

“His body was beaten, bones were broken,” said Ankuash 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kgzk2OTs2Ik>. “He had been tortured and he was 
thrown in the river. The mere fact that they buried him before telling us, the 
family, is suspicious.”


Tendetza had been a prominent critic of Mirador, an open-cast pit that has 
been approved in an area of important biodiversity that is also home to the 
Shuar, Ecuador’s second-biggest indigenous group.

The project is operated by Ecuacorriente <http://www.ecuacorriente.com/> – 
originally a Canadian-owned firm that was brought by a Chinese conglomerate, 
CCRC-Tongguan Investment, in 2010. According to the Confederation of Indigenous 
Nationalities of Ecuador, the project will devastate around 450,000 acres of 
forest.

“This is a camouflaged crime,” said Ankuash. “In Ecuador, multinational 
companies are invited by the government and get full state security from the 
police and the army. The army and police don’t provide protection for the 
people; they don’t defend the Shuar people. They’ve been bought by the company.

“The authorities are complicit in this crime,” Ankuash said. “They will never 
tell us the truth.” He added: “[Tendetza] was not just anyone. He was a 
powerful leader against the company. That’s why they knocked down his house and 
burnt his farm.

“The government will never give us a response; justice belongs to them. They 
will call us terrorists but that doesn’t mean we are not going to shut up.”

Several other Shuar opponents of Mirador have died as a result of the conflict 
in recent years, including Bosco Wisum in 2009 and Freddy Taish in 2013, 
according to Amazon Watch <http://amazonwatch.org/>.

An initial autopsy said the circumstances of Tendetza’s death were unclear. 
Harold Burbano, of the human rights organisationINREDH <http://www.inredh.org/>
, said there was a suspicion that the killing was related to his work as a land 
defender.

“There has been a rise of conflicts since the transnational mining company 
entered the area, significantly increasing the risks faced by community 
leaders,” he said.

Tendetza had planned to condemn the project at a Rights of Nature Tribunal 
organised by NGOs at the climate talks which are taking place this week in the 
Peruvian capital.

Luis Corral, an advisor to Ecuador’s Assembly of the People of the South, an 
umbrella group for indigenous federations in southern Ecuador, said that if 
Tendetza had been able to travel to the COP20 it would have put in “grave doubt 
the honorability and the image of the Ecuadorean government as a guarantor of 
the rights of nature”.

“We believe that this murder is part of a pattern of escalating violence 
against indigenous leaders which responds to the Ecuadorean government and the 
companies’ need to clear the opposition to a mega-mining project in the 
Cordillera del Condor,” he said.

“The state through the police and the judiciary is involved in hiding this 
violent crime because of the elemental irregularities in the proceedings. The 
body was buried without informing the family. They weren’t allowed to see the 
second autopsy.”

Tendetza’s killing highlights the risks facing environmental activists in 
Ecuador. Last week, a group of campaigners travelling in a “climate caravan” 
was stopped six times by police on the way to Lima, and eventually their bus 
was confiscated.

The activists said they were held back because president Correa wants to avoid 
potentially embarrassing protests at the climate conference over his plan to
drill for oil in Yasuni 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/23/ecuador-amazon-yasuni-national-park-oil-drill>
, an Amazon reserve and one of the most biodiverse places on earth.

Once lauded for being the first nation to draw up a “green constitution”, 
enshrining the rights of nature, Ecuador has seen its environmental reputation 
nosedived in recent years as Correa has put more emphasis on exploitation of 
oil, gas and minerals, partly to pay off debts to China.
 