
Ed Balls' Gangnam Style: the Strictly dance we can never unsee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/14/ed-balls-gangnam-style-the-strictly-dance-that-became-a-phenomenon>
On the night of 25 September 2010, there was a sombre atmosphere at the Labour 
party conference in Manchester. Supporters of Ed Miliband were walking around 
shell-shocked, stunned by their upset victory over his brother. David Miliband 
was counselling his own backers, who seemed almost bereaved by defeat. But in 
one packed, increasingly sweaty bar, a rather different scene unfolded.

Ed Balls, who had come third in that year’s leadership contest, was at a 
karaoke microphone belting outthe Killers’ Mr Brightside 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gGdGFtwCNBE>. While his rivals wore grave 
expressions, Balls was seeing the funny side, mocking himself and getting ready 
to dust himself down and start all over again. For his most loyal supporters, 
it was a typical display: part self-deprecation, part showing off, and all 
accompanied by an easy familiarity with popular culture.

It’s fair to say that was not the way most people saw Ed Balls. Once known as 
more of a spod than a SpAd – he was famously said to have inserted the phrase 
“post-neoclassical endogenous growth theory” into a Gordon Brown speech – he 
then became notorious as Brown’s enforcer, caricatured as both a boffin and a 
bruiser. As Ed Miliband’s shadow chancellor, he was the regular butt of jibes 
from David Cameron and George Osborne, who sought to make him the face of 
supposed Labour profligacy. When he lost his Morley and Outwood seat in 2015, 
it becamethe defining image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/08/ed-balls-loses-morley-and-outwood-seat-shadow-chancellor-labour-general-election>
 of Labour’s 2015 defeat. In all the political obituaries that were written 
back then, few described Balls as popular – and no one called him a national 
treasure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=He%20came%2C%20he%20danced%2C%20he%20pouted%3A%20Ed%20Balls%20out%20of%20Strictly%20after%2010%20weeks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=He%20came%2C%20he%20danced%2C%20he%20pouted%3A%20Ed%20Balls%20out%20of%20Strictly%20after%2010%20weeks%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Fed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video&media=>
He came, he danced, he pouted: Ed Balls out of Strictly after 10 weeks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/28/ed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
And yet when Balls was finally ejected from the BBC’s wildly popular Strictly 
Come Dancing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/video/2016/nov/28/ed-balls-out-strictly-bbc-10-weeks-video>
 last weekend, the wave of affection was unmistakable. In the previous 10 
weeks, he had steadily built up what felt like a major public following. On 
social media, the love overflowed. In the street, where once, if he was 
recognised at all, it might be by someone who, unprovoked, told him to fuck 
off, now strangers would call out to say he was “smashing it on Strictly”. BBC 
executives spotted a trend: whenever Balls was about to dance, the ratings 
spiked.

Week after week, the judges put him at the bottom of the leaderboard. But week 
after week he stayed in. The voters had glimpsed theEd Balls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edballs> of that Manchester bar in 2010 – 
and they loved him.

Ed Balls is the Brexit of the ballroom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-brexit-ballroom-strictly-come-dancing>
All this must surely mean he’s gutted to be out. On the contrary, he says now, 
catching his breath between an appearance on ITV’s Loose Women and taping the 
Strictly Christmas special. “I’m not disappointed at all. I’ve had a fabulous 
time. Feels like a victory, not a defeat.” Which might sound like a 
politician’s spin until he tells you that, in the seconds before Tess Daly 
revealed who was going to be in last week’s decisive dance-off, he confided to 
a producer that he was more worried about scraping through than staying in. “I 
think by the time I got to last Saturday, I knew it was time to go.”

But why? He had surpassed all expectations, even making it to the 
all-important Blackpool stage. The pantomime-villain-cum-judgeCraig Revel 
Horwood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/03/strictly-come-dancing-judgewatch-craig-revel-horwood>
 had declared him to be “improving”. Plenty believed Balls would make it to the 
final, even perhaps – in this year of Brexit, Trump and Leicester City – win 
the whole thing. But not him. “I knew that as the programme goes on, it becomes 
more about who’s good. And I wasn’t as good as the others. I felt that [had I 
stayed in] the next week would have had lots of people saying, ‘It’s not fair, 
it’s not on’. As Len Goodman has said since, the British people like an 
underdog, but there’s also a sort of sense of fair play.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf180e6d3cff193f5d7a45bfb1ddff55556086e%2F0_0_7191_4731%2F7191.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Balls%20on%20leaving%20Strictly%3A%20'By%20last%20Saturday%2C%20I%20knew%20it%20was%20time%20to%20go'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Balls%20on%20leaving%20Strictly%3A%20%27By%20last%20Saturday%2C%20I%20knew%20it%20was%20time%20to%20go%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fecf180e6d3cff193f5d7a45bfb1ddff55556086e%2F0_0_7191_4731%2F7191.jpg>
 ‘I’m not disappointed at all. I’ve had a fabulous time’ … Ed Balls. 
Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
And unlike those other electoral results of 2016, Balls did see this one 
coming. “Judge Rinder 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/profiles/5SLnPrKL1X4wfJ7m8J1rcM5/judge-rinder> 
and I were talking about the algorithm and the way things work,” he says, 
simultaneously straight-faced and aware of the comic absurdity. “Maybe we’re 
both a bit nerdy like that. Judge Rinder had been sitting there with his 
calculator working it out in the wardrobe room between the two shows on 
Saturday night.” He goes on to explain that, because “you’re balancing 50% 
public vote and 50% the judges”, once only a handful of contestants are left, a 
tipping point is reached where even coming first in the public vote might not 
be enough to save you from the dreaded dance-off. (Not for nothing was Balls 
reputed to be one of the finest economists of his generation.)

But he has more to say on the numbers. “The thing that is really frustrating 
about this show for people who follow politics, people who understand politics, 
is that we all need data. We need polls, we need exit polls, we need results. 
We need to know turnout. We need to know past results, and the problem with 
Strictly is that, although they’re very clear about the method, and they’re 
very clear about the independent verification, they don’t give us any data at 
all. So none of us ever know. We never knew whether we were just scraping 
through in week three, or totally storming it.”

He was like that throughout his Strictly journey, approaching the competition 
with an eye on political strategy. He learned quickly that it was crucial not 
to be bland, not to be stranded in the middle between those who are terrific 
and those who are awful. But nor did he want to be anotherJohn Sergeant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2008/nov/20/strictly-come-dancing-john-sergeant>
 orAnn Widdecombe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-follow-my-lead>
. He really wanted to learn to dance and to become better. Nothing pleased him 
more than when the judges praised his “dance content”.

Glitter sweet: can Ed Balls save British politics? | Ayesha Hazarika
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/18/ed-balls-british-politics-strictly-come-dancing>
As the weeks went by, he realised that people – perhaps millions of people - 
were beginning to rely on him for a little bit of cheer to relieve the gloom. 
Never more so than in the week ofDonald Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
.

As it happens, I watched him and his professional partner, Katya Jones 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/18/katya-jones-ambition-behind-team-glitterballs-ed-balls-strictly>
, in the rehearsal room that week. They were practising a salsa to Gangnam 
Style. The BBC cameraman had already seen it and predicted, rightly as it 
turned out, that “this is going to tear the roof off”. Sure enough, that moment 
whenEd appeared to ride Katya <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Czqtjk_iGFU> – 
“the pony” – made me, and everyone who saw it, gasp in a rare combination of 
delight and horror. It has been viewed3.5m times on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/bbcstrictly/videos/10153845512176619/?hc_ref=SEARCH> 
alone.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DCzqtjk_iGFU&media=>
Ed Balls and Katya Jones Gangnam Style on Strictly Come Dancing 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Czqtjk_iGFU> 
But going into it was not easy. First, the Trump election had brought everyone 
down. “How do you do this emotionally when you sort of feel something so 
terrible has happened?” Then he saw the Twitter voices sobbing that all they 
had to look forward to was Ed on Strictly. That added to the pressure. “I 
certainly felt a responsibility not to give people another disappointment or 
setback at the end of the week where there’d been a massive disappointment and 
setback.” The result was, he says, a more restrained performance, at least at 
the start, than he’d planned. He just didn’t want anything to go wrong.

This brings us to the dignity issue. Plenty of people felt that a man who had 
once sought to be the nation’s chancellor should not be cavorting around doing 
a paso doble on primetime TV. He includes Gordon Brown in that list, but 
quickly adds that Brown soon came around – texting Balls each Saturday evening 
to give him his own assessment of his performance. After Balls descended from 
the roof of the Winter Gardens playing a flaming piano, the former PM texted to 
say, “I will never see Blackpool in the same light again.”

Brown comes up several times in our conversation, including in a context few 
would have expected. I had asked Balls about Jones, a phenomenal dancer widely 
praised for playing to Ed’s strengths and unlocking his comic potential. They 
had to work together with great intensity, in the studio for 45 hours a week. 
To my surprise, he compares his working relationship with Katya with his 
equally demanding former boss.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74da9476f92ecd24ab43d6bc5378038d4dae369d%2F0_96_2322_2901%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Balls%20on%20leaving%20Strictly%3A%20'By%20last%20Saturday%2C%20I%20knew%20it%20was%20time%20to%20go'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Balls%20on%20leaving%20Strictly%3A%20%27By%20last%20Saturday%2C%20I%20knew%20it%20was%20time%20to%20go%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-interview-by-jonathan-freedland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74da9476f92ecd24ab43d6bc5378038d4dae369d%2F0_96_2322_2901%2F2322.jpg>
 Chancellor Gordon Brown with Ed Balls, then his advisor, in 1997. Photograph: 
Sean Dempsey/PA Archive/Press Association Ima 
“I was older, but I was the junior partner with Katya. With Gordon I was 
younger, but I was also the junior partner. But actually I always felt with 
Gordon that I should challenge him and say when I didn’t like things or when I 
disagreed. I did the same with her, and she with me. Actually what you realise 
is that, in both cases, the strength of the underlying relationship and the 
mutual respect is what allows you, sometimes, in the privacy of [working 
together, just] the two of you, to say ‘You’re getting this wrong, that’s 
ridiculous,’ or ‘That’s not going to work,’ or ‘Why can’t you support me more?’ 
The same way it happened between Gordon and me.”

The big shift came, he says, when he realised that performing on a show like 
Strictly meant playing a character. In the first week, he admits, he was stiff 
and stilted, because he was still being himself. But once he became the 
banjo-playing hick for his Charleston, or the yellow-suited Mask, or one half 
of Laurel and Hardy, he was liberated. He says he also focused only on the 
people in the studio audience, never thinking of the 11 million watching at 
home. If he had, he says, it would have been overwhelming.

Above all, the confidence came from a deep but unexpected source. In his 
memoir,Speaking Out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/07/speaking-out-ed-balls-review-new-labour-gordon-brown-tony-blair-ed-miliband>
, Balls explains that he did not realise he had a stammer – an “interiorised 
<http://www.stammering.org/help-information/people-stammer/adults/bsa-leaflets-adults/interiorised-stammering-bsa-leaflet>
” one – until he was 38. Facing up to that and then talking about it in public 
was, he believes, a turning point. “Being comfortable in yourself – including 
saying, ‘I’ve got a stammer, that’s who I am’ – once you’ve done that, nothing 
else seems quite as hard in the future.” Even dancing a cha-cha-cha on live TV.

Indeed, Balls goes further, saying he believes he would never have gone on 
Strictly had he not had the stammer and faced up to it. It has enabled him to 
take risks, and to believe “this is who I am and it’s OK”. Now when he speaks 
to stammering children, as he does often, he tells them not to aim to eradicate 
their stammer, because, “well, one, it’s never going to go, but two, the 
strength they get out of dealing with it, and therefore being able to be 
themselves, will make them better people. And that’s why I’m better for having 
a stammer.”

Now that he’s out, he has more time on his hands. What’s next? He’s doing the 
Strictly Live Tour next year, which will mean a return to the Leeds venue where 
he learned he lost his seat in 2015. He sees some kind of poetic karma in that. 
He will miss the Manchester leg because he’s flying to Arizona to give a speech 
on the world economy. Not many Strictly contestants can say that.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431073708611%2FKP_219544_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Balls%20loses%20his%20seat%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Balls%20loses%20his%20seat%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fmay%2F08%2Fed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F5%2F8%2F1431073708611%2FKP_219544_crop_640x480.jpg>
Labour’s Ed Balls loses seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/may/08/ed-balls-loses-seat-morley-outwood-labour-general-election-2015-video>
It’s a strange kind of balancing act – light entertainment star and 
heavyweight politician. He certainly hasn’t stopped thinking of Labour and its 
current predicament. “You don’t succeed by being supported bycheering rallies 
of paid-up members 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/06/were-not-cult-members-labour-supporters-at-corbyn-rallies>
,” he says pointedly. “The thing that’s worrying at the moment is not justour 
poll 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/are-you-worried-about-labours-polling-figures>
 andtrust ratings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/19/tories-trusted-by-twice-as-many-voters-with-economy-than-labour-poll>
, but actually on some of the big policy prescriptions, we’re out of touch. The 
British people want the security ofthe Nato alliance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nato>. They don’t think that getting rid of 
our nuclear weapons would make us safer. They don’t think that free movement 
and immigration is an unalloyed success. When they hear our senior spokespeople 
saying ‘immigration is good for you and you should just accept it’ – that may 
make sense in Islington or Hackney, but it makes no sense at all where 
elections are won or lost around the country.”

He may well now be the most popular Labour figure in Britain. In 10 short 
weeks, he has acquired a commodity that is denied most politicians: more than 
simple popularity, he is now seen as a human being. No longer is he viewed 
through what he calls the “thick lens” that stands between almost every 
politician and the public, one that warps and distorts them all. That could be 
a priceless asset.

Goodbye, Ed Glitterballs – here are your Strictly best bits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/nov/27/ed-balls-strictly-come-dancing-best-bits>
Does that mean there’s a way back for him? He says it would be “foolish” if he 
thought, “Oh, I’ve done well on a reality TV programme, let me go and be a 
reality TV politician.” The two disciplines are very different. To succeed on 
reality TV, he learned that, “You’ve got to shock. You’ve got to have some 
drama,” even go a bit “wild”. In politics, you also have to take risks, but you 
have to have “thought it through, and it’s serious, and you need to build 
consensus. You can’t just surprise. The world does not want a reality TV 
president,” he says (even though it’s about to get one).

Tellingly, he rules nothing out, even my half-serious suggestion that if there 
was ever a vacancy forthe London mayoralty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/nov/29/sadiq-khan-sets-out-key-plans-for-more-genuinely-affordable-london-homes>
, he could run and win. And there’s a reason for that.

When his book was launched in September, Balls told guests that no matter how 
much he was enjoying Strictly, what he missed was the sense of “purpose” that 
politics provided. He sticks by that now. I ask if even a wet Tuesday in 
February as education secretary was more thrilling than a spectacular night on 
Strictly. “Oh massively, oh definitely. Incomparably so.” The responsibility, 
the ability to make a difference in people’s lives – “It’s just in a different 
realm.”

“The thing is, though, I’m quite reconciled with that. I may never ever have 
that degree of responsibility and purpose again. And I’m quite happy with the 
idea that I might spend the next five years doing some [teaching at] King’s 
[College, London] and at Harvard, and someNorwich City 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2015/dec/27/ed-balls-new-chairman-norwich-city>
 [where he is chairman] and some television maybe. But I think I’d be 
disappointed if I didn’t do something that felt like it was public service … 
I’d love to have a chance to do that kind of thing again.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fed-balls-would-not-rule-out-return-to-politics-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ed%20Balls%20would%20not%20rule%20out%20return%20to%20politics%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fed-balls-would-not-rule-out-return-to-politics-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ed%20Balls%20would%20not%20rule%20out%20return%20to%20politics%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fed-balls-would-not-rule-out-return-to-politics-video&media=>
Ed Balls would not rule out return to politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/01/ed-balls-would-not-rule-out-return-to-politics-video> 