
Householders face steep hikes in electricity bills next year, as EDF Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/edf> said it would raise prices by 8.4% 
from March, with other “big six” energy providers expected to match the 
increases.

The French-owned energy giant, which in September signed an £18bn deal to 
build the controversialHinkley Point nuclear plant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/hinkley-point-ministers-sign-go-ahead-for-nuclear-power-plant>
, said it would cut gas prices by 5.2% but blamed rising costs for the increase 
in its electricity tariff.


Experts urged customers on standard tariffs to lock into cheap fixed-priced 
deals while they were still available.

The changes mean that dual fuel customers with EDF (taking both electricity 
and gas) will see their bills rise by 1.2%, to an average of £1,082 a year. 
Prepayment customers who take both gas and electricity from EDF will still pay 
5.1% less after March, at £1,081 a year.


Wholesale energy prices have risen by around a third since last spring, and 
Mark Todd, co-founder of Energyhelpline, said EDF’s rise is likely to be “the 
first of many”.


It is also the first major price rise since the collapse of GB Energy in 
November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/gb-energys-collapse-to-hit-160000-households-with-higher-bills>
. The three-year-old gas and power supplier, which pulled in 160,000 customers 
with cheaper tariffs, blamed “swift and significant increases in energy prices” 
for its failure. Fears are now growing that other “challenger” providers could 
fail, and leave the big six in a stronger position to raise prices.


Todd is predicting average rises nearer to 5%. “We urge consumers to take this 
as proof that price rises are definitely coming and to use it as a catalyst to 
get off the horrible standard tariffs that make so many cold and penniless, and 
get onto a nice low-cost fixed rate that makes heating your home affordable,” 
he added.

EDF said that 1.5 million customers would be unaffected because they are 
locked into fixed-rate deals. It said it would write to those on standard 
variable tariffs and provide details of its best deals.

Beatrice Bigois, managing director of customers at EDF Energy, said: “Many 
industry commentators have said that prices charged by energy suppliers will 
rise after the winter. We are being open about the fact our electricity prices 
will go up after our price freeze. But we also know it is right to pass on to 
loyal customers the fall in gas costs that energy suppliers have seen over 
recent months.”

But critics said EDF was raising electricity prices when much of its power was 
already generated from nuclear plants.


“EDF is in the unique position of owning all the UK’s nuclear power stations 
so they don’t actually need to buy any electricity. This means that they have 
been largely insulated from the turmoil in the wholesale markets that has seen 
35% wholesale price rises since March and put GB Energy out of business. These 
wholesale rises are putting much more pressure on other suppliers to hike rates 
than EDF,” said Todd.


onsumers.

EDF is first of the big six to announce that an increase in prices is in the 
pipeline.British Gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/british-gas-freeze-prices-sse-tariffs>
 andSSE have both frozen the cost of their standard tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/sse-to-freeze-energy-prices-this-winter>
 over the winter months.

Claire Osborne, energy expert at uSwitch, said: “It’s disappointing to see EDF 
already committing to price rises in March that will make them the most 
expensive variable tariff of the big six. Increasing the price of an already 
high energy bill could leave almost 2 million EDF standard variable customers 
buckling under the pressure, and it’s a bitter pill to swallow even if it is 
after the winter months – consumers still need to keep the lights on.

 “With wholesale costs rising, putting further pressure on bills, we have 
already seen the cheapest deal rise by £126 in the past two months, and the 
danger is now that the other big six suppliers will follow suit with their own 
price hikes in the spring.”







However Guy Anker, managing editor of Moneysavingexpert, said the price rise 
was lower than expected given what is happening to wholesale prices.


“Nevertheless, no one should see this as good news and it should sound as a 
loud clarion call to any customer of any energy firm on a standard tariff to 
urgently check if they can save by locking into a cheap fix, as other firms are 
likely to follow.”

He added: “Urgent is the key word as the price of the cheapest deals has been 
rising, so the longer you wait the less you’ll save if that trend continues.”
 