
The government has said it is dropping the education bill unveiled in this 
year’s Queen’s speech, abandoning several proposals that had proved to be 
unpopular. However, it said it would press ahead with plans for more grammar 
schools.

The bill was introduced in March by Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/educational-excellence-everywhere>, 
then education secretary, but its most controversial clauses were quickly 
removed, including forcing all state schools in Englandto become academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/06/government-backs-down-over-plan-to-make-all-schools-academies>
 by 2020 andending statutory places for parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/14/justine-greening-drops-plan-to-scrap-parent-governors-in-schools>
 on boards of governors.

Justine Greening, Morgan’s successor as education secretary, signalled the 
ditching of the bill in awritten statement to parliament 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Lords/2016-10-27/HLWS224/>
 on the unrelated technical and further education bill.

“We have rightly reflected on our strategic priorities and the proposals for 
education legislation put forward at the time of the Queen’s speech [in May],” 
Greening said in the statement.

“My department has renewed its focus on ensuring everything we do drives 
towards improving social mobility with an emphasis on not just the most 
disadvantaged families but also on those that are just about managing.

What does the dropping of the education bill mean?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/29/what-does-dropping-of-education-bill-mean>
“Our ambition remains that all schools should benefit from the freedom and 
autonomy that academy status brings. Our focus, however, is on building 
capacity in the system and encouraging schools to convert voluntarily.

“No changes to legislation are required for these purposes and therefore we do 
not require wider education legislation in this session to make progress on our 
ambitious education agenda.”

With two bills already in the legislative pipeline – the children and social 
work bill and the higher education and research bill – and with the technical 
and further education bill announced on Thursday, the Department for 
Education’s permanent secretary Jonathan Slater was keen to drop the workload 
entailed by the remnants of the controversial bill and is said to have 
convinced Greening.

Local authorities warned that while the bill’s demise meant councils would 
still have a role in school improvement and support, a planned budget cut would 
leave them with few resources to help schools.


“We also urge government to reverse plans to cut £600m from the education 
services grant awarded to councils and academies next year,” said Richard 
Watts, chair of the Local Government Association’s children and young people 
board.

“This funding is vital to help ensure that children are getting the education 
they deserve, from helping to provide speech therapy and physiotherapy, to 
carrying out checks on staff and providing music services in schools.

“It also helps to plan for the new school places that are urgently needed, 
ensuring that every child has a place at a good school near their home.”

The DfE is expected to include elements of the old bill when Greening’s Schools
 <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> that Work for Everyone 
consultation is published early next year and it is likely to set out proposals 
on extending grammar schools.

“The Schools that Work for Everyone consultation, which I announced in an oral 
statement to the house on 12 September, remains ongoing,” Greening said.

She reiterated her support for grammar schools. “This consultation asks how we 
can create more great school places in more parts of the country – including 
selective places for local areas that want them – and asks our independent 
schools, universities and faith schools to play their part in improving the 
quality of our state-funded schools.”


Grammar schools cannot help 90% of children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
However, Labour said the withdrawal of the education bill meant the government 
was having “second thoughts” about opening new grammar schools, with a 
statement by shadow education secretary Angela Rayner appearing to suggest that 
the policy was being dropped.

“This was supposed to be the new prime minister’s flagship domestic policy – 
an education bill paving the way for a new generation of grammar schools. That 
has been abandoned as a result of the huge pressure Labour has put the 
government under,” Rayner said.

Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
welcomed the dropping of the plan to convert all schools to academies. He said: 
“We welcome the demise of this legislation. It was, and remains, inappropriate 
to force good schools to convert when the evidence of any benefit is so 
dubious.”

Parts of the bill expected to survive include the proposed revamp of initial 
teacher training and an overhaul of the National College for Teaching and 
Leadership.


Last week, Greening reversed an election pledge to make children who fail 
primary school reading and maths exams resit them at secondary schools and 
offered a two-year freeze on new assessments.
 