
An Egyptian court has issued a final ruling rejecting a controversial 
government plan to transfer two uninhabited Red Sea islands toSaudi Arabia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/saudiarabia>, prompting cheers in the Cairo 
courtroom but potentially deepening tensions with the country’s erstwhile 
financial backer..

Celebrations erupted as the judge gave the verdict confirming Egyptian 
sovereignty over Tiran and Sanafir, saying the government had failed to provide 
evidence that the islands were Saudi.

 The deal to transfer the islands, announced in April, caused public uproar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/11/egypt-saudi-arabia-tiran-sanafir-red-sea-islands-transfer>
 andprotests by Egyptians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/25/cairo-protests-egypt-red-sea-islands-saudi-arabia>
, who believe Tiran and Sanafir belong to their country. It also fed into 
discontent over the country’s economic crisis.

Ali Ayoub, who helped bring the original case against the government, 
responded with jubilation to Monday’s ruling. “The ruling is final and cannot 
be subject to appeal, [even] the parliament doesn’t have the right to discuss 
this agreement, because it’s been made null and void by a court ruling” he 
said, surrounded by supporters chanting: “Egyptian, Egyptian, Egyptian.”

Tiran and Sanafir are situated in the narrow entrance to the Gulf of Aqaba 
leading to Jordan and Israel. Saudi and Egyptian officials say they belong to 
Saudi Arabia and have been under Egyptian control only because Riyadh asked 
Cairo in 1950 to protect them.

Map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/egypt-saudiislands/giv-3902nhT01KvZ5BYB/>
Timothy E Kaldas of Washington-based thinktank the Tahrir Institute for Middle 
East Policy, said the ruling demonstrated the complexity of Egypt’s 
authoritarian government. “It’s not as outsiders may imagine: an all-powerful 
leader who does as he pleases,” he said. “There are many centres of power 
within the Egyptian state that do not always see eye to eye.”

The ruling could win back some credibility for the judiciary among the 
Egyptian population, Kaldas added. Egypt’s judiciary has been criticised at 
home and abroad for a lack of independence from the government since 
Abdel-Fatah al-Sisi came to power in 2013.

The controversy over the islands has become a source of tension with Saudi 
Arabia, which has providedEgypt <https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> with 
billions of dollars of aid but recently halted fuel shipments as relations 
deteriorated.

“Saudi Egyptian relations were already strained by delays in the transfer and 
other conflicts,” Kaldas said. “This ruling will exacerbate those tensions and 
likely do long-term damage to any hopes for Egypt to regain significant 
financial support from Saudi Arabia.”

Monday’s blow to the government was also a moment of national pride for many 
of those reacting to the verdict. “Outside of government circles, you’ll be 
hard pressed to find an Egyptian upset about this ruling,” Kaldas said.

Reuters contributed to this report.
 