
An Egyptian court has upheld an earlier ruling to freeze the assets of three 
prominent rights activists, the latest chapter in a widening government 
crackdown against civil society groups.

The verdict targeted Mozn Hassan and her organisation, Nazra for Feminist 
Studies <http://nazra.org/en>, as well as Mohammed Zaraa and Atef Hafez, both 
of the Arab Organisation for Criminal Reform.

Egyptian feminist leader Mozn Hassan resolute in face of official investigation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/egyptian-feminist-leader-mozn-hassan-resolute-investigation>
The freezing of their assets and those of five other rights campaigners in 
September is part of a wider case against at least a dozen rights groups that 
started in 2011 and was revived in 2015.


The eight face allegations that they illegally obtained foreign funds 
subsequently used to destabilise Egypt. They are being investigated undercase 
173/2011 <http://www.icnl.org/research/monitor/egypt.html>, which began six 
years ago and targets local andinternational NGOs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/29/us-egyptian-forces-raid-cairo>. 
In 2013,43 NGO employees were convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/04/egypt-convicts-us-ngo-workers-sam-lahood>
 as part of the investigations.

Another prominent women’s human rights defender, Azza Soliman, the founder of 
the Centre for Egyptian Women’s Legal Assistance, received a travel ban and had 
her assets frozen in November. She was arrested in December.

The inquiry into Hassan – the founder of Nazra, which was registered as an NGO 
in 2007 – began last March and was roundly condemned by women’s rights groups, 
who called on the authorities to drop the case.

A statement published at the time by 43 organisations said: “The Egyptian 
state should be taking all measures necessary to acknowledge the important and 
pivotal work … Hassan conducts in the advancement of women’s rights, provision 
of support services for survivors of sexual violence and a feminist discourse 
that is against all forms of violence and extremism.”

Hassan is a prominent feminist in Egypt and her group campaigns against human 
rights abuses, particularly thegrowing rate of violence against women in the 
country 
<http://www.amnestyusa.org/research/reports/circles-of-hell-domestic-public-and-state-violence-against-women-in-egypt>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Finternational-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='They%20said%20they%20would%20rape%20me'%3A%20defenders%20of%20women's%20rights%20speak%20out%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Finternational-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27They%20said%20they%20would%20rape%20me%27%3A%20defenders%20of%20women%27s%20rights%20speak%20out%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Finternational-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists&media=>
‘They said they would rape me’: defenders of women’s rights speak out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/video/2016/nov/29/international-women-human-rights-defenders-day-video-activists>
In a statement 
<http://nazra.org/en/2017/01/asset-freeze-nazra-feminist-studies-and-its-founder-and-executive-director-not-end-its>
 on Wednesday, Nazra vowed to continue its work.

“Even though financial resources are an important factor for the presence and 
work of any organisation and a guarantee for its sustainability, the work of 
civil society organisations is not strictly limited to receiving funds, but the 
belief in principles and ideas related to the rights of citizens and working 
for realising them, and the attempts of these groups to positively affect their 
societies.

“In spite of the fact that the asset freeze of Nazra NGO will limit our work 
in an obvious manner, the team vows to continue what we started with all its 
energy and work tools guaranteed by the constitution and law.

“The future we dream of for women in Egypt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/egypt> is far from realised, we will 
continue to work for it, for a better life for Egyptian women, and for the 
sustainability of a strong and independent Egyptian feminist movement.”

Speaking to the Guardian in March last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/mar/31/egyptian-feminist-leader-mozn-hassan-resolute-investigation>
, Hassan said she believed her organisation was being targeted because of its 
human rights work. “We’re not this nice acceptable women’s organisation, we’re 
not a development-only [organisation],” she said. “We think the feminist 
movement is a political movement. We’ve always had a human rights perspective … 
we are not like other feminist organisations.

“If they want me, better to take me than the rest of the team.”

Arrest of leading Egyptian feminist Azza Soliman sparks anger
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/womens-rights-activist-azza-soliman-arrested-in-egypt>
Since his election in 2014, President Abdel Fatah al-Sisi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/abdel-fatah-al-sisi> has focused on reviving 
Egypt’s ailing economy, upgrading its rickety infrastructure and battling 
Islamic State militants in the Sinai Peninsula.


Sisi has defended his country’s human rights record, arguing on several 
occasions that it should not be judged by western standards and that the right 
to education, decent housing and healthcare is just as important as freedom of 
expression.

However, authorities have steadily moved to erode many of the freedoms won by 
the 2011 popular uprising that toppled the regime of long-ruling autocrat Hosni 
Mubarak. The new constitution ratified in a 2014 referendum is by far the most 
liberal and progressive Egypt has had, but clauses in that document 
guaranteeing freedoms, privacy or human rights have been largely ignored by the 
authorities.
 