
2016 is likely to be remembered as an annus horribilis for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
many 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/04/death-toll-from-nice-truck-attack-rises-to-85-after-man-dies-of-injuries>
reasons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/17/migrant-death-toll-2016-syria-united-nations>
 that it’s tempting to think everything is doomed.

But things are not always as they seem. There are silver linings. You just 
have to look hard to find them.


Death in conflict

Overall, 2016 looks set to have slightly fewer deaths through armed conflict 
than 2015, when 167,000 people died. Hardly numbers to celebrate.

But narrow the focus and pockets of progress can be found. According to the 
International Institute for Strategic Studies <https://www.iiss.org/>, the 
death toll from the war with Boko Haram in Nigeria has fallen sharply, as 
Nigerian government troops retake territory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc43f039c435988d2a3715a1174b9ec8ee2b34dbc%2F23_155_1462_877%2F1462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn't%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn%27t%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc43f039c435988d2a3715a1174b9ec8ee2b34dbc%2F23_155_1462_877%2F1462.jpg>
 Boko Haram. Photograph: AP 
“The group’s operational capacity within Nigeria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> was weakened,” notes Anastasia 
Voronkova, IISS research fellow for armed conflict. “At least 4,500 civilians 
held captive by the group were rescued in 2015 alone; another around 5,000 
people were freed by June 2016. 2016 fatalities are expected to be noticeably 
lower than the 11,000 recorded in 2015.”
Nigeria death toll 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T12:31:06/embed.html>
Death tolls are also expected to be lower from internal conflicts in the 
Philippines, Myanmar and India, according to the IISS.Mark Rice-Oxley

Emissions

Carbon is flatlining, and our planet has breathing space. After more than a 
century and a half of nearly unbroken growth, the quantity of greenhouse gases 
we pour into the atmosphere each year has stalled for the third year running. 
Burning fossil fuels and chopping down forests released about 40 gigatonnes of 
carbon dioxide last year, roughly the same amount as in the previous two years.


What is more, this plateau in emissions is taking place against a background 
of quickening economic growth, showing that increasing prosperity and lifting 
people out of poverty need not come at the expense of the climate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b67e1270c6ecebe90838314607917a428167302%2F0_275_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn't%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn%27t%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b67e1270c6ecebe90838314607917a428167302%2F0_275_4500_2700%2F4500.jpg>
 A disused mine in Pumarabule, Spain, where the struggling coal mining industry 
is on its way out. Photograph: David Ramos/Getty Images 
These are big reasons to be cheerful, and we need them. We are coming to the 
end of the hottest year ever recorded. The Arctic ice cap is 20C above its 
normal winter temperatures, a heating that scientists are calling “literally 
off the charts”, and may soon result in more rapid melting than anything yet 
seen. Donald Trump is hellbent ondestroying the Paris agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/trump-threat-paris-agreement-california-climate-change>
, boosting the coal industry anddefunding Nasa’s ground-breaking climate 
research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
 in favour of sending people into space. But at least our global warming 
emissions are abating. It has only taken 25 years to achieve.
Carbon emissions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-30T12:43:20/embed.html>
Stalling emissions should also spell better health, because coal burning in 
particular pollutes the air with lung-shredding particles and choking 
chemicals. Finished celebrating? Good. There’s work to do. Flatlining emissions 
are not enough. Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere are still at the 
highest levels since humans first walked the earth. That invisible stock of 
carbon in the air is what causes warming, so even if we stopped burning fossil 
fuels tomorrow the climate would continue to change because of the greenhouse 
gases already there.

We are not going to stop burning fossil fuels tomorrow, and emissions need to 
come down by as much as 80% to have a chance of keeping warming under control. 
That will take decades. Every molecule of carbon dioxide we release stays in 
the air for up to 100 years, all the while trapping heat on the planet’s 
surface. Every tonne of carbon emitted puts the goal of halting climate change 
just a bit further out of reach. We are not out of the rapidly dwindling woods 
yet.

For now, we still have a chance of saving the planet from runaway warming, if 
we act fast to save energy and invest in clean sources. So cheer the carbon 
slowdown and put up more windmills.Fiona Harvey, environment correspondent

Crime

While violent crime ticked up in the UK in 2016, the overall level of offences 
continued its long-term decline to the lowest level since 1981. The Office for 
National Statistics said there were an estimated 6.5m incidents in the year to 
June 2016.
crime 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-07T12:54:33/embed.html>
Various reasons are given for the long-term decline: better security against 
car and home theft, the drop in the jobless claimant count and a broader 
sociological shift towards greater civility in richer countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc11e532da1ffe144863064e216ce631a316b6e68%2F0_0_5492_3296%2F5492.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn't%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn%27t%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc11e532da1ffe144863064e216ce631a316b6e68%2F0_0_5492_3296%2F5492.jpg>
 Cybercrime. Photograph: Cultura/Rex/Shutterstock 
But police also report a rise in the number of reported rapes, while hate 
crime increased after the Brexit referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/hate-crime-horrible-spike-brexit-vote-metropolitan-police>
 in June and cybercrime poses an ever greater threat.

Connectivity

Connectivity is taken for granted in the western world, where smartphone and 
internet use rise inexorably year on year.

Now there are strong signs that this take-up is at last being mirrored in 
poorer parts of the world, with positive outcomes for growth, health and 
democratic participation.

Africa in particular is experiencing the sharpest growth anywhere of 
smartphone proliferation: by 2020 there will be more than 700m smartphone 
connections inAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> – more than 
twice the projected number in North America, according to GSMA, an association 
of phone operators. In Nigeria alone in 2016, an estimated 16 smartphones are 
sold every minute.
smartphones 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jul/2016-07-18T13:56:48/embed.html>
The mobile industry will account for 8% of GDP by 2020 – double what it will 
be in the rest of the world. And internet penetration is rising faster than 
anywhere else as costs of data and devices fall.

Population

Could 2016 go down as the year that the great global population surge finally 
showed signs of slowing?

The number of people around the world increases by about 80 million every 
year, and forecasts predict that the global population will continue to mount 
through this century, to hit about 11 billion people by 2100.

But much depends on behaviour and attitudes in parts of the world that have 
yet to experience the sudden drop in birthrates that swept across rich 
countries in the three decades after the second world war.

In January, the latest figures published by the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/datablog/2016/mar/08/contraception-and-family-planning-around-the-world-interactive>
 showed more women than ever are now using some form of contraception. Some 64% 
of women aged between 15 and 49 who are married or living with a partner are 
now using traditional or modern forms of family planning, up from 36% in 1970.

Contraception 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/nov/2016-11-28T12:16:35/embed.html>
Poorer regions of the world – particularly Asia and Africa, where access to 
contraception has been a barrier to development – have witnessed the fastest 
pace of growth. The UN predicts that Africa, a continent with the largest 
demand for contraceptives but the worst access to services, will record the 
highest rates of growth over the next 15 years.

In November, the Family Planning 2020 <http://progress.familyplanning2020.org/>
 initiative reported that the number of women using contraceptives in its 69 
target countries had leapt by 30 million in the past four years alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d28a6c9b2c7235f697d6d17b3db3562835bf3c5%2F0_377_6144_3685%2F6144.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn't%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn%27t%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d28a6c9b2c7235f697d6d17b3db3562835bf3c5%2F0_377_6144_3685%2F6144.jpg>
 A reproductive health volunteer gives a condom demonstration to a young family 
in Kasese, Uganda. Photograph: Jake Lyell/Alamy 
This is not only good news for women and their families: the increase in 
family planning could cut projections of population growth by as much as 1 
billion over the coming years. Jagdish Upadhyay, of the UN population fund, 
said if by 2030 the average family size was down by the equivalent of one 
child, then by 2030 the world population would be approximately 8 billion 
rather than 9 billion.Liz Ford

Homicide

Murder rates have been in decline in western democracies for years, but had 
persisted at stubbornly high levels in parts of central America. However, 2016 
could go down as a good year in El Salvador, for years one of the most 
murderous places in the world.

The July-September period produced a year-on-year drop in homicides of almost 
50%, according to data gathered for the Guardian by the IISS.
Death toll 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-07T12:27:11/embed.html>
“This decline can be attributed to the government’s tightened security 
policies at prisons, the creation of a new paramilitary force comprising 600 
members of the military and 400 police officers, as well as a negotiated truce 
between the leaders of the three main gangs,” said Anastasia Voronkova at the 
IISS.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c51adcc6df44361f7547d8ebff313922107b942%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn't%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eight%20charts%20that%20show%202016%20wasn%27t%20as%20bad%20as%20you%20think&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Feight-charts-that-show-2016-wasnt-as-bad-as-you-think%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c51adcc6df44361f7547d8ebff313922107b942%2F0_405_6016_3611%2F6016.jpg>
 Gang members are escorted after their arrival at the maximum security prison 
in Zacatecoluca El Salvador. Photograph: Marvin Recinos/AFP/Getty Images 
“The timing of the announcement by the gangs seemed to match the downward 
homicide trend: homicides fell by 42% in April 2016 in comparison with March 
[from 611 to 353], and have remained stable since then.”

Disease

The standout news in 2016 was that Sri Lanka had become the latest country to 
be declared malaria free.More than 30 countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/malaria-sri-lanka-china-iran-malaysia-end-for-disease>
 that are collectively home to some 2 billion people are hopeful that they 
might follow suit in the next four years.

Malaria 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/09/malaria-zip/giv-226010wFSksbLbSlN/>
The task of reducing the toll of malaria in sub-Saharan Africa, which has 90% 
of cases and 92% of deaths, is hard and needs more resources. But 2016 brought 
good news from other quarters: the World Health Organisation declared that 
measles had been eradicated from the Americas;death rates fell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/06/fall-in-ovarian-cancer-deaths-worldwide-linked-to-contraceptive-pill-use>
 in the developed world fromsome forms of cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/04/uk-cancer-death-rates-drop-10-per-cent-ten-years>
, and the number of peoplegetting Aids treatments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/21/un-calls-for-urgent-action-to-protect-young-women-from-hivaids-in-africa>
 continued to rise, from negligible levels in 2000 towards a target of 30m by 
2020.

The global assault on infectious diseases has led to ever longer lifespans: 
life expectancy is on average 10 years longer in 2016 than it was in 1980.

Poverty

The number of people living in extreme poverty has yet to be estimated for 
2016, but the long-term trend is a happy one, describing steep decline.

Numbers have more than halved since 1993, despite a growth in the world 
population of almost 1.9 billion.
Poverty 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-16T11:19:35/embed.html>
Statistically, as economies grow and middle classes expand, almost 50 million 
people escape poverty every year in net terms — a population equivalent to 
Colombia or Korea. Put even more simply, every single day over the past 25 
years, the number of people living in extreme poverty has declined by 137,000.

According to the newest figures 
<https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/bitstream/handle/10986/25078/9781464809583.pdf#page=55>
, the east Asia and Pacific region accounted for the greatest reduction in 
extreme poverty over the 23-year measuring period, based on a $1.90-per-day 
poverty line.

In just one year alone – 2012 to 2013 – the number of poor in east Asia and 
the Pacific declined by 71 million, while in south Asia the number of poor 
dropped by 37 million.


Declining poverty in extreme terms has shown significant regional 
fluctuations, however. In 2013, Sub-Saharan Africa accounted for nearly 51% of 
the global poor (389m people), but in 1990, it was east Asia and the Pacific 
that accounted for half of the global poor.


While the UN aims to eradicate extreme poverty by 2030, the World Bank report 
warns that economic growth has to be more equally distributed – in other words, 
the rich can’t keep getting richer – and says that extreme poverty trends 
depend on the economic success of Sub-Saharan Africa.

 