
In response to Dr Robin Shipp’s letter about the unfair requirements for 
charging electric cars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/how-electric-car-drivers-are-being-overcharged>
 (3 December), I’d like to point out one more: that you can’t pay cash for a 
charge. Whether you pay with a smartphone (that tracks you whenever it is 
operating), or with a proposed swipecard (that would track you whenever you use 
it), it does you wrong by tracking your movements. You can fill your car with 
gasoline anonymously, paying cash; electric cars should offer the same.

Business secretary says electric vehicles at heart of industrial strategy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/electric-vehicles-greg-clark-jaguar-land-rover>
The Nissan Leaf violates privacy in another way: it contains a cellphone data 
modem that transmits when the car runs. Aside from the data it may send 
(without asking your permission), merely informing the telephone network where 
you are violates your privacy. My friend who bought aNissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> Leaf disconnected the modem so 
his car would not track him.

The proposed London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> “tube for cars” 
raises a similar issue: if it requires users to identify themselves, it will be 
an injustice.

Due to various digital technologies, we now face far more surveillance than 
the inhabitants of the former Soviet Union. For democracy’s sake, we must 
insist that each new system be designed so as not to accumulate personal data, 
except about court-designated targets. We must fix the systems which do so; 
first step, don’t allow any new ones.
Dr Richard Stallman
President, Free Software Foundation

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 