
If only it were Elizabeth Warren on the brink of taking the White House. At a 
New Hampshire rally,tearing remorselessly into the misogyny of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/elizabeth-warren-hillary-clinton-nasty-women-donald-trump>
, Warren was a reminder of what could have been. The US presidential election 
has not, to say the least, showcased the best of the US: the country of the 
anti-slavery movement, the suffragettes, the labour movement and the civil 
rights movement. Instead, the racism and bigotry that infests significant 
swathes of the country has been distilled into human form and paraded for a 
global audience. Hillary Clinton is the only means to stop the victory of a 
candidate who could send the last remaining superpower hurtling into a 
political death spiral. But although theBernie Sanders movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/26/sanders-movement-bernie-hillary-donald-trump>
 has shifted the Democratic party to the left, let’s not pretend a Clinton 
presidency would provide an alternative to a society rigged in favour of Wall 
Street and corporate America.

Elizabeth Warren: 'nasty women' will defeat Trump on election day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/24/elizabeth-warren-hillary-clinton-nasty-women-donald-trump>
Warren, on the other hand, has been a determined champion of Main Street. She 
has passionately campaigned against Obama’s proposedTrans-Pacific Partnership 
deal <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YmLHwZkonwY>, which would grant 
corporations the ability to sue elected governments in secret courts to stop 
policies they don’t like. She is unlikely to be invited to give lucrative 
speeches to Wall Street firms: she has castigated the failure toprosecute 
bankers for the financial crisis 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/09/15/news/economy/elizabeth-warren-fbi-wall-street/>
, and has supported a campaign to “Take On Wall Street 
<https://thinkprogress.org/elizabeth-warren-calls-on-americans-to-fight-wall-street-4c4ef07f7e9f#.f4uo1g49b>
” with a raft of reforms. It took Warren’s campaigning zeal to create the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, whichprovides some protection for 
consumers 
<http://www.politicususa.com/2016/09/09/democrats-wells-fargo-fined-fraud.html> 
in the financial sector.

She’s a champion of workers’ rights, campaigning for those employed in the 
“gig” economy to getbasic employment protections 
<http://mitsloan.mit.edu/iwer/posts/good-gig-new-employment-proposals-for-contract-workers-could-make-it-better/>
 and social security. She has fought for a genuine living wage, arguing that 
the minimum wage would have risen to$22 an hour 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2013/mar/18/sen-elizabeth-warren-raise-minimum-wage-22-hour/>
 if it had increased at the same rate as productivity. She has demanded action 
to crack down oncorporate tax avoidance 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/elizabeth-warren-corporate-tax-reform_us_580bc082e4b02444efa3d387>
, passionately making the case that “there is nobody in this country whogot 
rich on his own 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/elizabeth-warren-there-is-nobody-in-this-country-who-got-rich-on-his-own/>
. Nobody.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Felizabeth-warren-trump-clinton-nasty-women-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='Nasty%20women%20vote'%3A%20Elizabeth%20Warren%20takes%20a%20swipe%20at%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Felizabeth-warren-trump-clinton-nasty-women-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27Nasty%20women%20vote%27%3A%20Elizabeth%20Warren%20takes%20a%20swipe%20at%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Felizabeth-warren-trump-clinton-nasty-women-video&media=>
‘Nasty women vote’: Elizabeth Warren takes a swipe at Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/24/elizabeth-warren-trump-clinton-nasty-women-video>
She has courageously embraced the Black Lives Matter movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/28/elizabeth-warren-speech-black-lives-matter>
, demanding reform of the police to stop the unjust killing of black Americans. 
She has co-sponsored a bill to repeal the authorisation for the Iraq war – 
which Clinton, of course,voted for 
<http://www.ibtimes.com/hillary-clinton-vs-elizabeth-warren-big-differences-despite-claims-contrary-1640810>
 – and has demanded the return of US troops from Afghanistan. And she backed 
equalmarriage for same-sex couples 
<https://thinkprogress.org/elizabeth-warren-comes-out-for-full-equality-for-lgbt-people-c6154a7425c9#.pja3006da>
 before Clinton belatedly converted to the cause.

She has embraced Black Lives Matter, demanding reform to the police to stop 
the unjust killing of black Americans

Not that Warren is perfect: her sympathy for Israel’s military offensive 
<https://theintercept.com/2014/08/28/elizabeth-warren-speaks-israelgaza-sounds-like-netanyahu/>
 in Gaza is, to say the least, a disappointment. But Warren is unapologetically 
in the tradition of courageous Americans who confront elites and stand up for 
the rights and freedoms of the average citizen. She has, naturally, been abused 
by the horror show that is Trump: because she claims Native American heritage,
he calls her “Pocahontas” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/11/donald-trump-repeatedly-elizabeth-warren-pocahontas-us-election-presidential-video>
.

Despite the earlier hopes of many American progressives, it will not be Warren 
in the White House next year. But both Warren and Sanders have risen to 
prominence for a reason. Growing numbers of Americans are disenchanted with a 
society where so much wealth exists alongside so much insecurity. Trump – 
although sadly not Trumpism – will almost certainly be defeated at the polls by 
the decent American majority next month. But President Clinton may swiftly find 
herself under pressure from an emboldened progressive movement – one with very 
little patience.
 