
The number of homes being planned on green belt land in England has increased 
to more than 360,000, according to countryside campaigners, who fear ministers 
are poised to weaken protections to meet ambitious building targets.

The assessment by the Campaign to Protect Rural England (CPRE) found that the 
number of homes planned on sites previously meant to block urban sprawl has 
risen from 81,000 in 2012 to 362,346, with the largest number slated for 
development in the north-west and east of England.


Open fields owned by Oxford colleges including Magdalene and Brasenose and 
sites close to the New Forest in Hampshire are among the green belt areas that 
could contain housing.

The threat comes as Sajid Javid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sajid-javid>, the communities secretary, 
prepares to launch a new national housing policy, expected in the coming weeks. 
He recently praised Birmingham city council for allowing housebuilding on green 
belt, but he has also described green belt as “absolutely sacrosanct”.

The most dramatic example of a threat to green belt land is around Manchester, 
where thousands of hectares have been identified by planners for about 50,000 
homes. Andy Burnham, the former shadow home secretary who is running to become 
mayor of Manchester,this week warned 
<http://www.burnhamformayor.co.uk/gmsf_response> that this development would 
“diminish quality of life in some communities and restrict people’s access to 
good air and green space”.

The Jockey Club, which owns Kempton Park racecourse in Surrey, this week asked 
the local council to zone it for 3,000 houses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/10/kempton-park-set-to-be-bulldozed-housing-jockey-club-plans>
 in a move that sparked anger from local residents and allegations of an 
“unwanted desecration of desperately needed green belt” from the council 
leader, Ian Harvey.

The number of homes granted planning permission annually in green belt rose 
fivefold from 2,258 in 2009-10 to 11,977 in 2014-15,according to the House of 
Commons library 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN00934>. The 
net loss of green belt 
<http://file:///Volumes/Downloads/Internet%20Downloads/SN00934.pdf> between 
2004 and 2014-15 amounts to 41,570 hectares (103,000 acres).

Environmentalists claim the spread desecrates Britain’s natural environment, 
but housebuilders and some planners argue the increase still means that only a 
small fraction of the country is urbanised. The release of green belt is 
essential to boosting the number of new homes, which remain short of the 
250,000 estimate of annual need.

Protection of green belt is highly sensitive for the government. Theresa May 
and Javid are among many Conservative MPs whose constituencies contain green 
belt and are under pressure to build more housing. The party made protection of 
the green belt a manifesto commitment, but has also pledged to tackle the 
housing crisis.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhomes-planned-for-green-belt-have-risen-to-360000-in-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd8a1fb45b8e46fb849c7dc1171dca6ceeaae95%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=English%20green%20belt%20set%20to%20get%20360%2C000%20new%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhomes-planned-for-green-belt-have-risen-to-360000-in-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=English%20green%20belt%20set%20to%20get%20360%2C000%20new%20homes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fhomes-planned-for-green-belt-have-risen-to-360000-in-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fccd8a1fb45b8e46fb849c7dc1171dca6ceeaae95%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Green belt land near Wigan where there are proposals to build hundreds of 
houses and a motorway link road. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the 
Guardian 
The housing minister, Gavin Barwell, has said 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-07-18/debates/16071818000022/Green-BeltLand>
 “most new building [on green belt] is inappropriate”.

“The government speaks with forked tongue on the green belt,” said Michael 
Tyce, a local CPRE activist campaigning against proposals for 17,000 homes on 
protected land around Oxford. “It says it will die in a ditch to prevent it, 
but it keeps allowing building on it.”

Ministers are able to open up the green belt for construction without 
expressly ordering it. Whitehall obliges councils to produce local plans to 
meet housing demand. If these include rezoned green belt, the secretary of 
state can decide whether or not to call it in. If he does not, then he is in 
effect granting tacit approval, but is able to say the decision was a local one.

A spokesperson for the Department for Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> and Local Government said of 
the CPRE figures: “These claims are based purely on projections in local plans, 
including those not yet adopted. This government is committed to protect the 
green belt. Only in exceptional circumstances may councils alter green belt 
boundaries, after consulting local people and submitting the revised local plan 
for examination.

“We’ve been absolutely clear that councils must prioritise development on 
brownfield land, and have announced plans to radically boost brownfield 
development and bring life back to abandoned sites.”

Housebuilders described green belt boundaries as “historic and arbitrary lines 
on a map”.

Andrew Whitaker, the planning director at the Home Builders Federation, said: 
“A strategic review of green belt policy could better ensure that this 
broad-brush policy evolves to cover the type of land many believe it was set up 
to protect, such as areas of natural beauty and gaps between settlements, while 
allowing the country to address our housing crisis in a sustainable way.”

Shaun Spiers, the chief executive of the CPRE, said: “The government faces a 
choice. It can either continue to set inflated and undeliverable targets that 
fail to increase building rates and force the release of green belt land and 
other countryside for development. Or it can set realistic targets and get the 
nation behind building the new homes we need.”

Hugh Ellis, the head of policy at the Town and Country Planning Association, 
said the government needed to move to a more strategic approach to housing by 
planning several substantial new settlements, if green belt is to be protected. 
He said that after the second world war the policies of designating green belt 
and building new towns operated together.

“What has happened is we have stopped building the new towns, but have kept 
the green belt,” he said. “It is not surprising we have a housing crisis.”

Local politicians are growing increasingly resigned to the need to allocate 
protected land for housing, with 58% of councillors who preside over green belt 
saying that their council will do so in the next five years, according to a 
survey by the Local Government Information Unit and the National Trust.

“There are concerns the new housing white paper, expected later this month, 
could make matters worse, if it sets rigid housing numbers for local plans that 
don’t take account of local factors such as green belt and areas of outstanding 
natural beauty,” said a spokesperson for the National Trust.
 