
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> in England are 
struggling to recruit headteachers, with posts in deprived areas particularly 
hard to fill and attitudes towards headship roles growing increasingly 
negative, according to a report. While there are fewer applications for 
headships across the country, leadership jobs in challenging schools in remote 
and deprived areas serving disadvantaged pupils are the most difficult to fill.

Some schools looking for new heads have to advertise repeatedly in order to 
fill the posts. High levels of stress and workload associated with school 
accountability measures are among the reasons why posts are hard to fill, while 
taking on a challenging school with a poor Ofsted rating is seen as a career 
risk.

Headteachers on the frontline: ‘You get to July and think – it’s worth it’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/headteachers-on-frontline-shortage-school-principals>
The report 
<http://www.future-leaders.org.uk/insights-blog/heads-challenges-headteacher-recruitment/>
, called Heads Up: Meeting the Challenges of Headteacher Recruitment, published 
on Tuesday by the Future Leaders Trust, says perceptions of the role of 
headteacher must change if the national shortage is to be addressed. It calls 
for a new strategy to find more recruits, urging serving headteachers to 
identify colleagues with the potential to lead schools and to encourage them to 
develop their skills.

The chief inspector of schools and former head Sir Michael Wilshaw, writing in 
the report, said it was incumbent on all leaders to plan for succession. “Heads 
must encourage their leadership teams to develop, whether through in-school 
opportunities or external programmes.”


According to a recent survey of school governors 
<http://www.nga.org.uk/News/NGA-News/NGA-comments-on-the-findings-from-the-biggest-gove.aspx>
 by the National Governors’ Association, 43% of respondents who recruited 
senior staff in 2015 said it had been difficult to find good candidates. Three 
out of 10 headteachers (28%) who took part in another survey said they planned 
to leave headship within five years.

Other research suggests that positive attitudes towards headship are 
declining. A 2015 survey of school leaders byThe Key 
<https://www.thekeysupport.com/media/filer_public/d8/35/d8357fec-59f1-4b22-8112-cae115e80343/state-of-education-report-2015.pdf>
, a national information service for school leaders, found that 86% of 
respondents believed headship was less attractive than it was five years ago.


According to analysis in 2013 <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-22554938> 
by Education Data Surveys, more than one in four primary schools advertising 
for a new head failed to recruit in two months and had to re-advertise – an 
11-point increase compared with the same period in 2012.

Peter Hyman, executive head of School 21 in east London and a former adviser 
to Tony Blair, has recently filled a vacancy for head of primary at his school 
for 4-18-year-olds, but only after several rounds of advertising, interviews 
and the use of a headhunter. “It was hard to find the right person,” said 
Hyman. “A lot of colleagues are finding that. You hear people saying they’ve 
only had two applications for a headship post.

“Increasingly, the step up from deputy to head is one some people don’t want 
to make. The pressures are well known. The exam system is such a constraining 
pressure ... then there’s the spectre of Ofsted.


“But I also think it’s one of the most exciting times for headship because of 
the variety of schools. You can set up your own school; there are chains of 
schools doing very exciting things. This is a golden age for seizing the 
opportunity to shape what is going on in the class room.”

Prof John Howson, an expert in school recruitment who has been tracking the 
turnover in headteachers since the 1980s, said: “Rarely since then has there 
been as much concern over finding the next generation of school leaders as 
there is now. Leading a school will only become an attractive career option 
again once it is accepted that leaders themselves need support and recognition 
for their work.”

The Future Leaders Trust is a leadership development programme aimed at 
recruiting talented headteachers to challenging primary and secondary schools 
to improve outcomes for disadvantaged pupils. Heath Monk, the trust’s chief 
executive, said: “Fewer people are applying to become heads and that means even 
fewer people are applying to lead schools that serve our most disadvantaged 
students.

Ofsted’s veil threats won’t help schools | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/27/ofsted-veil-threats-wont-help-schools>
“Without effective and inspiring leadership these children are losing out on 
the education they need. The talent is out there but many people need 
encouragement to understand they can step up. The solution is for existing 
heads to spot potential leaders in their schools and inspire them about 
headship.”

The report attempts to redress the negative perceptions of the role with 
stories from serving headteachers that describe what they love about the job. 
One of those quoted is Rimah Aasim, headteacher of Worth Valley primary school, 
Bradford.

She said: “I’ve wanted to become a headteacher since the age of six. Before 
taking up my post quite a few people told me that headship can be a lonely 
place. This worried me a little but I decided to carry on because headship had 
always been my ultimate goal.

“Being a headteacher is the best job in the world for me. It is a huge but 
rewarding role. Working in challenging schools in disadvantaged areas is tough 
but all children deserve an education no matter where they come from, and it is 
our duty to provide it.”

A spokeman for the Department of Education said: “High-quality school leaders 
are essential in delivering our vision of educational excellence everywhere. We 
are making good progress towards this goal, with Ofsted rating 85% of schools 
as good or outstanding for leadership and management, as well as a headteacher 
vacancy rate of just 0.2%, but we are not complacent.


“Our Talented Leaders initiative is placing outstanding headteachers into 
struggling schools, and the NationalTeaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> Service will place 1,500 
teachers and middle leaders in underperforming schools by 2020.”
 