
One of the tragedies of Theresa May’s government is that they are all so 
humourless, the only joke they can think of isBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>. They are helped by being opposed 
by Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour, who have literally never told a joke, and are 
nervously suspicious of anyone who has. The Corbynistas mistake humourlessness 
for seriousness, and are consequently the biggest joke in town. If you wanted 
a rule by which to live your life, you could do a lot worse than “never 
trust the humourless”. At best they are weak or devoid of imagination, at worst 
they are in the grip of a very dangerous vanity indeed.

This time it’s Saudi Arabia: even when Boris Johnson gets it right, he’s wrong 
| Simon Tisdall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/saudi-arabia-boris-johnson-yemen-arms-sales-riyadh>
But enough of the grateful fourth-place finishers in the Sleaford byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/sleaford-byelection-caroline-johnson-holds-seat-for-conservatives>
. As Labour said itself – without humour, obviously – “Some people said we were 
going to come fifth.” Our business today is with the Tories and their Punchline 
of State, who seems to have made another diplomatic bish. I know, I know – what 
are the chances? Either way, the chap Theresa May keeps reminding us is a total 
joke has caused Downing Street to have a sense of humour failure bypointing out 
that Saudi Arabia wages “proxy wars” in the Middle East 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/boris-johnson-accuses-saudi-arabia-of-twisting-and-abusing-islam>
. With this, Boris Johnson appears to have overstepped the limits of his role 
as prime ministerial straight man.

It isn’t the greatest loss to the gaiety of the nation, truth be told. Someone 
once described theLighthouse Family <https://twitter.com/lighthousefamly>’s 
output as soul music for people who don’t like soul music, and May’s Boris 
punchlines are comedy for people who don’t like comedy. For anyone else, 
listening to the guffaws at Tory conference feels like being a teenager at some 
dire event your parents have dragged you to, and having to smile through 
gritted teeth while screaming silently inside your own head.

“When we came to Birmingham this week, some big questions were hanging in the 
air,”said the prime minister this year 
<http://www.itv.com/news/update/2016-10-05/theresa-may-pokes-fun-at-boris-johnson-at-conference/>
, signposting her impending joke for the hard-of-humouring. “Do we have a plan 
for Brexit? We do. Are we ready for the effort it will take to see it through? 
We are. Can Boris Johnson stay on message for a full four days? Just about.” 
That one went over like a sublimeChris Rock <http://www.chrisrock.com/videos> 
riff. Brought the ruddy house down.

Well, to butcher the great Bob Monkhouse line, they’re not laughing now 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/dec/29/arts.artsnews1>. Boris has insulted 
the Saudis, of all victimless crimes. In a cute instance of comic timing, the 
Jeremy Clarkson of the Foreign Office is on his way to Riyadh this very 
weekend, presumably in a big red bus bearing the slogan: “We sell £3.3bn of 
weapons a year to you. Let’s be grown-ups about a proxy war dig between 
friends.”

For its part, No 10 seems so cross about the foreign secretary’s hugely 
off-colour statement of fact that people are speculating Johnson can’t be long 
in post. After all, it wasn’t so long ago that the prime minister delivered the 
most artless version yet of her one joke, at the Spectator parliamentarian of 
the year awards. On stage earlier that evening, Johnson had compared the fate 
of his leadership bid to that of the dog Michael Heseltine had recently 
announced he had strangled (and yes, just typing that reminds me what a 
boggling year it’s been). Taking the stage later, May picked up the feed line,
and explained in front of the audience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/theresa-may-put-downs-some-muttering-darkly-anti-boris-johnson-plot>
: “Boris, the dog was put down when its master decided it wasn’t needed any 
more …”

Oof. All right, all right – WE GET IT. Hearing her deliver that one put me in 
mind ofArthur Atkinson 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/comedy/fastshow/characters/arthur_atkinson.shtml>, the 
malevolent music hall comedian from The Fast Show. Arthur had a hapless 
sidekick, Chester Drawers, who he’d humiliate roundly in front of an audience, 
then come off stage and double down on by hissing something like: “I’ve seen a 
monkey take a pie better than that!”

Will May’s government soon be forced to undergo an emergency Borisectomy? Many 
seem to be working covertly to this end. “The most important thing is to be 
able to laugh at yourself,” Jeffrey Archer once told Dame Edna Everage. “You’d 
have to do that,” she smiled without missing a beat, “otherwise you’d be 
missing the joke of the century.”

No one has to even read between the lines to see that there are more than the 
beginnings of a campaign to make Boris himself look as though he doesn’t get 
the biggest joke of all – himself.

Earlier this week, a story appeared in the Times revealing that Boris and 
Theresa had held a discussion about whether he should continue “to bear the 
brunt of ministers’ jokes”. According to friends of Boris: “Mr Johnson is 
thought to believe that the jokes hinder effective government and undermine his 
work, although he appreciates that he has spent a career making light of 
himself and others and was not complaining.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-boris-johnson-double-act-cabaret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bd765b41e5b80a688a5d53488e57d71fabf790%2F0_23_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Enjoy%20it%20while%20you%20can%3A%20the%20May-Johnson%20double%20act%20may%20not%20last%20long%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-boris-johnson-double-act-cabaret%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Enjoy%20it%20while%20you%20can%3A%20the%20May-Johnson%20double%20act%20may%20not%20last%20long%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-boris-johnson-double-act-cabaret%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1bd765b41e5b80a688a5d53488e57d71fabf790%2F0_23_4080_2448%2F4080.jpg>
 ‘People are trying to trivialise Boris Johnson,’ says one friend. Photograph: 
Barcroft Media 
Mmm. I think we both know that whatever was being suggested, it certainly 
wasn’t that Boris “was not complaining”. Then I read another “friend” saying: 
“People are trying to trivialise him”, which appeared nothing less than a dare 
to wheel out thezipwire photo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2012/aug/01/boris-johnson-stuck-zip-wire-video>
 again. I do love Boris’s “friends”, whose undermining is so toxic we could 
probably sell it to the Saudis.

As for Boris himself, can he really be as thin-skinned as they make out? It 
certainly wouldn’t be without precedent for the personality type. It was never 
much of a surprise that Boris was linked with the vacant Top Gear job within 
hours of his Tory leadership bid crashing. Rather like Jeremy Clarkson, Boris 
has always seemed more sensitive to taking banter than his love of dishing it 
out would imply. He is certainly now adopting the Clarksonian position over the 
Saudi business, with his more genuine friends briefing that he certainly 
wouldn’t be apologising, because his comments were an accurate reflection of 
what he had long been saying in private.

So on it goes for now. What a classic double act Mrs May and Mr Johnson do 
make. Little and At Large. Diplomatic and Incident. Quite how long they can 
stay together is unclear, but the prospect of the PM losing her only joke feels 
somehow even more excruciating than her continuing to make it – and to no one 
more than May herself. Her own shortcomings are likely to be increasingly 
exposed. Rather like Arthur Atkinson, then, she surely needs her Chester 
Drawers.
 