
Once a year the government faces the ritual embarrassment of its own Social 
Mobility Commission’s “state of the nation” report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2016> – and 
yesterday’s was morethoroughly excoriating than ever before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/16/uks-social-mobility-problem-holding-back-thatcher-generation-says-report>
. Progress is in reverse, with dire warnings for the future.

Those born in the 1980s, Thatcher’s children, are now worse off than their 
parents, breaking the expectation that has been the norm for many generations 
that things will always get better, standards of living for most will always 
rise.

That’s the direct result of the great 1980s shock. In the late 1970s Britain 
reached its most equal state ever in income and wealth after decades of steady 
social progress and progressive taxation. But the Thatcher revolution of the 
1980s cut top taxes, curbed trade union power, saw pay slide back and took the 
lid off exploding top earnings. The country has never recovered. Labour rescued 
a million pensioners and a million children from povertythrough tax credits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/10/tax-credits-osborne-poverty-working-parents-children>
 and prevented inequality from rising, but the crippling damage had been done.

The concept of “social mobility” is almost irrelevant, but it’s used as 
convenient political cover to avoid talking about inequality. All politicians 
are happy to promote “equal opportunities” for every child, but shy away from 
inequality itself, though you can’t have one without the other. The most 
socially mobile societies are those that are most equal – think Scandinavia. In 
countries as unequal as ours, few ever climb up the vertiginously long, steep 
ladder from bottom to middle let alone to the top, and parents will move heaven 
and earth to stop their children taking such a precipitous fall by plunging 
down.

UK's social mobility problem holding back Thatcher generation, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/16/uks-social-mobility-problem-holding-back-thatcher-generation-says-report>
In countries where the ladder is short and the fall not terrifying, children 
travel both up and down with more ease. “Britain has a deep social mobility 
problem which is getting worse for an entire generation of young people,” says 
the social mobility report, signalling what is only a symptom: inequality 
itself is the problem.

The whirlwind of the 1980s has been reaped. Brexit and Trump are partly the 
result of excluding too many people from secure good jobs and a good education. 
Of course, that’s not the whole story as racism, nationalism and nativism can 
be wickedly stirred by demagogues at any time: it took plenty of the 
comfortable classes voting against foreigners to win those victories. Tory, not 
Labour, voters; thepropertied old 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/07/north-poor-brexit-myths>
, not the penniless young, swung the Brexit vote. Nonetheless, the left-behind 
places voted overwhelmingly to leave, inBarnsley by 70% 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_u2cfK5-_NM>. This report shows how even when 
schools do well in left-behind areas, the young who get qualifications leave 
the area due to a lack of good jobs – a perpetual drain on local talent.

We shall see in next week’s autumn statement if Theresa May and Philip Hammond 
begin to understand what helping “the many not the privileged few” would 
entail. Will herJams 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/16/philip-hammond-prepares-to-pump-up-the-jams-with-a-fuel-duty-fre/>
 – those that are just about managing – really gain? As Labour found, it takes 
monumental political will and bravery to shift privilege and cash from the 
haves to have-nots to make a even small dent.

May’s understanding of what creates genuine opportunity looks weak: the report 
is pitiless in exposing how grammar schools worsen working-class children’s 
chances. School segregation remains an article of faith beyond reach of fact or 
reason for many in her party who feel the idea of social mobility is their 
badge of egalitarianism: so long as some can rise, it doesn’t matter how wide 
the gap for most. I heard one MP at a Tory conference meeting talk warmly of 
“picking diamonds from the rough” – and that’s exactly what’s wrong with the 
“social mobility” concept. How fairly we all live matters more than exactly who 
gets the golden ticket. Oxbridge will have a fair share of entrants across the 
classes when there is more fairness between the classes.

Only one in eight low-income children will become a high earner. Low-paid work 
is permanent, not a stepping stone, especially for women, as only one in 10 
ever escape it. Early years provision is of the worst quality in areas where 
children most need a preschool boost. A child in a poor areais 27 times more 
likely to attend an “inadequate” school” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/state-of-the-nation-report-on-social-mobility-in-great-britain>
 – and on and on it goes.Read the report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/569410/Social_Mobility_Commission_2016_REPORT_WEB__1__.pdf>
 for a portrait of the widening “them and us”.

The Financial Times today reveals dismal forecasts for the years to 2020 that 
the Treasury will receive from theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.ft.com/content/acb33786-ac16-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122>, predicting a 
frightening £100bn loss in Treasury revenues as a result of Brexit. These 
months are just a little hiatus of growth and jobs before the effects of high 
import costs hit home next year: by the middle of next year inflation will well 
exceed pay growth, with investment stalled so Treasury tax receipts will be 
severely depleted. That makes the leeway for radical inequality-beating 
measures tougher and the decisions they make more crucial.

Frankly, there is no need for more information, for more social research. For 
three decades the same warnings have rung out in one report after another, from 
Rowntree, the IFS, the Resolution Foundation, the LSE, scores of serious 
charities and academics trying in every way they can to alert the public to the 
misshapen warps in the way we live now, for the middle as well as the poor. The 
solutions are there, but they require a massive willingness to redirect money 
away from its great misuse on property wealth, towards people and a productive 
future.

There is only one important question and no one has an answer: how can enough 
voters be persuaded to will the necessary shift, to convince the older/richer 
voters to make some sacrifice? In the post-Brexit vote and Trump despair, with 
the nation’s self-image grossly distorted by an increasingly malevolent 
antisocial press, I read the sometimes poisonous comments that follow any 
Guardian article on inequality, and I don’t know the answer. I have spent most 
of my journalistic life writing about it, including books chronicling the 
widening divide between the rich and the low paid, observing the social chasm 
and its miserable effects on everyone, but right now the answer to the only 
important question looks further away than ever.
 