
When ER Braithwaite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/jul/23/featuresreviews.guardianreview20>
, who has died aged 104, found doors closed to him in Britain because of his 
colour, he reacted by writing a novel, To Sir, With Love (1959), which became 
an international bestseller and was made into a film starring Sidney Poitier. 
Though he went on to write five other novels, often dealing with black-white 
relations, none had the impact of his first.

It was autobiographical in that it depicted a teacher called Ricky Braithwaite 
(the character was renamed Mark Thackeray in the film), who, like the author, a 
wartime RAF pilot and physics PhD, possessed substantial qualifications. He 
also took the tough teaching and discipline methods that he had been subjected 
to in his native British Guiana (now Guyana) to Stepney, in the East End of
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

Braithwaite was the product of the colony’s best school – Queen’s college 
<http://qcguyanaalumny.org/> – which even as late as the 1970s retained the air 
of an Edwardian public school. The Braithwaite of the novel insists on treating 
his semi-literate white working-class students with respect and calls on them 
to do the same to him and each other. They are not receptive to such an 
approach and regard him with contempt, not least due to his colour, as do some 
of his colleagues in the staff room.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXaEf4ktpPA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXaEf4ktpPA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DnXaEf4ktpPA&media=>
 To Sir, With Love, 1967, starring Sidney Poitier as Mark Thackeray (in the 
book the teacher is called Ricky Braithwaite) 
The teacher turns the situation round through thrashing one of the students in 
a boxing match, then declining to make him grovel, through encouraging 
discussion and organising a museum visit, and by challenging the students’ 
reluctance to deliver a condolence wreath when the mother of one of them dies, 
because her husband is black. However, at the point where he is ready to 
despair of them, the entire class attends the funeral, and love and respect are 
seen to prevail over discrimination. Braithwaite helps his students become more 
articulate and they soften his patrician manner.

While writing the book, Braithwaite became a London county council social 
worker (1958-60), finding foster homes for non-white children. His experiences 
there provided the basis for his second novel, Paid Servant (1962).

The real impact of To Sir came when it was made into a feature film in 1967, 
with a title song sung by a young Lulu, who also appeared as one of the 
students. The white colleague with whom Thackeray falls in love was played by 
Suzy Kendall, and the screenwriter and director,James Clavell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/obituary-james-clavell-1447652.html>, 
transposed the setting to the swinging 60s. Though Braithwaite found this 
version rather sentimental – he said, “the movie made it look like fun and 
games” – the story’s popularity persisted for the rest of his life, making his 
name as a literary figure.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fer-braithwaite-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86c855b56f8671c366887b5b09a51bba647f92e6%2F0_225_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=ER%20Braithwaite%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fer-braithwaite-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=ER%20Braithwaite%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fer-braithwaite-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86c855b56f8671c366887b5b09a51bba647f92e6%2F0_225_3072_1844%2F3072.jpg>
 Sidney Poitier and Judy Geeson in To Sir, With Love. Photograph: Moviestore 
Collection/Rex 
A television film version followed in 1974, with a US high school teacher on 
an exchange to London, and in 1996 Poitier starred in To Sir, With Love II, a 
television sequel to the original film, in which Thackeray retires from his 
London post only to take one up at an inner-city school in Chicago. In 2007, 
Kwame Kwei-Armah starred ina dramatisation for BBC Radio 4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00dztrb>.

As Braithwaite admitted that year when accepting a lifetime achievement award 
from theGuyana Cultural Association <http://www.guyanaculturalassociation.org/> 
in New York: “I feel fortunate that this piece of work I did 50 years ago is 
still well and alive. I have some assurance that this little book will outlive 
me and the interest of others for years to come.”

Edward Ricardo Braithwaite was born in Georgetown, the capital of British 
Guiana. His mother and father were graduates of Oxford University, in history 
and engineering respectively, and the latter was a gold and diamond miner. The 
then emerging black middle class in British Guiana were very literary: homes 
had libraries and Shakespeare was widely read and widely quoted. The empire was 
firmly embedded in the intellect of its subjects.

In 1940 Braithwaite, went to study at the City College of New York, and then 
to the UK, where he joined theRoyal Air Force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/royal-air-force> as a pilot – one of the very 
few non-white airmen, though in the RAF he did not feel discriminated against. 
After the second world war he gained a bachelor’s degree and a doctorate in 
physics from Cambridge University. Job applications proved fruitless until he 
landed a post at St George-in-the-East secondary school, Stepney (1950-57).

Like many other educated middle-class Guyanese, Braithwaite found solace in 
the proper use of the language of his youth: “I write because I enjoy putting 
words together, and composing them in such a way that readers feel the 
excitement I feel.”

Disillusioned with Britain, Braithwaite left for Paris, working as a human 
rights officer for theWorld Veterans Federation 
<http://www.wvf-fmac.org/index.php> (1960-63) and then as an education 
consultant to Unesco (1963-66). Guyana achieved independence, and the prime 
minister, Forbes Burnham, appointed Braithwaite as the country’s permanent 
representative to the United Nations (1966-68), and then ambassador to 
Venezuela (1968-70). This was a much more fraught position, since the two 
countries had historically had a fractious relationship, with Venezuela 
claiming much of Guyana’s territory. Braithwaite managed to put affairs on a 
more even keel and helped to negotiate a temporary settlement between the 
neighbours, which still holds.

From the diplomatic service, Braithwaite moved to academia, with writer- 
in-residence appointments atNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> University, Florida State 
University and Howard University, Washington. In 1973 the South African 
government lifted a ban on his books. The visa status he was given for a visit 
there – more privileged than for indigenous black people, but less privileged 
than for white people – provided the title for his account of the experience, 
Honorary White (1976).

Having settled in Washington, he marked his centenary in 2012 by returning to 
Guyana <https://www.theguardian.com/world/guyana> to receive the country’s 
highest honour, the Cacique’s Crown, and the following year toured Europe to 
give lectures for the US state department.

He is survived by his companion, Ginette Ast.

• Edward Ricardo Braithwaite, writer, teacher and diplomat, born 27 June 1912; 
died 12 December 2016
 