
Increasing interest in animal welfare means there are a range of options for 
where your ham comes from thisChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>. What should you look for 
if you want to tuck into a ham from an ethically raised pig?

You’ll find hams from four main production systems on supermarket shelves this 
year: conventional, sow stall-free, free range and “outdoor bred, raised indoor 
on straw”. But what do these labels mean?

Conventional hams

Conventional hams come from pigs farmed in intensive systems, where sows 
(mother pigs) and piglets (the pigs that your Christmas ham comes from) are 
housed indoors.

Piglets are weaned when they are about three or four weeks old. They are then 
housed in group pens on slatted or concrete floors (sometimes with straw or 
litter) until they are turned into ham and other pork productsat about four 
months 
<http://www.agriculture.gov.au/SiteCollectionDocuments/animal-plant/animal-health/livestock-movement/pig-movement-ead.pdf>
.

Some of the main animal welfare issues 
<http://kb.rspca.org.au/What-are-the-animal-welfare-issues-associated-with-pig-farming_109.html>
 in intensive pig farming relate to the confinement of mother pigs. During 
their pregnancy, they are housed in “sow stalls 
<https://theconversation.com/it-will-take-a-ban-on-caging-pigs-to-clean-up-the-pork-industry-44701>
” which are about the length and width of a fully grown sow and allow little 
movement.

Pigs are intelligent and social animals 
<https://escholarship.org/uc/item/8sx4s79c>, and this confinement can cause 
stress and injury 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0168159106001754>. There is 
evidence thatother types of pig housing 
<http://www.prairieswine.com/pdf/27968.pdf> can also lead to stress and injury.

Before giving birth, sows are moved to a farrowing crate, where they remain 
until their piglets are weaned. Farrowing crates are designed to prevent mother 
pigs crushing the piglets. The mother pig has just enough room to lie down, 
meaning that her movement is severely restricted.

Sow stall-free

About 75% of pig production in Australia is now “sow stall-free” 
<https://cloud.3dissue.com/74027/74377/102152/ARnew/index.html?r=91>, after the 
pork industry introduced a voluntary phase-out of sow stalls.Coles 
<https://www.coles.com.au/corporate-responsibility/responsible-sourcing/responsible-sourcing>
 brand pork products are sow stall-free, andWoolworths 
<http://www.woolworthsgroup.com.au/page/community-and-responsibility/group-responsibility/responsibile-sourcing/Animal_Welfare/>
 has committed to using stalls for less than 10% of the sow’s pregnancy (about 
115 days).

In some countries, including New Zealand 
<http://www.scoop.co.nz/stories/PO1512/S00038/ground-breaking-animal-law-change-comes-into-effect.htm>
, sow stalls have been totally or partially banned by law. They are also banned 
in theACT 
<http://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/FlagPost/2014/February/ACT_bans_battery_cages_and_sow_stalls>
.

Confusingly, “sow stall-free” doesn’t mean that sows are free of all systems 
of confinement. Sows can spend up to five days in “mating stalls 
<http://australianpork.com.au/industry-focus/animal-welfare/housing/>” after 
they have been mated (for Coles’ own brand products, it’sless than 24 hours 
<http://www.apiq.com.au/images/stories/Manuals/October2015/apiq_standards_manual_version_4.1_10_2015_final.pdf>
). Sows are still housed in farrowing crates until their piglets are weaned.

Are vegetarianism about not harming animals, or feeling morally superior? | 
Leslie Cannold for the Ethics Centre
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/02/isvegetarianism-and-veganism-about-not-harming-animals-or-feeling-morally-superior>
Free range

There are some free-range Christmas hams in the major supermarkets this year. 
However, just5% of the Australian pig herd is free range 
<http://www.aussiepigfarmers.com.au/types-of-farming/free-range/>.

In free-range systems, such as the RSPCA-approved outdoor system 
<https://www.rspca.org.au/sites/default/files/website/what-we-do/working-with-farming-industry/RSPCAPigsStandards.pdf>
 andAustralian pork certified free range 
<http://www.apiq.com.au/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=64&Itemid=86>
, both sows and piglets live outside in paddocks. They have access to shelters, 
wallows and shade.

Sows in these free-range systems aren’t confined in sow stalls or farrowing 
crates, and can behave naturally.

Most large-scale free-range pig production takes place in the south of Western 
Australia <http://www.abc.net.au/landline/content/2015/s4311406.htm>, which has 
ideal soil, water and climate. Free-range pig farming is challenging in many 
parts of Australia, because of thehot climate 
<http://australianpork.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/NGforOP_2013_22_lowres.pdf>
.

Pig farming can also have environmental impacts. These include soil and water 
degradation fromnutrient overload in manure 
<http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/themes/en/pigs/Environment.html>.

You can buy free-range hams from farmers’ markets, specialist butchers and 
small-scale pig producers. When you buy at a farmers’ market, ask about how the 
pigs are raised and whether they are free range.

Outdoor bred

There are a few hams around labelled “outdoor bred, raised indoors on straw”. 
These were labelled “bred free range” until theACCC took action 
<https://www.accc.gov.au/media-release/accc-concludes-review-of-free-range-and-other-similar-claims-in-the-pork-industry-0>
 against some producers for misleading and deceptive conduct.

Hams with this label come from production systems where the sows live outside. 
They live under free-range conditions and are not confined to sow stalls or 
farrowing crates.

Piglets are born outside, but are moved inside after weaning and raised in 
group pens on straw or other litter 
<http://www.aussiepigfarmers.com.au/types-of-farming/barn-reared-eco-housing/> 
before being butchered for products including Christmas hams.

So what ham should I buy?

You can vote for better animal welfare by buying the most ethical ham you can 
afford, whether that’s a sow stall-free one from one of the major supermarkets 
or a free-range one from a small-scale producer at a farmers’ market.

Supermarkets are setting higher animal welfare standards for their own-brand 
pork after increasing customer interest. These higher standards have the 
potential to influence newAustralian animal welfare standards and guidelines 
<http://www.animalwelfarestandards.net.au/> for pigs, which are likely to be 
developed in the next few years.

Up to two-thirds of processed pork (including ham and bacon) is imported as 
boneless frozen pork 
<http://australianpork.com.au/wp-content/uploads/2013/09/1113329_AustralianPork_Final-Cover_1-2_AustralianPork_Inner_1-2_Page-PDF-LoRes.pdf>
. If you want to buy an Australian ham, look for ham on the bone, a label such 
as “Made from 100% Australian pork”, or the square pink“Australian Pork” label 
<http://www.pork.com.au/home-page-consumer/buying-australian/buying-australian.aspx>
.

If you’re looking for an ethical ham that also scores on taste, check out the 
Good Food Christmas ham taste test 
<http://www.goodfood.com.au/good-living/entertaining/australias-best-ham-good-food-christmas-ham-taste-test-2016-20161117-gsrbln>
. Seven of the top 10 hams were from free-range pigs.

• Rachel Carey is a research fellow, Christine Parker is a professor of law, 
and Gyorgy Scrinis is a lecturer in food politics and policy at the University 
of Melbourne.This article was originally published on the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/how-to-pick-an-ethically-raised-ham-this-christmas-69640>
, part of theGuardian Comment Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/guardian-comment-network>
 