
The head of the Belgian region of Wallonia is still refusing to sign off on a 
EU-Canada trade accord and asked that a visit by the Canadian prime minister,
Justin Trudeau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/justin-trudeau>, be delayed.

EU struggles to keep Canada trade deal on track
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/eu-struggles-to-keep-canada-trade-deal-on-track>
Paul Magnette, the head of government of Wallonia, spoke a day after he 
received an ultimatum of Friday to allow Belgium’s federal government to 
endorse the huge trade deal, known as Ceta.

“We cannot sign by Friday. That is not reasonable,” a combative Magnette told 
RTBF radio after EU ministers asked he reverse course in time for a discussion 
on trade by European leaders set for Friday.

“I think that it is reasonable to delay indefinitely the meeting [with Trudeau 
set for 27 October] because it’s better to avoid what would seem like a 
confrontation,” Magnette added.

“It’s not because the Canadians are our friends that we must accept 
everything,” said Magnette.

But in a sign that a breakthrough might be in the making, a spokesman for 
Magnette said the Canadian trade minister, Chrystia Freeland, met the regional 
leader in the Walloon capital of Namur on Wednesday.

Magnette was then set to meet the EU trade commissioner, Cecilia Malmström, 
and Belgium’s pro-Ceta foreign minister, Didier Reynders, in Brussels later in 
the day.

Magnette warned the commission, which handles EU trade talks, that his demands 
could only be met by reopening negotiations withCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> that were formally concluded two 
years ago.

“The treaty is already unravelling,” Magnette said, citing concessions agreed 
with Germany, which was allowed on Tuesday to kill the deal if the German 
constitutional court should later decide against it.

While Magnette cited progress in his talks with the EU, he said differences 
remained too wide on a contested investor protection system that has become a 
hot-button issue for the anti-Ceta movement.

A senior EU diplomat told AFP that the signature with Trudeau would need to be 
confirmed by Monday.

“Wallonia’s deadline is Monday morning, otherwise Trudeau will not come,” the 
source said.

Canada's trade deal with EU a model for Brexit? Not quite, insiders say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brexit-canada-trade-deal-eu-model-next-steps>
The EU fears that the delay of Ceta would be fatal to the deal and send a bad 
signal to the world that it isdifficult to reach trade accords with Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/15/brexit-canada-trade-deal-eu-model-next-steps>
.

“I still believe that we can find a way forward and we can get it through,” 
said the European commission vice-president Jyrki Katainen at a news briefing.

Magnette has drawn big support from opponents to Ceta, including Greenpeace 
and Foodwatch, that see the Canada deal as a Trojan horse for a far more 
ambitious trade accord between the EU and US, known as TTIP.

Both deals threaten environmental and consumer protection and offer big 
benefits to multinationals, the groups say.
 