
British fishing fleets will be allowed to catch greater quantities of cod, 
haddock and sole next year, after Europe’s ministers approved a new fishing 
quota that will cheer fish and chip shops but has alarmed scientists concerned 
over dwindling stocks.

The European Union’s fisheries council 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/council-eu/configurations/agrifish/> reached 
anagreement <http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/> in the 
early hours of Wednesday morning, in what may be one of the last such quota 
divisions in which the UK takes part if supporters of a hard Brexit have their 
way.

Scientists warned that the EU catch limits for 2017 were above their 
recommendations, in contravention of the reforms to the common fisheries policy 
that are supposed to ensure levels of catch are sustainable by 2020. Nearly 
two-thirds of European fish stocks are overfished and 85% are below healthy 
levels.

UK fishing fleets will be allowed to catch 16.5% more cod in the North Sea, 
along with 17% more whiting, 20% more anglerfish and more than half as much 
saithe – pollock – as before. In the Irish Sea, they will be allowed to take a 
quarter more haddock and 8.6% more langoustines, while the Western Channel will 
yield an additional 7% on haddock and a fifth more sole.

George Eustice, the strongly pro-Brexit fisheries minister, lobbied forcefully 
against cuts to quotas that were proposed by the European commission on 
scientific grounds.

He said: “To deliver a profitable fishing industry, we must fish sustainably 
now and in the future. This year we were able to agree further increases on 
some valuable species. There have been challenges, especially on stocks like 
bass and cod in the south-west, where action to curtail catches have been 
necessary.”

Sea bass fleets have had their catch reduced by 80%, and fishers of cod in the 
Celtic Sea have also seen a drastic reduction in their allowed take.

Eustice said the resolution struck “the right balance that delivers both for 
our marine environment and coastal communities”.

He also looked forward to a post-Brexit future for UK fisheries, saying: “As 
we prepare to leave the EU we have an opportunity to build on progress made and 
improve the management of fish stocks in our waters, but we will continue to 
follow the principles of fishing sustainably and ending the wasteful practice 
of discarding fish.”

Fishing became a flashpoint in the political campaigns before the EU 
referendum, with a flotilla sailing up the Thames in support of Brexit sparking 
aheated confrontation between Nigel Farage and Bob Geldof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/15/nigel-farage-bob-geldof-rival-eu-referendum-thames-flotillas>
. Supporters of Brexit said it would give the UK’s fishing fleets greater 
rights over the potential catch, but politicians in favour of remaining argued 
that theUK would still have to enter tough negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/british-fishermen-warned-brexit-will-not-mean-greater-catches>
 over its catch because all of its major fishing grounds are shared with other 
countries.

Lasse Gustavsson, the European executive director of Oceana, accused ministers 
who agreed the new quota of ignoring science in favour of short-term interests. 
He said: “The consequences of today’s irrational decision will live longer than 
the ministers’ political mandates. Half of Atlantic stocks are already 
overfished and overfishing will now continue into 2017. It is difficult to 
understand why ministers fail to see the great opportunity of fish recovery for 
EU fishermen and citizens alike. Rebuilding stocks will create more jobs in the 
fishing industry and provide more healthy food for European tables. Why is that 
not a political priority?”

The European commission said the agreement brought 44 fish stocks in the EU to 
sustainable levels. Karmenu Vella, the environment commissioner, said: “We have 
taken another important step towards sustainable fisheries, a core objective of 
the EU common fisheries policy. I am proud to say our push for healthy fish 
stocks is starting to pay off.”
 