
5.07pm GMT 17:07  <> 

Afternoon summary

 * EU leaders are planning a meeting in December to discuss Brexit without the 
British prime minister, the Guardian has learnt.(See 5.03pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92#block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
 * The UK’s global diplomatic and security influence is at risk if it cuts 
itself off from the single market and continues to denigrate foreigners, one of 
Britain’s most senior civil servants has warned. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/08/uk-risks-losing-global-influence-quits-single-market-senior-civil-servant>
 AsPatrick Wintour reports, Sir Simon Fraser, who was permanent under-secretary 
at the Foreign Office until last year, said Britain’s position near or at the 
top diplomatic table was at stake after the vote to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. He said: “There is already evidence of 
potential self-harm in our behaviour to foreign people, the reported spike in 
hate crime, the insensitive comments of some British politicians, and the 
shocking press coverage of the legal judgment on article 50. I hope our 
political leaders will show more skill and wisdom in the next chapter of our 
European relationships than over the last decade which was strewn with 
diplomatic errors and misjudgments.” 
 * Anti-gay laws in Commonwealth countries are “totally out of date, highly 
inappropriate and should be changed”, the UK’s deputy foreign secretary, Sir 
Alan Duncan, has said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/uk-opposes-african-move-to-block-uns-lgbt-rights-champion>
 * Anne Turley, a Labour MP, is pressing the government to increase the 
penalties for animal cruelty offences, noting that research shows people who 
harm animals are more likely to go on to commit crimes such as domestic abuse. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/mp-calls-for-tougher-animal-cruelty-sentences-amid-link-to-domestic-abuse>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2%23block-5821fdbde4b07ceadb3a39d2&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
5.03pm GMT 17:03  <> 

EU leaders planning to meet next month to discuss Brexit without UK

Jennifer Rankin

Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was not invited 
to a European Union summit in Bratislava soon after she became prime minister. 
She will have to get used to it.

EU leaders are planning a meeting in December to discuss Brexit without the 
British prime minister, the Guardian has learnt.

Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, wants the EU’s 27 
remaining member states to discuss Brexit around the time of an EU summit 
scheduled for 15-16 December, according to two Brussels sources.

The British prime minister would attend the EU summit, but would not be 
invited to separate Brexit talks, the third time the UK has been excluded from 
leaders’ talks since it joined the bloc in 1973. EU leaders met without David 
Cameron soon after the Brexit vote and held the summit in Slovakia without 
Theresa May in September.

The meeting is a sign the EU27 are intensifying preparations on Britain’s EU 
exit ahead of article 50, which May has promised to trigger by the end of March.

Once the UK fires the starting gun on talks, the EU will spend four to eight 
weeks drawing up detailed guidelines for negotiations, a list of red lines that 
could cover everything from the single market to the status of Gibraltar.

That work hasn’t started yet, but Tusk wants to start preparing the ground. 
One senior EU diplomat told the Guardian the guidelines would be a trade off 
between speed and precision: “if the guidelines remain flexible they are easier 
to adopt, if they are very detailed, they are likely to take more time.”

Brussels diplomats are keenly following Brexit fallout in the UK. Some say 
they have been shocked by the UK media response to the high court decision on 
parliament’s role and the government’s limited defence of British judges.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92%23block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.56pm GMT 16:56  <> 

Welsh government's law officer condemns coverage of article 50 high court 
judgment

Steven Morris

The Welsh government’s law officer has strongly criticised the attacks on the 
Brexit high court judgement and explained why he wants to be able to make 
representations at the supreme court hearing.

Assembly member Mick Antoniw, Counsel General for Wales, said the judgement 
had been deliberately misrepresented by some. He said:

There are those who have deliberately chosen to misrepresent the facts to 
challenge the independence of the judiciary, one of the cornerstones of our 
democratic parliamentary system. The reporting of this judgment in some 
newspapers was frankly a disgrace and an insult to the good name of journalism.

The democratic structure of the UK and indeed this assembly is built on a 
foundation of the rule of law and the independence of our judicial system. The 
tragic recent history of Europe is littered with examples of countries that 
overthrew the rule of law and undermined the independence of the courts. That 
road is not a democratic one and leads only in one direction. I would hope 
those who may have made comments and statements in haste, will want to reflect.

Explaining to the assembly in Cardiff why he wants to appear in person at the 
supreme court hearing, Antoniw said:

I consider that this case raises issues of profound importance not only in 
relation to the concept of parliamentary sovereignty but also in relation to 
the wider constitutional arrangements of the United Kingdom and the legal 
framework for devolution.

I think it is of paramount importance to emphasise at this point that despite 
the political furore surrounding it and the frankly alarming tone of much of 
the press coverage, as the high court itself said, this case involves a pure 
question of law. It is not concerned with the merits and demerits of leaving 
the European Union and the politics surrounding that.

The sole legal question at issue is whether the UK Government can as a matter 
of constitutional law use the prerogative powers to give notice of withdrawal 
from the European Union. In seeking to intervene in any appeal, the Welsh 
government will seek to reinforce the importance of parliamentary sovereignty 
and the rule of law: core, established principles of British constitutional law.

Antoniw emphasised that the Welsh government was not seeking to reverse the 
result of the referendum. He said:

Having outlined what the case is about I should also make a comment on what it 
is not about. The first minister has made crystal clear and I repeat that 
sentiment now: the Welsh government respects the result of the referendum and 
this is absolutely not about overturning that decision.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4%23block-58220327e4b07ceadb3a39f4&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.23pm GMT 16:23  <> 

The legal commentator Joshua Rozenberg has posted a good story on his Facebook 
page. <https://www.facebook.com/JoshuaRozenbergQC/posts/222545208167403> He 
says that Liz Truss, the lord chancellor and justice secretary, is being sued 
by six high court judges for age discrimination. Two of the judges are also 
claiming sexual discrimination and racial discrimination respectively.

Here is an extract from Rozenberg’s post.

All the claims relate to reduced benefits the judges can expect to receive 
under a new judicial pension scheme introduced last year.


A two-week hearing has been arranged before a tribunal judge who is not 
affected by the new pension arrangements. There could be further hearings 
before appeal judges.

It’s thought to be unprecedented for serving judges to sue the lord chancellor 
and the Ministry of Justice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3%23block-5821fae1e4b07ceadb3a39c3&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
4.14pm GMT 16:14  <> 

Turning back to the IFS report (pdf) 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/bns/BN188.pdf>, this is 
interesting. It’s a table showing how many of the fiscal targets set by the 
Treasury since 1997 have been met.
 Success and failure of Treasury fiscal targets since 1997 Photograph: IFS 
The IFS counts 12 targets in all, and concludes that only two of them have 
been hit. Both were rolling targets that did not involve balancing the budget 
in a given year, but setting plans that involved balancing the current budget 
over a five-year, and then later a three-year, timetable. That may sound like 
cheating, but the IFS commends this approach.

Only two targets managed to be met consistently: that is the coalition 
government’s initial target to aim for a cyclically-adjusted balance on the 
current budget five years out and its subsequent revised target to aim to 
achieve this three years out. It is perhaps not a coincidence that these two 
targets also had much to commend them. In contrast the other targets either had 
more thresholds that were more arbitrary (“when did the cycle start and end?”, 
“why 40% of GDP?”, “why should debt definitely fall between two future points 
in time?”, “why should welfare spending definitely be below some fixed level?”) 
and/or were not sufficiently flexible in the face of adverse fiscal shocks 
(“why must there be an overall surplus in 2019–20?”, “why must borrowing in 
2013–14 be no more than half what it was in 2009–10?”). The weaknesses of these 
other targets often meant that their abandonment was preferable than trying 
slavishly to adhere to them.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae%23block-5821f7f9e4b07ceadb3a39ae&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.56pm GMT 15:56  <> 

Here are some more pictures from Theresa May’s India tour today.

 Theresa May stands amidst Hindu priests after offering prayers to the Hindu 
deity Lord Shiva during a visit to Someshwara Temple in Bangalore. Photograph: 
Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images  Theresa May at the Sri Someshwara Temple. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images  Theresa May at the Sri Someshwara Temple. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images  Hindu priests brief British Prime 
Minister Theresa May, center, during her visit to Someshwara. Photograph: Aijaz 
Rahi/AP 
And this is what Number 10 said about the visit in a briefing note sent out in 
advance.

The prime minister will visit the Sri Someshwara Temple in the Ulsoor District 
of Bengaluru later today to pay her respects at this ancient Hindu place of 
worship.

She will be welcomed by a guard of honour consisting of garlanders (who place 
a garland of fragrant flowers around the neck) and musicians playing drums and 
horns.

She will then tour the temple, built by the Chola dynasty (300 BCE–1279 CE) 
and showcasing an impressive mixture of Chola, Hoysala and Vijayanagar 
architecture.

Someshwara means “he who wears the moon on his head”, and is another name for 
Lord Shiva, one of the principal deities in the Hindu triumvirate.

The prime minister will conclude her visit by participating in a Hindu Aarti 
(blessing). Aarti is a part of pooja (prayer) in which light from wicks soaked 
in ghee (purified butter) or camphor is offered to the deities. The prime 
minister will draw her hands together across the top of the flame and touch her 
eyes, in a traditional ritual. She will then be offered Kumkum Tika (red power) 
to touch and dab a single spot on her forehead.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93%23block-5821f373e4b029b92ca46a93&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
3.00pm GMT 15:00  <> 

Anushka Asthana

A senior City figure who was a remain supporter during the EU referendum has 
urgedTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to “get 
cracking” with the process of Brexit, warning that any delays would only cause 
more uncertainty for business.

John Nelson, the chairman of Lloyd’s of London, said: “To be blunt with you, 
the longer the uncertainty goes on the worse it is for business.”

His intervention, while travelling to India as part of a delegation 
accompanying the prime minister, is significant because he has been a vocal 
opponent of so-called hard Brexit.

But while some pro-EU campaigners want to push back the triggering of article 
50, Nelson said delays could be damaging.

“I think unfortunately if it means greater uncertainty for a longer and longer 
period it is not so good,” he told the Evening Standard.

Get cracking is my view. It’s not a view that’s shared by all my colleagues 
here.

Lloyds announced major plans to expand during May’s three day visit to India, 
designed to boost economic ties between the two countries.

Nelson said he believed ministers understood the importance to City-based 
firms of resisting non-tariff barriers in the deal negotiated with the EU.

From our point of view we are very, very keen to have passporting rights and 
single market access. I detect that ministers are getting that very strongly 
now indeed.

He said it was important to prevent a cliff edge.

The other thing is we have to negotiate transitional arrangements otherwise we 
will be at a cliff edge for both sides, the EU and us. And they won’t start 
negotiating those until article 50 has been moved.

Updated at 3.20pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5%23block-5821e7d4e4b0d073c27d29e5&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.49pm GMT 14:49  <> 

Libby Brooks

Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, was inevitably also asked about 
the US election at her regular press conference this lunchtime.

Unsurprisingly, she’s expressed her preference for Hillary Clinton before now. 
Today she added that, whilst this is America’s election and not usual for a 
leader of another country to comment, “it would be good to see that biggest 
crack to date in the glass ceiling”.

Sturgeon said of the Democratic candidate:

I think her experience, her strength, her resilience which has been on show 
throughout this campaign will make her a good president and somebody well able 
to address the challenges America in common with many other countries faces.”

Above and beyond that, I’m standing here as the first woman to hold the office 
of first minister and I think it would be great to see the world’s biggest 
democracy elect the first woman leader. The message that would send to women 
and girls across the world would be a very positive one. It would be good to 
see that biggest crack to date in the glass ceiling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b%23block-5821e5a0e4b07ceadb3a393b&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
2.24pm GMT 14:24  <> 

Lunchtime summary

 * Theresa May has played down a warning from the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
about how Brexit could prolong austerity, saying “the fundamentals of the 
British economy are very strong”. (See 11.38am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-5821b79ae4b0d073c27d2892#block-5821b79ae4b0d073c27d2892>
 Theresa May visiting the Sri Someshwara Temple in Bangalore, India, today. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
 * May has been accused of caving in to business interests after it was 
reported that she plans to water down proposals to put workers on company 
boards.She announced this during the Tory leadership contest, implying that she 
would compel firms to have workers on their boards, but today the Times claims 
that the government will make this a voluntary initiative. The paper (paywall) 
says: 
Business leaders expressed concerns about a move that they said risked 
undermining effectiveness. The CBI and Insitute of Directors were among the 
groups to raise fears, quietly supported by the Treasury.

Mrs May used her Conservative Party conference speech to underline her 
commitment to the plan and Downing Street has repeatedly denied that it was 
being weakened. A senior figure involved in the preparations, however, said 
that the consultation, probably in the shape of a green paper, would seek to 
encourage rather than mandate workers’ representation when it was published as 
early as next week.

“On workers on boards the intention is not to be prescriptive but also where 
there is a need to tighten the codes we shall,” the source said.

A Downing Street spokesman said there was “no change” to May’s plan. But he 
also hinted that the scheme could become voluntary. He told the lobby briefing.

There is no change to our plan to have workers on boards. How that actually 
unfolds, clearly there’s a consultation process that we’re going to start, I 
clearly can’t anticipate what that consultation process will find, but there is 
no change to what the prime minister said at conference.

The TUC warned that a voluntary approach would “fatally undermine” May’s plans 
and turn it into “little more than a PR exercise”. And the Lib Dem business 
spokesmanLord Foster said:

Giving workers a say in how the business they work for operates is an idea 
whose time has come. If it can work in Germany and other major industrial 
countries then it can work here. IfTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> wanted to deliver her promise 
to make Britain a place that works for everyone then she could - sadly it seems 
she doesn’t have the political will to do so.

 * Bill Clinton disparagingly referred to Jeremy Corbyn as being selected for 
Labour leader because he was “the maddest person in the room”, according to a 
leaked transcript of a campaign speech he made last year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/labour-elected-jeremy-corbyn-maddest-person-in-room-bill-clinton>
 * Yvette Cooper, the chair of the Commons home affairs committee, has called 
Dame Lowell Goddard’s refusal to give evidence to the committee about her 
resignation as chair of the child sexual abuse inquiry “disgraceful”. (See 
12.12pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-5821beefe4b0d073c27d28d2#block-5821beefe4b0d073c27d28d2>
 * Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed that the Scottish parliament will intervene 
in the article 50 legal case as the UK government prepares to appeal against 
the high court decision. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/08/scottish-parliament-nicola-sturgeon-article-50-case>
 * Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, has dismissed a critical UN 
report which concluded that the UK government’s austerity 
policies“systematically violated” the rights of disabled people. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/damian-green-dismisses-offensive-un-report-on-uk-disability-rights>
 * Almost a quarter of people in Wales are struggling to make ends meet and 
poverty is costing the country £3.6bn a year – a fifth of the Welsh 
government’s annual budget, a report has revealed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/wales-poverty-report-joseph-rowntree-uk-eu>
 * Sports Direct’s board has said it did not know about or authorise an 
apparent attempt to secretly record a group of MPs who paid a surprise visit to 
its warehouse. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/sports-direct-denies-knowledge-of-secret-camera-filming-mps-shirebrook-warehouse>
 * Paul Maynard, a transport minister, has announced in a written statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-11-08/HCWS239/>
 that four electrification projects on the Great Western line are being delayed.
Mick Whelan, general secretary of ASLEF, the train drivers’ union, said this 
was “another blow to Britain’s railway industry and another example of the 
[Department for Transport’s] incompetence” 
 * Philip Hammond, the chancellor, has said that a review of information from 
the Panama Papers has led to 22 people being investigated for suspected tax 
evasion.In a written statement about the achievements of the taskforce set up 
to look at the leaked information 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-11-08/HCWS247/>
, he also highlighted various other leads being followed up. Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0%23block-5821d576e4b07ceadb3a38e0&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.20pm GMT 13:20  <> 

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has not 
been commenting on Bill Clinton, but his brother Piers has been using his 
Twitter feed to comment on Clinton’s wife today. He’s not a fan.
Piers Corbyn (@Piers_Corbyn) 
WhoeverUvote #TRUMP <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TRUMP?src=hash>'S RIGHT THAT 
#ManMade <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ManMade?src=hash> #CO2 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CO2?src=hash> #ClimateChange 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ClimateChange?src=hash> is a #GR8 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GR8?src=hash> CON LIKE #Hilary 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hilary?src=hash>+#ClintonFoundation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ClintonFoundation?src=hash> FACTS 
https://t.co/zUmOeShYAS <https://t.co/zUmOeShYAS> RT https://t.co/R1884awuqg 
<https://t.co/R1884awuqg>
 <https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795892064055656448> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795892064055656448> Piers Corbyn 
(@Piers_Corbyn) 
#Gr8 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Gr8?src=hash> QUESTION! WHY WOULD any 
SelfRespecting Latino Vote 2continue 2live with InnerCity degredation
#CorruptClintons <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CorruptClintons?src=hash> keep in 
"GOOD"#USA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/USA?src=hash>? RT 
https://t.co/CnRxkAnEtc <https://t.co/CnRxkAnEtc>
 <https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795908194904240128> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795908194904240128> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be%23block-5821d092e4b07ceadb3a38be&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.16pm GMT 13:16  <> 

Jeremy Corbyn’s office has not commented on the Clinton leak. This is from 
Huffington Post’s Paul Waugh.
Paul Waugh (@paulwaugh) 
Corbyn's office says he has no comment on Clinton describing him as 'the 
maddest person in the room', via@wikileaks <https://twitter.com/wikileaks> 
https://t.co/aVKiFS4668 <https://t.co/aVKiFS4668>
 <https://twitter.com/paulwaugh/status/795967798191280128> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paulwaugh/status/795967798191280128> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd%23block-5821cfffe4b07ceadb3a38bd&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close 
1.14pm GMT 13:14  <> 

The Bill Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> speech also 
includes reference to another British politician. Clinton told his audience:

I had a man come up to me this summer when we were on our family vacation, and 
a friend of ours holds a party on Long Island every summer and I’m honored to 
go to the party. I was the designated attendee from our family. So I’m just 
standing there drinking a Coke and this guy comes up to me and says, “You don’t 
know me because I was not in government when you were there, but when your wife 
was Secretary of State, I was the British cabinet [secretary] for Northern 
Ireland.” And I thanked him. Cameron was good on Northern Ireland; we did 
pretty well when he was there. So he said in 2010 – remember when the whole 
thing was about to come off the track? We had terrible conflicts. He said, “I 
was desperate. I didn’t know what to do. And finally, I realized that Hillary 
was the only person in office anywhere in the world that had enough influence 
with the Irish to solve it, so I called and pleaded with her to help me put it 
back on track. Thirty-six hours later, we were moving again.” She’s the only 
person in the world who could have done that. And he said, “She did that for a 
lot of us in a lot of different places, and a lot of us would like to help her 
now.”

Clinton did not name the Northern Ireland secretary but, although he mentioned 
David Cameron, he was probably talking toShaun Woodward, Northern Ireland 
secretary under Gordon Brown (who oversaw a crisis about devolving policing 
powers) not Cameron’s first Northern Ireland secretary, Owen Paterson.

Updated at 4.43pm GMT 
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba>
Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
 Share Share this post  Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba>
 Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20leaders%20plan%20to%20meet%20next%20month%20to%20discuss%20Brexit%20without%20UK%20-%20Politics%20live&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba>
 Google plus  
<https://plus.google.com/share?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fblog%2Flive%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_gp%26page%3Dwith%3Ablock-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba%23block-5821cef6e4b07ceadb3a38ba&amp;hl=en-GB&amp;wwc=1>
close  
 * EU leaders are planning a meeting in December to discuss Brexit without the 
British prime minister, the Guardian has learnt.(See 5.03pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92#block-58220544e4b0d073c27d2a92>
 * The UK’s global diplomatic and security influence is at risk if it cuts 
itself off from the single market and continues to denigrate foreigners, one of 
Britain’s most senior civil servants has warned. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/08/uk-risks-losing-global-influence-quits-single-market-senior-civil-servant>
 AsPatrick Wintour reports, Sir Simon Fraser, who was permanent under-secretary 
at the Foreign Office until last year, said Britain’s position near or at the 
top diplomatic table was at stake after the vote to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. He said: “There is already evidence of 
potential self-harm in our behaviour to foreign people, the reported spike in 
hate crime, the insensitive comments of some British politicians, and the 
shocking press coverage of the legal judgment on article 50. I hope our 
political leaders will show more skill and wisdom in the next chapter of our 
European relationships than over the last decade which was strewn with 
diplomatic errors and misjudgments.” 
 * Anti-gay laws in Commonwealth countries are “totally out of date, highly 
inappropriate and should be changed”, the UK’s deputy foreign secretary, Sir 
Alan Duncan, has said. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/uk-opposes-african-move-to-block-uns-lgbt-rights-champion>
 * Anne Turley, a Labour MP, is pressing the government to increase the 
penalties for animal cruelty offences, noting that research shows people who 
harm animals are more likely to go on to commit crimes such as domestic abuse. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/mp-calls-for-tougher-animal-cruelty-sentences-amid-link-to-domestic-abuse>
That’s all from me for today.

Thanks for the comments.
 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> was not invited 
to a European Union summit in Bratislava soon after she became prime minister. 
She will have to get used to it.

EU leaders are planning a meeting in December to discuss Brexit without the 
British prime minister, the Guardian has learnt.

Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, wants the EU’s 27 
remaining member states to discuss Brexit around the time of an EU summit 
scheduled for 15-16 December, according to two Brussels sources.

The British prime minister would attend the EU summit, but would not be 
invited to separate Brexit talks, the third time the UK has been excluded from 
leaders’ talks since it joined the bloc in 1973. EU leaders met without David 
Cameron soon after the Brexit vote and held the summit in Slovakia without 
Theresa May in September.

The meeting is a sign the EU27 are intensifying preparations on Britain’s EU 
exit ahead of article 50, which May has promised to trigger by the end of March.

Once the UK fires the starting gun on talks, the EU will spend four to eight 
weeks drawing up detailed guidelines for negotiations, a list of red lines that 
could cover everything from the single market to the status of Gibraltar.

That work hasn’t started yet, but Tusk wants to start preparing the ground. 
One senior EU diplomat told the Guardian the guidelines would be a trade off 
between speed and precision: “if the guidelines remain flexible they are easier 
to adopt, if they are very detailed, they are likely to take more time.”

Brussels diplomats are keenly following Brexit fallout in the UK. Some say 
they have been shocked by the UK media response to the high court decision on 
parliament’s role and the government’s limited defence of British judges.
 
The Welsh government’s law officer has strongly criticised the attacks on the 
Brexit high court judgement and explained why he wants to be able to make 
representations at the supreme court hearing.

Assembly member Mick Antoniw, Counsel General for Wales, said the judgement 
had been deliberately misrepresented by some. He said:

There are those who have deliberately chosen to misrepresent the facts to 
challenge the independence of the judiciary, one of the cornerstones of our 
democratic parliamentary system. The reporting of this judgment in some 
newspapers was frankly a disgrace and an insult to the good name of journalism.

The democratic structure of the UK and indeed this assembly is built on a 
foundation of the rule of law and the independence of our judicial system. The 
tragic recent history of Europe is littered with examples of countries that 
overthrew the rule of law and undermined the independence of the courts. That 
road is not a democratic one and leads only in one direction. I would hope 
those who may have made comments and statements in haste, will want to reflect.

Explaining to the assembly in Cardiff why he wants to appear in person at the 
supreme court hearing, Antoniw said:

I consider that this case raises issues of profound importance not only in 
relation to the concept of parliamentary sovereignty but also in relation to 
the wider constitutional arrangements of the United Kingdom and the legal 
framework for devolution.

I think it is of paramount importance to emphasise at this point that despite 
the political furore surrounding it and the frankly alarming tone of much of 
the press coverage, as the high court itself said, this case involves a pure 
question of law. It is not concerned with the merits and demerits of leaving 
the European Union and the politics surrounding that.

The sole legal question at issue is whether the UK Government can as a matter 
of constitutional law use the prerogative powers to give notice of withdrawal 
from the European Union. In seeking to intervene in any appeal, the Welsh 
government will seek to reinforce the importance of parliamentary sovereignty 
and the rule of law: core, established principles of British constitutional law.

Antoniw emphasised that the Welsh government was not seeking to reverse the 
result of the referendum. He said:

Having outlined what the case is about I should also make a comment on what it 
is not about. The first minister has made crystal clear and I repeat that 
sentiment now: the Welsh government respects the result of the referendum and 
this is absolutely not about overturning that decision.
 
The legal commentator Joshua Rozenberg has posted a good story on his Facebook 
page. <https://www.facebook.com/JoshuaRozenbergQC/posts/222545208167403> He 
says that Liz Truss, the lord chancellor and justice secretary, is being sued 
by six high court judges for age discrimination. Two of the judges are also 
claiming sexual discrimination and racial discrimination respectively.

Here is an extract from Rozenberg’s post.

All the claims relate to reduced benefits the judges can expect to receive 
under a new judicial pension scheme introduced last year.


A two-week hearing has been arranged before a tribunal judge who is not 
affected by the new pension arrangements. There could be further hearings 
before appeal judges.

It’s thought to be unprecedented for serving judges to sue the lord chancellor 
and the Ministry of Justice.
 
Turning back to the IFS report (pdf) 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/uploads/publications/bns/BN188.pdf>, this is 
interesting. It’s a table showing how many of the fiscal targets set by the 
Treasury since 1997 have been met.
 Success and failure of Treasury fiscal targets since 1997 Photograph: IFS 
The IFS counts 12 targets in all, and concludes that only two of them have 
been hit. Both were rolling targets that did not involve balancing the budget 
in a given year, but setting plans that involved balancing the current budget 
over a five-year, and then later a three-year, timetable. That may sound like 
cheating, but the IFS commends this approach.

Only two targets managed to be met consistently: that is the coalition 
government’s initial target to aim for a cyclically-adjusted balance on the 
current budget five years out and its subsequent revised target to aim to 
achieve this three years out. It is perhaps not a coincidence that these two 
targets also had much to commend them. In contrast the other targets either had 
more thresholds that were more arbitrary (“when did the cycle start and end?”, 
“why 40% of GDP?”, “why should debt definitely fall between two future points 
in time?”, “why should welfare spending definitely be below some fixed level?”) 
and/or were not sufficiently flexible in the face of adverse fiscal shocks 
(“why must there be an overall surplus in 2019–20?”, “why must borrowing in 
2013–14 be no more than half what it was in 2009–10?”). The weaknesses of these 
other targets often meant that their abandonment was preferable than trying 
slavishly to adhere to them.
 
Here are some more pictures from Theresa May’s India tour today.

 Theresa May stands amidst Hindu priests after offering prayers to the Hindu 
deity Lord Shiva during a visit to Someshwara Temple in Bangalore. Photograph: 
Manjunath Kiran/AFP/Getty Images  Theresa May at the Sri Someshwara Temple. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images  Theresa May at the Sri Someshwara Temple. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images  Hindu priests brief British Prime 
Minister Theresa May, center, during her visit to Someshwara. Photograph: Aijaz 
Rahi/AP 
And this is what Number 10 said about the visit in a briefing note sent out in 
advance.

The prime minister will visit the Sri Someshwara Temple in the Ulsoor District 
of Bengaluru later today to pay her respects at this ancient Hindu place of 
worship.

She will be welcomed by a guard of honour consisting of garlanders (who place 
a garland of fragrant flowers around the neck) and musicians playing drums and 
horns.

She will then tour the temple, built by the Chola dynasty (300 BCE–1279 CE) 
and showcasing an impressive mixture of Chola, Hoysala and Vijayanagar 
architecture.

Someshwara means “he who wears the moon on his head”, and is another name for 
Lord Shiva, one of the principal deities in the Hindu triumvirate.

The prime minister will conclude her visit by participating in a Hindu Aarti 
(blessing). Aarti is a part of pooja (prayer) in which light from wicks soaked 
in ghee (purified butter) or camphor is offered to the deities. The prime 
minister will draw her hands together across the top of the flame and touch her 
eyes, in a traditional ritual. She will then be offered Kumkum Tika (red power) 
to touch and dab a single spot on her forehead.
 
A senior City figure who was a remain supporter during the EU referendum has 
urgedTheresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to “get 
cracking” with the process of Brexit, warning that any delays would only cause 
more uncertainty for business.

John Nelson, the chairman of Lloyd’s of London, said: “To be blunt with you, 
the longer the uncertainty goes on the worse it is for business.”

His intervention, while travelling to India as part of a delegation 
accompanying the prime minister, is significant because he has been a vocal 
opponent of so-called hard Brexit.

But while some pro-EU campaigners want to push back the triggering of article 
50, Nelson said delays could be damaging.

“I think unfortunately if it means greater uncertainty for a longer and longer 
period it is not so good,” he told the Evening Standard.

Get cracking is my view. It’s not a view that’s shared by all my colleagues 
here.

Lloyds announced major plans to expand during May’s three day visit to India, 
designed to boost economic ties between the two countries.

Nelson said he believed ministers understood the importance to City-based 
firms of resisting non-tariff barriers in the deal negotiated with the EU.

From our point of view we are very, very keen to have passporting rights and 
single market access. I detect that ministers are getting that very strongly 
now indeed.

He said it was important to prevent a cliff edge.

The other thing is we have to negotiate transitional arrangements otherwise we 
will be at a cliff edge for both sides, the EU and us. And they won’t start 
negotiating those until article 50 has been moved.
 
Nicola Sturgeon, the Scottish first minister, was inevitably also asked about 
the US election at her regular press conference this lunchtime.

Unsurprisingly, she’s expressed her preference for Hillary Clinton before now. 
Today she added that, whilst this is America’s election and not usual for a 
leader of another country to comment, “it would be good to see that biggest 
crack to date in the glass ceiling”.

Sturgeon said of the Democratic candidate:

I think her experience, her strength, her resilience which has been on show 
throughout this campaign will make her a good president and somebody well able 
to address the challenges America in common with many other countries faces.”

Above and beyond that, I’m standing here as the first woman to hold the office 
of first minister and I think it would be great to see the world’s biggest 
democracy elect the first woman leader. The message that would send to women 
and girls across the world would be a very positive one. It would be good to 
see that biggest crack to date in the glass ceiling.
 
 * Theresa May has played down a warning from the Institute for Fiscal Studies 
about how Brexit could prolong austerity, saying “the fundamentals of the 
British economy are very strong”. (See 11.38am.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-5821b79ae4b0d073c27d2892#block-5821b79ae4b0d073c27d2892>
 Theresa May visiting the Sri Someshwara Temple in Bangalore, India, today. 
Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
 * May has been accused of caving in to business interests after it was 
reported that she plans to water down proposals to put workers on company 
boards.She announced this during the Tory leadership contest, implying that she 
would compel firms to have workers on their boards, but today the Times claims 
that the government will make this a voluntary initiative. The paper (paywall) 
says: 
Business leaders expressed concerns about a move that they said risked 
undermining effectiveness. The CBI and Insitute of Directors were among the 
groups to raise fears, quietly supported by the Treasury.

Mrs May used her Conservative Party conference speech to underline her 
commitment to the plan and Downing Street has repeatedly denied that it was 
being weakened. A senior figure involved in the preparations, however, said 
that the consultation, probably in the shape of a green paper, would seek to 
encourage rather than mandate workers’ representation when it was published as 
early as next week.

“On workers on boards the intention is not to be prescriptive but also where 
there is a need to tighten the codes we shall,” the source said.

A Downing Street spokesman said there was “no change” to May’s plan. But he 
also hinted that the scheme could become voluntary. He told the lobby briefing.

There is no change to our plan to have workers on boards. How that actually 
unfolds, clearly there’s a consultation process that we’re going to start, I 
clearly can’t anticipate what that consultation process will find, but there is 
no change to what the prime minister said at conference.

The TUC warned that a voluntary approach would “fatally undermine” May’s plans 
and turn it into “little more than a PR exercise”. And the Lib Dem business 
spokesmanLord Foster said:

Giving workers a say in how the business they work for operates is an idea 
whose time has come. If it can work in Germany and other major industrial 
countries then it can work here. IfTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> wanted to deliver her promise 
to make Britain a place that works for everyone then she could - sadly it seems 
she doesn’t have the political will to do so.

 * Bill Clinton disparagingly referred to Jeremy Corbyn as being selected for 
Labour leader because he was “the maddest person in the room”, according to a 
leaked transcript of a campaign speech he made last year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/labour-elected-jeremy-corbyn-maddest-person-in-room-bill-clinton>
 * Yvette Cooper, the chair of the Commons home affairs committee, has called 
Dame Lowell Goddard’s refusal to give evidence to the committee about her 
resignation as chair of the child sexual abuse inquiry “disgraceful”. (See 
12.12pm.) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/08/ifs-says-brexit-means-austerity-likely-to-continue-into-next-decade-politics-live?page=with:block-5821beefe4b0d073c27d28d2#block-5821beefe4b0d073c27d28d2>
 * Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed that the Scottish parliament will intervene 
in the article 50 legal case as the UK government prepares to appeal against 
the high court decision. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/08/scottish-parliament-nicola-sturgeon-article-50-case>
 * Damian Green, the work and pensions secretary, has dismissed a critical UN 
report which concluded that the UK government’s austerity 
policies“systematically violated” the rights of disabled people. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/damian-green-dismisses-offensive-un-report-on-uk-disability-rights>
 * Almost a quarter of people in Wales are struggling to make ends meet and 
poverty is costing the country £3.6bn a year – a fifth of the Welsh 
government’s annual budget, a report has revealed. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/08/wales-poverty-report-joseph-rowntree-uk-eu>
 * Sports Direct’s board has said it did not know about or authorise an 
apparent attempt to secretly record a group of MPs who paid a surprise visit to 
its warehouse. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/sports-direct-denies-knowledge-of-secret-camera-filming-mps-shirebrook-warehouse>
 * Paul Maynard, a transport minister, has announced in a written statement 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-11-08/HCWS239/>
 that four electrification projects on the Great Western line are being delayed.
Mick Whelan, general secretary of ASLEF, the train drivers’ union, said this 
was “another blow to Britain’s railway industry and another example of the 
[Department for Transport’s] incompetence” 
 * Philip Hammond, the chancellor, has said that a review of information from 
the Panama Papers has led to 22 people being investigated for suspected tax 
evasion.In a written statement about the achievements of the taskforce set up 
to look at the leaked information 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/publications/written-questions-answers-statements/written-statement/Commons/2016-11-08/HCWS247/>
, he also highlighted various other leads being followed up.  
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has not 
been commenting on Bill Clinton, but his brother Piers has been using his 
Twitter feed to comment on Clinton’s wife today. He’s not a fan.
Piers Corbyn (@Piers_Corbyn) 
WhoeverUvote #TRUMP <https://twitter.com/hashtag/TRUMP?src=hash>'S RIGHT THAT 
#ManMade <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ManMade?src=hash> #CO2 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/CO2?src=hash> #ClimateChange 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ClimateChange?src=hash> is a #GR8 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/GR8?src=hash> CON LIKE #Hilary 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/Hilary?src=hash>+#ClintonFoundation 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/ClintonFoundation?src=hash> FACTS 
https://t.co/zUmOeShYAS <https://t.co/zUmOeShYAS> RT https://t.co/R1884awuqg 
<https://t.co/R1884awuqg>
 <https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795892064055656448> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795892064055656448> Piers Corbyn 
(@Piers_Corbyn) 
#Gr8 <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Gr8?src=hash> QUESTION! WHY WOULD any 
SelfRespecting Latino Vote 2continue 2live with InnerCity degredation
#CorruptClintons <https://twitter.com/hashtag/CorruptClintons?src=hash> keep in 
"GOOD"#USA <https://twitter.com/hashtag/USA?src=hash>? RT 
https://t.co/CnRxkAnEtc <https://t.co/CnRxkAnEtc>
 <https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795908194904240128> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Piers_Corbyn/status/795908194904240128>  
Jeremy Corbyn’s office has not commented on the Clinton leak. This is from 
Huffington Post’s Paul Waugh.
Paul Waugh (@paulwaugh) 
Corbyn's office says he has no comment on Clinton describing him as 'the 
maddest person in the room', via@wikileaks <https://twitter.com/wikileaks> 
https://t.co/aVKiFS4668 <https://t.co/aVKiFS4668>
 <https://twitter.com/paulwaugh/status/795967798191280128> November 8, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/paulwaugh/status/795967798191280128>  
The Bill Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/clinton> speech also 
includes reference to another British politician. Clinton told his audience:

I had a man come up to me this summer when we were on our family vacation, and 
a friend of ours holds a party on Long Island every summer and I’m honored to 
go to the party. I was the designated attendee from our family. So I’m just 
standing there drinking a Coke and this guy comes up to me and says, “You don’t 
know me because I was not in government when you were there, but when your wife 
was Secretary of State, I was the British cabinet [secretary] for Northern 
Ireland.” And I thanked him. Cameron was good on Northern Ireland; we did 
pretty well when he was there. So he said in 2010 – remember when the whole 
thing was about to come off the track? We had terrible conflicts. He said, “I 
was desperate. I didn’t know what to do. And finally, I realized that Hillary 
was the only person in office anywhere in the world that had enough influence 
with the Irish to solve it, so I called and pleaded with her to help me put it 
back on track. Thirty-six hours later, we were moving again.” She’s the only 
person in the world who could have done that. And he said, “She did that for a 
lot of us in a lot of different places, and a lot of us would like to help her 
now.”

Clinton did not name the Northern Ireland secretary but, although he mentioned 
David Cameron, he was probably talking toShaun Woodward, Northern Ireland 
secretary under Gordon Brown (who oversaw a crisis about devolving policing 
powers) not Cameron’s first Northern Ireland secretary, Owen Paterson.
 