
Hugh Muir: ‘He was the fugitive from the outset’

It should never have been like this. The prime minister aimed to win the 
arguments and then rout the Europhobes to make his party electable for the 
future. Instead, he emerged as a man on the run.David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron>, the fugitive.

There are times, at prime minister’s questions, when we see Cameron with his 
back against the wall. His face reddens, his cadence quickens. Confronted by 
Sky’s political editor, Faisal Islam, and a studio audience, he was the 
fugitive from the outset: curt, severe, beleaguered. His arguments were valid. 
But he began the encounter on the run. He ended it on the run. Arguments only 
take him so far. Perception is everything.

He has clearly decided to position himself as the grownup in the room. I am 
the one who has been there in the international summits, he told his 
inquisitor. I know that is preferable to the way we settled arguments in the 
dark days of the 20th century. “What comes first,” asked Islam, “world war 
three or the global worldwide depression?” The audience laughed scornfully. The 
fugitive pursed his lips.

He faces opponents who make big declarations, and so, to survive, he offered 
declarations of his own. “I would never have Britain join the euro,” he said. 
“We keep our currency.”

The NHS would be worse, not better outside the EU, he said. We agree with 
Jeremy Corbyn and the Greens that remaining is the best option. He uttered the 
word Corbyn, and then referenced the TUC, Harriet Harman, many “new friends”. 
His lip did not curl. This was a PM making the effort.

He was was lucid, he had stats and facts. “This is a really important point,” 
he said, parading the brief he had learned.

But through it all, he was the fugitive, hassled, harassed and cornered. It 
should never have been like this, and even now he seems incredulous that it is.


Gaby Hinsliff: ‘The fluent final appeal to think of your children and 
grandchildren was vintage Cameron’

There was football on the other side, bottles of wine beckoning from fridges, 
and this damn referendum already feels like it’s gone on for ever. So all 
credit to those who gamely struggled through the whole of the first telly 
Brexit debate, featuring David Cameron live and unplugged onSky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-news>. But you may be wondering if it 
was really worth it.

By way of introduction, Cameron was briskly roughed up by Sky’s political 
editor, Faisal Islam, who got the first big laugh by innocently inquiring which 
comes first if we leave: world war three or global recession? The prime 
minister, wearing the pained expression of a headmaster facing an unusually 
rowdy assembly, said he was being glib. Some feisty exchanges over immigration 
– asked why he keeps promising to reduce it to levels he must know are 
implausible, Cameron ended up suggesting slightly lamely that it’s happened 
before and you know, might again – and something about the single market making 
it easier for “people making fanbelts in Bolton”.

David Cameron on EU referendum: let us not roll the dice on our children's 
future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/david-cameron-eu-let-us-not-roll-the-dice-on-our-childrens-future>
But then it was over to the audience, some of whom seemed only tenuously to 
have grasped what they were there for. Several wandered off topic to ask about 
his treatment of Sadiq Kahn, or why he’s scrapping nursing bursaries; you got 
the sense that while everyone knows Brexit matters in theory, we are still not 
feeling it in our guts. If it’s not uppermost in the minds of people invited on 
telly to discuss it, imagine how everyone else feels.

This will have been an odd sensation for some pro-European Labour voters, the 
first time they will have seen his nibs on screen and not just refrained from 
hitting the off switch, but grudgingly willed him on. He didn’t let the side 
down, exactly; the old bedside manner remains warm, the fluent final appeal to 
think of your children and grandchildren was vintage Cameron. But somehow it 
never quite caught fire. Next up: Michael Gove, appearing for leave. Brace 
yourselves.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcameron-leaving-the-eu-would-be-self-inflicted-wound-on-uk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%3A%20leaving%20the%20EU%20would%20be%20'self%20inflicted%20wound'%20on%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcameron-leaving-the-eu-would-be-self-inflicted-wound-on-uk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%3A%20leaving%20the%20EU%20would%20be%20%27self%20inflicted%20wound%27%20on%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fcameron-leaving-the-eu-would-be-self-inflicted-wound-on-uk-video&media=>
Cameron: leaving the EU would be ‘self inflicted wound’ on UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/02/cameron-leaving-the-eu-would-be-self-inflicted-wound-on-uk-video>
Matthew d’Ancona: ‘The audience did nothing to conceal its distrust and (in 
some cases) outright hostility’

David Cameron came face to face with the law of diminishing returns that 
afflicts any prime minister after five or six years. Remember Tony Blair’s 
“masochism” strategy before the Iraq war? This was the prime minister – fluent, 
unruffled and on top of his brief – confronting an audience that did nothing to 
conceal its distrust and (in some cases) outright hostility.

In the first half, he was interviewed by Faisal Islam, who – channelling his 
inner Paxman – focused remorselessly on the government’s failure to meet its 
immigration target. Cameron’s response was plausible enough: Brexit would not 
in itself solve the challenge of managed migration, but would remove Britain 
from the single market that is central to its prosperity. The phrase 
“self-inflicted blow” was one he used repeatedly, along with the word “glib” – 
applied to his Vote Leave opponents. Pressed by his interrogator, Cameron 
conceded that “sometimes this organisation [the EU] drives me crazy”. But that, 
he said, was a poor reason to flounce out, leaving Britain with its “nose 
pressed at the window”.

Slapped down: David Cameron faces hostility in TV interrogation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/02/slapped-down-david-cameron-faces-hostility-in-tv-interrogation>
The second part of the programme – pre-selected questions from the audience – 
was notionally chaired by Kay Burley, but descended into disorderly farce more 
than once. Smooth as ever and courteous in his replies, Cameron could do 
nothing about the fact this particular group of people clearly felt no 
affection for him whatsoever. One accused him of running “a classic Cameron 
fear campaign”. Another, who declared that she was an English literature 
student, said: “I know waffling when I see it.” That line secured the biggest 
round of applause of the evening.


To be fair to the Tory leader, his answers were almost entirely waffle-free, 
not least when he pointed out that 50,000 EU nationals worked for the NHS 
(which Vote Leave insists would be so much better after Brexit). But the 
audience was not remotely interested in such detail, or in anything much apart 
from their aggregated grievances. Really, it is small wonder that Cameron 
avoids these sessions in the stocks whenever he possibly can.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fdavid-cameron-accused-of-waffling-by-english-literature-student-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Cameron%20accused%20of%20waffling%20by%20English%20Literature%20student%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fdavid-cameron-accused-of-waffling-by-english-literature-student-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Cameron%20accused%20of%20waffling%20by%20English%20Literature%20student%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F03%2Fdavid-cameron-accused-of-waffling-by-english-literature-student-video&media=>
Cameron accused of waffling by English Literature student 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/03/david-cameron-accused-of-waffling-by-english-literature-student-video>
Giles Fraser: ‘Cameron doesn’t have a higher vision than the price of the 
pound’

Oh, how the prime minister has demeaned the high calling of his office. 
Whatever one thinks of his predecessors, at least they thought of their role as 
offering some sort of wider moral leadership, even if they were unable to 
deliver it. But what was so embarrassingly obvious from his performance on Sky 
News was that David Cameron understands his job to be little more than that of 
the UK trade ambassador, with a particular brief for financial services.

Cameron doesn’t argue out of principle. He doesn’t have a higher vision than 
the price of the pound. His pragmatism is so bendy that I’d even prefer him to 
have a principle that I disagreed with than to stomach more of his PR 
sincerity. Only a year ago, he promised to reduce immigration to the tens of 
thousands. And it was a manifesto promise, the political equivalent of “cross 
my heart and hope to die”. Of course, he was in no position to make such a 
ridiculous promise. He was cynically pandering to the potential Ukippers in his 
party, and he got found out. Bendy.

That was the theme of the whole evening. One moment Sadiq Khan is depicted as 
the most dangerous man in London and a friend of terrorists; the next, the 
prime minister is gladhanding him on the stump. The audience laughed again at 
that one. “I’m an English literature student – I know waffling when I see it,” 
said one young audience member, pointedly. Was there a slight blush beneath 
Cameron’s permanent pinkish glow? The things he has to do for his friends in 
the City.

“What comes first, world war three or the global worldwide recession?” asked 
Faisal Islam, taking aim at the remain camp’s perceived fearmongering. No 
wonder the audience gave Cameron such a hard time. “Too big, too bossy, too 
interfering” was how he used to describe the EU. But now that’s all changed. 
Now the prime minister has become little more than a circus dog turning tricks 
for the stock market. And his smarmy polish is wearing off. We deserve a lot 
more gravitas and principle from our political leaders.
 