
On Europe, the key issue is not article 50. Rather, the answer to the question 
(Editorial, 6 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/05/the-guardian-view-on-immigration-avoid-false-brexit-promises>
) on how to combine a border regime that is fluid enough to preserve economic 
dynamism and rigorous enough to inspire public confidence lies in articles 48 
and 49 ofthe original treaty of Rome 
<http://www.gleichstellung.uni-freiburg.de/dokumente/treaty-of-rome>. Article 
48 states that “freedom of movement for workers shall entail the right (a) to 
accept offers of employment actually made; (b) to move freely within the 
territory of member states for this purpose.” Article 49 calls for “the 
achievement of a balance between supply and demand in the employment market in 
such a way as to avoid serious threats to the standard of living and level of 
employment in the various regions and industries”. 

In other words, the treaty is not a neoliberal free for all. Freedom of 
movement is specifically tied to agreed, contracted employment and recognises 
the need to balance labour supply and demand. Here is the basis for a serious 
negotiation between the UK and the rest of the EU. These articles offer the 
framework for Andrea Leadsom to argue for seasonal agricultural labour and for 
hospitals and care homes to be able to recruit staff as required. Returning to 
the original principles of the treaty of Rome would be in the interests of all 
parties. It would permit a migration policy managed according to the needs of 
the economy. Are there British and European politicians up to the task?
Jon Bloomfield
Birmingham

• Since 2004, European Union law has allowed governments to control movements 
of EU citizens <http://ec.europa.eu/social/main.jsp?catId=460> as follows: 
allow EU citizens to freely circulate only for three months and then require 
them (should they want to stay longer) to show they are working (employed or 
self-employed), a registered student or have sufficient resources (pension, 
savings) to support themselves and comprehensive sickness insurance eg a valid 
European health insurance card enabling the NHS to claim back the cost of 
treatment or have private health insurance. The UK is one of the few 
governments that has not implemented this.

For six years, Theresa May was in charge of the Home Office responsible for 
immigration, yet did nothing to adopt these conditions. One wonders why not and 
why immigration was allowed to dominate the referendum and is still being 
paraded as a big problem. Yet another failure of our own government and the 
Home Office under Theresa May is being blamed on the EU. The remedy was always 
in the UK’s hands.
Pat Whitaker
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 