
EU students applying to study at English universities from autumn 2017 will 
continue to pay the same fees as domestic undergraduates and will remain 
eligible for the same loans and grants despite the Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> vote, the government has 
announced.

Universities welcomed the announcement, which follows three months of 
intensive lobbying and provides much-needed breathing space as the higher 
education sector grapples with the uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/uk-universities-mull-eu-campuses-in-new-era-of-uncertainty>
 triggered by the UK referendum vote to leave the EU.

With the deadlines for applications for next year’s university places 
approaching, vice-chancellors have been urging the government to clarify terms 
affecting future EU students in the hope that numbers will hold up. 
Applications for Oxbridge and most medical schools close later this week, while 
the deadline for most other courses is 15 January.

The higher education sector has become increasingly dependent on EU students, 
who have been the fastest growing proportion of young undergraduates in UK 
universities, at a time when the number of 18-year-olds in the British 
population has been reducing. In each of the past five years EU students 
accounted for more than 5% of undergraduates studying in the UK.


The government’s announcement confirms that new EU students will be eligible 
for the same funding and support as they are now, and that their eligibility 
will continue throughout their course, even if the UK exits the EU during that 
period. The same reassurance was given in June to existing EU students and 
those starting their studies this year.

The universities minister, Jo Johnson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-johnson> said: “We know that the 
result of the referendum brought with it some uncertainties for our higher 
education sector.


“International students make an important contribution to our world-class 
universities and we want that to continue. This latest assurance that students 
applying to study next year will not only be eligible to apply for student 
funding under current terms, but will have their eligibility maintained 
throughout the duration of their course, will provide important stability for 
both universities and students.”

The announcement marks a brief respite for the sector. Last week universities 
were left reeling after the home secretary,Amber Rudd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
, outlined plans for newhardline restrictions on overseas students  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/04/the-guardian-view-on-foreign-students-dodgy-evidence-duff-policy>
in her speech to the Conservative party conference, including two-tier visa 
rules affecting poorer quality universities and courses.

Dame Julia Goodfellow, the president of Universities UK, which represents 135 
universities, said Tuesday’s announcement provided much-needed clarity for EU 
students applying to start courses at English universities in autumn 2017.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Feu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24231e39618082fdbcb1f1d64b4cc9c3e57f3ce6%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20student%20funding%20in%20UK%20to%20remain%20same%20in%202017%20despite%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Feu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20student%20funding%20in%20UK%20to%20remain%20same%20in%202017%20despite%20Brexit%20vote&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Feu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24231e39618082fdbcb1f1d64b4cc9c3e57f3ce6%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Jo Johnson said international students’ eligibility to apply for funds would 
be maintained throughout the duration of their course. Photograph: Lewis 
Whyld/PA 
“It is good to see the government has recognised the value of EU students and 
acted positively to guarantee their access to financial support,” she said. 
“Every effort must now be made to ensure that this announcement is communicated 
effectively to prospective students acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.”

She highlighted the importance of international students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/internationalstudents> beyond the EU to 
British universities. “European and international students are a valuable part 
of cultural and academic life on British university campuses and play an 
important role in UK towns and cities, creating jobs and supporting local 
businesses.

“Looking ahead, as the government develops plans post-Brexit Britain, a 
commitment is needed to ensure that students, from Europe and beyond, are able 
to continue to come to the UK to study without unnecessary bureaucratic burdens.

“The UK should be an attractive destination for all qualified international 
students that would benefit from UK universities and can support themselves to 
study.”

The University and College Union (UCU), which represents 110,000 staff, 
welcomed the clarity for students applying next year but warned that the 
continuing uncertainty about international students risked damaging the UK’s 
role as a key player on the international academic stage.

Britain’s universities depend on open borders – Brexit has us all worried | 
Margret Wintermantel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/britain-universities-depend-openness-dont-let-brexit-destroy-it>
Sally Hunt, the UCU’s general secretary, said: “We don’t believe this measure 
can undo the damage that various proposals floated at the Conservative party 
conference last week may have done via headlines around the world.

“The news that the government was also seeking to ban leading foreign 
academics from advising the UK government over Brexit because they are not 
British nationals will have also done little to help our international standing.

“The government needs to think very carefully about the message it wants to 
send to the rest of the world at this challenging time. One good start would be 
to guarantee the rights of the many EU nationals working in our universities.”

Dr Wendy Piatt, the director general of the Russell Group which represents 24 
leading universities, added: “European and international students make a vital 
contribution to our universities and UK society as a whole. We will continue to 
work with the government to develop a system which supports legitimate students 
who want to study here.”

Maddalaine Ansell, the chief executive of University Alliance group, said: “We 
look forward to working with the government to ensure the message that Britain 
remains open and welcoming to international students carries weight.”

 