
England and Wales look like one country on Friday, with a clear if smallish 
majority for leaving the EU having been counted on both sides of Offa’s Dyke. 
But Scotland, where very nearly two in three voters and every counting area 
wanted to stay in, looks like another land entirely.

This is only the first, if potentially the most consequential, of the many 
divisions seared into the map – and right across British society – by this 
referendum. A vote that purported to be about the UK’s indivisible sovereignty, 
has served to disunite the kingdom.

At first blush, London looks like a capital in the midst of a foreign state – 
an island of Euro-enthusiasm amid a south-east that was mostly resolved to 
quit. The majorities for remain in some inner-London boroughs werecrushing: 
fully 75% of the ballot in Camden and 78% in Hackney. But further out, parts of 
the metropolis began to merge into the countryside beyond. To the south, Sutton 
went 54% for leave, as did Barking and Dagenham, where 63% wanted out.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&media=>
EU referendum: how Britain voted for Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Right across the rest of the south-east, East Anglia, Wales and the Midlands, 
leave was the rule and remain the exception. The exceptions sometimes came in 
pockets of particular prosperity – Tunbridge Wells, for instance – and then 
also cities where universities loomed large: Norwich, Bristol and especially 
Oxford and Cambridge, where remain notched up 70%-plus.

Leave’s overall lead owed much to a strong performance around the coast, and 
particularly in the east of England. Right around the foreshore, from Rother in 
East Sussex through Shepway and Dover in Kent, through Southend in Essex and on 
to Suffolk, leave notched up to 60% or above.
Regional breakdown 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/06/eureferendum/booted/embed/region.html> 
Across the breadth of the Midlands, in places of every sort, remain struggled, 
falling just short in picturesque High Peak in Derbyshire and big city 
Birmingham alike. In smaller Midland towns and cities – Wolverhampton, Nuneaton 
and Bedworth, Kettering – the margin was greater.

Further north, the picture was less uniform, several big cities – including 
Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool – swinging for remain, while old socialist 
bastions of the second order – Wigan, St Helens, Doncaster and Barnsley – were 
overwhelmingly for leave.

Like the geographical divide between London and the home counties, the gulf 
between the northern towns on the one hand and northern cities on the other is 
a product of sociological schisms. The polls were – once again – materially out 
in predicting the final result in a close race. But every survey, irrespective 
of methodology, was quite clear about two cast-iron links: rising age is 
associated with rising support for leave, while higher social class encourages 
support for remain.

The pattern of the results bears out both relationships. Measured by the 
proportion of locals with higher education, the class mix of the area gives a 
particularly snug fit with its propensity to vote remain. Only in Scotland were 
there many deprived communities, such as West Dunbartonshire, with precious few 
degrees, that were nonetheless solid for remain.

The results also bear out the generation gap. The places with the very 
youngest average age, often at or around 30, include Oxford, Tower Hamlets and 
Hackney, which all proved to be remain strongholds. Conversely, at the other 
end of the age spectrum, East Lindsey in Lincolnshire has an average age of 
closer to 50, and it turned in a thumping leave win.

These social divisions have led to a scrappy electoral map on which most of 
the UK has gone one way while Scotland, London, the university towns and 
several other big cities have gone in another direction entirely. There is a 
big difference here with the last referendum in 1975, when there was a solid 
victory for staying in the EEC, but a definite echo of last year’s general 
election, when many of the same trends applied.

The messy map is a challenge for political analysts, who are finding 
predictions are much harder than they used to be. More fundamentally, it is a 
reflection of a divided society, in which many young people are deeply unhappy 
about the decision that an older cohort of voters has just imposed on their 
future.
 