
Strong export sales saved the eurozone from stagnation in the second quarter 
of the year as investment slowed and domestic consumers held back on spending.

Figures showed exports from the 19-member currency bloc increased 1.1%, after 
stagnating in the first quarter.

But this surge in sales abroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/24/germany-surplus-part-blame-eurozone-stagnation>
 was offset by flat investment, reduced stockpiles of goods, stalled government 
spending and only marginally higher consumer spending that restricted the 
overall growth rate to 0.3%.

Economists said the lack of a strong impetus from domestic spending would 
likely to put pressure onEuropean Central Bank chief Mario Draghi to ramp up 
his support for the eurozone economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/21/ecb-european-central-bank-brexit-impact-stimulus-eurozone-growth>
 when he holds a press conference on Thursday.

Karen Ward, chief European economist at HSBC, said the more detailed breakdown 
of GDP growth in the latest figures showed that consumer spending, the key 
driver of growth for much of the last eighteen months, slowed as the boost from 
ow oil prices faded.


“Investment is likely to remain lacklustre due to weak global trade and 
political uncertainty including Brexit. So the second half of the year is 
likely to be sluggish,” she said.


The UK’s referendum vote, a series of terrorist incidents and the ongoing 
refugee crisis have made consumers in the eurozone wary of making large 
purchases and a broad slowdown in global trade is likely to dent exports.


But the German and French governments are not expected to boost spending ahead 
of general elections next year, leaving consumers and export industries to 
generate growth.

Germany, which has reported a record trade surplus for the last year, has 
alreadyplanned a balanced budget for 2017 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/us-germany-taxes-schaeuble-idUKKCN11C14H> that 
will do little to boost much-needed public infrastructure investment.

France, which has limited scope to boost spending without further breaching EU 
budget rules, has attempted to increase employment and GDP growththrough a 
series of liberalising reforms <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-30395168>
.

Bert Colijn, senior eurozone economist at ING Financial Markets, said with 
exports to important trading partners like the UK under pressure, the eurozone 
had “little left in the tank to boost growth in the final months of the year”.


He said: “Consumption could recover somewhat, but no miracles can be expected 
with weakening employment growth. It therefore seems likely that growth will 
slow down somewhat further in the months ahead.”

Overall, the eurozone economy grew by 0.3% in the three months to the end of 
June, in line with preliminary estimates and by 1.6% over the previous year. 
Growth in the first quarter was revised down a touch to 0.5% from 0.6% and 
economists predicted that the rest of the year would prove tough going for 
businesses and household spending.

Howard Archer, chief European economist at IHS Global Insight, said the 1.5% 
growth he has pencilled in for this year would not be repeated in 2017, when 
growth was forecast to drop to 1.2%.

Draghi will give his verdict on the latest eurozone figures on Thursday at the 
ECB’s regular press conference in Frankfurt.

Ewen Cameron Watt, senior director at BlackRock Investment Institute, said 
Draghi should pump more funds into the eurozone economy 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/videos/2016-09-06/cameron-watt-ecb-has-to-widen-menu-of-what-it-does>
 and widen the number of tools used by the ECB to counter a slowdown over the 
next year.















 