
Here’s a safe prediction for 2017: the Greek debt crisis will turn ugly again. 
In fact, the next chapter has already begun. On Wednesday, eurozone finance 
ministersput their plan for short-term debt relief on hold 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/dec/14/uk-unemployment-wages-pound-federal-reserve-interest-rates-business-live?page=with:block-58515c06e4b0b4f19a18a567#block-58515c06e4b0b4f19a18a567>
 because Athens handed a relatively small sum of money to pensioners at 
Christmas and said it would pay for school meals for 30,000 children in 
impoverished areas.

In the view of Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, Greek prime minister, the 
country has earned the right to make small acts of generosity, like €617m 
(£518m) for pensioners. Greece didn’t just meet its target to run a budget 
surplus of 1.5% last year, it exceeded it. That achievement was secured after 
seven years of austerity, a period in which Greece also found itself at the 
front end of Europe’s migration crisis.

In the eyes of the eurozone ministers, however, rules are rules. Tsipras’s 
measures “appear not to be in line with our agreements” and thus debt relief 
will be suspended. The message to Tsipras was plain: perform a U-turn, however 
politically embarrassing.

It is possible that the immediate tension could be defused, but it is hard to 
be optimistic about next year. The demands on the budget get stiffer from here 
– a surplus of 3.5%, rather than 1.5%, is required by 2018. The International 
Monetary Fund regards that target as too stiff, but its argument for greater 
leniency comes with strings attached. It wantsGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> to make sweeping structural reforms 
to its economy and labour laws to promote growth. But how, politically, is that 
supposed to happen in the face of the current high rates of unemployment and 
without an adequate system of welfare support?

The position is a mess. Greece is at loggerheads with eurozone ministers, and 
the eurozone and the IMF are struggling to maintain a united front. Optimists 
might argue that bigger disagreements have been overcome in the past. The 
difference this time, however, is that the demand for a 3.5% budget surplus 
looks unachievable, which is the IMF’s point. The body is right, but the 
eurozone’s position is only hardening.

Two would-be suitors prepare for Punch-up

Roll up, roll up, there’s a fresh brawl at Punch Taverns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/punchtaverns>. This time the squabble is 
not between junior bondholders, senior bondholders, shareholders and various 
hedge funds. That re-financing saga – the delayed consequence of turning a pub 
company into a grotesque exercise in financial engineering in the early 2000s – 
was finally resolved 18 months ago at the fifth attempt.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Feurozone-ministers-wont-budge-an-inch-on-greek-finance-measures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8050b56aa1e996758aa2409a3f1b129cfd40054f%2F0_0_2145_2501%2F2145.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Eurozone%20ministers%20won't%20budge%20an%20inch%20on%20Greek%20finance%20measures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Feurozone-ministers-wont-budge-an-inch-on-greek-finance-measures%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Eurozone%20ministers%20won%27t%20budge%20an%20inch%20on%20Greek%20finance%20measures&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Feurozone-ministers-wont-budge-an-inch-on-greek-finance-measures%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8050b56aa1e996758aa2409a3f1b129cfd40054f%2F0_0_2145_2501%2F2145.jpg>
 Punch Taverns owns 3,300 pubs. Photograph: Frank Baron for the Guardian 
Now comes something conventional: a takeover battle. Nobody has made much 
money from owning Punch shares for the past decade but suddenlytwo parties are 
keen to buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/punch-taverns-pub-group-receives-two-takeover-offers>
 a company that, even in shrunken form, still owns almost 3,300 pubs in the UK.

Unfortunately, from the point of view of the great British drinker, neither 
potential new owner raises a cheer. The Heineken proposal may be 
anti-competitive in intent. The Dutch brewer already owns 1,100 leased pubs in 
the UK. A plan to take the larger portion of Punch – some 1,900 pubs – may just 
be an attempt to force more of its bland lager on to a semi-captive audience. 
No wonder its co-traveller on the offer, Patron Capital, is presented as the 
leader.

The problem with the other contender, Emerald Investment, is that its chief, 
Alan McIntosh, was a founder of Punch back in the late 1990s. McIntosh has 
enjoyed success on many fronts over many years, but being a pioneer of the 
pubco model was not his finest hour. He might argue that he left Punch soon 
after flotation in 2002 and that the high-leverage formula only became 
dangerous when successors pushed it too hard. Maybe, but let’s hear that 
argument in full; financial engineering definitely seemed to be present at the 
birth.

Still, Stephen Billingham, Punch chairman for the past half decade, deserves 
credit for rescuing the company from its near-death experience, an outcome that 
was not guaranteed during the refinancing negotiations in 2012-14. He is 
probably obliged to back one of the proposals since the hedge funds who 
dominate the shareholder register may demand an exit. Besides, Punch’s 
securitised debts are still 6.6 times its top-line earnings, so his negotiating 
hand is weak.

But, strange as it sounds after Punch’s horrible history, independence 
wouldn’t be a bad outcome. On the trading front and in its relations with 
tenants, Punch has been showing definite signs of rehabilitation.

Financial spreadbetting firm’s move is outside bet

Financial spreadbetting firms hate the Financial Conduct Authority’s plan to 
make the industry a safer place for punters by clamping down on the leverage 
ratios that can be used on products such as contracts for difference. But would 
CMC Markets really re-locate to Germany? The idea, apparently, is under 
consideration.

Don’t put a penny on it happening. Some 350 of CMC’s 575 staff work in London 
and only 20 in Germany. The upheaval would be immense. Besides, the FCA is not 
stupid and has ways to tackle regulatory arbitrage, for example banning firms 
from advertising. CMC, one strongly suspects, will stay put.
 