
Much of the talk about Europe these days revolves around the return of the 
nation state, the rise of identity politics and all sorts of geographical 
divides, north-south, east-west – trends again illustrated byHungary’s 
referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/hungarian-vote-on-refugees-will-not-take-place-suggest-first-poll-results>
 on Sunday.

What’s less explored is Europe’s generational gap: not just the differences 
between young and old but the way people’s expectations have mutated over time, 
and how that can create deep frustrations when initial hopes aren’t met. 
Frustrations will easily breed anti-establishment sentiment, and they can fuel 
the extremes.

Hungary's refugee referendum not valid after voters stay away
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/hungarian-vote-on-refugees-will-not-take-place-suggest-first-poll-results>
Over the past quarter-century or so, Europeans have experienced huge 
transformations: the fall of the Berlin wall, globalisation, and now the impact 
of migration, terrorism and illiberal forces. European ambitions that were 
entertained just two decades ago seem to have shrivelled, opening up a 
Pandora’s box of grievances. Of course, the 2008 financial crisis hasn’t 
helped, but economic statistics often fail to measure the gap between what 
citizens expected their lives to be like and what they feel they have ended up 
with.

A Czech friend of mine who recently returned to Prague after spending 15 years 
working in Asia told me how impressed he was by the improvement in living 
standards since the 90s, and yet how depressing it was to see that apopulist 
agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/15/milos-zeman-czech-republic-president-populists-post-communist>
 had now taken hold.

A nation that spent decades behind the iron curtain is today a full-blown 
member of the European club, enjoying consumerism, better housing, better 
everything, its citizens no longer in the grip of a repressive police state or 
waiting in endless queues at food shops. Yet despite these changes there is 
deep frustration – which illiberal politicians are fast capitalising on.

People are obsessed with fears stoked by politicians and much of the media 
about the supposed threat of Muslim migrants swarming into the country. Czech 
president Miloš Zeman is notorious for fanning conspiracy theories about a 
radical Islamic takeover ofEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. None of this bears any 
relation to reality. But the very notion of refugees has been conflated with 
video images of Islamic State militants chopping off heads.

Just 131 people were granted asylum in the Czech Republic in the first half of 
this year – 64 of them Chinese Christians

Bewildered by this, my friend checked some facts: it turns out that just 131 
people were granted asylum in theCzech Republic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/czech-republic> in the first half of this 
year – 64 of them Chinese Christians fleeing persecution.

Paranoia about refugees is now spread widely throughout the west. But 
something distinct seems to be at play in central Europe, and it can’t just be 
explained by the fact that these countries have historically had little or no 
experience, historically, of immigration from the global south.

The need to find scapegoats in countries that have hardly taken in any 
refugees draws from a particular frustration that has grown over time – that of 
comparing one’s life with the life enjoyed by western neighbours, not with what 
it was like a generation ago.

In the Czech Republic, although living standards have risen, wages and GDP per 
capita remain well below those of neighbouring Germany. When Czechs joined the 
EU in 2004, the general feeling was that the country had finally “made it”. But 
prosperity didn’t follow at the speed many hoped for, and people seem to think 
they’re still second-tier members of the EU club.

Elsewhere in Europe too, it’s not that real problems don’t exist 
(unemployment, corruption, growing inequalities); it’s that they are compounded 
by the way many people compare their current lives with what they felt entitled 
to expect. Paradoxically, criticism of the EU institutions sits side by side 
with a genuine attachment to the union. The latestEurobarometer poll 
<http://www.europarl.europa.eu/pdf/eurobarometre/2016/attentes/eb85_1_synthesis_perceptions_wishes_terrorism_en.pdf>
, published in June, shows 75% of Czechs believe that “what brings the the 
citizens of the different EU member states together is more important than what 
separates them”.

I thought about this when reading another completely different study, carried 
out among French Muslims. It pointed to a perhaps comparable phenomenon of 
frustration. The reasons why some French Muslims feel disenfranchised are too 
long to list here, but the Paris-based Institut Montaigne’srecent survey 
<http://www.institutmontaigne.org/fr/publications/un-islam-francais-est-possible>
 also highlighted a generational gap. What first-generation migrants expected 
from life in France, when they moved there for work in the 1960s and 70s, is 
something second and third generations no longer accept as anything close to 
satisfying.

Half of the 28% of French Muslims who say they dislike the republican model of 
integration are between 15 and 24 years old. This is the group, says the 
institute, that turns to “rigorist” Islam as a way of expressing a generational 
revolt. They compare their lives not to where their parents came from, but to 
the opportunities other French people of their age can enjoy that they are 
denied.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Feuropeans-populism-hungary-czech-republic-french-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63264232abfdea857620655903641dc87a2d3af3%2F0_294_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Europeans%20no%20longer%20want%20what%20their%20parents%20aspired%20to%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Feuropeans-populism-hungary-czech-republic-french-muslims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Europeans%20no%20longer%20want%20what%20their%20parents%20aspired%20to%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Feuropeans-populism-hungary-czech-republic-french-muslims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63264232abfdea857620655903641dc87a2d3af3%2F0_294_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Marine Le Pen sings La Marseillaise after a speech on 18 September. ‘Paranoia 
about refugees is now spread widely throughout the west.’ Photograph: Claude 
Paris/AP 
None of this may be very surprising, but because Europe seems to be cracking 
at the seams with all the focus on diversity, lack of inclusiveness, and 
dividing lines between regions, nations and communities, it’s worth stepping 
back a little.

What links the populist spiral in the Czech Republic (taken as just one 
example in Europe) and the discontent brewing among some young Muslims inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> is that in both cases, the things 
that parents or grandparents strove for (joining the west, emigrating for jobs) 
no longer hold the same appeal for younger generations. The young tend to see 
what they don’t have (German wages, equal opportunities), whereas previous 
generations felt, to a degree, that they had “made it” (joining the EU, or 
establishing themselves in the developed world).

It’s as if, in today’s Europe, it has become much harder to cross social and 
economic boundaries than it was once to break out from behind the iron curtain, 
or get a migrant’s residence permit. These comparisons certainly don’t sum up 
everything that’s happening across the continent, but frustrations and multiple 
generation gaps are real – and are part of what is challenging the cohesiveness 
of Europe as a whole, and parts of its social fabric.
 