
With so many passions aroused in Europe by the impact of the refugee crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees>, rising populism, fear of 
terrorism, not to mention confused debates over secularism and burkinis, 
exploring what European Muslims think has arguably never been more important. 
One interesting figure is the grand mufti of Slovenia who I met at a recent 
conference in Austria, held by the International Peace Institute. Slovenia is a 
predominantly Catholic country of two million people – among them, an estimated 
50,000 Muslims. The country’s first mosque is currently under construction in 
the capital, Ljubljana. Building it required the overcoming of many political 
and administrative hurdles – these were eventually cleared when Slovenia’s 
constitutional court ruled that denying a minority the right to a place of 
worship ran counter to religious freedoms. Unsurprisingly, Grand Mufti Nezad 
Grabus thinks these are difficult times for Muslims in Europe. They constantly 
have to fend off suspicions of links with radical Islamism or terrorism.

I didn't realize how often Muslims get kicked off planes, until it happened to 
me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/08/muslim-woman-kicked-off-american-airlines-flight-islamophobia>
Grabus is a quiet, smiling man in his late 40s. If there is one thing he wants 
to stress, it is that “Islam is part of European civilisation”. Islam is by no 
means a new religion in Europe, “but it has new manifestations”, he says. He 
was shocked by this summer’sburkini ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/19/nice-becomes-latest-french-city-to-impose-burkini-ban>
 in some French seaside resorts, and he’s bluntly opposed to any legislation 
outlawing the niqab. But he also says the niqab is something European Muslims 
must work to counter, because it prevents Muslim women from finding a rightful 
place in society. Grabus was born in the Bosnian town of Travnik (his father 
later moved the family to Slovenia where he’d found work, when it was part of 
communist Yugoslavia). He is a Balkan Muslim. Islam certainly isn’t new in the 
Balkans, a region that was dominated for centuries by the Ottoman empire.

Just as Europe is a patchwork of cultures and nations, Europe’s Muslim 
populations are extremely diverse, as is their history. This may sound obvious, 
but it’s something that gets easily pushed aside in all the heated debates 
about Islam, migration and identity politics. Muslims tend to get lumped 
together as a single entity. “InEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, we Muslims have to acknowledge 
that we have no common narrative,” says the mufti, “there are many 
differences.” For example, he points to how ethnic characteristics play a more 
important role than many observers realise. Muslims can relate as much to their 
ethnic or national roots (Bosnian, Albanian, Turkish, Kurdish, Algerian, 
Pakistani etc) as they do to their religious beliefs. Religious revival, as in 
any faith, doesn’t mean you sweep away other parts of your identity.

How many people know that the first mosque in France was built by the French 
secular republic (in Paris, in the 1920s)?

But that’s not to say there can’t be a “common narrative”, and Grabus is 
adamant that: “As Muslims in Europe, our duty is to create one, in which we 
would expose our understanding of Islam belonging here.” Much of this, he 
points out, has to do with education and overcoming ignorance, both among 
Muslims and non-Muslims. How many people, he asks, know that Austro-Hungary, 
under the Habsburgs, recognised Islam as an official religion as long ago as 
1912? How many know that the first mosque inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> was built by the secular French 
republic (in Paris, in the 1920s) as a tribute to the tens of thousands of 
Muslims who died in the first world war? And how many people are ready to 
consider that the medieval scholar Averroes, born in Córdoba when Andalucía was 
ruled by the Arabs, was a European Muslim?

With all the current obsessing over terrorism and radicalisation, it’s easy to 
forget about Europe’s variety, and the diversity of its Muslim populations. 
Days after talking with Grabus, I was in Cologne, meeting representatives of 
the Turkish-Islamic Union for religious affairs (as part of a study group on
Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and the refugee crisis, 
organised by the Robert Bosch Foundation). The central mosque in Cologne is a 
beautiful, modern building with concrete and glass walls, and an Ottoman-styled 
dome. It is still under construction, and it stands as proof of some of the 
societal changes now under way.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Ffrancois-hollande-islam-can-co-exist-with-a-french-secular-state-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20Islam%20can%20co-exist%20with%20a%20French%20secular%20state%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Ffrancois-hollande-islam-can-co-exist-with-a-french-secular-state-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Hollande%3A%20Islam%20can%20co-exist%20with%20a%20French%20secular%20state%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F08%2Ffrancois-hollande-islam-can-co-exist-with-a-french-secular-state-video&media=>
François Hollande: Islam can co-exist with a French secular state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/sep/08/francois-hollande-islam-can-co-exist-with-a-french-secular-state-video>
A million Muslims live in the German state of North Rhine-Westphalia – a third 
of Germany’s three-million-strong Turkish community. The Turkish-Islamic Union 
has strong institutional ties with the Turkish state – something that has led 
some German politicians to express doubts about where its loyalties lie. It 
took decades for Germany to face up to the fact that its TurkishGastarbeiter 
immigrants, who arrived mostly in the 1950s and 1960s, should be entitled to 
citizenship and treated as an integral part of society – a population that had 
settled definitively, not temporarily. But Murat Kayman, a member of the 
Turkish-Islamic union, says “the attitude towards Muslims has never been as 
bad” as it is today. Anti-Muslim and racist incidents are on the rise. The fact 
Germany is now grappling with the integration of more thanone million refugees  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/germany-on-course-to-accept-one-million-refugees-in-2015>
who arrived in 2015 – many of them from the Arab world – has created additional 
stress. Last year’s outbreak of “welcome culture” has faded and the far right 
has madeelectoral gains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/07/angela-merkel-defends-german-immigration-policy-elections-afd>
 – to which Angela Merkel reacted ambiguously by saying in a speech: “Germany 
will remain Germany.”

9/11 was 15 years ago. Why do so many of us feel less safe? | Arjun Sethi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/9-11-us-safety-ethnic-racial-religious-profiling>
What struck me while talking to the Slovenian grand mufti and to leaders of 
Cologne’s Turkish Muslims is what little contact and exchanges they seem to 
have with each other, or with Muslim communities in France, Britain or 
Scandinavia. Just as European countries each grapple separately with issues to 
do with multiculturalism, integration, and contrasted models of relations 
between religion and the state, European Muslim populations are fragmented. 
These complexities get drowned out in Europe’s often hysterical debates over
Islam <https://www.theguardian.com/world/islam>.

The historian Tony Judt once wrote about the need to “map the overlapping 
contours and faultlines of European identity and experience”, because “in an 
age of demographic transition and resettlement, today’s Europeans are more 
numerous and heterogeneous than ever before”. How European societies embrace 
growing diversity will in many ways determine the fate of our democracies. 
Paying more attention to the differences among Europe’s Muslims, rather than 
seeing them as a homogeneous bloc, could be a way forward.
 