
The share price of Britain’s biggest power station operator has jumped to a 
five-month high after the European commission approved subsidies for its 
conversion to burn wood pellets instead of coal.

Drax was awarded a renewable energy subsidy contract by the government in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/apr/23/eight-major-uk-renewable-energy-projects-receive-government-backing>
 to switch the third unit of its coal power station in North Yorkshire over to 
biomass. That prompted astate-aid investigation by the commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/05/drax-biomass-conversion-must-comply-with-eu-state-aid-rules>
, which was concerned the estimates of the plant’s performance were too 
generous and Drax would be overcompensated.

On Monday the investigation cleared 
<http://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-16-4462_en.htm> the subsidy, which 
sees a guaranteed price paid for electricity generated by the plant. The 
commission said its analysis found the support would “not result in 
overcompensation” and would not unduly distort the wood market that will supply 
the plant with 2.4m tonnes of pellets a year.


Protesters criticise Drax over use of subsidies for coal and wood power
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/20/drax-power-plant-protesters-criticise-renewable-subsidies-uk-coal-wood>
The approval comes at the end of a year that has seen coal power drop to a 
record low in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/02/uk-coal-powered-electricity-projected-to-fall-by-record-amount>
 – down two thirds on 2015 – as environmental policies have shuttered several 
major coal plants. Ministers have said the country’slast coal power station 
will close in 2025 to meet climate targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/britains-last-coal-power-plants-to-close-by-2025>
.


Dorothy Thompson, CEO at Drax Group, said: “We are pleased the European 
commission has completed its review of the contract and approved it in line 
with our expectations. We now look forward to fully converting the unit to run 
on sustainable biomass.”


But the company is still looking for financial support to convert the fourth 
of its six units to biomass, which the governmenthas previously said is 
ineligible for subsidies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/07/drax-defeat-government-subsidy-court-appeal>
. “With the right conditions, we can do even more,” said Thompson.


“This announcement is hugely welcome, if a long time coming,” said local 
Conservative MEP, Amjad Bashir, who added that the power station would play an 
important role in climate targets.

But green groups questioned the climate change credibility of burning wood 
pellets which are largely sourced from US forests.

“Big environmental question marks continue to loom over biomass and whether it 
is in fact renewable on this scale. Biomass has been classified 
indiscriminately as a ‘zero carbon’ energy source but this stems from flaws in 
the way the EU and US account for carbon,” said Susan Shaw, a lawyer at the NGO 
ClientEarth.

Drax Group shares rose to a high of 356.2p on Monday, just below their highest 
level this year, in July. Company shares soared earlier this month after the 
company’sbid to buy four gas power stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/drax-coal-opus-energy-gas-plants>
 in a diversification away from its reliance on coal.
 