
So Europe’s first great love affair of the 21st century is over. Knowing that 
it could only last eight years kept almost every one of them special. Barack 
Obama’sapproval ratings in France and Germany 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/06/29/as-obama-years-draw-to-close-president-and-u-s-seen-favorably-in-europe-and-asia/>
 approach 90%. Almost every trip across the Atlantic turned into a memory to be 
treasured, except perhaps for the Poles, some of whomresent being reminded 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/09/world/europe/obama-poland-nato-summit.html?_r=0>
 that Nato is an institution intended to preserve European democracy against 
internal as well as external threat. Even in the UK last summer, after that
ill-judged appearance with David Cameron at the Foreign Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
, when the president warned that a post-Brexit Britain would go to the back of 
the trade deal queue, nearly 80% of Britons still loved him.

Barack Obama's farewell speech in full: annotated
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2017/jan/11/barack-obamas-farewell-speech-in-full-annotated>
Now his memory will be flattered, it seems, by the arrival of Donald Trump, 
with his questionable relationship with Vladimir Putin, his dodgy business 
record, andtoday’s astonishing allegations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 that Russia has evidence that is personally compromising to him.

But maybe, far from remaking the world in his image, Obama has been a 
catastrophic failure. Maybe he is just a little bit too much like the Jake 
Gyllenhaal character in the Tom Ford filmNocturnal Animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/02/nocturnal-animals-review-tom-ford-returns-with-wildly-gripping-revenge-tale>
: gifted, sensitive and creative, but not perfectly calibrated for power. We 
loved the way he walked softly: we may come to wish, despite ourselves, that he 
had actually used that big stick.

Where he should have sustained solidarity, Trump’s victory appears to prove it 
has been squandered. Where he tried to conciliate, Trump’s victory suggests an 
atavistic yearning for confrontation. Obama’s concern for the uninsured, his 
public tears for his inability to curb gun ownership, are being thrown back in 
his face by a man who wants to destroy his legacy and boasts theenthusiastic 
backing of the National Rifle Association 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/nra-gun-control-donald-trump-republicans>
. Maybe Obama has only proved that in the end strength does not depend on 
reason.

Certainly where Europe has loved American presidents before, it has often been 
out of heartfelt relief at the arrival of whatever the contemporary equivalent 
was of the cavalry. For the past 100 years, the first role for the US inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, in European eyes, has been to 
rescue it by force of arms from undemocratic power.

But democracy is not protected only by military hardware. And that is the 
first reason why, as individual countries wrestle with democracy’s limits, 
Obama – and not only Barack, but the whole family, above all Michelle – are 
exemplars of how despite its flaws, democracy alone can create solidarity: what 
in hisvaledictory speech in Chicago last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/yes-we-did-obama-lifts-up-america-one-last-time-in-emotional-farewell-speech>
, Obama described as “the idea that for all our outward differences, we … rise 
or fall as one”.

Obama gives way to a man who represents the shattering of a cohesion that 
generations have taken for granted

Obama gives way to a man who represents the shattering of a cohesion that 
generations have taken for granted, not only across the US but across the 
democratic world. It’s as if William Hogarth, the 18th-century caricaturist of 
good and evil, has reappeared in the globalGin Lane 
<http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/collection_online/collection_object_details.aspx?objectId=705186&partId=1>
 of the 21st to illustrate the same thought – only the choice is no longer 
between beer or something stronger, but the eloquent virtues of moderation 
against the bawdy and careless excess of a lascivious reality TV star.

In this world, moral courage becomes invaluable. Societies fracture over a 
generation, not two presidential terms. Years hence, it will be clear that the 
original choice of Obama eight years ago represented one version of the US that 
despite all his efforts was not on its own enough to overcome the obstacles to 
winning over the other, the version that is largely white, that feels excluded 
from its birthright by incomers with mimsy ideas about gay marriage, and that 
definitely doesn’t want to pay taxes.

Winston Churchill and Elizabeth I have always been the top-rated Britons in 
the US, admired for their courage, self-reliance and ambition. Europe has good 
reason to be suspicious of all these qualities. So we on this side of the 
Atlantic will go on treasuring Obama for his grace and emotional intelligence; 
and for the strength of his decency. An underrated quality that would never win 
a war and doesn’t often win elections – but might sometimes keep the peace and 
protect democracy.
 