
While Europe is transfixed by the UK referendum, the crisis that has arguably 
done the most damage to the continent continues unabated: the war in Syria. 
Right on Europe’s doorstep, Syria still burns. It is high time to acknowledge 
that the peace efforts of the US andRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> have failed dismally. Whether there 
is any chance of this changing after a new US president takes office in early 
2017 is anyone’s guess. But that’s precisely the question Europeans need to 
start preparing for. And the time to do so is now.

A diplomatic breakthrough is a long way off in Syria’s deadly war | Fawaz 
Gerges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/diplomatic-breakthrough-syria-war>
If anyone thought Syria had gone away, look again. Massive airstrikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/casualties-reported-airstrikes-rebel-held-districts-aleppo>
 carried out by Russia and Syrian government forces, some using barrel bombs, 
have picked up again over the besieged city of Aleppo. More hospitals have been 
destroyed and children killed: there are pictures of this online but they’re 
not receiving much attention. Let’s face it: we have slowly become numb to the 
suffering of Syrians.

But we ignore Syria at our peril. Future Arab and Muslim generations, if not 
today’s, will ask Europeans why they did not do more to help a nation butchered 
by a dictator’s army and his allies. Europe’s destiny is intertwined with 
events in its Arab neighbourhood in a way that the US’s is not. For each Syrian 
refugee who made it toEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> 
and was treated decently, how many rejected or stuck in the war zone will 
nurture resentment towards those in the west who preferred to erect barbed wire 
fences or wring their hands?

Preoccupied with terrorism and refugee quotas, we worry about the spillover 
effects but have stopped thinking about root causes. These causes are not in 
Raqqa, the capital of Islamic State’s self-styled “caliphate”. They are in the 
presidential palace in Damascus.

Most people in Europe now view Syria as essentially an anti-terrorism problem. 
Their governments encourage this because sending warplanes is simpler than 
addressing the reality of a complex catastrophe – the worst humanitarian 
disaster of our times. The fight against Isis has recently progressed. In Syria 
and Iraq, the jihadi group has, to a degree, been put on the defensive, and 
western-supported Kurdish and Arab forces seemset to retake more pockets of 
territory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/03/battle-for-falluja-isis-iraq-shia-militias>
. It’s only part of the picture, but it’s the one western politicians prefer to 
highlight.

The other part of the picture is what created the bulk of the refugee 
movements to Europe from Syria in 2015: the civil war, which started in 2011 
when president Bashar al-Assad ordered his security forces toopen fire on 
peaceful demonstrators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/apr/22/syria-protests-forces-shoot> who 
were calling for a democratic revolution as in Tunisia. Assad, who has been 
helped all along by Russia and Iran, then released Islamist militants from his 
prisons and made sure the world started to see Syria in binary terms: him 
against Sunni jihadis.

A solution in Syria can be found only if there is a degree of cooperation from 
Russia

Radicalisation has grown in the ranks of Syria’s armed opposition, a 
phenomenon no doubt encouraged by some of its Gulf sponsors. But that doesn’t 
mean the Syrian opposition should be dismissed. If it was no more than a bunch 
of Islamist radicals, there would never have been talks involving a 
UN-recognised, anti-Assad, Syrian “high negotiations committee 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-mideast-crisis-syria-latakia-idUSKCN0XF0VN>
”. Those talks went ahead, and Russia committed to themeven after it launched 
its military intervention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/15/john-kerry-moscow-vladimir-putin-syria-strategy-sergei-lavrov>
 in September 2015. The talks were supposed to halt the civil war. They haven’t.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feurope-syria-peril-burning-act%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc90520690ff44010853b9c97508c4419aa708815%2F0_252_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Syria%20is%20still%20burning%2C%20and%20now%20Europe%20must%20find%20the%20muscle%20to%20act%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feurope-syria-peril-burning-act%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Syria%20is%20still%20burning%2C%20and%20now%20Europe%20must%20find%20the%20muscle%20to%20act%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F11%2Feurope-syria-peril-burning-act%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc90520690ff44010853b9c97508c4419aa708815%2F0_252_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 ‘The Assad regime made sure only anti-lice shampoo, mosquito nets and vaccines 
were allowed into the town of Darayya.’ Photograph: EPA 
It wasn’t meant to be this way. Remember how, last December, the UN security 
council unanimously voted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/18/un-security-council-agree-resolution-on-syrian-peace-process>
 for a resolution designed to end the civil war and provide Syria with a new 
government? The accord was hailed as a major step towards peace. “This council 
is sending a clear message to all concerned,” said John Kerry, “that the time 
is now to stop the killing in Syria”. A 17-nation International Syria Support 
Group was officially tasked with a process leading to political change in 
Syria. It called for “credible, inclusive and nonsectarian governance” within 
six months, and “free and fair elections, pursuant to a new constitution” 
within 18 months.

Now all the UN seems able to do is wait for the Assad regime to give clearance 
for aid deliveries to the very cities and areas that its forces besiege. 
Earlier this month, in another humiliation of the UN, the Assad regime made 
sure onlyanti-lice shampoo, mosquito nets and vaccines 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/06/02/world/middleeast/syria-aid-convoy.html?_r=0> 
were allowed into the town of Darayya, under siege since 2012. This week some 
food did finally arrive – which made headlines as if it were a major 
breakthrough. Yet600,000 Syrians are still besieged 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-middle-east-36474800>.

Much has been said about the supposedly waning power of the US. And it is hard 
to disagree that a solution in Syria can be found only if there is a degree of 
cooperation from Russia. Despite itsannouncement in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/14/vladimir-putin-orders-withdrawal-russian-troops-syria>
 that it was pulling out, Russia has entrenched itself in the conflict, 
capitalising on the certainty that the Obama administration wanted as little 
involvement as possible.

By deploying planes and air-defence systems, Russia has created a no-fly zone 
suited to its own interests and those of the Assad regime it protects – not for 
the protection of civilians. Surely, after months of diplomatic stalemate, it 
is obvious that the only thing Russia has provided in Syria is more attacks on 
civilian populations – as in Aleppo, whereits airstrikes have been concentrated 
in recent weeks 
<http://www.understandingwar.org/backgrounder/russian-airstrikes-syria-may-13-june-2-2016>
, not in the Isis strongholds in the east.

Europe’s power is, of course, dwarfed by US might. But it isn’t nonexistent, 
if it could only get its act together. Europe has more at stake inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> than the US does because of the ways 
its domestic politics and security have been directly affected by the war. 
Getting to grips with this reality must be a priority for Europeans before it’s 
too late. Russia is Europe’s neighbour, and Europe should find the muscle to 
exert leverage on Putin. He won’t bow to smiles, but he has a difficult 
economic situation on his hands.

Maybe talk of new European sanctions, this time focused on Russia’s attitude 
in Syria? There are no easy solutions. But as long as the US and Russia are 
alone at the negotiating table, European interests will suffer. Not to mention 
those of Syrian civilians.
 