
‘It’s embarrassing”, said Andy Elvin of the Adolescent and Children’s Trust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/22/lone-child-refugees-unaccompanied-dubs-amendment-arrive-uk-calais>
, “for a developed nation not to have managed this more professionally. We’re 
not even talking about a massive number of children.” To be more specific, we 
are talking about 70 unaccompanied minors, arriving from the Calais camp in 
accordance with theDubs amendment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
, which was passed in April.

The children arrived to find a panicked Home Office planning to house them in 
a detention centre and there waiting, the rightwing press, baying for blood 
after previous child arrivals with family members failed to look young enough. 
The Border Agency in Croydon had to erect an emergency facade to prevent 
tabloid photographers catching and shaming the children, for the crime of 
needing help.

More refugee children to arrive in UK as Calais camp faces demolition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/23/france-prepares-to-demolish-calais-refugee-camp>
It would have been bad enough if they had left the squalor of the camps 
to meet a faceless bureaucracy, but at least any bureaucracy worth the name 
would know, given six months’ notice, how to cope with the arrival of two 
classrooms’ worth of kids. Instead, the refugees have been met with a snarling 
shambles. Thank goodness forCitizens UK <http://www.citizensuk.org/>, with its 
banner of welcome. Without it, this would have been more than embarrassing; it 
would have been nationally humiliating: an image of incompetence and unfettered 
nastiness that would never have left us.

Meanwhile in Calais <https://www.theguardian.com/world/calais> at the weekend, 
as the threat of the camps’ clearance loomed, the air was thick with teargas. 
Leaflets instructing the refugees to clear off generated outrage rather than 
obedience, as residents and agencies working in the camp had predicted.

The Le Touquet agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/29/uk-warned-calais-border-deal-is-in-danger>
, which put the UK’s effective border in France rather than England, and the 
principle underpinning it – that refugees must seek asylum in the first safe 
country they enter – have been unfit for purpose for some time. When people are 
displaced in very large numbers, they need to be distributed in a rational and 
humane way. It is not overly complicated to find a measure that establishes 
each EU nation’s resources and cross-references that against existing family 
connections, languages and skills among the refugees themselves, then allocates 
people to places in an orderly and dignified way. It might be fiddly, and 
naturally it would take political courage, but the task isn’t wild or 
unimaginable. Instead, we’ve been hiding behind one another’s skirts, hoping 
that Greece will take the hit by accident of geography, or Germany by dint of 
its prosperity.

The logic of France shouldering our obligations was always nebulous, and 
relied on an unstable combination of inertia and goodwill. But one thing has 
become plain since the goodwill evaporated: however bad an agreement is, the 
only possible amelioration is a better agreement. Stitching together isolated 
responses, for whose deficiencies we then blame each other, is worse than 
sub-optimal government. In practice, it is more like having no government.

This time last year, the refugee traffic was picking up again on the island of 
Lesbos after a choppy October: people died every day in the strait between 
Turkey and Greece, and the death tollin 2015 for this one route was 900 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/22/dozens-dead-as-two-boats-sink-off-greece>
. But Boris Cheshirkov, the UNHCR representativeI interviewed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/charity-appeal-2015-blog/2015/dec/14/guardian-charity-appeal-poor-weather-discount-the-refugees-risking-their-lives-at-sea>
 at the time, wasn’t even talking about the needless tragedies when he said: 
“This shouldn’t be a crisis. This shouldn’t be an emergency.” He was referring 
to the reality of life on the island, with hundreds of thousands of people, 
some trapped in limbo and others who would be travelling onwards into yet more 
danger, with more barbed wire and hostile governments. We were a continent that 
had lost sight of its founding principles of dignity, tolerance and 
brotherhood, he concluded.

The most concrete EU response to the refugee crisis so far has been to push it 
allback on to Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-strikes-deal-with-turkey-to-send-back-refugees-from-greece>
, a country that has already hosted 2.7 million people escaping the war in 
Syria. That was its big idea, its stab at universal fellowship, the culmination 
of decades of noble rhetoric: throw some money at the problem to make sure it 
stays somewhere else. Pretend the conflict is smaller than it is, or larger 
than it is, or closer to conclusion than it is, or more never-ending than it is 
– anything to make it none of our business. How much money should we throw at 
it? Whatever it takes to preserve the integrity of our shared border, since the 
project – whose purpose we can’t remember – will otherwise certainly fail.

EU-Canada trade deal in crisis as Canadian minister walks out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-meltdown-canadian-minister-walks-out>
There was always a sense that some members – mainly us, but also the newer, 
eastern European nations – had never bought into the EU for its humanitarian 
vision but only as a trading bloc. Michel Rocard, prime minister of France 
under François Mitterand, memorably wrote anopen letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/06/french-message-britain-get-out-european-union>
 to the UK two years ago, in which he stated, “You wanted trade, and you 
thought about nothing else”, adding bluntly: “Get out of Europe, before you 
wreck it.” I want to call him prescient, except that we did get out, and it 
looks like we might have wrecked it anyway.

Increasingly, I find this dichotomy between the grand language of universal 
rights and the base but profitable self-interest of free trade to be false. 
Whatever your formula is, however many millions of euros a deal will generate, 
whatever jobs it will create, sooner or later you will come down to the unit of 
a human being. As we have seen withWallonia’s rejection of the EU-Canadian 
trade agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-meltdown-canadian-minister-walks-out>
, the rational may converge with the irrational – some might reject it because 
they are worried about corporate hegemony, others might be yearning for a time 
when you only ate a pig if its ancestors knew yours.

But the prescription will be the same: unless you find a kind of free trade 
that distributes its fruits in a way that people can stomach, they will vote 
against it. Short of giving up on democracy, this means formulating an idea – 
as mutually agreed as your trading bloc is wide – of what fair distribution 
looks like, which cannot be done without an idea of equality at its foundation. 
It is hard to imagine, having got that far, aEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> that had framed its citizens as 
equal and yet offered no dignity, succour or fellowship to the rest of world.

Perhaps it sounds abstruse to even discuss these interlinked crises of an 
institution we’ve just walked away from. But it couldn’t be more vital, as we 
discuss what kind of trade relationship we want with Europe, to remember that 
trade is just a subset of a deeper question: what kind of people do we want to 
be?
 