
Why would a vast, sun-drenched Alpine ski resort, blessed with an abundance of 
snow and slopes and bars and clubs, need a week-long dance music festival 
chucked in? It seems about as necessary as an extra Jagermeister in your 
vodka-Red Bull. But then, in both cases, that’s the way a lot of skiers and 
snowboarders like it.

Last March, I headed to France’s Alpe d’Huez, for the second Snowboxx festival 
(it was launched in Andorra in 2013), where dance music acts such as Horse Meat 
Disco and Eton Messy were on the bill.

The focal point of the festival was La Folie Douce 
<http://www.lafoliedouce.com/en/>, sister to one of the most legendary après 
bars in the Alps (there are now five in the Folie stable), superbly situated 
halfway up the main peak on the Marmottes plateau. Fun-seekers are funnelled 
off the slopes onto the bar’s south-facing terrace, where DJs and singers 
entertained every afternoon. In a setting where you’d expect Gore-Tex, La 
Folie’s dancers wore leather, angel wings and high heels. Well, the male ones 
did.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104df4d3350e9e5bb099c6002720ea6e9d92ad4e%2F0_0_2592_1456%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104df4d3350e9e5bb099c6002720ea6e9d92ad4e%2F0_0_2592_1456%2F2592.jpg>
 The focal point of the festival is the superbly situated La Folie Douce après 
bars 
Plenty of visitors made an effort too: skiwear gave way to muppet outfits, pig 
costumes and retro onesies, while substantial German men in silver mini dresses 
enjoyed some full-blooded stamping of ski boots on the tables.

Anywhere else in the world this might be considered Eurotrash hell, yet here 
on the slopes the banging tunes in the full spring sun felt euphoric, something 
special. On one day, clouds crept up towards the peaks stopping just a few 
metres below the bar, leaving La Folie in the clear blue above, floating on 
cotton wool, the way heaven is supposed to look.

Even on the grey, cold day we arrived at the bottom of the main lift, hardy 
types were dancing in T-shirts – or less – to a set by One Love outside the 
Taburle bar as the snowflakes swirled around. I was freezing in my skiwear, 
clutching an overly cold pint.

Earlier in the week, when Belgian act 2manydjs were performing in the heart of 
the resort, the decking sank under the crowd’s weight, leading to a hasty 
change of venue to a car park across town. But festival headliners Jungle were 
a hit, even in a car park, and appeared on stage in fur coats and gloves.

Jungle’s frontman, his face just discernible inside a massive parka, told the 
audience: “We’re one of those bands that like to play gigs in weird places; we 
played a gig on the roof of Waterloo station but being in the fucking Alps has 
beaten all of them. Can’t feel my fucking fingers.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2216fc7224471ab3baefb1c4ec11428bdb8ef9c%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2216fc7224471ab3baefb1c4ec11428bdb8ef9c%2F0_0_1600_960%2F1600.jpg>
I decided to switch to vin chaud, which made all the difference to my effing 
fingers. Later we wandered back into town where some of the bars were hosting 
Snowboxx events and others just regular après-ski, DJs and dancing.

The secret joy of going to a resort during a music festival, it turns out, is 
that should 4am finishes, dancing on tables and retro onesies lose their 
appeal, there is more than enough room to escape. In fact, canny serious skiers 
should think about actively choosing such weeks as the collective hangovers 
mean the pistes were empty at the start of clear, gorgeous mornings. 
Afternoons, too, saw a mini-exodus to La Folie, freeing up the pistes, although 
the final descent was perilous after chucking out time, as La Folie’s clientele 
descended in a drunken charge: magnificent fun, but it’s not skiing.

And there is such lovely skiing in Alpe d’Huez, and for all levels: bountiful 
green runs for beginners just above the village; lots of fun reds and blacks 
for intermediates, even if the melting spring snow limited the off-piste. One 
particularly beautiful run goes down to the village of Oz, the afternoon 
sunlight chasing skiers down a cleft in the mountains into the green valley 
below.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdb5ca02423c7879d79595d7385202fb57c4f5c%2F0_0_2592_1456%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8bdb5ca02423c7879d79595d7385202fb57c4f5c%2F0_0_2592_1456%2F2592.jpg>
 The collective hangover meant the Alpe D’Huez pistes were empty at the start 
of clear, gorgeous mornings 
From the very top of the resort, the 3,330-metre Pic Blanc, starts the Saronne 
run, claimed by Alpe d’Huez to be the longest black in Europe at almost 16km. 
At the top, with the wind whipping round the peak, it was all deep blue sky and 
brilliant white crisp snow; we edged along a track above the precipice, then 
picked one of the broad, sweeping pistes to soar down. The melting spring snow 
made the middle section a slog through hundreds of metres of slushy moguls, 
where we counted down the piste markers, before hitting the last, almost 
horizontal section, where the late-season snow slowed us again.

Reaching a bar at the end of this run, refuelling with a hot chocolate loaded 
with cream, it was difficult to square this scenery – a wooded ravine, trees 
hugging bare rock, with snow only on the piste – with the peak above where we 
had been minutes before.
 But it was another reason to rejoin the party and carry on celebrating.

• This season’s Snowboxx <http://www.snowboxx.com/> event will take place in 
Avoriaz, Portes du Soleil, from 12-19 Marchincluding transfers, standard 
apartments, lift pass and festival wristband from £335pp with flights from the 
UK, or £239 without). The trip was provided byInghams 
<https://www.inghams.co.uk/ski-holidays/ski-resorts/france/alpe-dhuez> which 
offers a choice of 11 properties in the resort of Alpe d’Huez, including Chalet 
Hotel Les Cimes. A week’s stay at a chalet, half-board, costs from £619pp, 
including return flights from Gatwick to Chambery and transfers. A six day-lift 
pass for Alpe d’Huez costs from £195 per adult, and equipment hire from £97 per 
adult, both when pre-booked through Inghams


More ski festivals
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04752b98ffa5ee4fa4dec7c293b4dd448a5e01dd%2F0_0_2048_1227%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Even%20more%20fun%20than%20skiing%3A%20the%20Snowboxx%20festival%2C%20Alpe%20d%E2%80%99Huez&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Foct%2F25%2Ffrance-alps-snowboxx-festival-ski-resort%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F04752b98ffa5ee4fa4dec7c293b4dd448a5e01dd%2F0_0_2048_1227%2F2048.jpg>
 Rise Festival. 
Polaris brings electronic music (Laurent Garnier, Seth Troxler, Carl Craig) to 
Verbier on 11-12 December. Day ticket CHF69 (about £47),polarisfestival.ch 
<http://www.polarisfestival.ch/>

Catch the So Solid Crew, plus Amy Becker and Skream at Rise Festival (pictured 
below) in Les Deux Alpes, 12-19 December. Speed dating on the lift a bonus. 
£189pp for festival and six-day lift pass,risefestival.co.uk 
<http://www.risefestival.co.uk/>

Horizon brings banging tunes to Bansko, Bulgaria, with Goldie, flashmob ski 
downs, £1.50 pints and a rave in an abandoned hotel. Six nights’ accommodation 
plus festival ticket from £175pp, 12-17 March,horizonfestival.net 
<http://horizonfestival.net/>
 