
The number of articles discussing the teaching excellence framework (Tef) now 
easily eclipses the official government documentation describing it. People are
bashing it, 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/education/2015/nov/02/why-teaching-excellence-framework-tef-metrics-university-fees>
praising it, 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/blog/tef-chair-framework-opportunity-celebrate-excellence>
arguing about the metrics it uses 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network/2016/nov/23/tef-dont-equate-contact-hours-with-teaching-quality>
, and prophesying about how itwill shake up higher education for good 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/features/mock-teaching-excellence-framework-tef-results-revealed-a-new-hierarchy-emerges>
. Academics, university management, reporters and government officials are all 
weighing in. Everyone has something to say about how the Tef will change 
student life for better or worse.

Everyone, it seems, except the undergraduate students it is supposed to 
benefit. Stand at the lectern in any lecture hall and ask the assembled 
students what the Tef is. I doubt many will know.


Of course, some would argue that student voice is channelled through the 
National Union of Students (NUS) and students’ unions, who did respond to the 
Tef consultation. But these groups, rightly or wrongly, havecondemned the 
higher education bill 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/education/2016/aug/09/tef-is-an-unreliable-test-for-university-teaching>
 and the Tef outright because they see it as a back door to higher fees. The 
NUS are threatening a boycott and spoiling of the National Student Survey (NSS) 
(a key Tef metric) as a protest. They recentlyhave won some concessions 
<https://www.nus.org.uk/en/news/government-makes-amendments-to-he-bill-after-pressure-from-students/>
 in the Higher Education Bill, but the Tef is going ahead anyway.


Despite a survey revealing that students are not very enthusiastic 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/524495/he-teaching-quality-literature-review-qualitative-research.pdf>
 about the Tef, they do care deeply about quality teaching. Exeter University 
found that out in 2013 when they tried to sack anEnglish lecturer who was loved 
by students and had won teaching awards 
<http://www.exeterexpressandecho.co.uk/university-exeter-students-launch-petition-save/story-20049046-detail/story.html>
. UCL found the same thing when itsopen day was disrupted by angry students 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2015/07/06/ucl-students-white-up-protest-black-lecturer-race-module_n_7734226.html>
 who “whited up” when it rejected a masters program on whiteness led by Dr 
Nathaniel Coleman  and ended his contract. Students write passionate reviews of 
staff for awards entries. Others fill in module feedback forms with enthusiasm 
and constructive criticism. I know this as a postgraduate teaching assistant. 
If you give students a platform to tell their stories, they will use it.


If you want to learn about the problems of student satisfaction in the era of 
£9,000 fees, askLaura Gainer, a former graphics student from Brighton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
 – she can tell you exactly what was wrong with her course. Or ex-UCLstudent 
Laura Warner, who detailed the shortcomings of the 2015 NSS 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/student/blogs/student-blog-national-student-survey-gets-student-satisfaction-wrong>
. What about studying at Oxford, an institution consistently ranked highly for 
student satisfaction? ForCornel Hrisca-Munn 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/oxford-university-worlds-worst-cornel-hrisca-munn?trk=prof-post>
, this metric deceived him completely.

Beyond the abstract discussion of retention rates, graduate employment and 
“learning gain” are human stories that can richly describe what happens when 
university teaching isn’t up to scratch. This is the expert knowledge that the 
Tef should put at the forefront of any metric it uses. But apart from the 
Higher Education Council Funding for England tinkering with the NSS questions, 
the Tef doesn’t give students a place to get their views into the metrics.

 Meanwhile, students are struggling to get their voices heard through the 
current channels. It’s no surprise thatrateyourlecturer.co.uk 
<http://rateyourlecturer.co.uk/> (the UK version of ratemyprofessor.com 
<http://www.ratemyprofessors.com/>) is gaining popularity and criticising the 
political stance of the NUS, questioning ifthey “even care” 
<http://rateyourlecturer.co.uk/blog/home/do-the-nus-really-even-care> about 
students. But these sites aren’t designed to improve teaching, they’re designed 
to showcase excellent schooling and expose bad practice. I haven’t seen a video 
of British teachingstaff reading their reviews yet 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JBKmgJhSQV8>, but I imagine it’ll be fairly 
similar to those from the US: frustration, surprise and dismay from staff as 
students lash out.

Whether we like it or not, the Tef is here, and the government should be 
applauded for addressing the problem of quality teaching in universities. But 
if the Tef is about ensuring the best quality “product”, then the customer 
reviewing the product needs to be taken more seriously.

So how do we give students a platform that works? The United Kingdom 
Engagement Survey is a start 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/institutions/surveys/uk-engagement-survey>, but it 
doesn’t capture students’ everyday experience. The Department for Education and 
universities should develop a feedback system, in collaboration with current 
students, that future students could regularly contribute to, identifying 
weaknesses in teaching and offering strategies for improvement.

Students could then give a single set of numerical scores measuring quality 
and response to feedback that feed directly into Tef assessments, providing a 
regular student appraisal of departmental excellence. This system wouldn’t be 
perfect, and numbers cannot completely convey the depth of student experience, 
but it would be a start. Whatever is decided, it should be done in conjunction 
with students.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 