
It will be two years this summer since Charlotte Hughes and her group of 
activists in Ashton-under-Lyne,Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>, first gathered outside the 
local jobcentre to try to address some of the damage they believe it’s causing.

Hughes’s heavily pregnant daughter, then 19, had just been hit with a 
three-year benefit sanction. Her offence, Hughes says, was telling a workfare 
interviewer that she was pregnant, which meant she couldn’t take part inthe 
unpaid labour <http://www.boycottworkfare.org> needed to keep her benefits. 
“She was crying afterwards,” Hughes tells me. “She had to come back and live 
with me – she had no electric, gas, or food.”

Angela felt pressured into work. Now she’s struggling to pay the bills | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/jobcentre-advisers-pressure-work-carer>
Hughes made a decision there and then to get justice for – in her words – the 
“sitting ducks” exposed to Britain’s benefit system: jobseekers, low-waged 
workers, and claimants struggling with disability or mental health problems. On 
a Thursday morning in August 2014, the 44-year-old stood outside 
Ashton-under-Lyne’s jobcentre for two hours with a few friends: offering words 
of support to people going through the doors, pointing out local services, and 
handing out information leaflets on benefit rights (correcting misinformation 
given by the jobcentre is key, Hughes says).

They have been there every week since. The size of the group fluctuates, from 
three to 30: it includes retired people, the self-employed and former benefit 
claimants who have seen the system first hand. The important thing, Hughes 
says, is that they’re a constant presence. “Welfare rights are overrun. 
Citizens Advice too. But we’re right outside. Every week. They know where to 
find us,” she says. “That space outside the jobcentre is a safe place. Because 
they’ve not got one inside.”

Ashton-under-Lyne has in some ways developed a reputation as the embodiment of 
the Department for Work and Pension’s (DWP) grim frontline. Last September, 
inside its jobcentre, a man doused himself inpetrol and threatened to set 
himself on fire 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/news/greater-manchester-news/ashton-job-centre-man-petrol-10038444>
.

Hughes spoke to him only a week later. “It’s easy to judge and say he 
shouldn’t have done it, isn’t it? But people are desperate. He’d had enough.”

Desperation seems the only term to describe what Hughes and her group see: 
disabled and chronically ill people who have been found “fit for work”; single 
parents told to find a job; vulnerable jobseekers who have had their benefits 
stopped.

Nowadays, to need the jobcentre is like you’re a criminal

Hughes tells me of one man the group used to speak to regularly, after he’d 
been repeatedly sanctioned. “We hadn’t seen him for a few weeks. We saw his 
friend and we asked ‘where is he?’ His friend said: ‘He’s killed himself.’ That 
really stayed with us.”

What stands out about Ashton-under-Lyne is not that it’s unique – a rotten 
apple in an otherwise decent system – but that it’s one of the areas chosen as 
a test case for new DWP policies which, given enough time, spread to every 
other jobcentre across the country. As Hughes puts it: “Everything comes to us 
first.”

Three years ago, universal credit (UC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/universal-credit> was trialled here 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/universal-credit-for-local-authorities>
. Then thetroubled families programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/11469/2117840.pdf>
.

Now, it’s in-work conditionality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/11/benefit-sanctions-hurting-low-paid-vulnerable-people>
 – where low paid workers, relying on UC to “top up” their wage, must search 
for more hours, higher pay or an extra job or have their benefit taken.

From the street outside the jobcentre, Hughes is seeing the reality of this 
government policy first hand. She tells me of one man on azero-hours contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/zero-hours-contracts> who claims UC 
“top-up” in order “to live”. He had his benefit sanctioned after he missed the 
jobcentre’s job search target by one hour.

“He was working nights, all hours. But they stopped his housing benefit,” 
Hughes says. “He’s lost his home. We gave him a coat in the end. I’ve never 
seen a man more broken.”

Paul Donnachie’s benefits were suspended. Months later, he killed himself | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/paul-donnachie-benefits-suspended-months-later-killed-himself>
After two years of talking to people who are trying to hold on to their 
benefits, Hughes keeps coming back to one idea: nowadays, to need the jobcentre 
is “like you’re a criminal”.

The rules of the building support her point: no hot drinks, no mobiles, and if 
you’re 10 minutes early for an appointment, you’re sent to wait outside (“even 
when it’s freezing”, she adds). Two uniformed G4S security guards man the 
doors. “They’re there when people get sanctioned, in case they start crying or 
raising their voice,” Hughes explains. “We regularly see them escorting people 
from the building … It’s a culture of fear.”

Hughes tells me she’s witnessed a pregnant woman throw herself on the ground 
outside the jobcentre, distressed after a sanction. “‘I’ve got a baby to feed,’ 
she was saying. ‘How can I do it?’ It was just like my daughter.”

She pauses. “People don’t realise until it happens to them. This is really 
happening.”
 