
A group of leading authors, educationalists and child-development experts is 
calling on the government to introduce national guidelines on the use of 
screens, amid concern about the impact on children’s physical and mental health.

It is one of a series of measures outlined in a letter to the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/25/screen-based-lifestyle-harms-health-of-children>
, highlighting what it describes as the increasingly “toxic” nature of 
childhood, and signed by 40 senior figures, including the authorPhilip Pullman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/philippullman>, the former archbishop of 
Canterbury Rowan Williams, the psychotherapist Susie Orbach and the childcare 
expert Penelope Leach.

Screen-based lifestyle harms children’s health | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/25/screen-based-lifestyle-harms-health-of-children>
The letter urges the government to create a cabinet-level minister for 
children, with specific responsibility for auditing all government policies in 
order to assess their impact on children’s health and wellbeing.

It calls for the development of kindergarten-style education for three- to 
seven-year-olds, with emphasis on social and emotional development and outdoor 
play; and says guidelines on screen-based technology for children up to 12 
should be drawn up by recognised authorities on child health and development.

It is 10 years since the group sent its first letter to the media, expressing 
concern about the way it believes children’s health and wellbeing are being 
undermined by “the decline of outdoor play, increasingly screen-based 
lifestyles, a hyper-competitive schooling system and the unremitting 
commercialisation of childhood”.

Since then, they say, policy making has been “half-hearted, short-termist and 
disjointedly ineffective”, with obesity and mental health problems among young 
people approaching crisis levels.

“If children are to develop the self-regulation and emotional resilience 
required to thrive in modern technological culture, they need unhurried 
engagement with caring adults and plenty of self-directed outdoor play, 
especially during their early years (0–7),” the letter reads.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fexperts-call-for-official-guidelines-on-child-screen-use%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c32d11cd2bd9ba60cc8a1abde953a5a79cad58%2F475_679_4657_2794%2F4657.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Experts%20call%20for%20official%20guidelines%20on%20child%20screen%20use&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fexperts-call-for-official-guidelines-on-child-screen-use%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Experts%20call%20for%20official%20guidelines%20on%20child%20screen%20use&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F25%2Fexperts-call-for-official-guidelines-on-child-screen-use%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa7c32d11cd2bd9ba60cc8a1abde953a5a79cad58%2F475_679_4657_2794%2F4657.jpg>
 Sue Palmer, the author of Toxic Childhood, is among the letter’s signatories. 
Photograph: Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
“Without concerted action, our children’s physical and mental health will 
continue to deteriorate, with long-term results for UK society that are frankly 
unthinkable.”


Among the signatories is Sue Palmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sue-palmer>, the author of the 2006 book 
Toxic Childhood, which tapped into parental angst about raising children in the 
modern world; the psychologist and educational consultant Dr Richard House; the 
professor of education Dr Robin Alexander; the wellbeing programme director at 
the London School of Economics’ centre for economic performance,Richard Layard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/richardlayard>; the former London schools 
commissionerSir Tim Brighouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/sir-tim-brighouse>, the psychologist and 
authorSteve Biddulph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/jan/30/raising-girls-steve-biddulph-review>
 and a former government mental health championNatasha Devon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>
.

Not everyone subscribes to the doom-laden view of modern childhood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/sep/14/children.familyandrelationships>
 and the “toxic” environment in which children are growing up. Recent studies 
have suggested thatscreen-based technology can encourage reading in boys from 
low-income families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/dec/21/boys-screen-time-start-to-read> 
and that there may bea positive link between computer games and academic 
performance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/08/positive-link-between-video-games-and-academic-performance-study-suggests>
.

However, Palmer, who chairs the Upstart Scotland 
<http://www.upstart.scot/upstart-organisers/> campaign to introduce 
kindergarten-style education for under-sevens, said: “Apart from basic material 
needs, like food and shelter, there are two essential ingredients if children 
are to survive and thrive whatever the future brings: love and play.

“But consumer culture has encouraged adults to confuse both of these with 
stuff you can buy in the shops. We’ve also become obsessed with trying to teach 
kids everything they need to know. But you can’t teach things like 
self-regulation and resilience – they have to develop, through personal 
experience.”


Are tablet computers harming our children's ability to read?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/24/tablets-apps-harm-help-children-read>
House said: “It’s nothing short of a scandal that policymakers have done next 
to nothing to address the ‘toxic childhood’ issues that Sue Palmer first 
flagged up in her iconic book over a decade ago. Indeed, matters are now far 
worse, with children’s mental health and behavioural problems at record levels.

“The time for pussyfooting around politicians and policymakers is over, and 
it’s time to shame them into doing something substantive and meaningful – or 
future historians will doubtless look back on the current era as one of 
political child abuse.”

Dr Sharie Coombes, a child and family psychotherapist, was a primary school 
headteacher when Palmer’s book came out, implementing early years policies 
which she said felt “misinformed, abusive and dangerous to children’s 
wellbeing, confidence and long-term learning attitudes”.

“A decade on, I’m now a child and family psychotherapist helping to pick up 
the pieces of emotionally broken children forced to endure damaging, 
politically charged and excessively stressful learning environments and 
policies.

“We cannot stand by and tolerate such abuses when we have other international 
models to draw on that demonstrate how to achieve excellent results and 
mentally healthy young people who value their education.”
 