
Faces are important to us. From the moment we are are born, we prefer to look 
at faces than at other, inanimate objects, and, being social animals, we 
encounter faces every day of our lives. The face is the first thing we look to 
when identifying other people; faces also convey emotions, informing us of 
peoples’ mood, and from them we can usually determine a person’s sex and, 
sometimes, roughly how old they are.Eye movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/jun/02/how-your-eyes-betray-your-thoughts>
 can also reveal to us something about another person’s intentions.

How your eyes betray your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/jun/02/how-your-eyes-betray-your-thoughts>
Faces are so important for human social interactions that our brains contain a 
region that is specialised for processing them. This region,the fusiform face 
area <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC1857737/>, lies on the lower 
surface of the temporal lobe, and is thought to beunique to humans and other 
primates <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3619156/>. Our childhood 
ability to recognize faces improves as we get older, in line with development 
of this region, but we still know very little about how the emergence of such 
abilities is linked to anatomical changes.

A surprising new study by researchers at Stanford University 
<http://vpnl.stanford.edu/index.html> now shows that the size of this 
face-selective brain continues to increase well into the second decade of life. 
The findings, published in the latest issue of the journalScience, challenge 
our assumptions about the patterns of brain development in adolescence.

Jesse Gomez and his colleagues recruited 22 children and 25 adults, and 
scanned their brains using two different techniques – functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI), which measures brain activity indirectly by detecting 
changes in cerebral blood flow, andquantitative MRI 
<https://vistalab.stanford.edu/research/quantitative-mri-of-tissue-properties-in-the-human-brain/>
 (qMRI), a newly developed method that gives precise measurements of both the 
structure and composition of human brain tissue. The researchers focused on the 
fusiform gyrus in underside of the temporal lobe, which contains not only the 
FFA, but also, immediately adjacent to it, another region that is selective for 
scenes and places.

The researchers first identified both regions in the fMRI scans, confirming 
that one is activated only in response to images of faces, and the other only 
in response to images of places. Next, they used qMRI to produce detailed maps 
of both brain regions in all the participants. This revealed that the size of 
the fusiform face area increased with age – it was larger in the adult 
participants than in the children, and the older the individual, the larger it 
was. By contrast, no such difference was seen in the adjacent place-selective 
region, whose size remained stable in all the adults.

Gomez and his colleagues also tested the participants’ face and place 
recognition memory, and found that their ability to recognise faces was closely 
related to the size of their FFA – the bigger their FFA, the better the memory 
for faces. Their ability to remember places, on the other hand, was not at all 
related to FFA size. This suggests that the FFA continues to grow into 
adulthood, and that this growth is tightly linked to an improved face 
recognition abilities.

To confirm their anatomical findings, and try to establish how these size 
differences might occur, the researchers examined post-mortem brain tissue 
obtained from 10 adults. Sure enough, they found that the size of the FFA 
increased with age. Their analyses also suggested that these age-dependent size 
increases are likely due to a number of factors, especially the branching of 
dendrites, the growth of new dendritic spines, and the formation ofmyelin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2014/apr/24/white-matter-synaptic-plasticity>
, a fatty substance that envelops nerve fibres to insulate them and hasten 
their conductance of impulses.

Live imaging of synapse density in the human brain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/aug/10/live-imaging-of-synapse-density-in-the-human-brain>
Until recently, it was believed that brain development ended at around 16 
years of age. Although the brain has reached its full size by then, we now know 
that parts of it continue to mature until at least, and perhaps beyond 25 years 
of age. Most notably, the prefrontal cortex undergoes an extended period of 
maturation, during which huge numbers of synaptic connections are eliminated. 
This synaptic ‘pruning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2011/aug/19/neuroscience-microglia-synapses>
’ refines the prefrontal neural circuitry, making it more efficient at 
performing executive functions such as planning and decision-making.

The new findings seem to show that the FFA continues to grow into early 
adulthood, and therefore challenge the view that later stages of brain 
development are characterised by volume reductions caused by synaptic pruning. 
The findings are, however, somewhat limited by the small number of 
participants, and also by the fact that the oldest participants were just 28 
years of age. It is at around this age that brain development is thought to 
end, and so we cannot say conclusively that the FFA continues to grow in 
adulthood until the findings are replicated in people of a much broader age 
range.

The findings nevertheless seem to provide yet another example of 
experience-dependent neuroplasticity, the process by which the things we do 
alter brain structure and function. Childhood, adolescence, and early adulthood 
are periods of life in which most of us expand our various social circles. The 
size of the FFA may therefore increase relative to the number of new faces we 
see and remember, and so it would also be interesting to whether its size does 
actually differ according to the number of friends we have.

Reference

Gomez, J., et al. (2017). Microstructural proliferation in human cortex is 
coupled with the development of face processing.Science, 355: 68-71.

Mo Costandi <https://neurophilosophy.wordpress.com/> trained as a 
developmental neurobiologist and now works as a freelance science writer. His 
work has appeared inNature 
<http://www.nature.com/search?exclude-collections=journals_palgrave%2Clab_animal&include-collections=journals_nature%2Ccrawled_content&journal=nature%2Cnews%2Cnnewsb&order=date_desc&q=costandi>
,Science 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=site%3Ahttps%3A%2F%2Fwww.sciencemag.org%2Fnews%20costandi>
, andNew Scientist <https://www.newscientist.com/search/?q=costandi>, among 
other publications. He is also the author ofNeuroplasticity 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/neuroplasticity.html> (MIT Press, 2016) and 
50 Human Brain Ideas You Really Need to Know 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/50-human-brain-ideas-you-really-need-to-know.html>
 (Quercus, 2013).
 