
Tax credits 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/MoneyTaxAndBenefits/TaxCreditsandChildBenefit/TaxCredits/index.htm>
 were designed to lift millions of families out of poverty, but the system has 
been plagued by errors and controversy since it was launched in 2003 by the 
then chancellor Gordon Brown.

Problems with overpayments, errors and fraud have put many people off claiming 
the credits, but despite the system's complexity you should take the time to 
make a claim, because tax credits could benefit you and your family by 
thousands of pounds a year.

Child tax credit
 Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty 
The child tax credit is a means-tested benefit paid to parents and carers who 
are responsible for at least one child under 16 living under their roof, or 
what HM Revenue & Customs (HMRC) calls "a young person".

A child becomes a young person from 1 September after their 16th birthday, and 
will remain a "qualifying young person" up to their 20th birthday providing 
they are in full-time education or on an approved training course before they 
are 19.

You can't claim child tax credits for children at university or if they are 
claiming benefits, such as income support or income-based job seeker's 
allowance.

Child tax credit isn't just for the poorest families – households with an 
income of up to £50,000 are entitled to the full family element of the child 
tax credit. Those earning more get a reduced sum.

Couples have to make a joint tax credit claim - neither of them can claim as a 
single person. Where parents have split up and live separately the money should 
go to the person with whom the child normally lives.

Lone parents can also claim child tax credit. Parents or carers don't have to 
be in work to claim the money, which can be paid either weekly or every four 
weeks.

What you get

The child tax credit 
<http://www.direct.gov.uk/en/MoneyTaxAndBenefits/TaxCreditsandChildBenefit/TaxCredits/Paymentsandentitlement/entitlement/DG_073939>
 comes in two parts: a "family element" worth up to £545 a year, and a "child 
element" worth up to £2,235 for each child in the 2009/2010 tax year.

Families with a new baby can claim a further payment of up to £545 in the 
child's first year, and there are further payments for disabled children 
(£2,670) and severely disabled children (an extra £1,075).

To apply, call the tax credit helpline on 0845 300 3900. Lines are open from 
8am to 8pm every day.

Working tax credit

The working tax credit <http://www.adviceguide.org.uk/b_working_tax_credit.pdf>
 is designed to top up the earnings of people on low incomes, and the payouts 
are means tested. How much you get depends on how much you earn – you don't 
need children to qualify, although you might get more if you do have kids.

Your age and the number of hours you work each week will also affect how much 
you get.

You can claim if you are aged 25 or over and working at least 30 hours a week. 
You can also claim from the age of 16 if you are responsible for at least one 
child, and are usually working at least 16 hours a week.

People aged 50 or over and working at least 16 hours a week can also claim if 
they are starting work after receiving benefits for at least six months.

What you get

The working tax credit is made up of a number of different elements 
<http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/RATES/taxcredits.htm>:

· The basic element is worth up to £1,890 a year
· The couples and lone parent element is worth up to £1,860 a year
· The 30 hour element, for people who work this length of time or longer a 
week, is worth up to £775 a year. Couples with at least one child can claim 
this if they work 30 hours a week between them, providing one works 16 hours or 
more
· The disabled worker element is worth up to £2,530 a year
· The severe disability element is worth up to £1,075 a year
· The 50+ return to work payment (16-29 hours) is worth up to £1,300 a year
· The 50+ return to work payment (30+ hours) is worth up to £1,935 a year.

There is also a childcare element for people who spend money on registered or 
approved childcare. This is currently worth a maximum of £175 a week for one 
child, or £300 a week for two or more children. Up to 80% of eligible costs 
will be covered.

As you can see, tax credits are complicated. HMRC offers an online tax 
calculator <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/taxcredits/calculator.htm> for people who 
want to work out how much they are likely to get.

To claim working tax credits call the tax credit helpline on 0845 300 3900 
between 8am to 8pm.

Overpayments

In 2006/07, tax credit claimants received £1bn worth of overpayments. The bad 
news is that you have to pay this money back.

If HMRC tries to claw back any overpayments you can appeal against their 
decision <http://www.hmrc.gov.uk/leaflets/cop26.pdf>. Originally, you had to 
prove HMRC had made a mistake, and that it was "reasonable" to think your 
payment was correct. Up to two-thirds of appeals were rejected because HMRC 
said claimants should have spotted the errors.

It has now scrapped this "reasonable" clause. Under new rules, overpayments 
can be written off if the claimant has fulfilled all their responsibilities and 
HMRC hasn't.

Overpayments are actually an integral part of the tax credits system. Because 
they are means tested, your entitlement constantly changes in line with your 
income and other circumstances.

That's why your claims information must always be accurate and up to date. You 
must notify HMRC of any change in your circumstances within one month, as well 
as check award notices and point out any errors.

Further advice

If you need more information regarding a claim or appeal, contact the tax 
credit helpline or your localCitizens Advice bureau 
<http://www.citizensadvice.org.uk/cabdir.ihtml>. 

Alternatively, Community Legal Advice <http://www.clsdirect.org.uk> offers 
free, confidential advice, as does charityTaxaid <http://www.taxaid.org.uk>, 
which offers free advice, including on tax credits, for people on low incomes.
 