
National Savings & Investments was set up in 1861 as the Post Office Savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> bank. The bank was backed by the 
government and money paid in by the public provided a fund for the then 
chancellor, Gladstone, to borrow to put towards public spending.

During the first world war the scheme was expended to pull in more funds to 
finance the war effort, and savings certificates were introduced. Later, in 
November 1956, premium bonds were introduced.

In 1969, the Post Office Savings bank became a separate government department, 
accountable to Treasury ministers, and was renamed National Savings. 
Investments was added to the title in 2002.

Although its name has changed the organisation is still backed by the 
government, making it the most secure place for people to keep their savings. 
National Savings & Investments has two roles: to raise cost-effective financing 
for the government and to reduce the cost of government borrowing to the 
taxpayer.

The products
 NS&I offers products that are unavailable elsewhere 
NS&I offers a range products, some of which are unavailable elsewhere. 

Alongside an instant access deposit account, Isas 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/money/2007/oct/25/isas.shares> and savings bonds, it 
offers savings certificates and premium bonds - products that are not available 
from other institutions.

Savings certificates

These are tax-free investments that can be bought by anyone aged seven or over 
- or on behalf of a younger child. NS&I offers two types of savings 
certificate: one offers a fixed rate of interest, the other pays a rate linked 
to inflation. On both, interest is paid free of tax.

NS&I regularly launches new issues of the certificates, and investors are 
allowed to put between £100 and £15,000 into each issue. This allowance comes 
on top of your Isa allowance.

Premium bonds

Premium bonds are an investment that, instead of paying interest, offers 
savers the chance to win a tax-free lump sum each month. Investors can put up 
to £30,000 in bonds, subject to a minimum of £100 each time they invest. Each 
bond costs £1 and each has an equal chance of winning when prizes are allocated 
each month.

Each month, millions of prizes are paid out, ranging from £50 to two jackpot 
prizes of £1m. The winning bonds are picked each month by Ernie - a random 
number generator, now in its fourth incarnation.
 Ernie generates the winning premium bond numbers. Photograph: NS&I 
Prizes are paid tax-free and there is no limit to how much you can win each 
month. However the odds of any bond win any prize each month are 36,000 to one.

You can cash in your premium bonds any time you choose and when you do, you 
will get back exactly what you put in. This means over time the real value of 
your investment will be eroded by inflation.

For more on premium bonds, see our Q&A 
<http://money.guardian.co.uk/saving/story/0,,1936539,00.html>.

Where to find NS&I products

Most of the products can be bought via the telephone, post and the NS&I website
 <http://www.nsandi.com/>.

You will also find leaflets and application forms for NS&I products in post 
office branches, and from November 2007 premium bonds will also be marketed in 
branches of WH Smith.
 