
Life insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/lifeinsurance> helps your 
dependants to cope financially in the event of your death.

When you take out life insurance you set the amount you want the policy to pay 
out should you die – this is called the sum assured. The premium you pay will 
be based on this figure, and on your sex and age.

Your payments will also depend on the type of cover you choose. There are two 
basic types of life insurance, term assurance and whole-of-life cover, but 
within those categories there are many variations.

Term assurance
 Life insurance helps to safeguard your family should you die. Photograph: 
Martin Argles 
The cheapest, simplest form of life cover. It is straightforward insurance 
with no investment element and it pays out a lump sum if you die within a 
specified period.

Often term assurance is bought at the same time as a mortgage, and taken out 
for the same 25-year period. If you are alive at the end of the term you don't 
get anything back.

There are several types of term assurance:

 Level term assurance – this offers the same payout throughout the life of 
the policy, so your dependents would get the same amount whether you died on 
the first day after taking the policy out or the day before it expired. This 
tends to be bought with an interest-only mortgage, where the debt has to be 
paid off only on the last day of the mortgage term.

 Decreasing term assurance – the payout reduces by a fixed amount each year, 
ending up at zero at the end of the term. Because the level of cover falls 
during the term, premiums on this type of insurance are lower than on level 
policies. This cover is often bought with repayment mortgages, where the debt 
falls during the mortgage term.

 Increasing term assurance - the potential payout increases by a small amount 
each year. This can be a useful way of protecting the initial amount against 
inflation.

 Convertible term assurance - the policyholder has the option of switching in 
the future to another type of life insurance such as a "whole of life" or 
endowment policy without having to submit any further medical evidence.

 Family income benefit - instead of paying a lump sum, this offers the 
policyholder's dependents a regular income from the date of death until the end 
of the policy term.

Whole-of-life insurance

A policy that lasts throughout your life so your dependants are guaranteed a 
payout whenever you die. Because you are certain to die while holding the 
policy, premiums are substantially higher than for term assurance.

There are different types of whole of life policy – some offer a set payout 
from the outset, others are linked to investments, and the payout will depend 
on performance. The most popular investment-linked policies are unit-linked 
policies, linked to funds, and with-profits policies, which offer bonuses.

Whole of life policies are often reviewable, usually after 10 years. At this 
point your insurance company may decide to put up your premiums or reduce the 
cover it offers.

Buying life insurance
 You can buy insurance from high street outlets or online. Photograph: 
Guardian/Dan Chung 
Life cover is offered by insurance companies and some friendly societies; many 
insurers sell directly to the public, and through other outlets including 
mortgage brokers, banks and building societies and comparison websites.

Premiums, which are usually paid monthly, will be based on the sum assured, 
your age, and whether or not you smoke. Some insurers require that you undergo 
a medical before offering cover, but this is becoming less common.

Life insurance premiums change over time, and if you already have a policy it 
could be worth shopping around to see if you can get a cheaper deal. You should 
be able to cancel your existing policy without penalty – but don't do so until 
you have arranged another policy in its place.
 