
Lost and forgotten building society and bank accounts hold millions of pounds 
of savers' money. If you think you have a dormant account there are a number of 
ways to track down your cash.

Banks and building society accounts

If your account has been inactive for a long time your account provider should 
write to you to ask if you want it to remain open. If it gets no response - 
perhaps because the letters are going to an old address - it will stop sending 
letters and statements and class the account as dormant. However, your money 
will be safe and waiting for you to reclaim it.

If you have a passbook or details of the account and where it is held you 
should contact the provider directly. Some banks have forms on their websites 
for you to fill in and reclaim your money. The more account details you have 
the better your chance of being quickly reunited with your money.

Savers who don't know which bank or building society their account is held 
with, or who currently owns the organisation, can use a central search set up 
by the British Bankers' Association (BBA), the Building Societies Association, 
and NationalSavings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> and Investments 
(NS&I).

Their mylostaccount.org.uk <http://www.mylostaccount.org.uk/> website lets you 
search across all banks and building societies, including those that have 
merged. Again, the more information you have the better your chances of 
retrieving your money. If an account is found you will need to provide ID 
before you can withdraw your money.

If you can't find the bank or building society you are looking for on the 
mylostaccount site, you should call the BBA's dormant accounts unit on 020 7216 
8909.

Searches can take up to three months to complete, so be patient. 

National Savings & Investments

You can go direct to NS&I and use its tracing service, or use the 
mylostaccount site to search for lost accounts. Both services cover accounts 
bought from NS&I and the old Post Office Savings Bank accounts, as well as 
missing Premium Bonds.

However, if you know your Premium Bond numbers but do not know if you have 
unclaimed prizes you should check if you have won on theNS&I website 
<http://www.nsandi.com/index.jsp>. 

As long as you have some information or documentation - for example, the 
holder's number, the holder's card or the Bond itself - you won't need to 
complete a tracing request form to claim your lost prize.

Pensions

The government's Pension Service 
<http://www.thepensionservice.gov.uk/atoz/atozdetailed/pensiontracing.asp> will 
track down your missing occupational or personal pension schemes. You can just 
give the name of your previous employer or pension scheme provider, but the 
more information you can provide the more likely you are to be successful. A 
full name and address for the scheme or employer, and details of when you were 
a member, will help.

Investments and insurance policies

Unless you know the name of the company from which it was bought, the easiest 
way to trace a lost life insurance policy is to pay a search service. The 
Association of British Insurers suggests using theUnclaimed Assets Register 
<http://www.uar.co.uk/>, as many of its members register unclaimed policies 
with the site.

For Â£18 a search it will trawl its database of unclaimed life policies, 
pensions, unit trust holdings and share dividends. You can search online for 
policies held in your own name, but if you want to search for policies held in 
someone else's name - for example a deceased parent - you will need to print 
off the form and post it.

Unclaimed assets scheme

Under a government scheme to be introduced in 2009, money that has sat 
untouched in bank and building society accounts for at least 15 years will be 
taken into a central account. The money will then be distributed alongside 
lottery fund money.

However, savers will still be able to reclaim this cash if they later realise 
that some of it is theirs.
 