
When speaking about climate change, President-elect Trump has flip-flopped 
between acceptance and denial, which suggests that he hasn’t put much thought 
into one of humanity’s greatest threats. However, what his administration does 
is far more important than what he thinks. Unfortunately, Trump has nominated 
individuals to several critical climate leadership positions who reject 
inconvenient scientific and economic evidence.

Stage 3 denial: climate dangers and model accuracy

Climate denial often pinballs between five different stages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/16/climate-change-contrarians-5-stages-denial>
, but the cleverer denialist arguments tend to land on Stage 3: denial that 
climate change is a problem.

It’s ironic that Secretary of State nominee Rex Tillerson – CEO of ExxonMobil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/nov/25/two-faced-exxon-the-misinformation-campaign-against-its-own-scientists>
 – has the most sophisticated position on climate change among Trump’s key 
nominees. Tillerson accepts that humans are causing global warming, but he 
denies that it’s a problem. His key argument focuses on sowing doubt about the 
accuracy of climate models.

This happens to be the core topic in my book Climatology versus Pseudoscience 
<https://www.amazon.com/Climatology-Versus-Pseudoscience-Exposing-Predictions-ebook/dp/B00TIXVLZS/ref=sr_1_1_twi_kin_1?ie=UTF8&qid=1482512526&sr=8-1&keywords=nuccitelli>
, whose analysis I updated for a presentation atthe American Geophysical Union 
conference <https://fallmeeting.agu.org/2016/> two weeks ago. Climate 
scientists have been making global temperature predictions for over 40 years, 
and they’ve turned out to be amazingly accurate, as this video of the key 
slides from my presentation shows:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtPSIvu0gQ90&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtPSIvu0gQ90>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DtPSIvu0gQ90&media=>
 Various global temperature projections by mainstream climate scientists and 
models, and by climate contrarians, compared to observations by NASA GISS. 
Created by Dana Nuccitelli. 
Tillerson has long cast doubt on the accuracy of climate models 
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/2803702/AGU-Report-Final-20160325.pdf>
, for example saying at a 2013 ExxonMobil annual shareholder meeting:

our ability to project with any degree of certainty the future is continuing 
to be very limited …our examination about the models are that they’re not 
competent.

This line of argument led to the question Tillerson posed at the company’s 
2015 annual meeting:

What if everything we do, it turns out our models are lousy, and we don’t get 
the effects we predict?

The answer to that question is that we get the co-benefits associated with 
reduced burning of fossil fuels 
<http://www.unep.org/transport/gfei/autotool/understanding_the_problem/Netherlands%20Environment%20Agency.pdf>
: cleaner air, cleaner water, healthier people,green jobs and economic growth 
<https://nextgenamerica.org/blog/our-clean-energy-economy/>, energy 
independence, and so on. But the point is that Tillerson tries to cast doubt on 
scientists’ ability to project what will happen in the future, because the 
projections show thatwe need to leave most fossil fuel reserves in the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jan/07/much-worlds-fossil-fuel-reserve-must-stay-buried-prevent-climate-change-study-says>
. For Exxon, that’s bad for business.


Stage 2 denial: we’re causing the problem

Trump’s appointees will sometimes get stuck in Stage 1 denial – that global 
warming is even happening – but most frequently they land in Stage 2 denial – 
that humans are responsible.


This is a question that’s about as settled as science gets. The best estimate 
in the 2014 IPCC report, representing the consensus of the world’s top climate 
scientists summarizing the body of climate research, was that humans have 
caused all the global warming over the past 65 years. The report concluded with
95% confidence that humans have caused most of the global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/27/global-warming-ipcc-report-humans>
since 1950. Climate scientists areas confident in human-caused global warming 
as medical scientists are that smoking causes cancer 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/climate-risks-as-conclusive-as-link-between-smoking-and-lung-cancer/>
. There’sa 97% expert consensus on the subject 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/8/2/024024/meta;jsessionid=23675833D5361A0B26D2E0A916AD188A.c4.iopscience.cld.iop.org>
.

Trump’s nominee to head the EPA, Scott Pruitt is in Stage 2 denial 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/13/politics/kfile-scott-pruitt-climate-change-epa/>
. So is his choice to lead the Department of Energy,Rick Perry 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/skepticquotes.php?s=106>. His choice to lead 
the Department of Interior,Ryan Zinke is an interesting case 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2016/12/ryan-zinke-donald-trump-climate-change>
, who strongly supported climate action in 2010, but now denies that humans are 
responsible. EvenTrump himself has said “nobody knows” what’s causing it 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/11/politics/donald-trump-climate-change-interview/>.

Somebody does: the world’s scientific experts.

Stage 4 denial: we can solve it

Trump’s nominees will sometimes advance to Stage 4 denial, and argue that 
solutions to the climate problem are too costly. For example, while
environmental regulations actually have a positive net effect on employment 
<http://www.globalurban.org/Jobs_vs_the_Environment.pdf>, Pruitt and Trump 
argue that these sorts of regulations kill jobs.Tillerson argues 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/elliott-negin/secretary-of-state-nomine_b_13713292.html>
 that third world countries need fossil fuels to end ‘energy poverty.’ In 
reality, while access to electricity certainly helps the poor, distributed 
renewable energy likesolar panels and wind turbines are a better fit for most 
developing nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/31/coal-doesnt-help-the-poor-it-makes-them-poorer>
, especially sincepoorer countries are the most vulnerable to climate change 
impacts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/27/global-warming-could-be-more-devastating-for-the-economy-than-we-thought>
.

Trump’s transition team also believes the cost of carbon pollution is lower 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/12/22/the-coming-battle-between-the-trump-team-and-economists-over-the-true-cost-of-climate-change/?utm_term=.fb76c2453789>
 than the estimates used by the Obama Administration. However, the most recent 
research on the subject indicatesthe actual cost is in fact much higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jan/26/climate-change-could-impact-poor-much-more-than-previously-thought>
 than government estimates, anda majority of economists agree that the federal 
estimate is too low 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/04/consensus-of-economists-cut-carbon-pollution>
.

Tillerson has claimed to support a revenue-neutral carbon tax – a bipartisan 
solution that in addition to helping curb climate change and its damages,would 
have a modestly beneficial direct impact on the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jun/13/how-revenue-neutral-carbon-tax-creates-jobs-grows-economy>
. However, under Tillerson’s leadership, ExxonMobil hasn’t supported
policymakers who have proposed this exact legislation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/nov/25/latest-global-warming-bill-republican-conundrum>
, and has instead continued to fund climate denial organizations that work to 
obstruct it. And in 2013,Tillerson walked back his carbon tax support 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/22122016/rex-tillerson-exxon-climate-change-secretary-state-donald-trump>
:

I would not support putting a carbon tax in place today because I think we 
still have a lot of gains to be made through technology and other less 
intrusive policies on the economy which are showing results.

Tillerson has argued 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/elliott-negin/secretary-of-state-nomine_b_13713292.html>
 that climate change is “an engineering problem and it has engineering 
solutions.” In other words, that we can keep burning fossil fuels, and solve 
the problem through adaptation efforts. However, research is quite clear that 
while we’ll need a combination of mitigation and adaptation,relying primarily 
on adaptation would be exceptionally costly 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/mitigation-cheaper-than-adaptation-intermediate.htm>
.

It’s not surprising that the CEO of ExxonMobil advocates for a path that would 
lead to the burning of lots more fossil fuels. However,the Secretary of State 
has tremendous influence 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/the-climate-impacts-of-trump-rsquo-s-exxon-pick-for-secretary-of-state/>
 over America’s role in international climate negotiations. ExxonMobil’s 
priorities are in sharp conflict with America’s and the world’s on this issue.

We may need a ‘Facts Matter’ campaign

The prevalence and effectiveness of misinformation in this year’s elections 
suggests thatwe’re entering a post-truth world 
<http://thebulletin.org/truth-vs-post-truth-what%E2%80%99s-causing-our-record-shattering-global-temperatures10241>
 in which many people disregard whatever facts they don’t want to believe.A 
study by Robert Brulle and colleagues 
<http://www.pages.drexel.edu/~brullerj/02-12ClimateChangeOpinion.Fulltext.pdf> 
found that cues from political leaders are the main driver of public opinion on 
climate change. That strong response to elite cues is exemplified inthe sudden 
spike in Vladimir Putin’s favorability among Republicans 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/9/9/12865678/trump-putin-polls-republican>.


Unfortunately, Republican Party leaders are sending cues of doubt and denial 
to their constituents. But denying facts doesn’t change reality. As leading 
climate scientistBen Santer wrote to Trump 
<http://www.cnbc.com/2016/12/22/trump-climate-change-take-action.html>:

Your choice on Day 1 is clear. Leadership or denial. If it’s the former, 
you’ll have plenty of Americans willing to help you. If it’s the latter, you’ll 
have millions of powerful voices allied against you. Please choose wisely.
 