
In an age of austerity it will strike many as staggering largesse. A 
soon-to-close university technical college sponsored by a Premier League 
football club and educating only a few classes of students, is costing the 
taxpayer £500,000 a year in premises overheads alone, Education Guardian can 
reveal.

Latest accounts 
<https://beta.companieshouse.gov.uk/company/08291601/filing-history> for 
Tottenham Hotspur-sponsored Tottenham UTC, in north London, show £567,612 was 
allocated for its “rent and rates” for 2014-15. The rent seems to go to a 
property company that is part of the group of firms running Spurs. The UTC 
rents space from TH Property Limited in a building that also houses Spurs’ 
offices.

Department for Education data shows 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/capital-funding-for-open-free-schools>
 the taxpayer has already shelled out £12.8m on constructing and fitting out 
Tottenham UTC. The school, which opened in 2014, will close this summer having 
failed to attract enough students. It had only134 
<http://www.education.gov.uk/edubase/establishment/establishmentdetails.xhtml?urn=140968>
 last academic year, with latest accounts putting its total annual costs at 
£2m, or £15,000 a student. Numbers for this academic year are thought to be as 
low as 40. The UTC will be replaced on the same site in September by the London 
Academy of Excellence Tottenham, a sixth-form college.

Notes to the DfE’s 2014‑15 accounts [pdf] 
<http://www.parliament.uk/documents/commons-committees/Education/DfE-Estimates-Memoranda.pdf>
 show the government committing to pay rent on the UTC’s site for the next 35 
years, at a cost of £16.5m. In 2015,we reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/11/taxpayers-rent-free-school-education-lion-academy-trust>
 how the taxpayer is spending about £500,000 a year on rent for another 
education building with links to Tottenham Hotspur: the Brook House primary 
free school, also in Tottenham. Spurs sold the building for £11m that year to 
an investment firm, which the DfE has guaranteed will be paid £12.5m over 25 
years.

Asked about the UTC’s finances, a Spurs spokesman said the “rent and rates” 
2014-15 figure had not actually been spent in cash, but represented an 
accounting allocation of a proportion of the costs related to the 35-year 
lease. He did not respond to a request to explain how much cash had been 
received.

He said the rent was “subject to normal open market scrutiny/process by the 
public sector”, that most UTCs had struggled to recruit students and that those 
behind the UTC had worked “tirelessly” to set up the sixth form to “best 
validate the [previous] investment in resources” on its site.

Neither the UTC itself nor the DfE responded to requests for comment.

Indiscreet CEO rides academy gravy train 


News reaches us of indiscreet telephone comments by an academy chain chief 
executive on a train journey recently.

A fellow passenger contacted us to say: “I just came off a … train … where I 
had the misfortune to sit opposite a man who I found out afterwards was [the 
CEO, whom we are not naming]. He spent a good (or bad?) hour talking in an 
incredibly loud voice about a variety of people … details of salaries … schools 
were named, school closures, redundancies, legal actions, politicians 
and a lengthy discussion about how to destroy someone’s career, were all 
discussed.

“His phone was on so loud that I could hear both sides of the conversation. I 
was genuinely appalled that someone could have such an indiscreet conversation 
in a public place.”

The call was made from a first-class carriage, reportedly with a tumbler of 
wine in hand, completing what was not a good look, the fellow traveller says.
 