
To many observers, Lorna Lyons has what looks like the dream job. The school 
where she is headteacher is popular and successful and lies within easy reach 
of some of England’s most idyllic countryside.

But Gillingham school is one of the most poorly funded in Lyons’ home county 
of Dorset, which, in turn, is one of the most poorly funded authorities in the 
country when it comes to education. This, she says, has a daily impact on the 
lives of her pupils.

As school budgets come under unprecedented pressure, Lyons is in a militant 
mood. Along with MPs and heads from the other most poorly funded areas, she is 
waiting for a sign that heavily trailed changes to the way English schools are 
funded will become a reality in the government’sspending review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/06/2015-comprehensive-spending-review-public-services>
. Above all, she wants the government to introduce a “fair” national funding 
formula that would allocate money to every child in the country more equally, 
regardless of where they live.

Such a shakeup to the way schools are financed has been mooted and then 
abandoned by successive governments,including the coalition, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/jun/26/george-osborne-funding-formula-schools>
 over the past 20 years. It was among the Conservatives’manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/14/conservatives-election-manifesto-2015-the-key-points>
 promises.

Now the indications are 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/21/george-osborne-end-arbitrary-unfair-school-funding-forumla>
 that the chancellor, George Osborne, is ready to grasp the nettle. According 
to Lyons, there will be real disappointment if the practical and political 
difficulties of levelling things out mean the issue is side-stepped again.

At the heart of this highly charged debate are historical disparities in 
funding between schools in different areas. A complex array of local and 
national funding arrangements, developed over decades, can mean schools that 
are barely miles apart but sit across borough or county boundaries receive 
vastly different funding per pupil.

In the past some local authorities chose to top up their school funding from 
their own budgets, creating further disparities. When the Labour government 
introduced the current mechanism for funding schools, the dedicated schools 
grant, in 2006, existing variations were enshrined in the new system.

Critics of the current rules say their unfairness has been exacerbated by 
every subsequent increase in school funding and it is keenly felt by all 
schools – maintained and academy – in less generously funded areas.

According to the F40 group, which leads the campaign on behalf of these poorly 
financed local authorities, the 10 best-funded areas of England will receive an 
average grant of £6,297 a pupil this year, compared with £4,208 in the 10 most 
poorly funded areas. But even these figures mask dramatic differences, with 
some schools in inner London being funded at between £8,000 and £9,000 a pupil 
– almost twice the amount received by schools such as Gillingham.

And the problem does not divide neatly along party lines. Last month, a 
cross-party group of112 MPs <>, including many on the Labour benches in poorly 
funded areas, wrote to the prime minister urging him to act.

Successive governments have put this in the “too difficult” box, according to 
Malcolm Trobe, deputy general secretary of the Association of School and 
College Leaders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fschool-funding-system-fair-local-authorities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846e10087ac87370f05a4c25eff6bbcd994fdfc4%2F1194_2201_1794_1077%2F1794.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fairer%20funding%20for%20schools%3A%20the%20potential%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fschool-funding-system-fair-local-authorities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fairer%20funding%20for%20schools%3A%20the%20potential%20winners%20and%20losers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fnov%2F24%2Fschool-funding-system-fair-local-authorities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F846e10087ac87370f05a4c25eff6bbcd994fdfc4%2F1194_2201_1794_1077%2F1794.jpg>
 Graham Stuart MP, former chairman of the education select committee, says the 
current school funding arrangement is ‘indefensible’. Photograph: David Levene 
for the Guardian 
He says: “Labour looked at this in government but were lobbied hard by local 
authorities that stood to lose the most and lost their bottle. This was a shame 
because there was probably enough money in the system then to bring the 
worst-funded authorities more into line with the best without causing problems 
to those better-funded schools. In times of austerity, it seems inevitable that 
there will have to be an element of redistribution.”

Which is where the problems arise. A standardised formula based on a core 
entitlement, with some variation for local factors, deprivation, special needs 
and to cover higher teacher pay in London, could lead to a radical shift in 
resources.

The impact would be felt most strongly in some of the most disadvantaged 
communities, especially if the F40 group is successful in its bid to get the 
changes brought in over the lifetime of this parliament and there is no extra 
government money to smooth the transition.

Some estimates 
<http://www.f40.org.uk/current-activities/f40_proposals_for_a_new_funding_formula>
 suggest the better-funded authorities could lose up to 15% of their schools 
grant. And this fills many of the potential losers with dread.

Dame Jane Roberts, the former leader of Camden council in London and now a 
governor in the borough, which is one of the better-funded councils, says: 
“What really annoys me is the implication that it is accidental or without good 
reason that the current differences exist.

“This has happened in large part because of political decisions that were 
taken in the past, by councils like ours, to fund education more generously 
from our own resources. We had choices to make – our other services received 
less as a result – and other authorities chose not to make those choices and 
now they are unhappy with that legacy. By all means, put money in where there 
is need but don’t do it in a way that penalises those who have made education a 
higher priority in the past.”

We are not naive – finances have been difficult for all and we would always 
accept our share of the tough choices

The Conservative MP Graham Stuart, chair of the education select committee in 
the last parliament and now vice-chair of the F40 group, admits there will be 
“political pain” and that implementing such a change over the life of this 
parliament may be too ambitious, but he claims there will be real anger if the 
government does not act decisively.

“The current situation is indefensible,” he says. “It is quite wrong that a 
child eligible for the pupil premium and in care in one part of the country 
receives so much less funding than the child of an affluent professional parent 
in another.

“We are not asking for total parity but for the current gross inequities to be 
eradicated, so that a similar child from a similar background receives similar 
funding, regardless of where they live. There will be a backlash, of course, 
but redistribution along these lines would still leave areas like London better 
off.”

“There are people who want it to happen as rapidly as possible but in politics 
one of the hardest things is working out the right thing to do. Once you have 
done that – and I hope the government will in this case – we need to take one 
step at a time and restructure the settlements with a delivery period that is 
ambitious but without unnecessarily harsh disruption, so people on all sides 
can accept the change is fair and reasonable.”Other influential voices have 
sounded a note of caution.Research 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/researcharchive/background-to-success/> published 
earlier this month by the education charity the Sutton Trust suggested that 
poor children living in disadvantaged areas are still more at risk of 
underachievement than those living in more affluent parts of the country.

'Perfect storm' has state schools struggling to balance the books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/06/perfect-storm-has-state-schools-struggling-to-balance-the-books>
The trust’s chief executive, Lee Elliot Major, urged the government to take 
into account such risks: “Any fair funding system must reflect the true double 
disadvantage many pupils face – resulting not just from the homes they come 
from, but from the poor neighbourhoods in which they live.”

But Lyons disagrees: “I am not sure it is always right to assume that urban 
schools have higher costs. [We] have very limited access to public transport 
and accessing opportunities such as art galleries and theatres comes at a high 
cost, both in terms of transport and time. We also have to limit students’ 
access to some off site provision and vocational courses.

“We hear of the additional expertise that schools in other [better funded] 
authorities are able to employ to address issues like disadvantage and we 
aspire to do likewise, but we can’t. We are not naive – finances have been 
difficult for all and we would always accept our share of the tough choices. 
But we believe that, as a low-funded school per pupil in a low-funded 
authority, our ability to absorb these pressures has been exhausted, and more 
is still to come.

“We know that there are winners and losers – managing losing funds from a high 
base is challenging, but managing on a permanently low base is becoming 
impossible. Children from all areas deserve and should be able to expect the 
same opportunities as any others.”
Richest and poorest schools in England – bar chart 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2015/11/education_funding_england/giv-32650FBDfUHf2cmYQ/> 