
Human carbon pollution is heating the Earth incredibly fast. On top of that 
long-term human-caused global warming trend, there are fluctuations caused by 
various natural factors. One of these is the El Niño/La Niña cycle. The 
combination of human-caused warming and a strong El Niño event are on the verge 
ofcausing an unprecedented three consecutive record-breaking hot years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
.


Simply put, without global warming we would not be seeing record-breaking heat 
year after year. In fact,2014 broke the temperature record without an El Niño 
assist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jan/16/global-warming-made-2014-record-hot-year>
, and then El Niño helped push2015 over 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/25/record-hot-2015-gave-us-a-glimpse-at-the-future-of-global-warming>
, and 2016 over 2015.


Sadly, we live in a post-truth world 
<http://thebulletin.org/truth-vs-post-truth-what%E2%80%99s-causing-our-record-shattering-global-temperatures10241>
 dominated byfake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/02/fake-news-facebook-us-election-around-the-world>
 in which people increasingly seek information that confirms their ideological 
beliefs, rather than information that’s factually accurate from reliable 
sources. Because people have become incredibly polarized on the subject of 
climate change, those with a conservative worldview whoprefer maintaining the 
status quo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/04/the-similarities-between-trump-support-and-climate-denial>
 to the steps we need to take to prevent a climate catastrophe often seek out 
climate science-denying stories.

Into that environment step conservative columnists David Rose at the Mail on 
Sunday, parroted by Ross Clark in The Spectator and James Delingpole for 
Breitbart, all trying to blame the current record-shattering hot global 
temperatures entirely on El Niño. Perhaps saddest of all, the House Science, 
Space, and Technology Committee tweeted the Breitbart piece, to which Senator 
Bernie Sanders appropriately responded:
Bernie Sanders (@SenSanders) 
Where'd you get your PhD? Trump University? https://t.co/P5Ez5fVEwD 
<https://t.co/P5Ez5fVEwD>
 <https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/804432339640037376> December 1, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/SenSanders/status/804432339640037376> 
An über cherry-picked argument

The conservative columnists made their case by claiming that, with the recent 
strong El Niño event ending, temperatures are “plummeting,” thus blaming the 
record heat on El Niño. There are several fatal flaws in their case.

First, the “plummet” they cite is not in global temperatures on the surface 
where we live, andwhere temperatures are easiest to measure accurately 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-newspaper-claim-about-global-temperature-is-deeply-misleading>
, but rather in satellite estimates of the temperature of the lower atmosphere 
above the portions of Earth’s surface covered by land masses. Second, although 
the satellite data extend as far back as 1979, and the global surface 
temperature data to 1880, theycherry pick the data by only showing the portion 
since 1997 
<https://tamino.wordpress.com/2016/11/28/how-stupid-does-david-rose-think-you-are/>
. Third, the argument is based entirely upon one relatively cool month (October 
2016) thatwas only cool in that particularly cherry-picked data set 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-newspaper-claim-about-global-temperature-is-deeply-misleading>
.

The argument is easily debunked. While there was a strong El Niño event in 
2015–2016, there was an equally strong event in 1997–1998. The two events had 
very similar short-term warming influences on global surface temperatures, but 
according to Nasa, 2016 will be about 0.35°C hotter than 1998. That difference 
is due to the long-term, human-caused global warming trend. In fact, according 
to Nasa, even October 2016 was hotter than every month on record prior to 1998. 
These “plummeting” post-El Niño temperatures are still as hot as the hottest 
month at the peak of the 1998 El Niño.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0989a8970062b402de296953a706afaec80cc7%2F0_0_1409_960%2F1409.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fake%20news%20tries%20to%20blame%20human-caused%20global%20warming%20on%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fake%20news%20tries%20to%20blame%20human-caused%20global%20warming%20on%20El%20Ni%C3%B1o%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Ffake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b0989a8970062b402de296953a706afaec80cc7%2F0_0_1409_960%2F1409.png>
 Monthly global surface temperatures, from the NASA Goddard Institute for Space 
Studies. Illustration: Dana Nuccitelli. 
In fact, just three days after the conservative columnists’ pieces came out, 
the November 2016 satellite data was published. It turned out to bethe hottest 
November in the entire record 
<http://blog.hotwhopper.com/2016/12/hottest-november-on-record-for.html>. Oops.

Pushback from climate scientists and real science journalists

Climate scientists have strongly pushed back against this misinformation. 
Climate scientist Adam Sobel told the Guardian, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/03/climate-change-scientists-house-panel-global-temperatures-misleading?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_Tweet>
 “they’re not serious articles” and “grossly misinterpret” the data. For 
Climate Feedback, seven scientists graded David Rose’s piece, andgave it a 
“very low” credibility score of -1.9 
<http://climatefeedback.org/evaluation/stunning-new-data-indicates-el-nino-drove-record-highs-global-temperatures-david-rose-daily-mail/>
 (the lowest possible score is -2.0). The scientists described Rose’s article 
as “incredibly misleading,” “flawed to perfection,” and “completely bogus.”

Real science journalists have also taken the biased conservative pieces to 
task (I define real science journalists as those whose primary goal is to 
accurately inform readers about science, as opposed to fake science journalists 
whose primary goal is to distort science in order to advance an agenda). For 
example, see the Guardian,New York Times 
<http://mobile.nytimes.com/2016/12/02/opinion/earth-the-final-frontier.html?smid=tw-nytopinion&smtyp=cur&_r=0&referer=>
,Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/capital-weather-gang/wp/2016/12/01/earths-temperature-has-not-plunged-at-record-clip-and-nation-wide-record-cold-not-coming/?utm_term=.66068bda60ec>
,Slate 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2016/12/02/house_science_committee_tweets_link_to_climate_denial_article_at_breitbart.html>
,Carbon Brief 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/factcheck-newspaper-claim-about-global-temperature-is-deeply-misleading>
, andclimate science bloggers 
<https://tamino.wordpress.com/2016/11/28/how-stupid-does-david-rose-think-you-are/>
.

Science, facts, and truth aren’t changed by ideology or opinion

Admitting that conservatives have pushed us into a post-truth world, Donald 
Trump supporter and CNN political commentator Scottie Nell Hughes saidon The 
Diane Rehm Show 
<http://thedianerehmshow.org/audio/#/shows/2016-11-30/how-journalists-are-rethinking-their-role-under-a-trump-presidency/114095/@15:36>
:

People that say facts are facts, they’re not really facts … Everybody has a 
way of interpreting them to be the truth or not true. There’s no such thing, 
unfortunately, anymore of facts. And so Mr. Trump’s Tweets amongst a certain 
crowd, a large part of the population, are truth. When he says that millions of 
people illegally voted, he has some facts amongst him and his supporters, and 
people believe they have facts to back that up.

On issues of belief, like politics, it’s true that differing opinions are 
roughly equally valid. While policy questions can be supported by evidence and 
data, ultimately they often come down to subjective individual preferences and 
opinions. In science, that’s not true. A scientific theory or argument is 
either supported by evidence and data, or it’s not. Opinions are not equally 
valid. We all live on the same planet, in the same universe, governed by the 
same laws of physics. Whether we lean toward liberal or conservative ideology, 
those physical laws don’t change.

Unfortunately, conservatives are increasingly likely to deny this reality. As 
Trump’s chief of staffReince Priebus told Fox News 
<http://www.foxnews.com/transcript/2016/11/27/reince-priebus-on-trump-stance-on-cuba-cabinet-picks-rep-tim-ryan-on-why/>
:

as far as this issue on climate change … he has his default position, which 
most of it is a bunch of bunk

This is effectively the default position of the Republican Party, and it’s the 
only major political party in the world in denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/05/the-republican-party-stands-alone-in-climate-denial>
 about scientific reality. The party can take that position because the 
conservative media outlets that its voters consume misinform them with 
post-truth nonsense like this.


Unfortunately, when it comes to science, we don’t get to choose our own 
truths. Scientists and science journalists effectively held the post-truth 
crowd accountable on this story. They’ll have their work cut out for them in 
the coming years.

 