
If you had spent the past five years as one of the most feared names in 
education, able to make teachers quake in their boots, would you let it go to 
your head? Some would argue that it’s impossible not to. But it is worth 
remembering that Sir Michael Wilshaw, the outgoing chief inspector of schools, 
who has had this powerful position for almost five years, was a bit power-mad 
going in.

In 2011, at an interview panel of MPs, he likened himself to Dirty Harry, the 
Clint Eastwood anti-hero cop who is the epitome of ruthless policing and never 
hesitates to cross professional boundaries in his quest to get justice. It was 
an unusual choice. As his time in office comes to an end, another Eastwood film 
perhaps provides a better framework for assessing his record: the Good, the Bad 
and the Ugly.

From the start of his tenure, Wilshaw had a habit of making comments that 
shocked people: accusing teachers ofskiving off at 3pm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2012/sep/27/teachers-leave-school-not-lazy>
, saying“bad parents” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/17/schools-fine-parents-ofsted-michael-wilshaw>
 should be fined. But there was always an odd vulnerability to him. When 
interviewed, he would say he didn’t mean to upset anyone, they just 
misinterpreted his intentions, which in his eyes were always pure.

We are still letting down our poorest pupils, says Ofsted boss
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/23/we-are-still-letting-down-our-poorest-pupils-says-ofsted-boss>
Despite his headline-grabbing soundbites, Wilshaw has done plenty of good at 
Ofsted. Three years ago, the organisation’s reputation was near the floor. At 
teacher conferences, anyone uttering the O-word could hear audiences bristle. 
Insulting it guaranteed applause. Schools were confused after decades of 
endless fiddling with complicated and inconsistently applied rules. Contracted 
inspectors, hired via third-party companies, varied in quality: some werecaught 
copying and pasting reports 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/atl-head-questions-ofsteds-quality-assurance/>, and 
selling extra wares for high fees 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/schools-are-spending-thousands-of-pounds-of-public-money-trying-to-unfairly-boost-ofsted-results-10400507.html>
. Training of inspectors was patchy. But their judgments could end careers after
new government rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jun/25/ofsted-inspection-upset-headteachers-schools>
 allowed the removal of school leaders given low grades.

After nearly five years under Wilshaw, Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> is no longer in this mess. 
Inspectors are trained in-house. They have been banned from selling consultancy 
services, restoring faith in their independence, and a new framework makes it 
clearer what is expected of schools.

Parents like the organisation. Surveys run by inspectors show that 95% of 
parents know the brand and 88%believe its reports are reliable 
<https://educationinspection.blog.gov.uk/2015/11/23/what-do-people-think-about-inspection/>
. Half have read a report in the past year.

What is unclear is the extent to which Wilshaw is responsible for this 
improvement. He has rarely discussed these processes directly, instead leaving 
the Ofsted director Sean Harford to employ his remarkable listening skills on 
social media and at events, to mop up teachers’ concerns. Harford’s dogged 
determination has turned even angry Ofsted-haters into sympathisers, but he has 
barely received a mention from Wilshaw among the valedictory interviews and 
speeches. This is not a new trope. In 2015, when Iinterviewed Wilshaw 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/sir-michael-wilshaw/> about the opening of his first 
academy, I asked who aided him during difficult times. He declined to name 
anyone. “It sounds very arrogant to say I didn’t need much help, but I knew all 
the pitfalls,” he said. Wilshaw will take credit where he sees fit, though. In 
a recentObserver interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/sir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools>
, he said when he arrived at Ofsted, seven in 10 primary schools were rated 
good or better; now it is in nine in 10. He attributed this to Ofsted’s hard 
work. “We introduced greater demands into the system, had higher expectations 
and teachers and heads have risen to it,” Wilshaw said.

Where is the evidence that Ofsted drove the improvement? Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> have undergone hundreds of 
changes in the past five years, including the criteria on which they are 
inspected. The figures are incomparable. In fact, how do we know he didn’t just 
make it easier to pass?

All of which shows the bad side of Wilshaw’s tenure: the dual problems of 
arrogance and gut feel over evidence. Arrogance, in particular, may have caused 
myopia in areas he knows less well. Special educational needs were aparticular 
blind spot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jan/20/ofsted-sen-schools-outstanding>
. Having started a trend of writing an annual report, launched each year in a 
big media event, he managed to miss out special educational needs schools 
completely in 2014.

The further education community, also inspected by Ofsted, was likewise 
offended this year whenWilshaw told parliament 
<http://feweek.co.uk/2016/03/02/ofsted-boss-tells-mps-all-16-to-19-year-olds-should-be-taught-in-schools/>
 he would prefer all 16- to 19-year-olds to be educated in schools, a few weeks 
after saying colleges were “inadequate at best”. The opinion had scarcely any 
evidence behind it.

The Guardian view on Sir Michael Wilshaw: ruffling the right feathers | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/01/the-guardian-view-on-sir-michael-wilshaw-ruffling-the-right-feathers>
His reliance on personal anecdotes over facts has also led to him focusing on 
pet peeves. He has repeatedly lambasted north of England schools for pupil 
underachievement. Asresearch from Education Datalab 
<http://educationdatalab.org.uk/2016/01/every-school-contains-a-story-of-how-educational-inequalities-emerge/>
 shows, swaths of the north actually do rather well (for example, Hull), while 
some parts of London still do badly (such as Enfield). One can only hope his 
successor, Amanda Spielman, whose research background is strong, will rebalance 
this tendency.

Which leads us to the ugly. Ofsted’s biggest black mark of the past few years 
was its handling of the Trojan Horse scandal, in which several Birmingham 
schools were first given good or outstanding ratings, then quickly downrated to 
“inadequate” after allegations of extremist activity. An independent review by 
parliament’s education committee concluded that this moveundermined confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/mar/17/mps-ofsted-response-trojan-horse-school-allegations-birmingham>
 in the watchdog. At the time, Wilshaw passionately defended such actions and 
this year, he publicly warned that radicalism was still occurring in Birmingham 
schools. “It has just gone underground, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/08/childrens-exposure-to-extremism-is-an-urgent-problem-says-ofsted-head>
” he said.

Since then he has started to campaign against “illegal” faith schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/16/ofsted-finds-100-suspected-illegal-schools-in-england>
, which operatewithout a licence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/aug/11/orthodox-jewish-religious-schools-unregulated-london-yeshiva>
 and often have poor standards, and written to the education secretary about 
the number of“missing children” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/14/missing-children-risk-of-exploitation-ofsted-michael-wilshaw>
 who leave schools each year without any record of their whereabouts. Wilshaw 
is not wrong about this. As a country, we are failing the thousands of children 
who disappear from school rolls each year. But the unwillingness to take 
responsibility for Ofsted’s failures in the Trojan Horse case plus his
forthright language <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-28226642> have damaged 
morale and arguably slowed progress in the cities he criticised.

No doubt, Sir Michael would put his hands in the air and say he didn’t mean 
any offence. If only he had learned how not to cause it in the first place.
 