
The most significant event in food and agriculture over the past year did not 
take place on our farms. Nor did it occur in our factories, in our restaurants 
or on our kitchen tables. It happened in the voting booth.

Rural voters turned out in overwhelming support 
<http://www.npr.org/2016/11/14/501737150/rural-voters-played-a-big-part-in-helping-trump-defeat-clinton>
 of Donald Trump, throwing a Hail Mary pass against the growing economic 
hardship 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-11/farmers-get-biggest-u-s-subsidy-check-in-decade-as-prices-drop>
 felt by these communities. Caught in a toxic cycle 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-13/betting-the-farm-and-losing-banks-seek-collateral-as-debts-rise>
 of depressed commodity prices, rising debt and plummeting income, it comes as 
no surprise thatAmerican farmers voted en masse 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2017/01/11/the-vast-majority-of-these-counties-voted-for-donald-trump-even-if-theyd-backed-democrats-for-years/?utm_term=.c13501c182a8>
 for change and the hope of different leadership with new ideas.

Trump struck a chord with farmers and other rural voterswho were eager for 
change and desperate to recapture economic opportunity in their industries and 
communities. Sadly, the inconsistencies of Trump’s agenda are poised to inflict 
the greatest damage in these pockets of the country that most faithfully 
supported him.

So far, Trump is assembling an administration that looks unlikely 
<http://qz.com/862412/trumps-16-cabinet-level-picks-have-more-money-than-a-third-of-american-households-combined/>
 to support the wellbeing of ordinary Americans, including our rural and 
farming communities. But with a nomination for secretary of agriculture still 
to come, he has the chance to tap a leader committed to serving the true 
interests of all of rural America: someone with the vision and strength to 
rectify campaign promises that will inevitably harm the livelihood of farmers, 
ranchers and rural citizens.

Will new FDA rules curb the rise of antibiotic-resistant superbugs?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2017/jan/08/fda-antibiotic-use-in-livestock>
It does not require close scrutiny to identify where Trump’s proposals would 
be harmful to American agriculture.

Campaign promises to cancel or renegotiate trade agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
 hold the potential to eliminate major markets for US agricultural products and 
raise prices for imports – such as fruit and vegetables from the tropics and 
southern hemisphere – that Americans have come to expect year-round. You don’t 
need to be an economist to understand that fewer exports and higher import 
prices will not stimulate a market economy. In fact, they will work counter to 
the economic prosperity of American farmers who depend on global trade.

Vows to deport undocumented immigrants and build a wall along the Mexican 
border to constrict the flow of these immigrants would significantly affect the 
already limited agricultural workforce, as well as the workforce across the 
food chain that’s heavily comprised of undocumented workers. According to the 
US Department of Labor’s own count, nearly half 
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/topics/farm-economy/farm-labor/background.aspx#Numbers>
 of farmworkers in the US are undocumented – a figure widely regarded as an 
underestimation. Stemming this flow of workers would raise farmers’ costs and 
lower productivity, threatening the very lifeline of American farming and, in 
turn, threatening food security nationwide.

On top of that, Trump vows to bring jobs back to the US while repeatedly 
flip-flopping 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jul/28/donald-trump/donald-trump-gets-full-flop-stance-minimum-wage/>
 on raising the federal minimum wage. And in an appointment so sinister it 
almost seems like a hoax, Trump has nominated Andrew Puzder, a fast food CEO 
and a staunch opponent of raising the minimum wage, to lead the labor 
department, an entity responsible for overseeing our nation’s labor policy and 
protecting our workers. Without raising the minimum wage, the new 
administration will be hard-pressed to to fill vacant agricultural jobs with 
its blue-collar supporters – many of whom have complained about losing work to 
immigrants.

Trump’s immigration agenda and resistance to raising wages could decimate the 
domestic production of fruit, vegetables, dairy and processed meats. Low-paying 
jobs do little to attract American workers, and without immigrant workers to 
fill the overwhelming gap, farmers will see their production capacity drop and 
their sales plummet, inevitably raising food prices. The irony of this scenario 
is palpable: we are the world’s largest agricultural producer, yet policy 
decisions such as these will worsen our ability to provide enough domestically 
produced, affordable fruit and vegetables to meet domestic demand.

Despite his campaign’s populist, antitrust tone 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/trump-says-he-would-block-at-t-time-warner-deal-1477162214>
, Trump has appointed Jeff Sessions as attorney general, all but paving the way 
<http://modernfarmer.com/2016/11/trumps-attorney-general-smooth-way-monsanto-bayer-merger-says-report/>
 for extreme consolidation of big agricultural businesses. Sessions is unlikely 
to instruct the Department of Justice to oppose mergers like the pending $66bn 
marriage between Monsanto and Bayer 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/business/wp/2016/09/14/bayer-and-monsanto-merge-in-mega-deal-aimed-at-domi-worlds-food-supply/?utm_term=.1a8f411db791>
, which is set to create the world’s largest seed and chemical company – 
resulting in fewer choices and higher costs to both farmers and consumers. 
Failing to block mergers in these industries will further damage already 
struggling rural economies.

Can we feed 10 billion people on organic farming alone?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/14/organic-farming-agriculture-world-hunger>
It is also worth noting that the rural and farming populations don’t always 
share the same interests. About19% 
<https://www.census.gov/geo/reference/ua/urban-rural-2010.html> of the 
country’s population is rural, whereas about2% are farmers and ranchers 
<http://www.fb.org/newsroom/fast-facts>, very few of whom share the interests 
of corporate agribusiness. In siding with large agribusiness interests that 
want to roll back environmental regulations that protect clean air and water in 
vast swaths of the country, the Trump administration would threaten the health 
and wellbeing of the majority of people living in those regions.

Mere days away from the inauguration, Trump needs to reconcile his conflicting 
campaign pledges if his administration is to truly help the rural voters who 
swept him into power. To start, his administration must survey the entire food 
system and recognize that great economic opportunities will result from 
policies that support immigration and higher wages, incorporate environmental 
protections, address growing domestic demand for healthy food and safeguard our 
workers’ health. If Trump wants to deliver on his promise of greater prosperity 
for all, he must enact comprehensive policies that prioritize the wellbeing of 
the American people over benefits for a select few.

We’ve heard that above all else, Trump values loyalty. Now it is his chance to 
demonstrate loyalty to the base that elected him by appointing a secretary of 
agriculture who will truly support them.

The authors are with the Union of Concerned Scientists’ food and environment 
program: Ricardo J Salvador is the director and senior scientist and Nora 
Gilbert is a policy researcher.
 