
The FBI covered up information about Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> seeking to tip the 2016 presidential 
election in Donald Trump’s favour, a senior Democrat claimed on Saturday, after 
reports emerged about spy agencies’ investigations into hacks of US political 
parties.

CIA concludes Russia interfered to help Trump win election, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
Harry Reid, outgoing Senate minority leader, compared FBI director James Comey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/james-comey> to the agency’s notorious 
founder, J Edgar Hoover, and called for his resignation.

A secret CIA analysis found that people with connections to the Russian 
government provided emails, hacked from the Democratic National Committee and 
Hillary Clinton’s campaign, to the whistleblower website WikiLeaks in the final 
months of the election, according to a Washington Postreport 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-orders-review-of-russian-hacking-during-presidential-campaign/2016/12/09/31d6b300-be2a-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.172e859d9917>
 published late Friday.

“The FBI had this material for a long time but Comey, who is of course a 
Republican, refused to divulge specific information about Russia and the 
presidental election,” Reid told MSNBC’s AM Joy on Saturday. Comeytestified 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/james-comey-testimony/2016/07/what-party-is-james-comey-registered-as-225223>
 to Congress in July that he was no longer a registered Republican, though he 
belonged to the party most of his life.

“Everyone should know WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> 
was involved from the very beginning,” Reid continued. “They leaked the 
information as if it was run by one of the great political operatives in 
America when in fact it was run by the political operatives in Russia.

“Russia has a pretty good way of cheating. Look at what they did with 
athletes,” he added, alluding tothe long-running doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/09/more-than-1000-russian-athletes-benefitted-from-state-sponsored-doping>
 of Russian Olympic athletes.

Pressed on whether he believed Comey had information on Russia’s influence and 
sat on it, Reid replied: “That’s right, that is true.”

“I am so disappointed in Comey. He has let the country down for partisan 
purposes and that’s why I call him the new J Edgar Hoover, because I believe 
that,” Reid added, calling for the director’s resignation.

Person of the year shouldn’t be Trump – it’s clearly Putin | Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/person-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth>
“I think he should be investigated by the Senate. He should be investigated by 
other agencies of the government including the security agencies because if 
ever there was a matter of security it’s this … I don’t think any of us 
understood how partisan Comey was.”

Comey had previously angered Democrats when, 10 days before election day, he 
sent a letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/29/fury-fbi-director-cryptic-letter-clinton-emails-response>
 to Capitol Hill leaders indicating the FBI had located additional emails 
potentially related to its investigation of Clinton’s private email server. Two 
days before the election, hesent another letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-hillary-clinton-email-investigation-criminal-james-comey>
 saying the review was complete and that he stood by the bureau’s original 
conclusion findingno criminal wrongdoing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/05/fbi-no-charges-hillary-clinton-email-investigation>
.

A month before the election, the US government formally accused Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 of a campaign of cyber-attacks against Democratic party organisations, with an 
intention to interfere in the US election. Intelligence officials did not 
specify that a Trump victory was the ultimate goal at the time. On Friday, 
Barack Obama ordered a review of evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/us-election-hacking-russia-barack-obama-review>
 that Russia had interfered in the election.

Gene Sperling, a former national economic adviser to Obama and former 
president Bill Clinton, tweeted: “So at end of close election,FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> deeply hurt HRC [Clinton] based on no 
evidence, while CIA sat on clear evidence of Putin interference for Trump.”

On Saturday Adam Schiff, the ranking member of the House committee on 
intelligence, said in a statement that though he could not “comment on or 
confirm any intelligence briefings … one would also have to be wilfully blind 
not to see that these Russian actions were uniformly damaging to Secretary 
Clinton and helpful toDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>.”

He added: “I do not believe this was coincidental or unintended.”

Trump himself curtly dismissed the reports of the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> findings. “These are the same people 
that said Saddam Hussein had weapons of mass destruction,” his transition team 
said in a statement. “The election ended a long time ago in one of the biggest 
electoral college victories in history. It’s now time to move on and ‘Make 
America Great Again’.”

The comment earned widespread derision. David Axelrod, a former top adviser to 
Obama, tweeted that Trump’s “blithe dismissal only deepens concern”, and John 
Dean, the former White House counsel under former president Richard Nixon, 
described the response as “remarkably inadequate”. Dean called for the 
intelligence report on Russia’s role to be made available to the 538 members of 
the electoral college before 19 December, when they formally vote to elect the 
next president.

Senior Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/democrats> demanded a 
congressional investigation next year. “Reports of the CIA’s conclusion that 
Russia actively sought to help elect Donald Trump are simultaneously stunning 
and not surprising, given Russia’s disdain for democracy and admiration for 
autocracy,” said Chuck Schumer, Reid’s successor as Senate minority leader.

“The silence from WikiLeaks and others since election day has been deafening. 
That any country could be meddling in our elections should shake both political 
parties to their core.”

Russian involvement in US vote raises fears for European elections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/russian-involvement-in-us-vote-raises-fears-for-european-elections>
Schumer threw down a gauntlet to Republicans to back the investigation. “It’s 
imperative that our intelligence community turns over any relevant information 
so that Congress can conduct a full investigation.”

The call poses a dilemma for Republicans who have increasingly rallied around 
Trump and do not want to be seen undermining his legitimacy. Trump has
repeatedly praised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/vladimir-putin-russia-donald-trump-smart-man>
 Russian president Vladimir Putin and rejected the intelligence community’s 
findings. In a recent interview with Time magazine, he said: “I don’t believe 
they interfered. It could be Russia. And it could be China. And it could be 
some guy in his home in New Jersey.”

In its report on the CIA conclusions, the Post quoted an unnamed senior US 
official who had been briefed on the intelligence agency findings. “It is the 
assessment of the intelligence community that Russia’s goal here was to favour 
one candidate over the other, to help Trump get elected,” the official said. 
“That’s the consensus view.”

CIA agents told senators it was “quite clear” that putting Trump in the White 
House was Russia’s goal, according to officials who spoke to the Post.

Meanwhile, a New York Times report 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/09/us/obama-russia-election-hack.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=first-column-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
 suggested that the Republican National Committee was also hacked. “We now have 
high confidence that they hacked the DNC and the RNC, and conspicuously 
released no documents” from the RNC, the Times quoted one senior administration 
official as saying.

A senior administration official told Reuters: “That was a major clue to their 
intent. If all they wanted to do was discredit our political system, why 
publicise the failings of just one party, especially when you have a target 
like Trump?”

The Kremlin has denied accusations of interference in the US election. 
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange has denied links with Russia’s government.

At the White House on Friday, deputy press secretary Eric Schultz said Obama 
had called for the cyber-attacks review, for release before inauguration day on 
20 January, to ensure “the integrity of our elections”.

“We are going to make public as much as we can,” Schultz said. “This is a 
major priority for the president.”

Michael McFaul, former US ambassador to Russia, said that during the election, 
Republicans had wanted to “avoid the subject altogether and the Obama 
administration did not want to appear to be influencing the election”.

“Now that the election is over, we need a serious , independent, bipartisan 
investigation to know the facts.”

Bruce Riedel, a 30-year veteran of the CIA, now director of the Brookings 
Intelligence Project, called the situation “unprecedented”.

“A foreign adversary has been caught trying to influence an American election. 
The intelligence community must have certainty that the evidence is concrete to 
support the conclusion. But revealing the evidence may not be in the national 
interest and undermine future capabilities to monitor Russia’s next attack on 
the nation.”
 