
The debate over whether overdraft charges should be capped is being reignited 
by the City regulator, just months after a competition watchdog rejected the 
idea.

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) announced it would include overdraft 
fees in a review into high interest loans in its response tothe Competition and 
Markets Authority’s two-year investigation into high-street banks, which was 
completed in August. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/watchdog-demands-banking-app-to-help-customers-shop-around>

The CMA stepped back from imposing a cap on overdraft fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/09/watchdog-demands-banking-app-to-help-customers-shop-around>
 – which campaigners such as Labour MP Rachel Reeves argue cost more than 
payday loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/22/mp-urges-city-regulator-to-impose-caps-on-overdraft-charges>
 – and instead said banks should publish their monthly maximum charge (MMCs) 
for going over the limit.

In its response to the CMA’s findings 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-acts-improve-competition-current-account-market>
, which were published in August, the FCA said it was preparing to review 
“high-cost, short-term credit” which will include overdrafts and other products 
such as payday loans and doorstep lending.

Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity that runs 
National Debtline, welcomed the move to look at overdraft charges again. “The 
CMA’s proposed monthly maximum charges are a small positive step but are 
ultimately unlikely to make the difference required in bringing down the 
extremely high charges that many people in financial difficulty end up paying,” 
she said.

The CMA asked the FCA to look at various areas of its work, which the City 
regulator agreed to do. It will look at whether new rules are needed around the 
monthly maximum charges and also monitor the effectiveness of “prompts”, such 
as text messages, sent to customers before they go overdrawn.

But it is also going further, not only by examining overdraft fees but also 
embarking on wider scrutiny of retail banking by analysing the impact of 
so-called “free-if-in-credit” banking on consumers. Campaigners argue that free 
banking for customers who do not go overdrawn hides the cost of current 
accounts.

Christopher Woolard, executive director of strategy and competition at the 
FCA, said: “Our role in regulating retail banking markets goes beyond the 
remedies the CMA has asked us to take forward, and we will continue to look 
more broadly at how well these markets work, with a particular focus planned on 
high-cost credit including overdrafts. We will also be looking at wider retail 
banking business models,” he said. The FCA will launch a call for evidence in 
the coming weeks.

The FCA’s remit is wider than the CMA’s as it can also look at whether 
customers need protection. It has capped charges on payday loans at 0.8% per 
day of the amount borrowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca> since 
last year.

The regulator said some campaigners had argued that unarranged overdraft fees 
– from which banks make £1.2bn a year – should be set at the same level as 
arranged overdrafts. According to consumer body Which? the cost of borrowing 
£100 through an unauthorised overdraft for 28 days from some high street banks 
was as high as £90. This is up to four times higher than the maximum allowed 
charges of £22.40 on a payday loan.

Gillian Guy, chief executive of Citizens Advice, said overdraft charges could 
quickly become unmanageable. “An unplanned expense that pushes someone into 
their overdraft by just a few pounds can lead to them being trapped in a cycle 
of daily charges.”

The CMA also looked at free banking and concluded it worked well for most 
customers. The FCA said it would now look at this area again. “We intend to 
undertake further work to better understand how firms’ actions in one market 
may affect outcomes in another and how conduct and competition are affected by 
the links between different parts of the business model,” the FCA said.


The move was welcomed by new players attempting to break the stranglehold that 
the big four – LloydsBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> 
Group, Royal Bank of Scotland, HSBC and Barclays – have on the current account 
market. There are 70m current accounts in the UK which generate £8.7bn of 
revenue.

“That the FCA feels the need to undertake further investigations into the 
practices of banks raises questions about the efficacy of the recent CMA 
investigation into current account competition. Why must we continue to wait 
for years for things to improve? This glacial pace of change is at odds with 
how customers and taxpayers alike expect to be treated,” said Mark Mullen, 
chief executive of digital service Atom Bank.

Alasdair Smith, who led the investigation by the CMA, appeared before MPs on 
the Treasury select committeeon Tuesday and was forced to defend its 
conclusions, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/mps-bank-reform-competition-and-markets-authority>
 which focus on boosting competition by encouraging customers to compare their 
account details with rivals.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the select committee, said: “The 
FCA have acted quickly. It looks as if they may be prepared to pick up the 
baton which the CMA has just dropped”.



 