
The City regulator has said it is keeping a close watch on algorithmic traders 
of the type that may have been connected with the flash crash in the pound 
earlier this month.

Sterling plunged in a few minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/theories-emerge-for-pounds-flash-crash-against-dollar>
 of early trading in Asia on 7 October, prompting the Bank of England to say it 
waslooking into possible causes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/confusion-as-pound-falls-10-in-insane-asian-trading-and-no-one-knows-why>
 of the sudden movement.

On Wednesday, a senior official at the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> was asked 
how it regulated algorithmic trading – computers programmed to take bets on 
markets.

Megan Butler, director of supervision at the City regulator, said: “Our 
approach is to recognise that a poorly designed, poorly controlled, 
inappropriately used algo[rithm] can have a very significant impact on proper 
operation of the market.”

Andrew Bailey, the chief executive of the FCA, said the use of such trading 
systems had been discussed with companies in the City in the run-up to the EU 
referendum on 23 June.

Bailey, who took over at the FCA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/andrew-bailey-new-fca-boss-says-he-did-not-apply-for-role>
 in July after a long career at the Bank, was setting out his “mission” for the 
regulator as he pledged to clean up the behaviour of major financial companies 
after a “very sorry” history of scandals.

There had been two financial crises in the past decade, he said, the first 
about the strength of the banking industry, which called into question “our 
financial stability at the level of the whole system”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Ffca-chief-pledges-to-clean-up-scandal-prone-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998046eb5699ff20b691d4fd69c9694660dbf1a9%2F0_0_1684_2335%2F1684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FCA%20says%20it%20is%20watching%20algorithmic%20traders%20linked%20to%20pound's%20flash%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Ffca-chief-pledges-to-clean-up-scandal-prone-city%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FCA%20says%20it%20is%20watching%20algorithmic%20traders%20linked%20to%20pound%27s%20flash%20crash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Foct%2F26%2Ffca-chief-pledges-to-clean-up-scandal-prone-city%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998046eb5699ff20b691d4fd69c9694660dbf1a9%2F0_0_1684_2335%2F1684.jpg>
 Andrew Bailey said the rules brought in since the financial crisis must not be 
watered down. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/PA 
“The second crisis has involved the conduct of business by financial firms,” 
he said, highlighting the mis-selling of payment protection insurance to 
individuals and interest rate swaps to businesses, the rigging of the Libor 
rate and foreign exchange markets, as well as breaches of money laundering 
rules.

“This is a very sorry history and the future needs to be radically different 
from the past. We owe this to the public, who are the consumers of financial 
services,” said Bailey, as he launched aconsultation on the regulator’s mission 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/publications/corporate-documents/our-future-mission>.


His appointment followed the decision by the then chancellor, George Osborne, 
not to renew the contract 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/17/city-watchdog-chief-quits-fca-george-osborne>
 of Martin Wheatley, the first head of the FCA when it was set up after the 
financial crisis. When the regulator was launched, Wheatley said he would 
“shoot first and ask questions later”.

But Bailey said he was not steering the FCA towards a different approach 
around regulating City firms. “I should also point out that this is not a 
document about Brexit. In fact, that is the only time the word appears in the 
document.

“This is because we believe that the issues we are setting out in the mission 
are at the heart of financial conduct regulation, whatever we do next,” he 
said..

In a speech to a City audience later on Wednesday, he said any attempt to 
water down the rules put in place since the financial crisis should be 
resisted. “We should not now start to regret the policies that are in place, 
but remember the scale of the crisis and what has been avoided,” Bailey said.

Earlier this week, a report by the thinktank New City Agenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/financial-conduct-authority-andrew-bailey-new-city-agenda-report>
, which Bailey described as disappointing, warned that regulations were being 
scaled back.

Bailey was speaking alongside his successor at the Bank, the deputy governor 
Sam Woods, who told guests at Mansion House that banks needed to make sure 
their business models could cope with extra regulation and the low interest 
rate environment. “This is a first-order issue for us,” said Woods, who is the 
chief executive of the Prudential Regulation Authority.

“Firms need to review their business models for the new world,” said Woods, 
indicating that rules would continue to be implemented despite the Brexit vote.
 