
Britain’s top financial regulator has launched a staunch defence of pension 
saving as a key part of preparing for old age, countering comments by the Bank 
of England’s chief economist that the best bet for a comfortable retirement is 
to invest in property.

Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/17/andrew-bailey-financial-conduct-authority-chill-may-wind>
, said workers should avoid putting all their eggs in one basket and should not 
rely on property to fund their retirement.

In his first speech since joining the regulator in July, he said the risks of 
relying on property were too great and savers should have a balanced portfolio 
of investments.


In a thinly veiled attacked on Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of 
England <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, Bailey 
said public officials should provide a clearer picture of the risks of 
investing in property compared with a pension.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Ffca-chief-cautions-property-fund-retirement-pensions-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998046eb5699ff20b691d4fd69c9694660dbf1a9%2F0_0_1684_2335%2F1684.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=FCA%20chief%20cautions%20over%20relying%20on%20property%20to%20fund%20retirement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Ffca-chief-cautions-property-fund-retirement-pensions-old-age%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=FCA%20chief%20cautions%20over%20relying%20on%20property%20to%20fund%20retirement&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F16%2Ffca-chief-cautions-property-fund-retirement-pensions-old-age%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998046eb5699ff20b691d4fd69c9694660dbf1a9%2F0_0_1684_2335%2F1684.jpg>
 FCA chief Andrew Bailey. 
The current poor returns on pension saving could improve over the period of a 
working life, he said. Equally, returns on property investments could stall or 
decline over time.


Haldane drew protests from the pensions industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/28/property-is-better-bet-than-a-pension-says-bank-of-england-economist>
 when he said property was a better bet for retirement planning than a pension.

“It ought to be pension but it’s almost certainly property,” he said. “As long 
as we continue not to build anything like as many houses in this country as we 
need to … we will see what we’ve had for the better part of a generation, which 
is house prices relentlessly heading north.”

Ros Altmann, the former pensions minister, criticised Haldane, saying it was 
“irresponsible” to suggest people should rely on property rather than pensions.

Bailey said regulators needed to understand that it was becoming more 
complicated for individuals to make rational decisions when life expectancy was 
rising, state pension payouts being delayed, and the shift from work to 
retirement becoming less clear cut.


He said there were huge risks for the regulator when millions of homebuyers 
were tempted to take on greater levels of debt to purchase a flat or house, 
especially when many of them were betting that rising house prices would 
provide long-term gains.


“Retirement saving and pensions is one of the largest issues we face. It needs 
to be considered broadly. There are some very big issues at stake here: the 
balance of who takes the risk, between the state, employers and individuals, 
with the balance shifting to individuals; the potential for large 
inter-generational shifts in income and wealth; and the impact of heightened 
economic uncertainty on the ability to write long-term financial contracts 
which embed assumptions on future returns,” Bailey said.
 