
Fund management firms are facing a shakeup after the City regulator published 
a hard-hitting critique 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/publications/market-studies/asset-management-market-study>
 of the “sustained, high profits” the industry has earned from savers and 
pension funds over the years.


The major companies, which manage £7bn of assets, should charge a single fee, 
theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> said, so 
investors could see how much they were being charged. The regulator said it 
would also consult on the need for a competition investigation into the 
consultants that advise pension funds on which fund manager to select to look 
after their assets.

It is the first time the FCA has used its powers to suggest a recommendation 
to the Competition and Markets Authority. It recommended a review into the 
investment consultant market in which three firms, Aon Hewitt, Mercer and 
Wallis Towers Watson, have a 60% market share.

With interest rates low, investment funds look attractive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/12/low-interest-rates-investment-funds-savers>
Much of the FCA’s year-long review was into the wider asset management 
industry which it found left investors unclear about the objectives of funds, 
and performance which was not always measured against an appropriate benchmark.

 Andrew Bailey, the FCA chief executive, said: “Asset managers are responsible 
for the savings of millions of people in the UK, making decisions which affect 
their financial wellbeing both now and in the future. In today’s world of 
persistently low interest rates, it is vital that we do everything possible to 
enable people to accumulate and earn a return on their savings which can meet 
their lifetime needs.

“We want to see greater transparency so that investors can be clear about what 
they are paying and the impact charges have on their returns. We want asset 
managers to ensure investors receive value for money through pursuing 
energetically their duty to act in their customers’ best interests. The 
remedies that we are proposing today aim to achieve these outcomes.”

As well as suggesting an “all-in fee” so investors can see what they are 
paying, the FCA suggested ideas aimed at retail investors who it said needed 
better ways to identify which fund was right for them. Retail investors should 
find it easier to move into better-value funds, the FCA said.

Martin Gilbert, the chief executive of Aberdeen Asset Management, said the 
FCA’s report would bring a “sense of urgency, to confronting some key industry 
issues impacting customers”. Its shares were little changed on the stock market.

Publication of the report removed the uncertainty that had been clouding the 
industry for the past year while the review was under way. “Although the FCA’s 
findings present some serious challenges for the asset management industry, the 
report puts an end to a source of speculation and uncertainty that has been the 
leading worry for asset managers, even with Brexit,” said Owen Lysak, a senior 
associate at Clifford Chance.

The UK leaving the EU could have significant consequences for the asset 
management industry, which uses a “passport” to operate across the current 28 
member states.

The fund management industry has been the subject of a number of reviews since 
the start of the millennium, including a 2001review by Paul Myners – later to 
become Lord Myners 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2001/mar/07/personalfinancenews.budget2001> 
– andone in 2012 by John Kay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/feb/29/vince-cable-kay-review-stock-markets>
.

 