
The new head of the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> is being 
urged to remain independent from politicians and instigate change at the City 
regulator amid fears that rules introduced since the 2008 crisis are being 
watered down.

The call to Andrew Bailey – who took the helm of the FCA in July after a long 
career at the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/george-osborne-appoints-andrew-bailey-fca-chief>
 – is made in a report published on Tuesday which says there should be an 
overhaul of the way financial regulators are run.

The report by the New City Agenda thinktank highlights a reversal of some of 
the changes made since the banking crisis eight years ago. It pointsto the 
departure of Bailey’s predecessor, Martin Wheatley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/17/city-watchdog-chief-quits-fca-george-osborne>
, as “a political sacking orchestrated by the Treasury” and intended to signal 
a softer approach to the City. It describes a weakening of rules intended to 
hold bankers to account by forcing them to demonstrate they had behaved 
correctly –the so-called reverse burden of proof 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/15/financial-accountability-regime-will-not-be-fully-operational-until-2018>
 – a year ago as the fastest climbdown in 300 years of financial regulation.

“There is a clear and present danger that we will repeat the mistakes of 
history. Much-needed change is already being watered down,” the report said. 
“The attention of politicians has moved on.

“The vote to leave the European Union will mean that the UK will be in full 
control of its regulation, but it will also have significant resource 
implications for regulators over the coming years.Regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/regulators> need to redouble their 
efforts to change their culture and move away from the bureaucratic and 
ineffective approaches of the past.”

Bailey, who is setting out his “mission” for the FCA this week, was called 
upon to resist political inference. “Leadership changes and the perception of 
political interference were in danger of making the FCA into a timid and cowed 
regulator,” the report said.

The cost of City regulation is six times greater than it was 16 years ago, 
reaching £1.2bn a year, as a result of bureaucratic and ineffective rules, the 
report said.

The report – written by André Spicer, a professor at Cass business school at 
City, University of London – calls on the FCA to use new powers to name and 
shame misleading adverts and take action against senior executives.

It also calls for the abolition of rules that allow regulators to cite their 
inability to disclose confidential information about firms. “The current 
framework has damaged efforts to hold regulators accountable,” the report said.

New City Agenda was formed in the aftermath of the banking crisis and is 
backed, among others, by John McFall, a former MP who used to chair the 
Treasury select committee.
 