
Check their teeth. The lying “hulking 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/17/from-the-calais-jungle-to-croydon-migrant-children-arrive-in-bri/>
” children let in from Calais. That small handful are not children at all. Use 
computer software to determine their true age, these quasi-criminals. Tory MP
David Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
 wants their teeth X-rayed. That’s right. While thousands of people have been 
festering in the camps about to be demolished, the public is being told we have 
overextended our “famous hospitality” by letting in these boys. We don’t want 
to be a soft touch.

I note that no one is talking about the Eritrean girl who was also let in this 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/teenage-girl-arrives-uk-calais-crisis-eritrea-children-camp>
, because she is a girl. Because God knows that the women and girls in the 
camps qualify as vulnerable. Some are forced into sex work. Many dress as boys 
or stay in the tents to avoid the smugglers, but let’s not bother with details 
here. They, too, could be lying. Check their teeth. Like you would with a 
corpse. Or a cow. This is when dental records are actually used to determine 
age. But, again, why bother with details? Living or dead. Human or animal. 
Toxic discourse around migrants has gone mainstream – even if teeth checking 
has now, thankfully, beenruled out by the Home Office as unethical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/home-office-rules-out-unethical-dental-checks-for-calais-refugees>
.

Davies <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/david-davies>, would-be 
Teeth-Checker General, argues that people in Britain want to help children, 
“but we don’t want to be taken for a free ride”. He surely missed a trick here. 
While checking their teeth, we could also see if they own gold fillings and 
remove them. Or is that going a little too far? Is that a little too 
reminiscent of the unmentionable? Of course it is and Britain is a kind, caring 
nation. Fair, gentle, decent. We pride ourselves on these values. We claim them 
even as the gutter overflows with sulphurous racism dressed up as realism.

Give child refugees dental tests to verify age, says David Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
The discourse around migration ebbs and flows. They are “vermin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/19/katie-hopkins-migrants-vermin-darkest-history-drownings>
” or “cockroaches”. These people have no place. Thegreat anthropologist Mary 
Douglas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2007/may/18/guardianobituaries.obituaries> 
defined dirt as “matter out of place”, and so these people with no place become 
dirt themselves. No longer human to us: simply threatening and other. There 
have been murmurs of empathy despite this. Oh, look, here is a drowned toddler 
and a sinking ship of people, whose names we will never know. Oh, look, there 
is an interminable war in Syria and children smattered with blood and dust sit 
half alive and we think something should be done. But it’s far away and it’s 
complicated.

Calais is not very far away, but it is complicated. Some of the people there 
are seeking asylum, some are migrants. Some are adults, some are children, some 
will die trying to get here and will never settle in France. Some haveburned 
off their fingerprints 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/oct/07/dublin-regulation-european-asylum-seekers>
 so as not to have to settle in their country of entry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees'%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%27%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&media=>
Refugees’ hope and despair in Calais camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/17/refugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
So the divvying up of these people into vulnerable and not vulnerable enough 
(they live in tents in the mud?) is a way for us to ration our compassion. The 
value of compassion has plummetedlike that of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/11/pound-pressure-city-fears-hard-brexit-bank-of-england-business-live>
. What is deemed valuable now is hardness. Stay hard for ever. Permanently 
hard. Hard Brexit. This is delusional, but it is a bravado whereby the weak and 
the vulnerable must be punished for reminding us that they exist. This fear of 
foreigners is political Viagra for a set of limp leaders.

Those who speak up for migrants are often those in possession of some actual 
facts about the situation. The migration of displaced people is massive and 
ongoing. Yes, more will come, however many fences are erected; yes, immigration 
has effects. It is no good simply saying that we are a rich country and can 
afford it, when so many feel very far from rich. The Brexit vote is being 
interpreted by the extreme right as a referendum on immigration. I continue to 
believe it was much messier and more complex than that. But alarm bells are 
ringing because of the flood of racism that is now permissible.

The Good Immigrant review – an unflinching dialogue about race and racism in 
the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/22/good-immigrant-review-nikesh-shukla-britain-racist>
It is shameful that reuniting some teenagers with their families has caused 
this latest outpouring. It is shameful that the only moral leadership is coming 
from the church (and a few good Labour MPs) – although, historically, we know 
the church will step in when the Tories become too reprehensible. It is 
shameful, too, that we are now arguing over whether teenagers are teenagers, as 
if anyone over 18 has no rights at all.

There is now a trap where we talk of the good and bad immigrants, as Nikesh 
Shukla, editor of the book The Good Immigrant, has said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/22/good-immigrant-review-nikesh-shukla-britain-racist>
. The good ones winBake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> or 
long-distance races or save your aunt’s life in hospital. There are deserving 
and undeserving migrants. If someone has got from Afghanistan to within 22 
miles of our coast, what category are they? There are the innocent ones – 
little children, maybe a few Syrians – so the rest must be guilty? In their 
years of journeying, some may have lied to survive. Wouldn’t you?

The reaction to this handful of people is sickening. Maybe some cannot imagine 
ever having to flee. Maybe it is better to be hard of heart and mind. But this 
hatred is a brittle creature. Check its teeth, find its age, you will indeed 
find it a very old thing, rotten to the core, stinking of decay.

If this is what governs our country now, you are welcome to it.
 