
The discovery of a new strain of bird flu in Antarctic penguins has raised 
concerns the virus is reaching the frozen continent more often than previously 
thought, flown in by migratory birds.

Australian researchers helped uncover the new strain of avian influenza in the 
chinstrap penguin in 2015, finding striking similarities to a North American 
strain, which meant it had been introduced toAntarctica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/antarctica> only recently.

The virus was first detected in Antarctica in 2013, but the discovery of the 
new strain has raised a red flag to the vulnerability of penguins to avian flu 
and its capacity to reach Antarctica.


New H7N7 bird flu strain discovered that could pose threat to humans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/aug/21/new-h7n7-bird-flu-strain-discovered-china>
Associate professor Aeron Hurt, of the Melbourne-based Peter Doherty Institute 
for Infection and Immunity, said scientists had previously thought viruses 
rarely reached Antarctica.

“What the most recent finding shows is that viruses do get down there more 
often than we thought and it’s a red flag towards the future,” Hurt said on 
Tuesday.

“Our concern with that is that there have been viruses over the last couple of 
years that have been quite deadly to certain types of birds.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffears-for-antarctic-penguins-as-new-bird-flu-strain-reaches-frozen-continent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4214e3dadaace7be345664998290830bdc55b9%2F0_1_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fears%20for%20Antarctic%20penguins%20as%20new%20bird%20flu%20strain%20reaches%20frozen%20continent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffears-for-antarctic-penguins-as-new-bird-flu-strain-reaches-frozen-continent%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fears%20for%20Antarctic%20penguins%20as%20new%20bird%20flu%20strain%20reaches%20frozen%20continent&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Ffears-for-antarctic-penguins-as-new-bird-flu-strain-reaches-frozen-continent%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4214e3dadaace7be345664998290830bdc55b9%2F0_1_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 Bird flu hasn’t made penguins ill, but the fact that it has arrived in 
Antarctica is of concern to scientists. Photograph: Dean Lewins/AAP 
Hurt said the unique strain of influenza found in 2013 was also detected the 
following year, which might mean it could survive underneath the ice during the 
winter, resurfacing in the summer months as migrating penguins returned.

Several migratory birds, including the Arctic tern and skua are thought to be 
the most likely culprits for delivering the viruses to Antarctica.

Diseases spread in weeks. Epidemic research takes years. This must change | 
Jeremy Farrar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jun/10/diseases-epidemic-research-outbreaks-ebola>
The birds can interact with poultry farms infected with avian influenza in 
North and South America before returning to Antarctica.

While the influenza hasn’t made the penguins ill, the fact that the viruses 
have arrived in Antarctica worries scientists.

“The impact of a pathogenic influenza virus, one that causes death or severe 
illness in birds, would have a really devastating impact,” Hurt said.

 Understanding how avian influenza reached Antarctica helped provide more 
insight into how the virus moved around the world, he said.

 