
It’s been two months since a deadly coup attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/military-coup-was-well-planned-and-very-nearly-succeeded-say-turkish-officials>
 stunned Turkey, leaving some 240 dead and the country reeling. The physical 
scars are still raw – outside the parliament building in Ankara, which was hit 
by bombs and gunfire where helicopters fired into a crowd of protesters who had 
gathered to defend their democracy, the tarmac is still pockmarked with bullet 
holes. Dark, iron-coloured stains on paving slabs betray the final moments of 
the brutally slain. Yet the psychological damage, the paranoia and fear that 
permeate public life, is still being done.

Turkey has detained a prominent novelist. We unite to say this vendetta must 
end
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/11/turkey-coup-ahmet-altan-mehmet>
According to the ruling Justice and Development party (AKP) and pro-government 
media, the unquestionable engineer of the coup wasFethullah Gülen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/16/fethullah-gulen-who-is-the-man-blamed-by-turkeys-president-for-coup-attempt>
, a secretive US-based Islamic cleric. His followers, known as Gülenists and 
labelled the Fethullah Terror Organisation (FETÖ) by Ankara, are also accused 
of having infiltrated the government to establish a “parallel state” that seeks 
to topple the AKP. The search for anyone affiliated to the group over the last 
two months has been likened to a McCarthyite witch hunt. Tens of thousands have 
been detained for questioning or arrested, including soldiers, civil servants, 
journalists, writers, lawyers and more than 3,000judges 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/turkey-coup-latest-news-erdogan-istanbul-judges-removed-from-duty-failed-government-overthrow-a7140661.html>
. There have been so many that the prison service, stretched to breaking point,
released almost 34,000 prisoners 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/turkey-coup-attempt-latest-releases-almost-34000-prisoners-in-amnesty-amid-international-alarm-over-a7221451.html>
 who were jailed before the failed coup in order to free up space.

Over 100,000 people have been purged <http://turkeypurge.com/> from positions 
at government ministries, airlines,schools and universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/turkey-sacks-15000-education-workers-in-purge>
; and independent business owners have also been targeted. The blanket sackings 
have been so widespread that many have wondered how the remaining institutions 
will now run. Some 160 media outlets have been closed and more than 2,000 
educational institutions shut down. With a state of emergency declared almost a 
month ago, there is little to temper the guilty-by-association crackdown.

Gülen is liked by neither secular Turks, nor Islamist AKP supporters. His 
followers have been blamed for nearly every government mistake or embarrassment 
since President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s inner circle were the subject ofa 
corruption scandal in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/17/turkish-ministers-sons-arrested-corruption-investigation>
. Since the coup attempt, the preacher has also been variously accused of 
owning a Bible, being a “secret cardinal” and working for the CIA, and being in 
possession of a $1 bill is seen as evidence enough of links to the coup plot – 
they’re said todenote membership of FETÖ 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2016/08/turkey-gulen-movement-one-dollar-fear.html>
. There has long been a PR battle between Erdoğan and Gülen – one that costs 
Turkey $50,000 a month for a US attorney to file civil complaints, even before 
15 July – but with aformal detention request  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/23/turkey-fethullah-gulen-extradition-request-joe-biden-ergodan>
for Gülen now submitted to the US it remains to be seen who will succeed.

These psychological games played out through unsophisticated propaganda leave 
Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> struggling to heal. The 
official government narrative is everywhere, from the Twitter accounts that 
appeared in the weeks following the coup, to the dominance of the 
state-affiliated and pro-government press and TV in the wake of media 
crackdowns. The same words and phrases have been repeated endlessly by the AKP 
and their supporters until they become almost meaningless – Get Gülen. Gülen. 
Gülen. We are democracy. Democracy. Democracy. That is how it is, and there is 
no room to consider anything else.

Yet despite the hard line on the official story of events, paranoia is still 
rife. The US and EU have been accused of backing the coup and, on the weirder 
end of the scale, America was said to have prepared an “earthquake machine” to 
attack Istanbul after its failure. Positive reinforcement has been dished out 
to reward the people for stopping the coup through street celebrations – for 
almost a month people stayed on the streets to protest, encouraged by calls 
from the minarets of local mosques and text messages from President Erdoğan to 
protect their country from a follow-up coup. It was part-street party, 
part-nationalist muscle-flexing. One province even removed speeding penalties 
during a recent national holiday as a reward; 15 July has been immortalised 
with a national day; and key points such as Istanbul’sBosphorus bridge 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bosphorus_Bridge> and Ankara’s Kızılay square 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/15_Temmuz_K%C4%B1z%C4%B1lay_Milli_%C4%B0rade_Square>
 have been renamed in honour of the resistance.

I’m a journalist on the run from Erdoğan – I have no idea what I’ve done | 
Yavuz Baydar
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/journalist-erdogan-arrests-turkey-crackdown-criticism-president>
Almost universal condemnation of the attempted coup, regardless of political 
orientation, created an opportunity for national unity. Yet with the purges now 
spreading to democratically elected mayors, mostly affecting those from the 
Kurdish People’s Democratic party (HDP) suspected of links to the outlawed 
Kurdistan Workers’ party (PKK), it has gone far beyond those who may have had a 
role in the putsch. Opponents who appear to have had little to do with the coup 
are being punished and divisions deepened in Turkey’s already fractious 
society. It’s a stain that will likely be seen long after the last traces of 
the blood has been cleaned from the streets.
 