
There is no escape from the pornography of war: Aleppo writhes in its terrible 
anguish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/deal-reached-to-evacuate-rebels-and-civilians-from-aleppo>
 on Twitter, on the radio, on TV and on the front of every newspaper and news 
website. We are spectators, compelled to bear witness – as if by watching we 
are, in some ineffectual way, not passing by on the other side.

We get up and dress while schoolchildren tweet farewells to the world. We 
clean our teeth while their mothers weep for help on morning radio shows. We 
eat breakfast listening to a young woman describing how she endures war and 
siege by reading the English classics and refining her embroidery. And that’s 
the sanitised story.

MPs to debate how UK can help civilians trapped in Aleppo 'hellhole'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/mps-to-debate-how-uk-can-help-civilians-trapped-in-aleppo-hellhole>
This hyperconnectivity is slowly destroying the confidence that used to be the 
first privilege of living in a wealthy country. History is no longer an 
inexorable march to a better future and there are problems that our democracy 
seems unable to solve. That’s not quite what this month’s Prospect magazine 
means when it says theAmerican century is over 
<http://www.prospectmagazine.co.uk/world/listen-headspace-3-is-the-american-century-over-donald-trump-podcast>
, but that is how the decline of optimism will be felt.

So we tweet out sympathy and text a fiver to the Red Cross 
<http://www.redcross.org.uk/Donate-Now/Make-a-single-donation/General-Fund-Appeal/General-Fund-search?gclid=CJ2dpfHH89ACFcy17QodnBQAyg>
 and then we grow a thicker skin. Daily life turns into an exercise in empathy 
suppression. British social attitudes surveys record declining sympathy for 
people on benefits. The eyes of someone walking by a person who isbegging are 
blind 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/29/how-should-cities-deal-with-street-begging-homelessness>
.

All of us who work in or near a city centre probably pass rough sleepers on 
our way. One of the most morally diminishing experiences available in one of 
the world’s richest cities is cycling along a street hoping that the heap in 
the doorway is a bag of rubbish and not a human being. That takes a thick skin 
too.

The war in Syria and the neighbourhood misery of rough sleeping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/22/how-do-i-help-rough-sleepers-homelessness-money-begging-street>
 are poles apart in scale. Both of them inspire astonishing acts of courage and 
determination among a few (including the women whostarted one of the charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 for child refugees that theGuardian is supporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-raises-250000-in-four-days>
 this Christmas).

But often the reaction, paraded so shamelessly in the Commons debate on Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/13/labour-will-fight-to-stop-a-hard-brexit-says-starmer-politics-live?page=with:block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889#block-58501bc6e4b077e984850889>
 yesterday, is a kind of chest-thumping uselessness. Yesterday’s debate was 
billed as an attempt to compel the government to intervene somehow to ease the 
plight of thecitizens of Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/12/syria-assad-forces-close-to-capturing-east-aleppo>
. But beyond pressing for some kind of EU action, no one had a workable idea of 
how. The debate morphed seamlessly into a familiar contest to shovel blame onto 
the other side, or for some backbenchers, onto their own. It was another chip 
in confidence in representative democracy.

Syria’s civil war never had an easy answer. But that must not be allowed to 
callous our sensitivity to problems that do, nor our faith in the possibility 
of political solutions. So, for example, no one should ever need to sleep 
rough. Less than a decade ago, it was a problem that had been ticked, solved,
dealt with 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2010/dec/09/homelessness-labour>. 
Councils learned how to organise support teams able to tackle the multiple 
disadvantages that cause and are caused by sleeping out – the breakdown in 
physical and mental health, and quite likely substance abuse – and they had the 
resources to find temporary accommodation and to support vulnerable people back 
into normal life.

Please help us help #childrefugees survive the winter - Guardian/Observer 2016 
Appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
But what wasn’t tackled was the housing shortage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/05/ideas-for-the-relief-of-britains-housing-shortage>
. So rough sleeping, which is the visible tip of the homelessness iceberg, has 
doubled in the past five years. In London it was a third higher last year than 
the year before and is clearly going to be higher again this year. It starts 
with not enough homes; and then overstretched health services fail to provide 
adequate support; and savagely under-resourced councils cannot afford to pick 
up the bits and put them together again.

No one had a good answer on Syria; but at least there is now a homelessness 
reduction bill 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/CBP-7736> 
going through parliament that has government backing. It requires English 
councils to do what Scottish ones do already by tightening up their obligations 
before making someone homeless: which is fine, but there still aren’t enough 
homes.

Labour is launching its homelessness initiative 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/14/labour-vows-to-double-number-of-homes-reserved-for-homeless>
 today, too, demanding that housing associations reserve 4,000 units for people 
with a history of rough sleeping, reviving a scheme pioneered by the charitySt 
Mungo’s <http://www.mungos.org/documents/7403/7403.pdf> and first introduced by 
the Tories 25 years ago.

In the end, politics can only be the art of the possible. We can’t stop the 
slaughter in Aleppo, but we can make sure no one needs to sleep rough. And with 
small successes politics can start to rebuild its reputation.
 