
In a nightclub toilet not dissimilar to the well-bleached stalls of Glasgow’s 
Shimmy Club, a vexing stand-off unfolds over bog roll.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> waltz in and out of the 
cubicles, adjusting bra straps and appraising one another in the mirrors with 
the unselfconscious abandon that only exists in all-female environments. It’s a 
familiar setting – the sweaty and occasionally stinky environs of the women’s 
loo – and one where Adura Onashile has set her new play, Expensive Shit.

The story of former dancer and current toilet-roll tyrant, Tolu, played by 
Sabina Cameron, switches the audience between modern-day Scotland andFela Kuti 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/fela-kuti>’s Shrine club in Lagos. This is 
London-born, Glasgow-based Onashile’s first attempt at directing her own work – 
“you permanently feel something’s about to go wrong” – and the possibilities 
afforded by the specific, lavatorial setting are key to the production. It 
joins a highly select number of plays set in women’s toilets, includingWhen 
Women Wee <http://wefund.com/project/when-women-wee/p5038/> by Rachel Hirons, 
adapted for screen <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt2608726/> in 2013, starring 
Sheridan Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/sheridan-smith>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8fdfac288c4eb8d24dfb12184d2c045bde6088b%2F0_220_5101_3061%2F5101.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8fdfac288c4eb8d24dfb12184d2c045bde6088b%2F0_220_5101_3061%2F5101.jpg>
 Teri Ann Bobb-Baxter in Expensive Shit. Photograph: Sally Jubb 
“There’s the difference between the persona you put on for the dancefloor and 
elsewhere,” Onashile explains. “The toilets are the one place where you’re not 
watched, except, in this one, there’s a toilet attendant and so you are.”

She says the work was partly prompted by her own tricky relationship with the 
mainly Nigerian toilet attendants she encountered in the UK (Onashile lived in
Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria> for eight years as a 
child). “On the one hand, I hated what I saw as exploitation, as they’re not 
really paid, and on the other, there was this social discomfort that I’m not 
proud of, about: ‘We’re almost the same …’ I want to explore anything I feel 
icky about,” she says.

The scenes based at the Shrine club in Lagos explore a different flavour of 
exploitation: “We’re looking at four women who dream of being in Fela’s band. 
They use the toilet as the place where they practise their numbers before they 
do them full-out on the dancefloor, and the dream is that they will get picked 
up for the band. So in this respect, the toilets have become a place of fantasy 
and possibility, in a way that theGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> toilet is not … or is it?” She laughs, 
leaving the denouement unspoiled.

But the play also becomes an exploration of Fela’s music from a female point 
of view. “I love his music, but I have a difficult relationship with how women 
were portrayed in his politics, and yet they were such a big part of his 
aesthetic. I think half the reason I grew up loving it was because of the 
dancers and the singers, but they were in the background and I wanted to bring 
them to the foreground.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F043a391f0a644ce123342a6b8da88d94e039fa59%2F0_330_3509_2105%2F3509.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F043a391f0a644ce123342a6b8da88d94e039fa59%2F0_330_3509_2105%2F3509.jpg>
 Fela Kuti on stage in 1983. Photograph: Ian Dickson/Redferns 
While the dramatic setting allows Onashile to isolate the way that women 
regard themselves and each other, the impact of the male gaze is never far 
away. “We’ve discussed it in the cast: why do women go to the toilet in pairs? 
One woman said: ‘Because you don’t want to be cornered.’ So we’ve always got 
that sense of being watched, judged, ridiculed.” That gaze can, of course, be a 
threatening one: “When are we not going to worry about sending texts when we 
come back from a night out so everybody knows we’re safe? Men don’t do that. 
Women just take it for granted … so somewhere the world must feel unsafe to us 
on a basic level.”

In his music, Fela was blatant about his misogyny, she says. But here the 
parallels between Lagos and Glasgow are at their most illuminating: “We look at 
Africa and say: ‘You guys are primitive and gender relations are archaic,’ but 
here there’s a very obvious feminism, and yet things are still happening that 
are baffling to me. How far have we really come?”

Edinburgh festival 2016: what to see and where to go
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatreblog/2016/jun/08/edinburgh-festival-2016-what-to-see-and-where-to-go>
Onashile decamped to Glasgow six years ago, after arriving in the city to 
preview Cora Bissett’s award-winning play about sex trafficking,Roadkill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2010/aug/12/roadkill-edinburgh-festival>. 
Since then, she has toured internationally with her hugely successful one-woman 
show HeLa, which tells the story of Henrietta Lacks, the African-American woman 
whose unique cancer cells were cultured without her consent and had a global 
impact on medical research.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb21c88155526f35dbc87f0f40c0e0ecf7baa289c%2F0_358_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fela%20Kuti%2C%20a%20Glasgow%20nightclub%20and%20the%20drama%20of%20the%20ladies%E2%80%99%20loos&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Faug%2F15%2Fadura-onashile-expensive-shit-nightclub-toilet-fela-kuti%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb21c88155526f35dbc87f0f40c0e0ecf7baa289c%2F0_358_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Adura Onashile says she was inspired by Nigerian toilet attendants in the UK. 
Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
Of the move north, she says: “It’s been amazing for my work, the nurturing, 
support and belief. It’s home. And I find it fascinating because Scotland has a 
very interesting relationship with Nigeria.” (Scotland has only lately begun to 
confront its own part in the African slave trade, for too long conveniently 
passed off as an English malignancy.) “I grew up in London and Nigeria and 
nobody really mentioned Scotland, so it’s a revelation being there.”“I grew up 
in London and Nigeria and nobody really mentioned Scotland, so it’s a 
revelation being there.” That said, Onashile struggled to find black Scottish 
actors to play her roles and, after holding two auditions north of the border, 
found only one suitable Scots-born artist, Jamie Leary. Indeed, she says her 
production is the first all-female, all-black cast in a Scottish production at 
theEdinburgh festival <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/edinburghfestival>.

“Even in the time I’ve been here, the population of Glasgow has definitely 
become more diverse. That set-up, that you don’t see many people of colour on 
theatre stages inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, would make 
you think that maybe there’s a strange kind of vibe: there isn’t. There’s an 
openness to making mistakes and trying things out that for me is gold dust.”

Expensive Shit is at the Traverse, Edinburgh 
<https://tickets.edfringe.com/whats-on/expensive-shit>, until 28 August and will
run at London’s Southbank Centre 
<http://www.southbankcentre.co.uk/whatson/expensive-shit-98111> from 1 to 4 
September as part of Africa Utopia
 