


It is being dubbed “frenzied Friday” and is set to be the busiest food 
shopping day of the year in the UK, with an estimated 10 million people 
expected to hit supermarket aisles on 23 December.

After a year of grocery pricing offensives, this Friday is when the key 
commercial battle will be fought – and fought well into the evening, to cater 
for shoppers who are still working.

The Centre for Retail Research has calculated that shopping is set to peak on 
the Friday before Christmas – the day when many will receive their December pay 
cheque. It estimates that shoppers will spend £894m – or £865,158 a minute – on 
food, drink and gifts that day. Spending in Britain is set to make up 25% of 
total expenditure that Friday across Europe. The average British family spends 
£800 on itsChristmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> 
shopping (including food, drink and gifts) – almost double the European average.

The day on which Christmas Day – this year on a Sunday – and subsequent bank 
holidays fall affects shopping patterns. “I think this year shoppers will start 
buying their fresh produce from Wednesday onwards, to make sure it’s in tip-top 
condition,” said Joshua Bamfield, an analyst with CRR. “Friday is definitely 
going to be the busiest day and convenience stores will benefit from people 
‘topping up’ at the last minute.”

Bosses at Asda and Waitrose <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> 
expect Friday to be the most frenetic day, with the latter anticipating its 
till takings will be three and a half times higher than normal Friday trading. 
The UK’s largest retailer, Tesco, along with Sainsbury’s, expects shopping to 
be more spread out over the week while the Co-op convenience store chain, which 
has 2,800 shops across the UK, has earmarked its busiest day as Christmas Eve.

For those hoping to steer clear of jammed aisles, the hour from 11am on 23 
December is traditionally the busiest of the year for grocery shopping.

Many retailers make more than half of their sales and profits in the three 
months before Christmas, and despite the marked shift in Britons’ shopping 
habits to “little and often” and online, the festive fresh-food shop still 
tends to be a large one, done in person at the supermarket. Waitrose opened the 
Christmas delivery slots for online shopping on 22 September this year due to 
customer demand – 93 days before the day itself.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchristmas-food-shoppers-braced-battle-frenzied-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4e082d043684c3bb3cb03df83906d265131069%2F194_384_2970_1783%2F2970.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Festive%20food%20shoppers%20brace%20for%20battle%20on%20%E2%80%98frenzied%20Friday%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchristmas-food-shoppers-braced-battle-frenzied-friday%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Festive%20food%20shoppers%20brace%20for%20battle%20on%20%E2%80%98frenzied%20Friday%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fchristmas-food-shoppers-braced-battle-frenzied-friday%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c4e082d043684c3bb3cb03df83906d265131069%2F194_384_2970_1783%2F2970.jpg>
 Supermarket warehouses are gearing up to sell to more than 10 million shoppers 
on 23 December. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
Fresh turkeys go into most stores tomorrow and alongside the millions of pigs 
in blankets, cooked hams, sprouts and mince pies that will be piled up in 
gridlocked trolleys, supermarkets expect strong sales of more unlikely 
essentials such as festive handwash and even posh toilet paper as hosts prepare 
to welcome guests.

Marks & Spencer said its shoppers will be splashing out all the trimmings and 
want help to reduce time spent in the kitchen by turning to prepared foods. The 
retailer expects to sell more than 6.5 million pigs in blankets and over 720 
tonnes of stuffing. M&S was the first retailer to launch ready-made fresh gravy 
20 years ago and expects to sell 500,000 litres in December, easing the stress 
of struggling with chicken stock. Despite shoppers having the chance to stock 
up in advance with wine, beers and spirits, Asda says that on Friday alone it 
expects to sell more than 620,000 litres of Budweiser.

Aldi has prepared for peak shopping on Friday by organising 1,000 extra trucks 
on the road to meet increased demand. Tony Baines, Aldi’s joint managing 
director of corporate buying, said: “We’re gearing up for our busiest week of 
the year as shoppers stock up on festive treats ahead of the big day.”

But this year environmental charities are urging shoppers to exercise 
restraint and not buy food they don’t need – or ensure they use up their 
leftovers. According to the government’s waste advisory body,Wrap 
<http://www.wrap.org.uk/?gclid=CL6Rh9mP-9ACFdaRGwodrN0EEg>, in the UK an 
estimated two million turkeys, five million Christmas puddings and 74 million 
mince pies are thrown away each year. It is also estimated that, three-quarters 
of us struggle to eat all of the food we buy for the festive season.

“It can be so easy to get carried away at the supermarket in the run-up to 
Christmas, as none of us want to run out of food,” said Trewin Restorick, chief 
executive and founder of environmental charityHubbub 
<https://www.hubbub.org.uk/>.

“Unfortunately that can often lead to food going to waste as we buy more than 
we need. The best way to avoid this is to plan ahead before you go shopping and 
if you do overbuy don’t forget to freeze what you can.”
 