
The documentaries praised on these pages are all ones that fired me up, 
galvanised me into action, which are also magnificent works of film-making well 
worth watching now. I’m proud to look around and, as that there are far too 
many non-fiction films to choose from, please forgive the omissions as I’m 
spoiled for choice by my inspiring film-maker colleagues.

There are brilliantly energising films that have brought real-world justice, 
such as The Central Park Five (directed by Ken Burns, Sarah Burns, David 
McMahon) about five black and Latino teenagers wrongly convicted of raping of a 
white woman jogging in New York in 1989. In this category, I would also mention 
The Jinx (directed by Andrew Jarecki) about the real estate heir Robert Durst, 
accused of murder and the subject of a manhunt; and The Thin Blue Line 
(directed by Errol Morris) about a man sentenced to death for a crime he didn’t 
commit.

And there are some films which have had such fantastically huge impact that I 
won’t mention here because so many people will know about them already. That 
list would be topped by Davis Guggenheim’s An Inconvenient Truth, about Al 
Gore’s mission to get the planet to wake up to global warming.

The Up series (1964-present)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dbeb3962d30708ed52e159e25f8ead1af9966f%2F0_123_1476_885%2F1476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F67dbeb3962d30708ed52e159e25f8ead1af9966f%2F0_123_1476_885%2F1476.jpg>
 7 Up, Michael Apted’s original 1964 documentary following a group of British 
children. Our most recent meeting with them was in 56 Up. Photograph: ITV 
To care for your fellow creatures is to want them to be happy and prosper, to 
want to change what is causing them to suffer. To see directorMichael Apted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/michael-apted>’s series – which has followed 
the lives of 14 British children since 1964, when they were seven – is to be 
confronted by social inequality. You quickly realise the evil of imagining that 
life is played on a level field, and that individuals can be judged fairly, or 
at all.

What’s shocking is to see how much is already determined by the time someone 
has turned seven. A fairytale of social inequality,this ongoing series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2012/may/13/profile-michael-apted>, so 
groundbreaking in format and ahead of its time in every way, offers the 
clearest look at contemporary Britain. To know the world, its joys and its 
sufferings, is to want to change it. And this series, like the best work in any 
medium, helps me to know the world.


The Gleaners & I (2000)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6c64e5fc2043a0824799e40a86754091a93d403%2F0_0_2400_1764%2F2400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6c64e5fc2043a0824799e40a86754091a93d403%2F0_0_2400_1764%2F2400.jpg>
 Agnès Varda’s The Gleaners & I. Photograph: Zeitgeist/Alamy 
This might not quite fit the galvanising notion, but Agnès Varda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2009/sep/24/agnes-varda-beaches-of-agnes>’s 
film is no less vital a work. And, personally, I respond more to being gently 
inspired than harangued. My activism comes from my love for the world: I am a 
film-maker not an activist. I trust the audience and want to respect them by 
giving them the space to create their own meaning, their own responses.

Varda travels the French countryside, as well as the city, to find and film 
various groups ofgleaners <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gleaning> as they hunt 
for food, knicknacks, and discarded items. Her film has me thinking, looking, 
experiencing – gleaning, in fact. Varda notes that her work is “another kind of 
gleaning, which is artistic gleaning. You pick ideas, you pick images, you pick 
emotions from other people, and then you make it into a film”.

What I gleaned from this film helped me make my film Waste Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/24/waste-land-review>. Released in 
2010, it focused on the lives of Rio de Janeiro’s rubbish-dump dwellers and 
inspired practical change throughout Brazil, as well as individual behaviour. 
When I think of what might flash before me on my deathbed, I hope it will be 
the impact of my film.

The Invisible War (2012) and The Hunting Ground (2015)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4e14eca08e78b9deedb69fef1278897984d9aee%2F0_0_8000_4500%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4e14eca08e78b9deedb69fef1278897984d9aee%2F0_0_8000_4500%2F8000.jpg>
 The personal possessions of one servicewoman featured in The Invisible War. 
Photograph: Cinedigm/Docurama Films 
These films by the formidable team of director Kirby Dick and producer Amy 
Ziering don’t just tell riveting stories – they break those stories and follow 
them up, creating a massive impact and bringing positive change. The 
investigative reporting is as strong as the film-making, fearless and 
commanding.

The Invisible War <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-invisible-war> lifted 
the lid on sexual assault in the US military. It featured interviews with 
veterans recounting their assaults and identified common themes, such as the 
lack of an impartial justice system and reprisals against survivors. The 
documentary has been praised for its influence on government policies aimed at 
reducing rape in the armed forces.


The Hunting Ground followed that up by transforming our understanding of 
sexual assault on college campuses – by arguing that educational institutions 
are failing to deal with it adequately. Lady Gaga co-wrote the songTil It 
Happens to You <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZmWBrN7QV6Y> for the film. It 
was nominated for an Oscar and she performed it at the 2016 Academy Awards, 
notably introduced by vice-president Joe Biden in a rare political moment for 
the event. With her on stage, survivors of sexual assault revealed parts of 
their bodies with things like “Not your fault” written on them. It may not have 
won a gold statue but, for most viewers, it won the Oscars outright for its 
emotional power.

The Farm: Angola, USA (1998) 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff156c1f195afa80145eb948f226609bd22f20d66%2F0_0_1992_1318%2F1992.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff156c1f195afa80145eb948f226609bd22f20d66%2F0_0_1992_1318%2F1992.jpg>
 Prisoners head out on farm labour duty at the state penitentiary in Angola, 
Louisiana. Photograph: Bill Haber/AP 
Everything you need to know about human justice is here in this film, directed 
by Liz Garbus, Jonathan Stack and Wilbert Rideau. Set in America’s infamous 
maximum security prison inAngola 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louisiana_State_Penitentiary>, Louisiana 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Louisiana>, the film follows the lives of six 
inmates who tell their own stories of life, death and survival in a place few 
will ever leave.It still makes me cry – not because of the cruelty of the legal 
system and its representatives, but because of the breathtaking grace of the 
so-called felons.

The Act of Killing (2012) and The Look of Silence (2014)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e5706d7eeebeca279f27371c880eeee01f3cae%2F2_0_3539_2124%2F3539.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe5e5706d7eeebeca279f27371c880eeee01f3cae%2F2_0_3539_2124%2F3539.jpg>
 Lack of remorse … The Act of Killing. 
The first of Joshua Oppenheimer’s documentaries looks at the individuals who 
took part in theIndonesian mass killings of 1965–66 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Indonesian_killings_of_1965%E2%80%9366>. When 
Suharto overthrewSukarno <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sukarno>, the president 
of Indonesia,gangsters 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Preman_(Indonesian_gangsters)> Anwar Congo and 
Adi Zulkadry took control of a powerfuldeath squad 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Death_squad> and targeted communists. Anwar, who 
is said to have personally killed 1,000 people, recounts and re-enacts his 
killings for the cameras.

The Look of Silence <https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-look-of-silence>, 
meanwhile, focuses on the story of one man whose brother was murdered and who 
confronts his killers. It’s with the second film that these works resolve – and 
achieve masterpiece status in my mind.

Both films take us out of any familiar territory, in terms of revealing our 
ignorance about Indonesia’s recent violent history and also the intensity and 
strangeness of the scenes. We are disoriented and yet the film-making is so 
powerfully crafted that we are utterly compelled by it, and forced to find our 
own moral and emotional bearings. As Joseph Conrad said: “To the destructive 
element submit yourself, and with the exertions of your hands and feet in the 
water make the deep, deep sea keep you up.”

Bowling for Columbine (2002)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3feb125ad86962fc7bc16015746ad96fa2368636%2F0_0_3496_2044%2F3496.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20the%20power%3A%20documentaries%20to%20unleash%20the%20activist%20in%20you&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fdocumentaries-to-unleash-the-activist-in-you-lucy-walker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3feb125ad86962fc7bc16015746ad96fa2368636%2F0_0_3496_2044%2F3496.jpg>
 Michael Moore in Bowling for Columbine. Photograph: Moviestore/Rex/Shutterstock
Ideally, I would actually include everything Michael Moore has ever done, up 
to and including 2015’s Where to Invade Next, a sort of travelogue full of 
lovely inspirational stories about countries where things get done right. But 
Bowling for Columbine, about the 1999high-school massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/14/mother-supposed-know-son-columbine-sue-klebold>
, was the one which resonated the most emotionally for me. Sometimes we need 
these bright lights on a dark night. We gather together and remember. Good 
things can be accomplished, lessons can be learned.

13th 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/sep/29/the-13th-review-ava-duvernay-new-york-film-festival-prisons-plantations-race-law-us>
 andI Am Not Your Negro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-am-not-your-negro-review-james-baldwin-raoul-peck>
 (both 2016)

Two astounding new documentaries. The title of the first, by Ava DuVernay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ava-duvernay>, refers to the 13th amendment 
to the constitution, which outlaws slavery in the US. The film progresses from 
that to the horrors of mass criminalisation and the prison industry.

The second, by Raoul Peck, is narrated by Samuel L Jackson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jun/30/amuel--ackson--was-a-drug-addict-out-of-my-mind-but-showed-up-on-time-and-hit-my-marks>
 and is based on an unfinished work by James Baldwin about civil rights leaders
Medgar Evers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Medgar_Evers>, Malcolm X 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Malcolm_X> and Martin Luther King 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Martin_Luther_King,_Jr.>.

These documentaries demand to be seen now. I don’t even want to delay you by 
listing any more. Just stop reading and track them down right now. This is your 
call to action. Go!

 * More inspiring culture for 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/uplifting-culture-for-2017> 
 * Lucy Walker’s documentaries include Devil’s Playground (2002), Blindsight 
(2006),Countdown to Zero 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/jun/23/countdown-to-zero-review> (2010) 
andThe Crash Reel  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/13/the-crash-reel-review>(2013). Her 
upcoming film is a documentary about Cuba and the musicians of the Buena Vista 
Social Club, set to premiere this month at Sundance.  