
Imagine that the free press disappeared and you got all your news from rumor 
and social media. Imagine that there was no way to find out who wields power, 
who profits, who tells the truth, and who lies.

We came close to that this year, with fake news, warped news, timid news and 
confirmation-bias bubbles that offered reinforcement instead of challenge. But 
a free press – one that is independent and unfettered – is crucial to a free 
society.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fguardian-2016-coverage-best-moments-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20the%20best%20moments%20from%20the%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%202016%20US%20coverage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fguardian-2016-coverage-best-moments-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20the%20best%20moments%20from%20the%20Guardian%E2%80%99s%202016%20US%20coverage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Fguardian-2016-coverage-best-moments-video&media=>
Watch the best moments from the Guardian’s 2016 US coverage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/dec/20/guardian-2016-coverage-best-moments-video>
That’s why I’m writing to ask you for your support of the Guardian as 2016 
comes to a close. Like many news publications that care about facts and 
truthful reporting, the Guardian is battling troubling attacks from Donald 
Trump and his allies. Last week, Breitbart News, the rightwing website founded 
by Trump’s chief strategist Steve Bannon, opened a new front in the war over 
fake news,accusing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/breitbart-fake-news-right-trump>
 the Guardian of a liberal media campaign to mislead readers about immigration. 
Earlier in the week, Newt Gingrich, a longtime advocate for the 
president-elect, called journalists lying “propagandists” and said Trump 
supporters were entering “a world in which we get to tell the truth”.

If you’ve studied how societies fall apart and how dictatorships arise, you 
know that strangling an independent press is key. We talk about governments 
having intelligence and intelligence agencies, but a free country depends on 
our intelligence – on our informed understanding of the issues. An independent 
media is the people’s intelligence agency.


Good journalism is hard work, and it’s not free: it costs the Guardian to pay 
salaries and expenses for people who report, write and edit the stories that 
matter. At this pivotal moment in America, I’m proud to write for the Guardian, 
which has tough and brilliant journalists doing important reporting on 
everything from climate change to political crises, and columnists covering 
everything from feminism to pop culture to politics.

There are good grounds for complaint about the mainstream media, which I think 
of as having not a rightwing or a leftwing bias, but a status quo bias, an 
inability to see outside its own boxes or to tell stories that rock the boat. 
In that sense, the Guardian is not mainstream. Even though we have a strong US 
presence, we bring a global point of view to America, and operate outside the 
east coast establishment. And even though the Guardian is nearly 200 years old, 
it’s fresh in how it sees the world, willing to assume nothing and question 
everything, to go farther and ask harder questions.

Think about all the things you’re willing to pay for, from your coffee to your 
transportation, and think how essential the news is to keeping your world 
running.

We hope you’ll join our community by making a contribution 
<https://contribute.theguardian.com/us?INTCMP=co_global_epic_us_eoy_control_control>
 or becoming amember 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/us/supporter?INTCMP=DOTCOM_HEADER_BECOMEMEMBER_US>
.
 