
Since the Guardian launched the Hardworking Britain series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/hardworking-britain> in 
January, we’ve covered a range of personal stories behind the politics: from
disability benefit cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/cut-disabled-woman-dwp> 
andBrexit’s marginalised voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/30/martin-nothing-lose-vote-leave-unemployed-benefits-sanctioned>
 to shrinking localdomestic violence services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/domestic-violence-services-equation-nottingham>
.

In the face of deepening poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/study-finds-7m-britons-in-poverty-despite-being-from-working-families>
, benefit bureaucracy and a rightwing government, it’s easy to feel that not 
only is Britain getting bleaker but that we’re also powerless to stop it. 
However, whether it’s appealing at a social security tribunal or challenging 
the local council, fighting back is possible. Many of the families Hardworking 
Britain featured this year have since had their own victories. For the final 
column of 2016, I went back to catch up with four families.

Peter and Gabriel
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96cf94a0b5b4f59549e11f075c44bc6e21bcec49%2F0_229_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F96cf94a0b5b4f59549e11f075c44bc6e21bcec49%2F0_229_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Peter Sanford and Gabriel. Photograph: David Sillitoe for the Guardian 
For Peter Sanford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/04/peters-car-lifeline-remove-it-disabled-benefit-cuts>
 – who at only 48, has what his doctors describe as the arthritis of an 
80-year-old – and his five-year-old autistic son, Gabriel, the family car was 
“a lifeline”. For Peter, unable to even walk to a bus stop, it’s the only way 
he could pick up his pain medication or get his son to therapy. But after being 
tested for personal independence payments (PIP) this summer, the government’s 
tougher replacement for the old benefit test, Peter was barred from the
Motability scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/paralympics-carly-tait-lifeline-car-disability-benefit-cuts>
 that swaps disability benefits for a car.

Three months after I spoke to Peter in Redditch, in the West Midlands, this 
August, he appealed against the Department for Work and Pensions’ ruling at 
tribunal. It took 40 minutes for the panel to hear the evidence, deliberate, 
and give Peter the ruling: he’d won.

“The usher said that was a bit of record,” Peter says. In fact, not only did 
the tribunal reinstate the high mobility part of Peter’s benefit – giving him 
back his right to a car – but they increased the care element of his benefit 
too.

What Peter and Gabriel had to go through in the meantime seems as pointless as 
it was painful. Because of DWP rules, Peter’s car was removed before the appeal 
took place, forcing him to buy it back (he was only able to do so with 
donations fromGuardian readers 
<https://membership.theguardian.com/membership-content?referringContent=society/2016/sep/09/prisoners-in-home-guardian-readers-benefit-cuts&membershipAccess=MembersOnly>
), only to have to then sell it because he couldn’t afford a £1,450 repair bill.

Three weeks after winning at tribunal, Peter and Gabriel finally have a car 
again. “Happy doesn’t begin to cover it,” Peter says.

Charlotte and Jayson
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa896e2246e5810f806ee1da2fde61f9b5041e72c%2F0_62_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa896e2246e5810f806ee1da2fde61f9b5041e72c%2F0_62_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Jayson and Charlotte Carmichael. Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
In their two-bed flat in Southport, Merseyside, Charlotte and Jayson Carmichael
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/25/bedroom-tax-supreme-court-disabilities-supreme-court-government>
 encapsulate the injustice of the bedroom tax. Charlotte, 43, has a severe 
spinal condition that leaves her partially confined to a specialist bed – 
sharing an ordinary double with her husband, Jayson, would damage her permanent 
pressure sores – and their flat, partly adapted for Charlotte’s needs, is too 
small to put two single beds in one room. But because Charlotte’s carer is also 
her husband, according to the DWP, Jayson’s bedroom – a room in which he sleeps 
every night – is “spare”.

From local tribunals to the high court, the Carmichaels have been fighting 
this in some shape or form for nearly four years – “Month after month, there’s 
another hurdle,” as Jayson told me – but it all led to February’s battle: going 
to the supreme court to try to prove the bedroom tax discriminates against 
disabled adults.

In November – nine months after going to court, and almost two years after 
first launching legal action –Charlotte (also known as Jacqueline) and Jayson 
finally won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/09/families-win-supreme-court-appeals-over-unfair-bedroom-tax-jacqueline-carmichael>
. They’re now fully exempt from the bedroom tax. Thepolicy itself may not be 
dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/09/the-bedroom-tax-supreme-court-rulings-what-happened-and-what-does-it-mean>
 but the two of them dealt it a body blow. It’s emblematic of the shame and 
fear around benefits that years of anti welfare rhetoric has created that, if 
you ask the couple how they feel, they say: “vindicated”. “It felt like the win 
was clearing our names, as much as anything,” Jayson explains.

For the Carmichaels, their bedroom tax victory wasn’t just their own but a 
victory for carers and disabled people. “People have been congratulating us in 
the street,” Jayson says.

Rhiannon and Andy

Rhiannon Doolan, 14, has been a carer for her dad 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/proxy/preview/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/rhiannon-carer-disabled-dad-benefits-slashed>
, Andy, since she was a toddler. She pushed their trolley in the supermarket 
before she could see over it, and now she’s at secondary school she cooks meals 
and helps her dad dress. Andy, 48, can’t straighten his arms, and can barely 
walk even with crutches. Twenty years ago, he caughtMRSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mrsa> during a double hip replacement and 
has had almost 25 operations on his legs since.

Christmas at a food bank: ‘They’ve not eaten for three days’ | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/christmas-food-bank-not-eaten-three-days-paddington-london>
Still, after being tested for PIP this summer, Andy had his benefits cut. 
“I’ve heard him crying,” Rhiannon told me in September as they worried about 
the future. “It’s horrible.”

But with the help of a pro bono solicitor, Andy applied for mandatory 
reconsideration – the first stage of appeal to the DWP – and last month, had 
his full benefits reinstated. The solicitor was able to dispute each point in 
the report made by the assessor as well as collect supporting letters – 
something that with legal aid cuts and shrinking welfare rights services, not 
enough claimants have access to.

“It feels a weight has been lifted off of my dad’s shoulders,” Rhiannon says. 
“It’s nice to see him smile again.”

Alison and Sam
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1adb293fe4a3fa85281870067d9b97749adbcbba%2F295_522_1945_1167%2F1945.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fighting%20back%20is%20possible.%20At%20the%20end%20of%20a%20bleak%20year%2C%20here%20are%20my%20winners%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Ffighting-back-against-system-hard-possible%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1adb293fe4a3fa85281870067d9b97749adbcbba%2F295_522_1945_1167%2F1945.jpg>
 .Sam St Pierre with her sister Eve. Photograph: Alison St Pierre 
When I last spoke to Sam St Pierre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/sam-cant-speak-disabled-housing-ruining-health>
, and her mum, Alison, in Lancashire, Sam – who has severe cerebral palsy as 
well as learning difficulties – was at the mercy of Britain’ssocial care crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-care>. At only 36, she’d been 
housed in a supported tenancy for the elderly. Her only company was a 
79-year-old, and a 61-year-old with Alzheimer’s – both of them too disabled to 
talk – and a skeleton staff that meant Sam spent her weekends stuck in her 
bedroom.

For more than a year, Sam had a place waiting at a residential house in Hebden 
Bridge – bustling with young people and only five minutes from her family – but 
the council refused to fund it. “It’s the cuts, the cuts, isn’t it?” Alison, 
56, said to me. In the meantime, the room was filled.

It’s all been devastating for Sam – she stopped wanting to go out and 
developed stress-related seizures – and Alison, disabled herself, was 
struggling alone to help her. But after a pro bono solicitor contacted the 
family in September, Alison was able to take legal action. By the end of 
October, the council had agreed to increase Sam’s funding – and a new spot at 
Hebden Bridge opened.

A week ago, Sam moved in. “She’s a different person,” Alison says. “She talks 
more. She’s happy. The staff says she’s flourishing.” Sam hasn’t had any 
seizures since November; not since she was told she was moving.

“She’ll be celebrating the new year in her new home, surrounded by friends,” 
Alison beams. “They’re having a party.”
 