
Every five seconds another person in the world turns blind, according to UK 
charityFight for Sight <https://www.theguardian.com/fight-for-sight>, which has 
funded medical research for a multitude of eye conditions since 1965. Closer to 
home, more than 100 people in Britain begin to lose their eyesight – the sense 
86% of us value over any other – each day.


 Scarily, the situation is worsening: with an ageing population, it is 
predicted that by 2050 4 million UK residents will be living with sight loss, 
double today’s figure. And yet many of us are blind to the threat of 
deteriorating vision, as “good sight is taken for granted when functioning 
well”, suggests pioneering eye surgeon Dr Hari Jayaram. Perhaps as a 
consequence, the level of funding for breakthrough research to improve the 
outlook is pitiful, currently.

Interactive - See everyday situations as visually impaired people do
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fight-for-sight/2016/oct/31/interactive-see-everyday-situations-as-visually-impaired-people-do>
In June, Dr Jayaram returned to the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre for 
Ophthalmology – which is a formal collaboration between University College 
London’s Institute of Ophthalmology and Moorfields Eye Hospital NHS foundation 
trust, the oldest and largest centre for ophthalmic treatment, teaching and 
research in Europe – after a Fulbright scholarship, undertaken in Portland, 
Oregon in the US.


His 18-month placement in the US – facilitated and financially backed by Fight 
for Sight – which has committed £25m to eye research in the last decade – 
focused on learning about game-changing techniques in glaucoma research, the 
Cambridge-University educated medic’s area of expertise. It informed, improved 
and inspired the 41-year-old, who is now spearheading a shift in mindset for 
the supposedly irreversible condition.


Glaucoma is a disease typically caused by a build up of pressure within the 
eye. Inexorably, it damages the nerve fibres, which connect the eye to the 
brain, and affects 60 million people worldwide. On the current trajectory, 
there will be some 327,000 sufferers in the UK in 2020.

“It is slow, insidious – over 10 or even 20 years you may lose parts of your 
peripheral vision – and people, predominantly, don’t know they have it,” 
continues Dr Jayaram, whose research centres on how to prevent optic nerve 
damage and achieve earlier, accurate diagnosis. “With technology and 
understanding improving, we don’t have to think that glaucoma is irreversible.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e3de802cc9f010cfa8404fc62c9f5c41e75db10%2F0_125_1000_1250%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20for%20Sight%3A%20opening%20doors%20for%20ground-breaking%20glaucoma%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20for%20Sight%3A%20opening%20doors%20for%20ground-breaking%20glaucoma%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e3de802cc9f010cfa8404fc62c9f5c41e75db10%2F0_125_1000_1250%2F1000.jpg>
 Research is a major part of Dr Jayaram’s work 
The Chester-born medic splits his time between academia and outpatient 
commitments, and often performs theatre surgery at Moorfields, a few corridors 
away from his laboratory. “I’m basically doing two jobs in the space of one, 
and time management is a challenge,” he says, wryly. “Half research, half 
patient care is the perfect combination, though. Doing both provides a 
fantastic variety in my job, and – more importantly – one informs the other, 
which is very motivating.


“The bottom line is: I wouldn’t be here, doing this work, if it wasn’t for 
Fight for Sight. It has had a major impact on my career, opening new doors and 
making new links. The challenge for any researcher is having the support to 
carry out the projects you have planned. Fight for Sight enabled me to have 
these opportunities, and I am also now fortunate to have protected time for 
research while working as a consultant within the NHS.”


Dr Jayaram is tall, bespectacled, cheery and yet fiercely driven. Indeed, he 
sports an impeccable pencil beard, hinting at his attention to detail, and a 
steady hand. He spends approximately half of his working life in the UCL 
Institute of Ophthalmology, experimenting and analysing, and occasionally 
diving into a small “tissue culture” laboratory – where duties include feeding 
stem cells bovine serum and glucose.

When not researching, Dr Jayaram, who occasionally travels the world to speak 
about his potentially breakthrough work, spends his time with glaucoma patients 
and will “scrub up” to perform surgery on them, at an operating theatre at 
Moorfields.


Glaucoma sufferers are treated through the use of eye drops, laser surgery or 
going under the knife – with the latter their defective eyeball is clamped open 
while a tube is inserted, recalling A Clockwork Orange – in a bid to release 
some of the pressure. These procedures sometimes only provide mere respite, 
before the eyesight continues its gradual decline.

“It’s frustrating for the doctor because you know that even if you lower the 
pressure, the vision may still get worse from glaucoma,” acknowledges Dr 
Jayaram. “For the last 40 years the mainstay of treating glaucoma hasn’t 
changed. There is a lot of research work going on now around early detection 
and diagnosis, treatments and reversing sight loss though – and that’s where 
people can make a difference, by helping to fund these projects.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb81c1c573eb0f1abeb3b19018583e86804ebdb%2F0_50_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fight%20for%20Sight%3A%20opening%20doors%20for%20ground-breaking%20glaucoma%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fight%20for%20Sight%3A%20opening%20doors%20for%20ground-breaking%20glaucoma%20research&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffight-for-sight%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Ffight-for-sight-opening-doors-for-ground-breaking-glaucoma-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fceb81c1c573eb0f1abeb3b19018583e86804ebdb%2F0_50_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Performing surgery at Moorfields Eye Hospital 
During his Fulbright scholarship, at Oregon Health and Science University, Dr 
Jayaram was also part of a group of scientists who published “the first paper 
in how microRNAs change in the retina in glaucoma” and he is now conducting 
“similar studies, but in the optic nerve head – the anatomical site where 
glaucoma damage happens”.


He has also kept up to date with his knowledge of stem-cell treatments, and 
believes that great strides are being made, noting that only a month ago a 
research paper published in Nature Neuroscience, by scientists from San Diego,
found connections from the eye to the brain could be regrown in a mouse 
<https://neuroscience.stanford.edu/news/first-ever-restoration-vision-achieved-mice>
 with glaucoma. With adequate funding, improvements will be possible soon.


“People have been trying to do this for the last 20 years,” Dr Jayaram says. 
“It’s a big step, a huge advance, and it’s empowering to be able to say to 
patients: ‘There are things on the horizon, we don’t know the timescale, but we 
are working on them.’”


His short-term target is to recreate the experimental set up – a laboratory 
model of glaucoma – scientists used in Portland, which is currently difficult 
to facilitate in the UK. “I need to obtain funding to be able to do that, and 
that’s a challenge,” he continues. “Once that is in place, and we have that 
platform, which will help other doctors’ research also, then I can move forward 
with the bigger plan.


“It is an ambitious but tangible aim, but in five years we would like to have 
identified potential microRNAs which we can modulate, and I would like to think 
we would be looking to establish the first human trial in a population of 
glaucoma patients.”


Currently, only 1% of charitable spend in the sight-loss sector is set aside 
for research, however, with the rest being funnelled to support and services. 
Further, less than 1% of government spend on health research goes on eye 
research.


“Research generates ideas, brings money in, and is an investment for the 
future,” adds Dr Jayaram. “There is a paradigm shift in thinking about glaucoma 
treatment, and technology and funding will help the situation dramatically. If 
we don’t secure funding, we won’t find out whether this cycle can be broken.”


Fight for Sight is the leading charity in the UK funding pioneering eye 
research to make sight loss a thing of the past. Please help us. Find out more 
atfightforsight.org.uk/get-involved/sight/ 
<http://www.fightforsight.org.uk/get-involved/sight/?utm_campaign=Media_Partnership&utm_medium=Referral&utm_source=Guardian&utm_content=Article&utm_term=Researcher>
 