
The £37bn bill for payment protection insurance mis-selling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/ppi-claims-all-you-need-to-know-about-the-mis-selling-scandal>
 by Britain’s banks is likely to escalate further after the Financial Ombudsman 
revealed that it continues to be inundated with complaints.


In the first half of 2016, the number of PPI cases taken on by the Financial 
Ombudsman was 91,381, only slightly down on the 92,667 in the previous period.

The chief ombudsman, Caroline Wayman, said expectations that PPI complaints 
would start to drop have been proved wrong. “Although it’s a few years now 
since PPI complaints peaked, we have been receiving over 3,000 a week for six 
years running – despite wider expectations that numbers will fall. And we’re 
continuing to deal with the issues and uncertainties around PPI which remain a 
significant challenge for everyone involved.”

Britain’s banks have been lobbying regulators and government to cap PPI claims 
by imposing a deadline for complaints.

But the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) stunned the banks in August when it 
proposeda deadline of June 2019 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
, rather than the spring 2018 cutoff it had suggested in October.


The later deadline, plus the figures from the ombudsman, are likely to mean 
banks will have to increase provisions. LloydsBanking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group has paid out most, about 
£16bn, but analysts predict its final bill could be at least another £1bn.

Lloyds and its Bank of Scotland subsidiary were the subject of by far the most 
PPI complaints to the ombudsman in the first half of 2016. The combined group 
saw 33,984 PPI cases, compared with 9,371 at Barclays, 6,975 at HSBC and 2,756 
at Nationwide.

PPI complaints made up 54% of new cases brought to the Financial Ombudsman in 
the first six months of 2016. The “uphold rate” for PPI cases – where the 
complaint is found in favour of the customer – was 57%.

There was an 8% increase in complaints other than PPI to 77,751, led by a 
surge in cases involving payday lending. WDFC, the parent group of Wonga, was 
the subject of 821 complaints, up from 361 in the same period of 2015, while 
Instant Cash Loans received 285 complaints.
 