
The government’s data protection regulator has issued fines totalling more 
than £2m since the law was changed 12 months ago to make it easier to crack 
down on nuisance marketing and phone calls.

The penalties levied by the Information Commissioner’s Office on companies 
found to be breaking the law are more than four times higher than the £360,000 
handed out during the previous 12 months. Thelaw was changed last April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/apr/06/crackdown-begins-on-nuisance-texts-and-phone-calls>
.

This week, the ICO will fine a Scottish company for making 2.5m recorded calls 
in an effort to sell its home improvement services. It will be the 19th firm 
that the regulator has taken action against in the past year, and brings the 
tally of penalties for nuisance marketing during this period to £2,035,000.

The law change made it easier for the ICO to fine firms behind nuisance calls, 
texts and emails, up to a maximum of £550,000. The companies fined so far have 
been responsible for 55m nuisance calls, more than 1m text messages and 
hundreds of thousands of emails.

The fines range from a £5,000 penalty issued to David Lammy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/10/david-lammy-fined-over-mayoral-bid-nuisance-calls>
, the Labour MP, who made recorded calls as part of an election campaign, to a
record £350,000 fine 
<http://email.prnewswire.com/wf/click?upn=Y-2FyZf6XWG7MK9Tb1UCqe8-2BwfZSYSh4rKHVd0f1sstYafqFsHuhcFTy1Qos9DJaW8ghvjCCMCQoSvSlGpEgjP44rdmsQIcjAKD1H9swer83-2Bf3yhhp3yRWrGFb223aVcR4FSQ-2FBZveKxRms5UG7DkhbVHfouSpL6ILt-2F9h3xDtVnhcSP5ioCoRk5PxUdrFxyyy8C9unGh41RoEuVtwCocEg-3D-3D_x7QAo5Znl5xEvTh8iH2q9SKEZE6EV0Jv61Rf4zgopIKZ5lT1UlZy812sjBRx5kPFpWTxLm0MavRcs5t7R0f9P6PksI-2BCGyJS-2BbGRvVm7PGTIQHn9IlObI0pr9jatvg4CED3lVPccGvlqOhLTDXnO-2FiJlwRQngKufT7rJCajRzO7-2BloNeN76ekLLnLa2lzC06vnfzQT9SdTPlhguS35meHcECRQPESJpDcqSRes0jJhAxj81FehJTlI-2BOfxcnWXuuE-2B-2FDYAznsXj6Su2zYLhjWi7aUUxD0tFky7juS4a9caO5G1tG1br8Y3xTF6GoljW3cLVDakRzF1BpsOMsjrY9i0r3AtbmCiSefhsmK9Fh0ew-3D>
 for a company that made 40m illegal calls trying to sellpayment protection 
insurance <https://www.theguardian.com/money/payment-protection-insurance>. 

Christopher Graham, the information commissioner, said: “This time last year, 
we promised that these changes to the law would make a difference, and they 
have. The fines we’ve issued should mean fewer calls next year. But we know 
there is more to do. We’ve got more fines in the pipeline and more ways to stop 
the nuisance these calls create.


The ICO, which regulates marketing calls, typically receives more than 14,000 
complaints about nuisance calls every month.

Under a separate change in the law due to come into effect in mid-May, 
marketing companies will be forced to display their telephone numbers or face 
heavy fines. It is part of an attempt to end anonymous phone calls from British 
companies that have call centres based in the UK and overseas. Firms will have 
to display their working phone number so that customers know who is calling and 
can follow up with formal complaints.

“The law change put forward today around caller ID is another step forward,” 
Graham said. “We know that people are more likely to complain to us when they 
can see the number behind the call they’ve received. Those complaints inform 
many of our investigations, lead to fines and, ultimately, stop the calls.”
 