
Sara Kelly Keenan didn’t think a Google search would change her life. But in 
2009, at age 48, a few clicks revealed the truth that her parents and doctors 
had hidden for decades: Keenan is intersex – biologically a mix between male 
and female.

After meeting someone with a similar condition, Keenan’s online research and a 
later appointment with an endocrinologist confirmed that she was born 
genetically male with female genitalia and a mixed reproductive anatomy.

“It never occurred to me that I was going to uncover a 30-year lie,” she said. 
“It was really shocking to learn that I had been duped about my own body.”

Keenan, 55, has soared to international fame in recent weeks after she became 
the first person in the US to obtain abirth certificate 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/30/health/intersex-birth-certificate/> with 
“intersex” on it. Activists said it’s a groundbreaking moment in thefight for 
intersex rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/02/male-and-female-what-is-it-like-to-be-intersex>
 that could help pave the way for public officials, doctors and parents to 
better recognize and respect a marginalized group.

In a recent interview with her husband at her home in the mountains of Santa 
Cruz,California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>, Keenan said 
she decided to go public with her story in part because she recognizes that 
misconceptions about intersex people can have life-altering and sometimes fatal 
consequences.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be0c346958b06b57919899bc4d5ae0e631d06ef%2F0_190_1267_760%2F1267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20US%20person%20to%20have%20'intersex'%20on%20birth%20certificate%3A%20'There%E2%80%99s%20power%20in%20knowing%20who%20you%20are'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20US%20person%20to%20have%20%27intersex%27%20on%20birth%20certificate%3A%20%27There%E2%80%99s%20power%20in%20knowing%20who%20you%20are%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1be0c346958b06b57919899bc4d5ae0e631d06ef%2F0_190_1267_760%2F1267.jpg>
 Sara Kelly Keenan’s birth certificate. Photograph: Sam Levin for the Guardian 
Intersex – the often ignored “i” in the LGBTQIA acronym – is a general term 
<http://www.intersexrecognition.org/intersex.html> for a range of conditions in 
which a person is born with a reproductive or sexual anatomy that doesn’t fit 
typical definitions of male or female. Campaigns for the rights of transgender 
people – whose gender identities don’t match the ones assigned to them at birth 
– have gainedsignificant momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/01/north-carolina-hb2-law-transgender-issues-corporate-businesses-protest>
 inrecent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/13/obama-public-schools-transgender-access-restrooms>
. But intersex issues remain widely misunderstood, even in queer and 
progressive communities.

Growing up, Keenan recalled, her physicians and parents insisted she was “100% 
girl”, even after she failed to hit puberty and grew much taller than average 
girls. At age 16, she was advised to start hormone replacement therapy and 
undergo surgery to remove what doctors told her were ovaries that could become 
cancerous.

Later in life, she found out that doctors had actually removed what was 
essentially testicular tissue that could never develop. After her 2009 
discovery, Keenan’s father revealed that doctors had told him Keenan had the 
option of “masculinizing” with hormones and a constructed penis.

When Keenan learned the truth, her longstanding confusions about her identity 
made sense.

“It was a ‘duh’ moment for me. I’ve always felt as masculine as I do feminine. 
I can’t really choose a gender,” she said. “The world doesn’t know what gender 
I am.”

I’ve always felt as masculine as I do feminine. I can’t really choose a 
gender. The world doesn’t know what gender I am
Sara Kelly Keenan 
When she was born in New York City, Keenan’s initial hospital records 
identified her as male, but her documents were switched to female weeks later – 
before her parents adopted her from an orphanage.

She said she’ll never know whether she received genital surgery as an infant, 
but intersex advocates said it’s acommon problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/10/intersex-human-rights-lgbti-chile-argentina-uganda-costa-rica>
 rooted in outdated andharmful <http://www.isna.org/faq/reimer> medical 
theories. Physicians have long convinced parents to agree to cosmetic 
procedures that aren’t medically necessary and are designed to “normalize” 
babies.

“Doctors have taken it upon themselves to literally carve bodies so they fit 
neatly into male and female body types,” said David Strachan, a 69-year-old San 
Francisco resident who is intersex. “We’re not stereotypically male or female. 
There’s a whole spectrum in between.”

Advocates argue that it’s unethical to force a gender assignment on intersex 
infants, particularly with genitalmutilations <http://www.isna.org/node/138> 
that can severely impair sexual functioning, and that people should be able to 
make their own decisions about their bodies and identities when they are older.

One way activists have been fighting back is by pushing governments to 
formally recognize that they are neither male nor female. After learning of the 
case ofJamie Shupe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/16/i-am-first-official-genderless-person-united-states>
 – an Oregon transgender person who became the first in the US tosuccessfully 
petition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/jamie-shupe-first-non-binary-person-oregon>
 for a “non-binary” gender classification – Keenan decided to pursue a similar 
case in California last year.

In September, a judge changed the formal gender of Keenan from female to 
non-binary. (Not all intersex people identify as non-binary; many identify as 
male, female or transgender). Keenan, a retired paralegal who now works as a 
health and wellness coach, used the state court order to seek a change on her 
birth certificate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F068dae2c747bcff83757eef723e701380760f504%2F0_106_1267_760%2F1267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=First%20US%20person%20to%20have%20'intersex'%20on%20birth%20certificate%3A%20'There%E2%80%99s%20power%20in%20knowing%20who%20you%20are'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=First%20US%20person%20to%20have%20%27intersex%27%20on%20birth%20certificate%3A%20%27There%E2%80%99s%20power%20in%20knowing%20who%20you%20are%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fintersex-rights-gender-sara-kelly-keenan-birth-certificate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F068dae2c747bcff83757eef723e701380760f504%2F0_106_1267_760%2F1267.jpg>
 In December, New York City officials mailed her a new certificate with 
‘intersex’ written under the ‘sex’ column, which is believed to be the first of 
its kind in America. Photograph: Sam Levin for the Guardian 
In December, New York City officials mailed her a new certificate with 
“intersex” written under the “sex” column, which is believed to be the first of 
its kind in America.

At her home, where the couple’s four dogs cuddled by her side, Keenan’s face 
lit up when she pulled out laminated copies of the documents.

“I just noticed my smile gets a lot bigger when I hold this,” she said. 

Her husband, David, chimed in to say it’s been a joy to embrace her identity 
in recent years.

“She doesn’t feel she’s supposed to be something she’s not,” he said. “There’s 
a power in knowing who you really are.”

Proper identification can also help people avoid a wide range of 
discriminatory practices. As iscommon with trans people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/06/oakland-fire-ghost-ship-transgender-victims-them-are-us-too>
, intersex and non-binary people can often struggle with police, airport 
security, doctors, employers, landlords and others misgendering them or 
refusing to acknowledge their identities.

“It’s an issue of respect, but it’s also about safety as they move about in 
the world,” said Toby Adams, legal director of theIntersex and Genderqueer 
Recognition Project <http://www.intersexrecognition.org/contact.html>, which is 
helping people petition to get their documents updated. (Genderqueer is another 
term for people who don’t identify as male or female.)

The legal successes of Shupe and Keenan have inspired others to ask judges and 
state officials to recognize their true gender identity and sex.

“We’re trying to exist in this society and be recognized,” said Char Crawford, 
a 32-year-old San Francisco resident who is trans and non-binary and has 
petitioned the court for their gender to be recognized on their ID. “I’m doing 
this personally to live an honest life and to be out and open about who I am.”

Breaking down the stigma of being intersex is critical, advocates said, 
particularly consideringhigh rates of suicide 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/lanesainty/largest-ever-survey-of-intersex-australians-shows-high-rates?utm_term=.bj3AX9ZG5#.hnyY2oPvD>
, possibly linked to coercive treatments.

“There’s nothing about intersex that needs to be shameful or hidden or 
surgically altered to fit into a gender binary world,” Keenan said. “This is 
just another way human beings are created.”
 