
The UK’s fishing industry has been warned it will have to accept difficult 
deals over foreign fleets in British waters if the country is to win favourable 
terms in next year’s Brexit talks.

EU easing of fishing quotas raises scientists fears dwindling stocks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/14/eu-easing-of-fishing-quotas-raises-fears-over-dwindling-stocks>
A House of Lords <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> committee told 
fishing communities, who campaigned vigorously for a leave vote during the 
referendum, that they may have unrealistic hopes about the chances of reducing 
foreign fleets or cutting their catch sizes once the UK leaves the European 
Union.

The UK’s trawlermen were among the most vocal critics of the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/31/salt-in-their-veins-and-fire-in-their-bellies-fishermen-battling-for-brexit>
 during the referendum, fuelled by several decades of resentment against 
increasingly strict controls on fishing quotas, which are blamed on Brussels 
and the common fisheries policy (CFP), and claims that their interests are too 
easily traded away.


Their campaign culminated in the famous “battle of the Thames” confrontation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/15/nigel-farage-bob-geldof-rival-eu-referendum-thames-flotillas>
 between a flotilla of trawlers skippered by pro-leave fishermen and led by 
Nigel Farage, the then Ukip leader, and a pro-EU flotilla led by Bob Geldof. 
Farage said this issue typified the need for the UK to take back control of its 
resources from the EU.

The Lords energy and environment subcommittee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/eu-energy-environment-subcommittee/>
 said leaving the EU would allow the UK and devolved administrations to 
directly control access to the UK’s waters – the largest exclusive economic 
area in the UK – and its rich fishing grounds.

But the fate of those fish stocks was closely linked to the UK’s wider 
interests, it said. Flexibility during the Brexit negotiations would be 
essential to protect British trawlers from retaliatory controls on access by 
its neighbours and also to preserve the UK’s wider trade and political 
interests in the talks.

The peers told ministers that open and low-tariff access to the single market 
was essential for UK fisheries, because the industry was so integrated and 
dependent on European markets.

The UK would also have to urgently negotiate new bilateral fisheries deals 
with two of Europe’s most powerful and competitive fishing nations, Norway and 
Iceland, and with the Faroe Islands. They all have substantial interests in 
mackerel and herring, the two most valuable catches to the UK.
Fish map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/fish-zip/giv-3902yA08DUBDn4Sx>
In 2010, a fleet of 50 Scottish boats blocked a Faroese trawler from entering 
Peterhead ina dispute over sharing out mackerel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/aug/22/britain-iceland-faroe-islands-mackerel-war>
 and herring stocks, after Nordic fleets decided their share was too small. The 
incident echoed the cod wars of the 1970s, where Royal Navy warships were 
confronted by Icelandic coastguard vessels when British boats were excluded 
from Iceland’s coastal waters, and was also a warning of the potential for 
future conflicts.

“The vote to leave the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
and, with it, the common fisheries policy has raised expectations for the 
future of fisheries policy that may be hard to deliver,” peers said.

“In withdrawing from the EU, the UK will be able to develop a domestic 
fisheries policy and control fishing activity within its exclusive economic 
zone. However, the majority of commercial fish stocks in UK waters are shared 
with other states, rendering continued cooperation with the EU and other 
neighbouring states crucial to the sustainability of those stocks.”

The committee said fish stocks were mobile and crossed international 
boundaries, which underlined the need to maintain existing management 
agreements. “The government should therefore pursue new, or interim, agreements 
as a matter of urgency, building on existing models where possible,” it said.

The subcommittee said even though fisheries made up a tiny fraction of the 
UK’s GDP – contributing £426m to the economy - ministers had to be aware that 
they had substantial economic and cultural value to coastal communities.
Fish we catch, eat, export 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-16T18:03:48/embed.html>
The UK government should also collaborate with devolved governments on 
fisheries policy during the Brexit talks, peers said, to present a united front 
and prevent fisheries fragmenting into competing areas within the UK. The 
Scottish, Welsh and Northern Irish parliaments legally have jurisdiction over 
fisheries in their waters through devolution settlements, raising the prospects 
that they could win full control over policy and quotas too after Brexit.

The UK’s fishing industry bodies, who are frequently at odds with each other, 
signed a joint position statement in November calling on the government to take 
full control of access by foreign vessels to British waters. They also demanded 
a full revision of quotas and fisheries management policy, to further distance 
the UK from the common fisheries policy.

The Lords committee said the UK would still need to base its fisheries 
policies and catch levels on objective scientific data, agreed and shared with 
neighbouring countries, and base its quotas on international protocols.

Despite the industry’s attacks on the CFP, peers said recent changes – heavily 
influenced by the UK – meant it was now far better run. The rest of the EU 
would continue to operate under the CFP, making it impossible for the UK to 
ignore.

Bertie Armstrong, the chief executive of the Scottish Fishermen’s Federation, 
the largest of the industry bodies, said although deals would need to be 
struck, it was clearly in the UK’s economic interests to greatly tighten up 
access to British waters.

They are the richest and largest fishing grounds of any in the EU, yet 58% of 
fish was taken by other national fleets while only 17% of the UK’s overall 
catch came from other waters.


“Every nation or state has a set of fundamental assets,” Armstrong said. “One 
of the UK’s fundamental assets are these exceptionally rich waters. It is not 
an act of aggression to wish to take up your rights and responsibilities [for 
those waters] under international law. It’s normal.”
 