
“Within one community, there can be a business that’s throwing away perfectly 
good food and just around the corner there’s a charity that’s struggling to 
feed people in need,” says Iseult Ward ofFoodCloud <http://food.cloud/>, a 
remarkable social enterprise which she co-founded with Aoibheann O’Brien in 
2012. “We wanted to connect the two.”

Ward, who is 26, was studying business and economics at Trinity College, 
Dublin, where O’Brien, 31, was completing a masters in environmental science. 
Neither were particularly tech-savvy – they bonded over “a love for food and a 
distaste for waste” – but that didn’t deter them from using technology to 
address the problem. “We developed an app that would help businesses notify 
charities when they had surplus food available,” says Ward.

It took them a year and a half to build. To use FoodCloud, the retailer simply 
uploads details of what’s available to the app. Local charities receive that 
information automatically, collect the surplus food at an appointed time and 
distribute it to those in need. The idea appealed toTesco Ireland 
<http://www.tesco.ie/>, which offered FoodCloud a trial just as Ward was 
finishing her degree. Tesco later introduced the service to all of its 140 
stores around Ireland.

The women in the refuge are now coming out of their rooms, swapping food and 
laughing

Now FoodCloud is expanding. In partnership with the food supply organisation 
FareShare <http://www.fareshare.org.uk/>, the start-up is helping 929 Tesco 
stores donate to 3,979 charities around the UK. According to Rachel Finn, 
Tesco’s head of community food projects, “We’re going to need about 5,000 
charities to make sure all that food finds a home.”

But why did this disconnect between retailers and charities exist? An 
estimated 1.9m tons of food is wasted in the UK grocery supply chain every 
year, according to theWaste and Resources Action Programme 
<http://www.wrap.org.uk/> (Wrap). Meanwhile food poverty is on the rise – 
figures from theTrussell Trust <https://www.trusselltrust.org/> show that 
food-bank use has increased more than 40-fold in the UK since 2008-09. It seems 
indefensible that supermarkets are throwing away good produce.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fnew-app-proves-a-nourishing-idea-for-wasted-food-foodcloud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc627308365c418b68506e3502dd069a8a85a9cc4%2F0_124_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20app%20proves%20a%20nourishing%20idea%20for%20wasted%20food%20%7C%20Killian%20Fox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fnew-app-proves-a-nourishing-idea-for-wasted-food-foodcloud%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20app%20proves%20a%20nourishing%20idea%20for%20wasted%20food%20%7C%20Killian%20Fox&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Fnew-app-proves-a-nourishing-idea-for-wasted-food-foodcloud%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc627308365c418b68506e3502dd069a8a85a9cc4%2F0_124_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Fit to burst: Aoibheann O’Brien and Iseult Ward help out in FoodCloud’s Irish 
distribution warehouse. Photograph: Mark Nixon for the Observer 
“What you learn,” says Tesco’s Rachel Finn, who helped implement the FoodCloud 
technology in the UK, “is that it’s genuinely hard to give away food for free. 
In our shops, there are uncertainties in supply and demand which means we’re 
not a good match for the voluntary sector. Then you have to work through food 
safety. And then, assuming you’ve cleared all of that, you have to do it every 
day. It’s very difficult.”

Ward agrees. “Managing relationships with charities isn’t part of a retailer’s 
core business, so we had to make it really easy for them to donate food. 
Charities, on the other hand, are often understaffed and low on resources, so 
we had to make the process easy for them as well.”

To do this, FoodCloud had to be more than just a clever piece of technology. 
In Ireland, the start-up – a team of 12 full-time and six part-time staff, with 
twice as many women as men – have been in charge of finding and vetting the 
charities for Tesco. They have a food safety officer who works with the 
charities, making sure the food is properly stored after collection. They also 
provide guidance on legal issues and draw up written agreements. If someone 
were to get sick from eating surplus meat, for example, both sides need to be 
absolutely clear where the responsibility lies.

Finn is full of admiration for what FoodCloud has achieved. “As well as 
providing the technology, they were also able to do the matchmaking that helped 
get it off the ground,” she says. “We learned a lot from what they were doing 
in Ireland.”

The role of technology shouldn’t be underestimated here. Simple though 
FoodCloud’s app may be, it enables donations on a scale that was unimaginable 
before smartphones became ubiquitous. “As the technology improves, we’re 
finding more effective solutions to problems that we weren’t able to solve 
efficiently before,” says Ward. She praises a number of other start-ups 
harnessing technology to similar ends, includingOlio <https://olioex.com/>, a 
UK app that allows you to share surplus food with your neighbour, andZero 
Percent <https://www.zeropercent.us/> and Food Donation Connection 
<http://www.foodtodonate.com/> in the US, which also help businesses donate 
food. “It’s incredibly encouraging that more start-ups are looking to address 
the food waste problem.”

Where FoodCloud diverges from your average tech start-up is that it’s not a 
profit-making enterprise – retailers pay a fee for the service, but all the 
money goes towards covering operational costs. Still, Ward has big ambitions 
for FoodCloud. As well as Tesco, they’ve been working with Aldi in Ireland (who 
have donated 500,000 meals via FoodCloud, saving more than €700,000 for the 
charities and community groups involved) and hope to have all major Irish 
retailers on board in the near future. And through a new initiative called
FoodCloud Hubs <http://food.cloud/foodcloudhubs/>, which O’Brien is running, 
they are looking at other areas of the food industry, particularly 
manufacturing and distribution where they can access much larger quantities of 
surplus food with a longer shelf life.

But this isn’t all about networks and supply chains, nor can you judge 
FoodCloud purely on the number of meals they’ve helped donate – 8.4m in the UK 
and Ireland since they launched. It’s also about the tangible difference that 
the start-up is making in people’s everyday lives. Ward tells me they are 
working with a women’s refuge in Ireland where many of the residents find it 
difficult to socialise. “Now the managers are noticing that when the food 
donation arrives twice a week, the women are coming out of their rooms, 
swapping food and sharing recipes, and there’s laughter in the room. The 
recognition that food is about far more than nutrition, that it also has the 
potential to connect and empower people. For us that’s one of the most powerful 
pieces of feedback we can get.”

For more information, go to FoodCloud <http://food.cloud/>
 