
A woman who gave up her right to anonymity as a rape complainant has accepted 
£100,000 in damages after a judge found that two footballers raped her.

Denise Clair, 30, welcomed the ruling in a civil case at the court of sessions 
in Edinburgh, but said she was “bitterly disappointed” that no criminal charges 
had been brought against David Goodwillie and David Robertson.

She said the then Dundee United 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/dundeeunited> teammates raped her in the 
early hours of 2 January 2011 at a property in Armadale, West Lothian, after a 
night out in nearby Bathgate.

The judge, Lord Armstrong, said: “I find the evidence for the pursuer to be 
cogent, persuasive and compelling. In the result, therefore, I find that … both 
defenders took advantage of the pursuer when she was vulnerable through an 
excessive intake of alcohol and, because her cognitive functioning and 
decision-making processes were so impaired, was incapable of giving meaningful 
consent, and that they each raped her.”

Criminal charges against Goodwillie were dropped in 2011 for lack of evidence. 
Robertson was never charged.

Clair said she was left “devastated, upset and confused” when she was told the 
men would not be prosecuted. The Criminal Injuries Compensation Authority 
agreed she had been raped and awarded her £11,000.

In 2014 Scotland’s former first minister Jack McConnell questioned the 
decision to drop charges against Goodwillie andcalled on the lord advocate 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/former-first-minister-calls-full-3104164>
 to personally explain the decision to Clair.

On Tuesday Clair said: “I am pleased by today’s verdict. However I am bitterly 
disappointed that I was so badly let down by the criminal justice system and 
was forced to seek a remedy through the civil court.

“If it was not for the support of my lawyer Cameron Fyfe and the team at Rape 
CrisisScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, I do not know how I 
could have coped throughout this long, harrowing journey.”

At one point Clair faced the prospect of being questioned in court by one of 
her attackers, because Goodwillie had said heintended to represent himself 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/crime/rape-case-striker-david-goodwillie-9002075>
. The judge, however,refused to allow him to do so 
<http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/news/scottish-news/former-scotland-star-david-goodwillie-9025741>
.

Simon Di Rollo QC, the senior counsel for Clair, said: “It was incredibly 
brave of Ms Clair to have brought the action, in which, unlike in a criminal 
case, she did not enjoy anonymity.

“The case illustrates the importance of the 2009 Sexual Offences [Scotland] 
Act, which clearly spells out that free agreement to sexual activity cannot be 
given while a person is incapable because of the effect of alcohol. The court 
accepted that Ms Clair was incapable and that anyone dealing with her would 
have known that.”

Goodwillie, a former Scotland international now at Plymouth Argyle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/plymouthargyle>, and Robertson, now at 
Cowdenbeath, both maintain they had consensual sex with Clair.


The judge said he did not find Goodwillie’s evidence to be persuasive and did 
not find Robertson credible or reliable.


Clair told the court she remembered meeting Robertson at the Glenmavis Tavern 
on the evening of 1 January 2011 but did not remember meeting Goodwillie. Her 
next recollection was waking up naked the following morning in a house she did 
not recognise.

Plymouth said Goodwillie would not play for the club until it had considered 
the judge’s full report.

Cowdenbeath <https://www.theguardian.com/football/cowdenbeath> said Robertson 
would not be considered for selection until the club had reviewed all the 
details.
 