
I am a migrant from the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. 
You have probably heard lots of things about people like me in the referendum 
campaign, but you may not have actually heard from any of us. We have got more 
to lose than anyone else – our livelihoods depend on the outcome – but we do 
not have a voice, or a vote.

I came to live in the UK in 1998, to study for a PhD. Before that, in 1993-94, 
I had been an exchange student here, partly funded by the EU’s Erasmus 
programme. It was on that occasion that I got to know and love Britain as an 
open-minded and welcoming country. My landlady was one of the kindest and 
warmest people I have ever met. My fellow students later came to visit me at my 
(then) home in Berlin, and I’m still friends with many of them. I returned to 
Britain as soon I could.

After finishing my PhD, I embarked on a post-doc and then moved to another 
university, where I worked for eight years, before taking up my current post. I 
have profited from the openness of UK academia and the mobility offered by EU 
membership. I have very rarely encountered prejudice or discrimination, and 
have been able to thrive as a result.

My laboratory would fall apart if Britain left the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/aug/28/my-laboratory-would-fall-apart-if-britain-left-the-eu>
Give and take

But, as in any good partnership, I have given a lot back. I have worked hard 
to educate thousands of students over the years. I have undertaken research and 
written books and articles. I have worked as a head of department and an 
external examiner, and taken on countless administrative roles at my own 
institutions and in other bodies.

There are thousands of people like me at British universities – one study puts 
the figure at15 per cent 
<http://www.universitiesforeurope.com/register/Documents/The-European-Unions-contribution-to-UK-higher-education.pdf>
 – and the country has undoubtedly benefited from the international nature of 
this workforce. To compete internationally, the UK’s universities have to be 
able to attract the best talent, wherever it is found. Success in the 
international rankings relies on their ability to do just that.

If the UK votes to leave, it will become less attractive not only for EU 
nationals, but for the brightest and best across the world. Several US-born 
colleagues, for example, have told me that one of the reasons they settled in 
the UK was because indefinite leave to remain here gave them access to the EU.

But the signs are ominous. The referendum campaign has created an atmosphere 
of hostility towards immigrants, in ways I have never experienced in my 18 
years in this country. We are being blamed for the state of public services 
such as health, housing and education, and for undercutting wages, even though 
the real culprits – chronic underinvestment, poor planning, ineffective 
governance and watered-down labour laws – are entirely homemade.

University chief rejects claim that Brexit would not deter EU students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/university-chief-rejects-claim-that-brexit-will-not-deter-eu-students>
The tales of intimidation and threats against pro-Remain campaigners, 
immigrants and their supporters are a cause for serious concern. There is no 
doubt that many Leave proponents are decent, thoughtful people, but there is 
also no doubt that parts of the campaign have played on xenophobia and 
emboldened nasty, violent racists.

‘It’s not you, it’s them’

I have been told: “It’s not about people like you, it’s the others.” I am, 
apparently, a “useful” foreigner. So who are the others they are talking about? 
The Polish plumbers? The Lithuanian fruit pickers? The Spanish nurses? The 
Greek doctors? Or is it the benefit tourists, those mythical creatures that, 
like the Loch Ness monster, have never actually been spotted, but that surely 
must exist, given the amount of conversation about them?

Even in the event of a vote to Remain, it will be difficult to control the 
forces that have been unleashed in this campaign. And it is difficult to 
imagine what the UK would turn into after a Brexit, possibly under the 
leadership of Messrs Johnson, Gove and Farage. What is certain, however, is 
that it will no longer be the country that embraced me – and that I fell in 
love with – all those years ago.

I don’t know whether I would be allowed to stay, but, like many others, I am 
beginning to wonder why I would want to. I would hate to leave the country that 
has been my home for almost 20 years and that has been so good to me – but if 
it comes to that, the real loser will be Britain.

The writer is an EU national teaching music at a Scottish university

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 