
In reality, it’s merely another day in the calendar but 2016 has more of us 
than usual hoping that 1 January 2017 is some kind of spiritual, cultural, 
political and personal reset button. We’re reflecting on what has been and what 
the future holds with greater concern and urgency than previous years.

What does 2016 say about Australia? Who are we? 

We’re a people who voted in a leader who promised to slash education and 
health funding while giving a massive tax break to wealthy corporations.

We’re the nation who voted for the party committed to giving every person 
earning more than $87,000 a year a tax cut whilestripping a few dollars a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/sep/09/coalitions-plan-to-abolish-welfare-supplement-attacked-by-australia-institute>
 from people living on or below the poverty line.

A New Year that changed me: when my mum was star of the dancefloor | Coco Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-years-eve-mum-dancefloor-bollywood-dancing>
We’re the ones who after 25 straight years of economic growth think it’s 
appropriate to cut aid to the lowest levels in our history – including aid to 
Africa and the Middle Eastby over $100m 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/political-news/the-blind-truth-of-australias-foreign-aid-cuts-20151210-glk3e9.html>
 despite our political leaders regularly reminding us how violence, poverty and 
instability in that region threaten our very way of life.

We’re the ones who thought spending $200m on an opinion poll on whether LGBTI 
people are worthy of having their relationships recognised like the rest of us 
was a good idea.

We’re the kind of people who barely notice when our leaders cut thousands from 
the annual refugee intake,announce an increase 
<http://www.afr.com/news/politics/malcolm-turnbull-hikes-refugee-intake-by-one-third-indefinitely-20160919-grjxcw>
 to a lower level than when they came to power, and have the nerve to call that 
generosity.

We’ve cultivated a culture that rewards the politics of fear, division and 
prejudice with votes, in which the vilification of minorities is an effective 
campaign strategy and where jingoistic nationalism gets you on TV, in the 
papers and in the Senate.

We’re a country where being cruel to the world’s most vulnerable people is the 
best election strategy going. We have normalised brutality. We have validated 
xenophobia.

When you look at Australia from this perspective, we’re not in good shape. 
This is the Australia imagined by the kind of people whoblame the impact of 
wild storms on renewable energy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/29/is-this-a-new-low-politicians-using-a-natural-disaster-to-push-a-fact-free-agenda>

But there’s another “we” that we also see in the story of 2016.

There’s another Australia recorded in the narrative of those who answer the 
“who are we?” question not with apathy, despondency or resignation but instead 
with hope, vision and action.

We’re Mariam Veiszadeh and Susan Carland refusing to be cowed by the trolls, 
bigots and daily threats of violence.

We’re the unions and their allies who didn’t relent until the CUB 55 had their 
jobs back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/07/cub-55-workers-have-won-all-demands-in-industrial-dispute-says-union>
.

We will not abandon our future to the self-interested class

We’re Rosie Batty and Arman Abrahimzadeh <http://zahrafoundation.org.au/> 
tirelessly working to end family and domestic violence.

We’re AB Original 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/24/ab-original-on-reclaim-australia-the-album-being-black-everything-you-do-becomes-a-protest>
 andL-Fresh the Lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2015/oct/05/l-fresh-the-lion-get-mine-video-premiere>
 making incredible music that also calls our better selves into being.

We’re the thousands of Australians who joined Walk Together in more than 25 
towns <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fRkSSbOPA5U>and cities for a future 
where all people can belong and contribute.

We’re Hugh de Krester, Daniel Webb and the Human Rights Law Centre fighting 
for decency and justice for people seeking asylum and children in our 
corrections system.

We’re volunteering with charities. We’re joining unions and organising our 
workplaces. We’re writing to our political leaders and marching for change. 
We’re joining progressive political parties and contributing to local advocacy 
groups.

We welcome people seeking asylum and refugees with more than our social media 
status – they’re our friends, our workmates and our community. We won’t be a 
part of demonising a whole community because of the actions of a few and so we 
learn about Islam from real people we’ve taken the time to get to know instead 
of from our Facebook feed.

We oppose the marriage equality plebiscite because it’s bad for our democracy, 
bad for our community and because we believe it is self-evident that all people 
deserve equal rights regardless of their gender, race, religion or sexuality.

We’re those who know that climate change is the greatest challenge of our time 
and are tirelessly working for real world solutions.

We’re the people who “give a Gonski” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/22/education-and-the-election-its-still-all-about-the-money>
, who know that people and their unions fought for years to secure our 
universal healthcare system and are willing to fight to protect it again. We’re 
those who can’t wait to vote in a referendum that will finally recognise the 
people of our First Nations. We’re the premiers ofVictoria 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-02-26/victoria-to-begin-talks-for-first-indigenous-treaty/7202492>
 andSouth Australia starting treaty negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/14/sa-government-aims-to-sign-treaty-with-indigenous-australians-within-12-months>
 and passing new laws to give LGBTI people greater rights.

Who are we?

Reaching for perspective: books to make sense of the new world order | Jeff 
Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/reaching-for-perspective-books-to-make-sense-of-the-new-world-order>
We’re the millions of Australians who will not be divided, who will not sell 
out to hate, who like it that our tax dollars help people less fortunate than 
us – and who wish the government would spend more of our money on that rather 
than helping wealthy people become wealthier.

We’re the millions of Australians who believe a good education, healthcare and 
secure work should be available to the many and not only the few.

We’re those who believe that cruelty is not a sign of leadership but of 
weakness and that fear is a weapon wielded by those absent of inspiring vision 
and noble character.

And this is our our 2017 resolution: we’ll get up tomorrow, and every day, to 
offer our time, our energy, our skill, our hearts and our passion to all of 
those for whom it is it not “the most exciting time to be Australian”.

We will not give up. We will not go away. We will not abandon our future to 
the self-interested class who don’t care who is left behind as long as their 
privilege and power is maintained.

This is who we’ll continue to be on 1 January 2017 and every day following – 
and for this reason we’re the evidence that our future can be characterised by 
generosity, opportunity, inclusion and equality.

Who are “we”? We are hope. 
 