
The emails currently roiling the US presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/30/democratic-senators-fbi-director-comey-clinton-emails-letter>
 are part of some unknown digital collection amassed by the troublesome Anthony 
Weiner, but if your purpose is to understand the clique of people who dominate 
Washington today, the emails that really matter are the ones beingslowly 
released by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
 from the hacked account of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chair John Podesta. They 
are last week’s scandal in a year running over with scandals, but in truth 
their significance goes far beyond mere scandal: they are a window into the 
soul of the Democratic party and into the dreams and thoughts of the class to 
whom the party answers.

The class to which I refer is not rising in angry protest; they are by and 
large pretty satisfied, pretty contented. Nobody takes road trips to exotic 
West Virginia to see what the members of this class looks like or how they 
live; on the contrary, they are the ones for whom such stories are written. 
This bunch doesn’t have to make do with a comb-over TV mountebank for a leader; 
for this class, the choices are always pretty good, and this year they happen 
to be excellent.

They are the comfortable and well-educated mainstay of our modern Democratic 
party. They are also the grandees of our national media; the architects of our 
software; the designers of our streets; the high officials of our banking 
system; the authors of just about every plan to fix social security or 
fine-tune the Middle East with precision droning. They are, they think, not a 
class at all but rather the enlightened ones, the people who must be answered 
to but who need never explain themselves.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fdonald-trump-us-immigration-daca-arizona-obama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='We%20learned%20to%20fight%20back'%3A%20Dreamers%20campaign%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fdonald-trump-us-immigration-daca-arizona-obama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27We%20learned%20to%20fight%20back%27%3A%20Dreamers%20campaign%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fdonald-trump-us-immigration-daca-arizona-obama-video&media=>
‘We learned to fight back’: Dreamers campaign against Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/donald-trump-us-immigration-daca-arizona-obama-video>
Let us turn the magnifying glass on them for a change, by sorting through the 
hacked personal emails of John Podesta, who has been a Washington power broker 
for decades. I admit that I feel uncomfortable digging through this hoard; 
stealing someone’s email is a crime, after all, and it is outrageous that 
people’s personal information has been exposed, sinceWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> doesn’t seem to have redacted the 
emails in any way. There is also the issue of authenticity to contend with: we 
don’t know absolutely and for sure that these emails were not tampered with by 
whoever stole them from John Podesta. The supposed authors of the messages are 
refusing to confirm or deny their authenticity, and though they seem to be 
real, there is a small possibility they aren’t.

With all that taken into consideration, I think the WikiLeaks releases furnish 
us with an opportunity to observe the upper reaches of the American status 
hierarchy in all its righteousness and majesty.

The dramatis personae of the liberal class are all present in this amazing 
body of work: financial innovators. High-achieving colleagues attempting to get 
jobs for their high-achieving children. Foundation executives doing fine and 
noble things. Prizes, of course, and high academic achievement.

Certain industries loom large and virtuous here. Hillary’s ingratiating 
speeches to Wall Street are well known of course, but what is remarkable is 
that, in the party of Jackson and Bryan and Roosevelt, smiling financiers now 
seem to stand on every corner, constantly proffering advice about this and 
that. In one now-famous email chain, for example, the reader can watch current 
US trade representative Michael Froman, writing from a Citibank email address 
in 2008,appear to name 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/137798/important-wikileaks-revelation-isnt-hillary-clinton>
 President Obama’s cabinet even before the great hope-and-change election was 
decided (incidentally, an important clue to understanding why that greatest of 
zombie banks was never put out of its misery).

The far-sighted innovators of Silicon Valley are also here in force, 
interacting all the time with the leaders of the party of the people. We watch 
as Podesta appears toemail <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/15865> 
Sheryl Sandberg. He makes plans tovisit 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/29255> Mark Zuckerberg (who, 
according to one missive, wants to “learn more about next steps for his 
philanthropy and social action”). Podesta exchanges emails with an entrepreneur 
about an ugly race now unfolding for Silicon Valley’s seat in Congress; this 
man, in turn, appears to forward to Podesta the remarks of yet another Silicon 
Valley grandee, whocomplains 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/19482> that one of the Democratic 
combatants in that fight was criticizing billionaires who give to Democrats. 
Specifically, the miscreant Dem in question was said to be:

“… spinning (and attacking) donors who have supported Democrats. John Arnold 
and Marc Leder have both given to Cory Booker, Joe Kennedy, and others. He is 
also attacking every billionaire that donates to [Congressional candidate] Ro 
[Khanna], many whom support other Democrats as well.”

Attacking billionaires! In the year 2015! It was, one of the correspondents 
appears to write, “madness and political malpractice of the party to allow this 
to continue”.

There are wonderful things to be found in this treasure trove when you search 
the gilded words “Davos” or “Tahoe”. But it is when you search “Vineyard” on 
the WikiLeaks dump that you realize these people truly inhabit a different 
world from the rest of us. By “vineyard”, of course, they mean Martha’s 
Vineyard, the ritzy vacation resort island off the coast of Massachusetts where 
presidents Clinton and Obama spent most of their summer vacations. The Vineyard 
is a place for the very, very rich to unwind, yes, but as we learn from these 
emails, it is also a place of high idealism; a land of enlightened liberal 
commitment far beyond anything ordinary citizens can ever achieve.

Consider, for example, the 2015 email 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/30396> from a foundation 
executive to a retired mortgage banker (who then seems to have forwarded the 
note on to Podesta, and thus into history) expressing concern that “Hillary’s 
image is being torn apart in the media and there’s not enough effective push 
back”. The public eavesdrops as yet another financierinvites 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/24270> Podesta to a dinner 
featuring “food produced exclusively by the island’s farmers and fishermen 
which will be matched with specially selected wines”. We learn how a Hillary 
campaign aiderecommended <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/19449> 
that a policy statement appear on a certain day so that “It wont get in the way 
of any other news we are trying to make – but far enough ahead of Hamptons and 
Vineyard money events”. We even read thepleadings 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/32784> of a man who wants to be 
invited to a state dinner at the White House and who offers, as one of several 
exhibits in his favor, the fact that he “joined the DSCC Majority Trust in 
Martha’s Vineyard (contributing over $32,400 to Democratic senators) in July 
2014”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
(Hilariously, in another email chain 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/8640>, the Clinton team appears 
to scheme to “hit” Bernie Sanders for attending “DSCC retreats on Martha’s 
Vineyard with lobbyists”.)

Then there is the apparent nepotism, the dozens if not hundreds of mundane 
emails in which petitioners for this or that plum Washington job or 
high-profile academic appointment politely appeal to Podesta – the ward-heeler 
of the meritocratic elite – for a solicitous word whispered in the ear of a 
powerful crony.

This genre of Podesta email, in which people try to arrange jobs for 
themselves or their kids, points us toward the most fundamental thing we know 
about the people at the top of this class: their loyalty to one another and the 
way it overrides everything else. Of course Hillary Clinton staffed her state 
department with investment bankers and then did speaking engagements for 
investment banks as soon as she was done at the state department. Of course she
appears to think <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/927> that any 
kind of bank reform should “come from the industry itself”. And of course no 
elite bankers were ever prosecuted by the Obama administration. Read these 
emails and you understand, with a start, that the people at the top tier of 
American life all know each other. They are all engaged in promoting one 
another’s careers, constantly.

Everything blurs into everything else in this world. The state department, the 
banks, Silicon Valley, the nonprofits, the “Global CEO Advisory Firm 
<http://www.teneoholdings.com/>” that appears 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/clinton-foundations-fundraisers-pressed-donors-to-steer-business-to-former-president-1477527597>
 to have solicited donations for the Clinton Foundation. Executives here go 
from foundation to government to thinktank to startup. There are honors. 
Venture capital. Foundation grants. Endowed chairs. Advanced degrees. For them 
the door revolves. The friends all succeed. They break every boundary.

But the One Big Boundary remains. Yes, it’s all supposed to be a meritocracy. 
But if you aren’t part of this happy, prosperous in-group – if you don’t have 
John Podesta’s email address – you’re out.
 