
I’ve been thinking a lot about Kellyanne Conway’s recent advice on how to make 
sense of Donald Trump. Conway, one of Trump’s closest advisers and a one-woman 
spin-machine,told Chris Cuomo this week 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2017/01/trump-statements-kellyanne-conway-233344>
 that the mistake journalists make is that “you always want to go by what’s 
come out of his mouth rather than look at what’s in his heart”.

I agree with Conway on one count – we can’t go by anything that comes out of 
Trump’s mouth. That’s because nearly everything he utters is a self-serving lie.

It’s makes sense, though, that Conway justifies supporting a dangerous 
egomaniac by convincing herself that what’s in his heart is somehow different 
than his words and actions. How else could she go on working for a person who 
has been reprehensible at every turn?

It’s easier for her and others who support Trump to ignore that he has bragged 
about grabbing women“by the pussy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 andmocked John McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
 for being a prisoner of war. Better to forget, if you ever want to be able to 
look at yourself in the mirror again, that you empowered a man who called for 
themurder of women and children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/01/donald-trump-anti-terror-policies-war-crimes-waterboarding-torture>
 as a way to eradicate terrorists. A man whose defense against sexual assault 
allegations is that the accusersare not attractive enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/look-at-her-i-dont-think-so-trumps-defence-is-to-demean-his-accusers>
 for him to attack. A person who dismissively characterizes any unflattering 
news as “fake”, any criticism as reminiscent of Nazi Germany.

Yes, better to tell yourself that it’s what’s in Trump’s heart that really 
matters. Never mind that whatever he feels is irrelevant; the harm he does is 
what truly counts for Americans. Trump hasn’t even taken office yet, and we’ve 
already seen the aftershocks of his rise to power, including thesharp increase 
in reported hate crimes 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/hate-on-the-rise-after-trumps-election>
 andpre-emptive strikes at women’s health 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/health-shots/2016/11/10/501573568/trumps-election-could-greatly-reduce-access-to-abortion>
.

Conway may have convinced herself, along with Republican voters, that Trump is 
a good person deep down; but when the rest of us take a guess at what he’s 
really feeling it doesn’t paint a much more flattering picture.

Even if we are to ignore the constant stream of invective that falls out of 
Trump’s mouth, this is a person we almost never see smile – only smirk. Can you 
imagine Trump ever feeling joy that isn’t based on the humiliation of another 
person? Can you picture him playing catch with his grandchildren?

When you are holding on to the toxic combination of self-loathing and 
self-aggrandizing that powers Trump, it’s a sickness too large to hide.

People lie to themselves all the time. We believe abusive partners will 
change, that our luck will turn around despite all odds, that a cruel remark we 
made will have no lasting impact. Some of the lies we tell ourselves are 
forgivable. But Conway’s insistence that we trust Trump’s innate goodness is 
not. There is too much at stake to gloss over the hatred or to dismiss the 
horror.

This is a man who shows us who he is again and again – in that one way, this 
one time, we should believe him.
 