
Eric Daniels, who ran Lloyds TSB during the financial crisis and presided over 
a £16bn mis-selling scandal,has emerged as a director of the peer-to-peer 
lender Funding Circle <https://www.fundingcircle.com/uk/about-us/>.


Daniels, 65, retired from Lloyds in 2011 after eight years in charge of 
Britain’s biggest retail bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/sep/20/lloyds-banking-group-eric-daniels>
. In 2008 he oversaw Lloyds TSB’s rescue of HBOS to form Lloyds Banking Group 
and a government bailout that left taxpayers owning 43% of the company.

Lloyds was the biggest seller of payment protection insurance (PPI) during 
Daniels’s tenure. The bank has had to set aside more than £16bn to compensate 
buyers of the product, which was often sold without the buyer’s knowledge and 
failed to pay out.

Three years ago Lloyds claimed back most of Daniels’s £1.45m bonus for 2010, 
leaving him with £300,000, as the bill for PPI claims mounted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2013/mar/25/lloyds-clawback-eric-daniels-bonus>
. Danielstold MPs in 2013 he thought Lloyds was on “the side of the angels” on 
PPI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/feb/14/former-lloyds-boss-eric-daniels-defends-ppi>
 and that most of the policies his bank sold to cover people during illness or 
unemployment were sold correctly.

Daniels, who likes to wear coloured shirts with white collars and cuffs, was 
briefly shortlisted in 2011 to be chairman of the insurer Avivabut was 
reportedly dropped after opposition from investors unhappy about the HBOS 
takeover <https://www.ft.com/content/247fc648-532c-11e0-86e6-00144feab49a>. He 
will serve on Funding Circle’s risk and audit committees,he told Bloomberg News 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-09-09/ex-lloyds-ceo-daniels-joins-board-of-p2p-lender-funding-circle>
, which was first to report his appointment.

“There has been a sea change in traditional banking,” Daniels said. “New 
capital and risk-weighting requirements have turned the industry upside down, 
and it’s become difficult for institutions to continue lending the way they did 
before. That’s left an opening, and Funding Circle has deftly taken advantage 
of that.”

Funding Circle is one of the biggest of the peer-to-peer lenders that have 
sprung up with the avowed purpose of taking business from the big banks. It 
specialises in funding businesses ranging from chocolate makersto small 
housebuilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/12/peer-to-peer-lender-property-funding-circle>
 and has arranged $2.5bn (£1.9bn) of loans mainly in the UK but also in the US 
and Europe.

Peer-to-peer lenders match borrowers with lenders online, promising higher 
rates for lenders than bank savings and cheaper deals for borrowers. They 
flourished after the financial crisis triggered a period of low interest rates 
and reluctance by some banks to lend to small businesses.

The appointment of Daniels, a former mainstream banker, appears at odds with 
peer-to-peer lenders’ claims to be shaking up the lending market with new 
levels of transparency. But the sector has edged into the mainstream by 
becoming subject to regulation and in some cases receiving government backing.

Samir Desai, Funding Circle’s co-founder and chief executive, said: “We are a 
financial technology business, but our objective is to bring in a lot of 
experience and get the best of both worlds.”

Since leaving Lloyds, Daniels has taken consultancy jobs with CVC Capital 
Partners, a private equity firm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/mar/04/private-equity-firm-hires-eric-daniels>
, and StormHarbour, a financial advisory firm. He is also a non-executive 
director at Russell Reynolds, a recruitment firm.
 