
A significant anniversary of the speech by Jim Callaghan, then the prime 
minister, atRuskin College in 1976 
<http://www.educationengland.org.uk/documents/speeches/1976ruskin.html> seems 
to have gone largely unnoticed. The passage of 40 years may make it a 
historical irrelevance to some, or it may be that the new brooms in government 
(and opposition) are too busy feeling their way to understand its relevance.

To describe Callaghan’s speech as a big vision would be an overstatement. But 
it did make waves. He wanted to start a debate by challenging what was then 
seen as the “secret garden” of the education world; a place inhabited by 
unaccountable teachers, a loose curriculum and off limits to prime ministers of 
the day.

Callaghan’s policy supremo, Bernard (now Lord) Donoughue, who wrote much of 
the speech, noted in his autobiography that officials and the education 
establishment were “deeply shocked” at the prime minister’s impertinence. He 
was asked to relay to Downing Street that education was not the business of the 
prime minister – an unimaginable concept today when barely anything happens in 
schools that is not the business of government.

What Callaghan said was, by today’s standards, unexceptional. He questioned 
informal teaching methods, hinted at the right of parents and government to 
know more about what went on in schools, talked about the need for a core 
curriculum, for schools to counter disadvantage and to meet the needs of 
employers. There were veiled warnings that politicians would no longer 
“politely keep off the grass”.

It took another decade and a radically different government before real change 
began, but the seeds had been sown for the restless changes we have witnessed 
since. However, re-reading the speech recently I was struck less by its 
long-term impact, than by how many of the issues Callaghan raised remain 
unresolved today.

That schools have got better  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/05/massively-improved-state-schools-threaten-private-sector>
is undeniable. More accountability to parents and government played a part in 
that. But can we say we haveovercome disadvantage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/06/schools-fail-pupils-disadvantaged-backgrounds>
? No.

School reforms widen poverty gap, new research finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/02/school-widen-poverty-admissions-academy-free-schools-segregation>
Do we have a curriculum that promotes basic standards while allowing a child’s 
personality to “flower in its fullest possible way” as Callaghan put it?
Probably not. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/06/justine-greening-michael-gove-school-arts-michael-rosen>
 Are we free of claims that school-leavers lack the skills employers want? 
Absolutely not. Do we need another Ruskin moment, 40 years on, to understand 
why this is and what we should do next. Almost certainly.

Callaghan was right that education is the business of government. It goes to 
the heart of what sort of society we create, and eats up a huge chunk of 
taxpayers’ cash. But could he ever have foreseen the sort of bloated 
centralisation we have today?

At the time he made his speech the secretary of state had three powers over 
schools. The current incumbent has more than 2,500 and is personally 
responsible for over 5,000 individual institutions. Far from tiptoeing into the 
garden, ministers have charged into the house and are moving the furniture 
around.

Would he have envisaged systems of oversight so fragmented and convoluted that 
some headteachers can become proprietors of smallbusiness empires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/greg-martin-superhead-failing-schools-durand>
 from which they directly profit? Or a curriculum so micromanaged and 
politically charged that the secretary of state can decide which books pupils 
should read, and vocational, technical and creative education can be downgraded 
out of existence.

Would Callaghan have wanted good heads and teachers suffocated by 
hyper-accountability, wrestling with what is best for their schools against 
what is best or their pupils, while the less scrupulous boost performance by 
weeding out the most challenging pupils?

At a recent seminar 
<http://www.soss.org.uk/the-callaghan-speech-and-its-consequences/> discussing 
the Ruskin speech, Lord Donoughue acknowledged that progress had been made but 
said his political mentor would have been horrified by what is happening now. 
What were good ideas in their time have spiralled out of control and the 
absurdly named “Schools that work for everyone”consultation [pdf] 
<https://consult.education.gov.uk/school-frameworks/schools-that-work-for-everyone/supporting_documents/SCHOOLS%20THAT%20WORK%20FOR%20EVERYONE%20%20FINAL.pdf>
, which closed on Monday, answers none of these pressing points.

The way is clear for someone, preferably on the left, to walk in Callaghan’s 
footsteps and articulate a new vision.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> alone can’t solve wider 
inequality. Endless structural change might be counterproductive and once 
accountability becomes persecutory, it may hinder rather than help improvement.

Callaghan’s moral imperative to “equip children for a lively, constructive, 
place in society, and also to fit them to do a job of work” is as relevant 
today as in 1976. But perhaps more important is to note Callaghan’s insistence 
that governments need to take the teaching profession with them.

The underlying message from last week’s Pisa tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/06/english-schools-core-subject-test-results-international-oecd-pisa>
 is clear. After decades of domestic reform, our international ranking has 
barely shifted. Countries that do well for all their young people pour 
resources and energy into teachers and create a culture that attracts the best 
to the profession.

Where does that leave an education system that can’t even recruit enough people
 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/pisa-nearly-half-heads-england-worried-about-teacher-shortages>
 to teach its children? Surely it’s failing and is ripe for a re-think, a 
system and society in which the lessons from history have a part to play.
 