
The Turnbull government has been an utter disappointment on so many things but 
nowhere as much as on the biggest issue of our time: climate change.

Unable to shrug off the legacy of the climate-denying Abbott government, it 
has beenbullied out of any climate change ambition  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/10/malcolm-turnbull-shut-down-the-only-credible-option-for-our-failing-energy-market>
by science-denying fringe elements on the right.

The list of dishonourable mentions are long. Despite signing the Paris 
agreement last year, the Australian government has consistently undermined any 
efforts to keep the world below the safe level of 2C.Last week’s backflip  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/07/australia-malcolm-turnbull-rules-out-carbon-tax-or-emissions-trading>
on the idea of a carbon-intensity emissions trading scheme –supported by most 
of the banks and the energy sector as the best way to reduce emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/australias-energy-transmission-industry-calls-for-carbon-trading>
and provide a level-playing field – is just the latest in a long line.

But the biggest worry is seeing Turnbull’s coal-loving ministers push through 
the Adani mega coalmine in Queensland, replete with theoffer of a $1bn 
taxpayer-funded loan to build a railway line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/adanis-carmichael-coal-rail-line-may-not-be-eligibile-for-government-funding>
through rich farmland to a coal terminal on the Great Barrier Reef. If 
constructed, the Adani mine will almost certainly condemn the Great Barrier 
Reef to the annals of history, not to mention blowing almost any chance of us 
living in a safe climate future.

But while climate change is mired in partisanship and cheap political 
point-scoring on a federal level, Australian organisations, driven by a strong 
market shift away from polluting fossil fuels, particularly coal, are leading 
the way towards the clean economy.

Wave energy: Carnegie launches world-leading hub in Cornwall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/15/wave-energy-carnegie-launches-world-leading-hub-in-cornwall>
On Tuesday a report by global financial outfit Arabella 
<https://www.arabellaadvisors.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Global_Divestment_Report_2016.pdf>
 shows that fossil fuel divestment is now worth an astounding A$7tn globally. 
It spans almost 700 organisations as diverse as the Norwegian Sovereign Wealth 
Fund, the City of Newcastleand the Australian National University. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/15/staff-demand-anu-finish-divestment-from-fossil-fuels>

This $7tn that is not invested in coal, oil and gas provides a significant 
financial indicator to back up what we already know: fossil fuels are on the 
nose.

While Australia may be lagging on a government level, many of our businesses 
are leading the world in waking up to the risks posed by fossil fuels and the 
opportunities of the new clean economy.

The Arabella report highlights that Australia has the most divestments per 
capita of any developed nation. And these organisations that have divested are 
by no means radical. It is groups such as the Australian Capital Territory’s 
government, Australian Academy of Science, the Royal Australasian College of 
Physicians and the National Tertiary Education Union. Add to the mix almost 30 
local government councils, 10 super funds, a handful of our top universities 
and you get the picture.

There is even a chance you live in a fossil-free council considering that more 
than one in 10 Australians now live in a council area that has sworn off fossil 
fuels.

In 350.org <https://350.org.au/>’s work, we deal closely with banks, energy 
companies and organisations that are constantly weighing up the risks 
associated with fossil fuel investments. All of them have told us just how 
quickly things are changing.

The recently released Melbourne University sustainability plan 
<http://sustainablecampus.unimelb.edu.au/about-us/strategy/sustainability-plan> 
acknowledges the changing market dynamics:

Companies which effectively manage environmental, social and governance 
responsibilities should yield better risk-adjusted returns over the long term.

'The heat is there': is there a future for geothermal energy in Australia?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/04/the-heat-is-there-is-there-a-future-for-geothermal-energy-in-australia>
And as coal enters structural decline, clean energy is booming. Consumers and 
local government are bypassing government barriers and again leading the way.

Local governments, such as the City of Melbourne and others such as the ACT 
are teaming up to source their energy from renewables – thus providing security 
for investors to build more clean energy infrastructure.

The  
<http://www.irena.org/menu/index.aspx?mnu=Subcat&PriMenuID=36&CatID=141&SubcatID=690>
Renewable Energy Benefits: Measuring the Economics 
<http://www.irena.org/menu/index.aspx?mnu=Subcat&PriMenuID=36&CatID=141&SubcatID=690>
 report that came out earlier this year showed that doubling renewable energy’s 
current share of the global energy mix to 36% by 2030 would create 24 million 
jobs and deliver about half of the emissions reduction necessary under the 
Paris agreement.

For Australia this would boost our economy by 1.7%. The clean energy rush 
would create a swathe of new jobs in regional areas to meet the demand to 
transition from our dirty grid to the new renewable one.

Already we are seeing a transition that is well under way. Just last week 
Energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Australia announced an 
investment of $1.5bn into new wind and solar projects to meet its renewable 
energy target. It also announced support for a price on carbon – the same day 
the Turnbull government backflipped and said a carbon price was now off the 
table. Something is seriously wrong when the country’s biggest climate 
polluters are calling for a tax on their operations and the government refuses 
to consider it.

Energy Australia’s announcement is one of many from around the country: Eco 
Energy is building a new solar plant in regional Queensland; AGL is building 
solar plants across regional New South Wales, including a new one near Broken 
Hill; and Origin Energy is seeking to divest much of its oil and conventional 
gas assets to focus more on renewables.

The key now is to ensure our big three energy companies collectively push 
beyond our rudderless federal government, not fall into the idea that gas is 
the answer over coal, and quicken the pace to clean energy. It helps that at 
this point in time, both large-scale wind and solar projects are now cheaper 
than fossil-fuel energy sources.

Over the past few years, leadership from business has been the main driver in 
Australia’s route to decarbonisation. But businesses can’t bear the load alone 
and they have recognised this. In November, Andrew Vesey, the chief executive 
of AGL, was one of 17 eminent Australians who called on the government to stop 
blocking the transition, “facilitate and accelerate the inevitable closure of 
coal plants” and “create an attractive sustainable investment environment for 
clean energy”.

If we are to benefit from the jobs of the new economy and ensure a safe future 
for the planet,Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> and the energy 
minister, Josh Frydenberg, must stop listening to the science-denying members 
of their party and instead start making some real decisions about what our 
energy and economic future will look like.
 