
At low tide on an autumn afternoon, the dark shale of Kimmeridge Bay in Dorset 
is dotted with figures. A group of student marine biologists equipped with 
instruments are making notes, children clutching nets are rockpooling, and day 
trippers are picking their way over the natural stone ledges jutting into the 
water.

Among them is a man who has spent a lifetime discovering and preserving the 
wonders and secrets of Kimmeridge. Steve Etches, a 67-year-old plumber and 
self-taught paleontologist, nimbly navigates the rocks like a man half his age, 
showing me ammonites that date back 150 million years or more. They’re not easy 
to spot. I follow Etches’ finger as he points at ridges and whorls in the dark 
rock – and when I find one myself, I feel a flash of pride.

Etches is doing what he loves most: fossil-hunting. Every spring tide – just 
after a full or new moon – he’s down on the beach, head down, searching the 
rocks. “I usually go on my own. I’ve always been a solitary guy. I enjoy my own 
company,” he says. “There’s a sense of being connected with deep time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5824537cc93ac1315071caaa28373ceda8501f0b%2F0_34_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset's%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset%27s%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5824537cc93ac1315071caaa28373ceda8501f0b%2F0_34_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Former plumber and fossil expert Steve Etches 
He’s a very self-effacing man, but the words The Etches Collection: Museum of 
Jurassic Marine Life are emblazoned across a new building a mile from the 
beach. The £5m museum in tiny Kimmeridge village (population 90) houses Etches’ 
magnificent collection of some 2,500 specimens, which has attracted the 
admiration – and perhaps envy – of experts all over the world.

Etches intends to be on hand as much as possible to guide visitors around the 
collection

Around 10% of his finds are on permanent display in illuminated 
climate-controlled cabinets, with computer-generated images of marine creatures 
from the Jurassic era projected on to the ceiling. Their blue light gives a 
sense of being under water, with prehistoric creatures swimming above and their 
fossilised remains telling the story of a lost era.

Etches’ collection includes fossilised ammonite eggs – a world first – a 
two-metre-long Pliosaur jaw, an Icthyosaur with a belly full of fish and squid, 
and a Pterosaur skull. He says he loves all his finds equally, but one item 
stands out: a minute echinoid, or sea urchin. It was the first fossil he found, 
at the age of five. “I was hooked in that moment of discovery,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcace02e5952a0c0f7bcef9673c7fed7f8a886f7c%2F0_29_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset's%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset%27s%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcace02e5952a0c0f7bcef9673c7fed7f8a886f7c%2F0_29_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Inside the Museum of Jurassic Marine Life, Kimmeridge 
At one end of the museum is a glass- fronted workshop, where visitors will be 
able to watch Etches – who was awarded an MBE in 2014 to crown a string of 
accolades and awards – cleaning and preserving new discoveries. Beyond that is 
a room lined with deep drawers that house the rest of his collection, 
unavailable to museum visitors but, hopefully, conserved for all time.

It’s called the Jurassic Coast, but this stretch of shore includes rocks from 
the Triassic and Cretaceous periods too

Kimmeridge Bay is popular with scuba divers and has some of the best surfing 
waves in the UK, but this museum will draw new sorts of visitors to the Isle of 
Purbeck, actually a peninsula stretching south of Poole harbour and taking in 
Studland Bay, Swanage, with its charming steam railway running through six 
miles of beautiful countryside, and the ruins of Corfe Castle. Stunning walks 
along sections of the Jurassic Coast can be punctuated by breaks in cafes, pubs 
and restaurants that take pride in locally sourced produce.

It’s called the Jurassic Coast, but this 95-mile stretch of shore from Exmouth 
in Devon to Studland includes rocks from the Triassic and Cretaceous periods as 
well. According to the Royal Geographical Society, it’s the only place on earth 
where 185 million years of geological history are sequentially exposed in 
cliffs, coves, coastal stacks and barrier beaches.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa177ea4c3423c4305b0e980667d84c4951fa4f6%2F0_77_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset's%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset%27s%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa177ea4c3423c4305b0e980667d84c4951fa4f6%2F0_77_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Etches is a Dorset man, although he only moved to the village that gave its 
name to the fossil-rich Kimmeridge Clay two decades ago. He converted his 
double garage to accommodate his ever-growing and increasingly renowned 
collection, then had to appropriate the dining room as well. He has been able 
to devote himself “more or less full-time” to his fossils since giving up his 
plumbing business 18 months ago.

He came up with the idea of a permanent home for the collection when he began 
contemplating what might happen to it after his death. A trust was created to 
hold the finds for the nation, and shortly afterwards local landowner the 
Smedmore Estate donated a site for the museum. With £2.5m from the Lottery
Heritage <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/heritage> Fund matched by private 
donations, work started on the building in July 2015. Its doors officially 
opened last month.

Etches intends to be on hand as much as possible to guide visitors around the 
collection. “I’m untrained and unqualified, so people aren’t intimidated about 
asking questions,” he says. His 35 years of “field experience” can’t be learned 
from books, he adds, dismissing “boring” academics.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3349951f60f4fba265be989ff5fd080074d870fc%2F0_51_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset's%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fossil%20fever%3A%20exploring%20Dorset%27s%20Jurassic%20Coast%20with%20Steve%20Etches&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Fnov%2F04%2Ffossil-hunting-jurassic-coast-steve-etches-new-museum-dorset%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3349951f60f4fba265be989ff5fd080074d870fc%2F0_51_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 An ammonite in Kimmeridge shale Photograph: Alamy 
He also plans to lead fieldwork projects, and the museum urges people who find 
fossils on the beach to alert Etches, so excavation and curation can be 
expertly carried out. The Smedmore Estate, which owns the beach, forbids 
visitors from excavating fossils; prominent signs warn: “No fossil hunting, no 
hammers, no metal detectors.” Etches, not surprisingly, is exempt from the ban.

Even those who know next to nothing about paleontology will find their 
curiosity about the prehistoric past stirred

The chance to go fossil hunting in dramatic Kimmeridge Bay then view Etches’ 
remarkable collection and learn about the ancient creatures is likely to prove 
irresistible to amateur paleontologists and enthusiasts, young and old. Even 
those, like me, who know next to nothing about paleontology will find their 
curiosity about the prehistoric past stirred.

Etches never intended the museum to be eponymous, saying the decision was 
taken in his absence. “Most people don’t know who I am. If they notice me at 
all, they probably think I’m the plumber,” he says with a wry smile. His 
modesty is misplaced, though – as much as he wants the fossils to be the star 
of the show, he has near-equal billing.

Asked what the collection might be worth, Etches claims to have no idea. “I 
don’t put a price on it. I don’t think about it. People think there has to be a 
price for everything. Well there hasn’t. Not to me.”

• The Etches Collection (theetchescollection.org 
<http://theetchescollection.org/home>) is open Tues-Sun from 10am-5pm, adult 
£8, child 5-16 £4, family ticket £16-£20. The nearest station is Wareham, eight 
miles away
 