
‘Tis the season for excess packaging. It can be extremely convenient, keeping 
food cold, extending shelf life and easing transportation.

The downside is a huge amount of waste, exacerbated by declining 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/recycling-rates-england-drop-first-time>
 recycling rates in the UK. Here’s our guide to the main problems and the 
companies offering a solution.

Plastics

The problem More than half of all goods in Europe 
<http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/331na5_en.pdf>
 are packaged in plastic, equivalent to 29kg per person per year. Manufacturers 
love it because it is lightweight and strong, but each year at least8m tonnes 
<https://www.ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/assets/downloads/EllenMacArthurFoundation_TheNewPlasticsEconomy_15-3-16.pdf>
 [pdf] of plastic end up in the ocean. By 2050, it is predicted, there will be 
more plastic than fish in the sea.

 Industry’s main response has been to encourage recycling. In the UK, almost 
every local authorityrecycles plastic bottles 
<http://www.bpf.co.uk/packaging/environment.aspx> and around three-quarters 
will collect pots, tubs and trays. But 80% of plastic film – the material used 
for carrier bags and the like – still ends up in landfill. And while 20m 
plastic bottles wererecycled every day 
<http://www.recoup.org/downloads/info-required?id=413&referrer=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.recoup.org%2Fp%2F229%2F2015-uk-household-plastics-collection-survey>
 in the UK in 2015, more than 15m a day were not.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4844ba06a8ab5eb91f5ea0378f919ca6706f7447%2F83_56_812_1015%2F812.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4844ba06a8ab5eb91f5ea0378f919ca6706f7447%2F83_56_812_1015%2F812.jpg>
 Tetra Rex’s drinks carton is pitched as the first package made entirely of 
plant-based materials. 
A solution The Tetra Rex <http://www.tetrapak.com/uk/packaging/tetra-rex> 
bio-based drinks carton, pitched as the world’s first package made entirely 
from plant-based materials, is manufactured exclusively from plastics derived 
from sugar cane and paperboard. The plastic manufacturer behind the renewable 
packaging innovation is Brazil-based Braskem, which uses sugar cane grown on 
degraded pastures and certified paperboard. The carton has 4kg less embedded 
carbon than conventional polyethylene on a per kg basis.

Another brand following in Tetra Pak’s footsteps is bread manufacturer Hovis, 
which now uses a sugar cane-based renewable polyethylene bag for its Seed 
Sensations range. The bag, which has a 75% lower carbon footprint than 
traditional bread bags, was developed by Australian firm Amcor Flexibles.

Did you know? Of the 57m tonnes of plastics produced in Europe annually, 39% 
is used in packaging 
<http://ec.europa.eu/environment/integration/research/newsalert/pdf/331na5_en.pdf>
.

Refrigeration

The problem Refrigeration is essential if you don’t want your salad arriving 
mouldy or your milk turning rancid. Seventy percent of foods are chilled or 
frozen, [pdf <http://www.unep.fr/scp/publications/details.asp?id=WEB/0012/PA>] 
yet keeping our food cold on the journey from farm or food processing plant to 
the shop shelf or our doorstep is a polluting business.

Refrigeration in trucks and other forms of transport is energy intensive and 
prone to leaking HFC refrigerants. Diesel powered fridges on refrigerated 
vehicles also emit “grossly disproportionate” amounts of toxic nitrogen oxides 
and particulate matter, two key causes of air pollution that contribute to 
millions of premature deaths worldwide [pdf 
<http://www.birmingham.ac.uk/Documents/college-eps/energy/policy/Doing-Cold-Smarter-Report.pdf>
].
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9cc19e6f7846cd4b48dcd1ce8ede3eca6ffb514%2F376_737_1848_1195%2F1848.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9cc19e6f7846cd4b48dcd1ce8ede3eca6ffb514%2F376_737_1848_1195%2F1848.jpg>
 Allplants’ ‘spaceman envelope’ keeps food cold in transit. 
A solution Instead of relying on refrigerated vans, allplants 
<https://allplants.com/>, a new online retailer of food stuffs made entirely 
from plants, is using a “spaceman’s envelope” to keep its products refrigerated 
in transit. The system relies on a sponge-likeinsulation liner 
<http://www.koldtogo.com/thermal-shipping-liners/koldtogo-extreme-box-liners/12-cube-extreme-shipping-liner>
 made from post-industrial raw denim fibres, coupled with high-duration deep 
freeze gels.

The gels contains no toxins so can be safely poured down the sink after use, 
while the liner has two parts. The external part is plastic and can be recycled 
through your local recycling system, the inside part is compostable.

Did you know? The 1m transport refrigeration units on European streets have 
the equivalent impact on air pollution as up to 56m diesel cars.

Wasted wrapping

The problem The average UK householder throws away an estimated 400g of 
packaging every day [pdf 
<http://www-materials.eng.cam.ac.uk/energyforschools/downloads/D-PackagingRecycling.pdf>
].


A solution As part of its commitment to what it calls “naked packaging”, 
cosmetics retailer Lush now wraps its shower-wash bars in “soap paper 
<https://uk.lush.com/article/soap-paper-whole-new-kind-pulp-friction>”. The 
dissolvable packaging is made from a mix of blended melon puree and soap flakes 
which are dehydrated and flattened into a sheet. Melons were found to have an 
optimal balance between sugar and fibre that makes them consistently pliable 
yet also resistant in dehydrated form.

Did you know? 25% of household waste is packaging [pdf 
<http://www.cbenvironmental.co.uk/docs/Recycling%20Activity%20Pack%20v2%20.pdf>
].

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0520bbdbeebd32a33af3ee419d632804f04a5c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Four%20ways%20to%20tackle%20our%20packaging%20guilt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Fpackaging-guilt-recycling-solutions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab0520bbdbeebd32a33af3ee419d632804f04a5c%2F0_192_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Splosh’s reuseable bottle. 
Liquids

The problem A high proportion of home cleaning, laundry, and health and beauty 
products come in liquid form. That presents manufacturers and retailers with an 
environmental headache. Liquid is heavy and bulky, which means transporting it 
– whether by plane, train, ship or lorry – incurs serious emissions. Freight 
road transport alone represents 30% of all transport emissions in the UK.

The solution Powys-based eco-manufacturer Splosh <http://www.splosh.com/> gets 
around the liquid dilemma by manufacturing its home-cleaning, soap and laundry 
products in concentrate form. Consumers need just one bottle that they can use 
time and again by adding the sachet of concentrate and mixing it with water. 
The packaging for the sachets is made from recycled cardboard and is designed 
to fit directly through a standard letterbox (Splosh sells almost exclusively 
online). Customers then post back the cardboard packaging and sachets free of 
charge for repurposing.

Did you know HGVs produce 22% of transport’s CO2 land transport emissions 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/blog/better-transport/reducing-freight-co2-emissions>
, while only accounting for 5% of vehicles.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 