
It is no surprise that many teachers have an interest in neuroscience and 
psychology since areas such as memory, motivation, curiosity, intelligence and 
determination are highly important in education.

But neuroscience and psychology are complex, nuanced subjects that come with 
many caveats. Although progress is being made towards understanding what helps 
and hinders students, there is still a disconnect between the research in labs 
and what happens in many schools.


Many “neuromyths 
<http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/stellent/groups/corporatesite/@msh_peda/documents/web_document/WTP055240.pdf>
” are rampant in our classrooms, andresearch suggests that people are often 
seduced by neuroscientific explanations 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2778755/>, even if these are not 
accurate or even relevant. Research also shows that explanations accompanied by
images of the brain also persuade people to believe in their validity 
<http://www.imed.jussieu.fr/en/enseignement/Dossier%20articles/article4.pdf>, 
however random the illustration.

Lia Commissar, a project manager at the Wellcome Trust 
<http://www.wellcome.ac.uk/index.htm>, says there are several reasons why 
neuromyths gain traction: “They seem to persist because they are easy to 
understand, fit everyday observation, are heavily promoted or are easy to 
implement. However, unfortunately they often have little or no evidence 
supporting the impact they will have on learning.”

Can neuroscience solve the mystery of how students learn?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jul/12/neuroscience-solve-mystery-how-students-learn>
Such myths are a drain on time and money, and it is important to explore and 
expose them. So which popular neuromyths exist in schools and how did they 
catch on?

Learning styles


The myth: Learning styles are often referred to as VAK – students are 
categorised as visual, auditory or kinaesthetic learners. This myth states that 
students will learn more if they are taught in a way that matches their 
preferred style. Despitean absence of any evidence 
<https://www.psychologicalscience.org/journals/pspi/PSPI_9_3.pdf> (pdf) to 
support this claim, research carried out in 2012 found it was believed by93% of 
teachers <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3475349/> in the UK.


How it caught on: Each student is unique and has a different personality, 
experience and genes. Teachers are often encouraged to differentiate to ensure 
that each child is making as much progress as they can. This, combined with the 
fact that students may have a preference for how they are taught, has morphed 
into the belief that if you match your style to their preference, it will lead 
to better grades.

Where next for learning styles? Teacher Tom Bennet recently drew attention to 
the problem of this myth being taught ininitial teacher training 
<https://www.tes.com/news/blog/zombie-bølløcks-world-war-vak-isnt-over-yet>. On 
Twitter, and the hashtag#VAKOFF <https://twitter.com/hashtag/vakoff?src=hash> 
has been used to draw attention to this neuro-nonsense. To highlight the lack 
of evidence behind this myth,$5,000 has been promised 
<http://www.willatworklearning.com/2014/08/learning-styles-challenge-year-eight.html>
 to anyone who can prove any such intervention helps. Advances in research may 
help kill this myth, with findings indicating thatteaching new information to 
students using a variety of senses results in stronger learning 
<http://www.cne.psychol.cam.ac.uk/pdfs/publication-pdfs/Goswami_JOPE_42_3-4_381-399_2008.pdf>
 (pdf).

You only use 10% of your brain

The myth: This myth states that people only use 10% of their brain. In a 
survey of the general public in Brazil (pdf), this brain myth was one of the 
most prevalent 
<http://anatomia.icb.ufrj.br/pdfs/HerculanoHouzel2002TheNeuroscientist.pdf>. 
But it is completely untrue. We are able to examine the brain in better detail 
than ever before; if we were only using 10% of it, at least one scientist would 
have written about it but none has.


The origins: Many people believe Albert Einstein first said this. He didn’t. 
In fact, hedidn’t say most of the things that the internet claims he did 
<http://paleofuture.gizmodo.com/9-albert-einstein-quotes-that-are-totally-fake-1543806477>
. This myth is alluring as it resonates with the very true fact that we can 
probably get better at things and our potential is an unknown entity.

Where next for the 10% myth? Hopefully, the overwhelming evidence against this 
myth will drown it out. Unfortunately, as long as it keeps being linked to the 
concept of self-improvement and bettering yourself, it will probably hang 
around for some time yet.

Right brain v left brain

The myth: 91% of teachers believe that difference between the left hemisphere 
and right hemisphere explains individual differences among learners 
<http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3475349/>. This typically 
translates into people thinking you are left-brained if you are rational and 
objective or right-brained if you are intuitive and creative.

The origins: In the 1960s, research on patients with epilepsy found that when 
the connection between the right and left hemispheres were broken, the two 
sides acted individually and processed things differently 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/brain-myths/201206/why-the-left-brain-right-brain-myth-will-probably-never-die>
. This led to the belief that the two hemispheres of our brain worked 
independently. This spoke to the desire for us to categorise people and 
behaviours. It made the complex simple; the confusing clear.


Where next for the right-brain/left-brain myth?

Researchers have found that neither hemisphere is solely responsible for one 
type of personality. It is a particularly damaging myth as it can lead to 
students not trying in certain subjects as they believe they don’t have the 
brain for it.

How to teach… the brain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/mar/09/how-to-teach-brain-neuroscience>
Playing brain games makes you smarter

The myth: That playing brain-training games can help improve your memory, 
concentration or intelligence. This is usually evidenced by people playing 
these games and getting better at them; however, the problem is that there is 
little to no transfer of these skills when tested in different contexts (ie in 
the classroom).

The origins: This myth is mainly peddled by companies wanting to cash in on 
the public’s interest in neuroscience. They may be fun to play, butresearch 
shows that popular brain games do not make you smarter or improve your thinking 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/brain-babble/201401/brain-training-apps-wont-make-you-smarter>
.


Where next for the brain game myth? There may be some benefit for a small 
percentage of the population (early research suggests it may be of benefit in 
the fight against Alzheimer’s 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ioppn/news/records/2015/november/Brain-training-improves-memory-and-performance-of-everyday-tasks-in-older-people.aspx>
). However, one of the lead researchers into brain training games has concluded 
thatthere is “no evidence for any generalised improvements in cognitive 
function following brain training in a large sample of healthy adults”. 
<http://digest.bps.org.uk/2010/04/brain-training-doesnt-work.html?m=1>

Why teachers need a critical eye

The fields of psychology and neuroscience can aid us in helping students, but 
it is important to view claims with a critical eye. Is the claim being sold as 
a silver-bullet? What is the evidence behind it? Does it sound too simple? 
Hopefully, as these myths die out, they can be replaced with practical 
suggestions to best help students, that are backed up by credible research.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 