
Teachers have long battled with how to get their students to become more 
resilient and improve their mindset.

One popular theory, pioneered by Carol Dweck, professor of psychology at 
Stanford University, is the idea of growth mindset. Dweck explains that some 
students believe ability is malleable and can be improved (a growth mindset), 
while others think it is set in stone, probably decided at birth (a fixed 
mindset). Evidence suggests that those with a growth mindset seek out feedback 
on how to get better, persist with work for longer and cope better with change 
– all attitudes teachers want to develop in their young charges.

How can teachers encourage a growth mindset?

When working with young people, choosing which behaviours to praise can have a 
profound impact. In one study, children aged one- to three-years-oldwho were 
praised for their effort were far more likely to develop a growth mindset five 
years late 
<https://goldin-meadow-lab.uchicago.edu/sites/goldin-meadow-lab.uchicago.edu/files/uploads/PDFs/2013%20gunderson%20praise%20paper.pdf>
r <> (pdf). This is because praising effort provides a template for young 
children to follow, whereas praising ability doesn’t give them any guide on how 
to behave next time.

As well as thinking of the feedback you offer your class, there are certain 
questions you can ask to get them thinking about their own mindset:

 * Is the effort today worth the reward tomorrow? 
Get students to spend a few minutes writing down how doing well at school can 
help them achieve future goals. Combine this with teaching them that their 
ability can be improved, and you have a powerful combination.

This gets students to place more meaning and value on what they are learning, 
as well as increasing their belief that they can get better. It leads to 
students putting more effort and attention into their studies.

A recent study into this approach showed a significant improvement in student 
grades <http://slatestarcodex.com/Stuff/mindset3_paper.pdf> (pdf). 
Interestingly, it found the students who benefited the most were the ones who 
were at risk of dropping out of school.

 * Do you feel threatened by successful people? 
Some students see tests as a chance to explore how much they’ve learned. 
Others use it as a chance to compare themselves with their classmates. 
Psychologists have found thatconstantly comparing yourself with others can have 
a negative impact on your confidence 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1041608096900151>, 
motivation, self-management and academic performance.

Instead of feeling threatened by other people’s success, a more healthy 
approach is to want to learn from them. How do they do what they do? What is 
their mindset like? Ask students to choose someone they admire – for example 
Larry Page, chief executive of Google, Michael Jordan or JK Rowling – and 
encourage them to research their mindset.

This can be a simple weekend project. Ask students to research what obstacles 
they have had to overcome or their opinion on working hard to maximise their 
talent. On Monday morning, have your students present their findings in class.

 * Do you spend more time questioning the feedback you get or taking action? 
Some people spend more time questioning the feedback they are given, instead 
of responding to it. This is because what they really want is praise so when 
they get negative feedback they feel personally attacked. But learning how to 
improve from your mistakes is an important life skill and is central to 
developing a successful mindset.

This doesn’t mean teachers should adopt a Simon Cowell approach of brutal 
honesty; however, guiding students towards being comfortable with receiving 
feedback and giving them the confidence to act on it will serve them well. This 
is often best done in private, on an individual basis, as it will remove the 
fear that some students have of being publicly judged.

 * You’ve had a setback. What would you do differently next time? 
This question avoids any judgement on a student’s ability. It can also stop 
them from dwelling on the past because it allows them to have a sense of 
control over the situation.

Psychologists use the term “metacognition” to describe being aware and in 
control of your own thought process. Asking what you would do differently is a 
great example of this; it helps students to analyse and reflect on their 
thought process. Developing metacognitive skills has been found to be one of 
the mosteffective ways to help students improve their grades. 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/toolkit-a-z/meta-cognitive-and-self-regulation-strategies/>

This is an effective strategy as it helps students improve how they plan, 
monitor and analyse their thoughts and behaviours. Students who have strong 
metacognition often have a growth mindsetand high levels of resilience 
<http://learning.wellingtoncollege.org.uk/first-working-paper-published-getting-gritty-with-it/>
.

Many other questions exist that will help students develop both their 
metacognition and mindset 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/9-questions-to-help-develop-metacognition/>
. These include: who can I ask for help? What could I have done better?

A final thought

The growing research on growth mindset is an exciting development in 
education. But we are still working out what is the best way to help students. 
Facilitating a growth mindset is not straight forward, but, done correctly, it 
could help students improve how they learn, feel and behave.


Bradley Busch is a registered psychologist and director at InnerDrive 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/>. Follow @Inner_Drive 
<https://twitter.com/Inner_Drive?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 on Twitter.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 