
French motorists in high pollution areas will be required to display a “clean 
sticker” on their vehicle from January to combat pollution that has created a 
cloud of noxious smog inParis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris> and 
other cities.


The six differently coloured Crit’Air (air criteria) stickers  
<https://certificat-air.gouv.fr/>will be large enough for the police to see at 
a distance and will indicate the age of the vehicle, its engine and cleanliness 
on a scale of one to six.


Although emergency vehicles, vintage cars and certain delivery and security 
vans will be exempt from the regulation, to takeeffect from 16 January 
<http://www.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/Un-certificat-qualite-de-l-air,43566.html>
, stickers will be obligatory for motorbikes and scooters.


A world without cars: cities go car-free for the day - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/sep/26/world-without-cars-cities-go-car-free-in-pictures>
On weekdays, vehicles without the stickers will be banned from entering 
designated zones à circulation restreinte (ZCR - low-emission zones), which 
will be determined by local authorities based on pollution evaluations.


Announcing a raft of measures to combat the increasing problem of pollution in 
France’s cities, the ecology minister, Ségolène Royal, said the government was 
“taking the problem seriously”.


“What we now need is a revolution bringing clean transport, responsible 
cities, electric vehicles in cities and different ways of moving around,” Royal 
said.


The alternating traffic rule 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/paris-bans-cars-for-second-day-running-as-pollution-strikes>
 – in which cars with odd or even registration plates are banned from cities – 
was enforced for a record four days in Paris last week. It was dropped after 
the pollution improved over the weekend when the roads were less busy. But 
Airparif, which monitors air quality in the French capital, warned that the 
smog, which led to a rise in asthma and hospital admissions for breathing 
difficulties and caused schools to cancel outdoor sports, could return with the 
rush-hour traffic on Monday.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffrance-clean-air-stickers-vehicles-high-pollution-areas-paris-smog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32fdab6dbbc1387de2db30964fa54b41c73b30e3%2F0_153_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20to%20require%20'clean%20stickers'%20on%20vehicles%20in%20high%20pollution%20areas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffrance-clean-air-stickers-vehicles-high-pollution-areas-paris-smog%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20to%20require%20%27clean%20stickers%27%20on%20vehicles%20in%20high%20pollution%20areas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Ffrance-clean-air-stickers-vehicles-high-pollution-areas-paris-smog%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F32fdab6dbbc1387de2db30964fa54b41c73b30e3%2F0_153_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 A shroud of smog envelopes the Eiffel Tower. Photograph: Lionel 
Bonaventure/AFP/Getty Images 
Other measures announced include an extension of the “superbonus scheme” in 
which vehicle owners can obtain a €10,000 (£8,400) payment for changing an old 
polluting vehicle for an electric one. Until now this has been offered to 
private car owners but is to be extended to taxis and vans.

From January, the government will also offer €1,000 to those buying an 
electric scooter.

The Paris mayor, Anne Hidalgo, who has made fighting pollution in the city a 
priority, has declared she wants the capitalfree of diesel vehicles by 2020 and 
the whole of France by 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/02/four-of-worlds-biggest-cities-to-ban-diesel-cars-from-their-centres>
.
 