
France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> – the land of pristine 
Alpine resorts and dramatic Pyrenean vistas – has been pipped at the post as 
top world winter sport destination by its close rival the United States.

French ski resorts sold about 52m “ski days” during the 2015-16 season, 
according toDomaines Skiables de France 
<http://www.domaines-skiables.fr/fr/home/> (DSF), which represents 230 French 
ski resorts, blaming the weather for discouraging visitors.

The figures were obtained by calculating the number of skiers on the slopes 
each day during the winter ski season. France was closely tailed by Austria 
with 49.9m ski days.

“The start of the season was very complicated because there was very little 
snow at low and medium altitudes, then the weather was changeable,” Marie 
Tissier, spokeswoman for DSF said.


“The larger stations did OK, but the smaller and middle-sized resorts didn’t 
come out of it so well. The problem was basically the weather, and that’s out 
of our hands. What we need this year is more snow earlier.”


DSF reported: “Despite this the numbers dropped only 3% compared with the 
previous season and only dropped 6% on the average for the last four years. 
This resilience is thanks to our savoir-faire and investment by the ski 
resorts, particularly in artificial snow [machines] that have made seasonal 
work in the stations more secure.


“The United States had better snow conditions this season.”


Laurent Reynaud, head of the DSF, said: “We remain in first place in Europe”. 

In France, sports d’hiver (winter sports) means mountains – and for the 
privileged minority, mountains mean skiing and snowboarding.


While fewer than 10% of French people take to the slopes each year, skiing and 
snowboarding remain national sports high in the news and the country’s psyche.


The country has more than 357 resorts 
<http://francobritishchamber.com/the-ski-economy-up-or-down/> – just under 9% 
of the world’s share – and winter sports account for around 18% of France’s 
tourist economy, according to the Franco-British chamber of commerce. More than 
100,000 jobs are created in resorts during the winter season, including 18,000 
in the ski business and 15,000 seasonal posts.

It is the second year in a row that France’s ski resorts have recorded a drop 
in attendance. Meanwhile, the US saw the number of skiing days rise on its west 
coast, which enjoyed an unusually dry period..

After the 2015-16 season in France there were 72 insurance claims linked to 
bad weather conditions from ski stations totalling €2.85m (£2.4m), which 
Reynaud said was the highest in a decade.

Mountain resorts in the Jura were the worst affected, with visitors down 23% 
in a year, followed by the Vosges (-16%), the Massif Central (-15%). The Savoie 
(+1%) and the Haute-Savoie (+0.1%) remained stable, but the Pyrenees reported 
winter sport tourist numbers down by 7%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffrench-ski-resorts-blame-bad-weather-visitors-decline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eb00380597d384868b44f138eda97235c1ac4d5%2F0_167_3307_1984%2F3307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=France%20loses%20skiing%20pole%20position%20as%20US%20leads%20winter%20sports%20destinations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffrench-ski-resorts-blame-bad-weather-visitors-decline%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=France%20loses%20skiing%20pole%20position%20as%20US%20leads%20winter%20sports%20destinations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Ffrench-ski-resorts-blame-bad-weather-visitors-decline%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eb00380597d384868b44f138eda97235c1ac4d5%2F0_167_3307_1984%2F3307.jpg>
 While fewer than 10% of French people take to the slopes each year, skiing and 
snowboarding remain high in the country’s psyche. Photograph: Gary Calton for 
the Guardian 
French ski resorts reported a peak number of visitors in the 2008-09 season 
with 58.9m ski days. In the United States, the highest recorded number was in 
2010-11 when it reached 60.5m ski days.

In a 2010 report, the French Research Centre for the Study and Observation of 
Living Conditions said the cost of ski holidays was way beyond the means of 
most French families.


“Apart from the cost of winter holidays, it’s above all the cost of the sports 
and activities that 40% of French people object to. Those who do go away and 
particularly those who take to the snow slopes are the most acerbic on this 
subject.

“In other words, the image of expensive holidays still applies above all to 
what we like to call ‘winter sports’ and the general publish has shown a desire 
for less costly activities.”


Over Christmas 2014, research from the travel money provider International 
Currency Exchange found that a family of four could pay €486 for six-day ski 
passes in Germany, a saving of 85% compared with the €900 that it cost in 
France for the same period.


The Observatoire des Inégalités (Inequality Observatory) suggested 
<http://www.inegalites.fr/spip.php?article1384> that only 8% of French people 
depart for the mountains at least once every two years and one week of winter 
sports for a family costs around €3,400, equivalent to three months of the 
minimum wage.


The results are a reversal of fortune for France’s ski results. For many 
years, America was the top skiing destination until it was toppled by France in 
2011-12.

 