
François Fillon’s victory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/fillon-beats-juppe-in-tv-debate-ahead-of-vote-on-presidential-candidate>
 in France’s rightwing presidential primaries shows that liberal progressive 
values in Europe aren’t just confronting the ghosts of fascist-type movements. 
There is now a threat from a new type of reactionary movement. Anyone who 
thinks that Fillon’s success clears the ground for a resounding defeat of 
far-right ideas in France’s 2017 presidential race should think again. Fillon’s 
most active support base has come essentially from hardline, traditionalist 
Catholics – people who generally aren’t described as far right, in the sense 
that they don’t affiliate themselves with Marine Le Pen’s Front National. But 
some of their ideas do overlap.

The European elite have developed a death wish | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/28/european-elite-have-developed-a-death-wish>
The new reactionaries stand for “family values”, they dislike same-sex 
marriage, they are opposed to adoption rights for gay couples and – like Fillon 
– they reject the notion of a “multicultural” society. Their mobilisation on 
social media has been astounding, and apparently played no small role in 
Fillon’s surprise emergence this month. His opponent in the runoff, Alain 
Juppé, a moderate candidate who embraced diversity as a “happy identity” for 
the nation and combated anti-Muslim sentiment, found himselfthe target of 
online hate campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/alain-juppe-france-prophet-happiness-presidential-wows-rally-crowd>
, some of which nicknamed him “Ali Juppé”.

European liberal democrats tend to worry about the danger coming from 
far-right would-be autocrats – but that’s not the full picture. The rise of 
ultra-conservative religious, Christian movements must now be looked at more 
closely. In France, pundits and parts of the media were caught offguard by it. 
In the US, white Christian anger has stood at the heart of the Tea Party and 
the Christian right – groups that have now gained a president-elect. A somewhat 
similar type of thinking seems to be making inroads inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, plugging into a historical legacy 
of deeply entrenched rightwing Catholic networks.

Further east on the continent, that religious and reactionary line of thought 
has long been prominent in Vladimir Putin’s Russia – a regime in tight alliance 
with the Orthodox church. The key message is that Christianity is under threat 
from Islam – and it resonates strongly in outwardly secular France, a country 
still traumatised by jihadi terrorist attacks. It is no coincidence thatFillon 
was publicly lauded by Putin 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-france-putin-idUSKBN13I1GG?il=0>. 
This wasn’t just because the Kremlin hopes to find a French presidential ally 
on foreign policy. It’s also because Putin detects in Fillon streaks of his own 
ultra-conservative ideology.

According to this world-view, liberal progressive values have brought western 
societies to a state of “decadence”, as a result of sexual policies and 
immigration. Witness how Russian propaganda has dubbedEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> “Gayropa”. That’s not far from 
some of the social media propaganda spread by some Fillon supporters.

As national populism and social conservatism make gains in Europe, liberal 
progressives might be forgiven for thinking they are fast becoming the 
political underdog, or even an endangered species. Donald Trump’s election was
applauded by Europe’s populists and far-right leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/far-right-first-to-congratulate-donald-trump-on-historic-upset>
 – a sure sign that more illiberal contagion is under way. But the threat does 
not just come from groups or politicians labelled far right - it is larger than 
that.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffrancois-fillon-threat-liberal-values-marine-le-pen-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9af879807a6aa75571fed36a283eb9150d77855%2F0_113_4296_2727%2F4296.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20is%20as%20big%20a%20threat%20to%20liberal%20values%20as%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffrancois-fillon-threat-liberal-values-marine-le-pen-france%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fran%C3%A7ois%20Fillon%20is%20as%20big%20a%20threat%20to%20liberal%20values%20as%20Marine%20Le%20Pen%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F28%2Ffrancois-fillon-threat-liberal-values-marine-le-pen-france%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd9af879807a6aa75571fed36a283eb9150d77855%2F0_113_4296_2727%2F4296.jpg>
 ‘Fillon will now battle against Le Pen whom he expects to face in the 2017 
presidential runoff.’ Photograph: Action Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
Radical Christian militant groups are hostile to social liberalism without 
having an obvious, direct connection to Europe’s dark past of fascist parties.
Fillon will now battle against Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/francois-fillons-victory-creates-strategy-problem-for-marine-le-pen>
, whom he expects to face in the 2017 presidential runoff. Yet it would be a 
mistake to think of him as the perfect antidote to the far right. Ever since 
the 2008 financial crisis, far-right groups across parts of Europe have 
benefited from the disgruntlement of the middle classes. Le Pen intends to 
capitalise on being the “anti-establishment” candidate – something Fillon, a 
former prime minister, can hardly claim for himself.

Comparisons with the Europe of the 1930s have been made, but they have their 
limits – armed militias aren’t exactly parading in the streets of European 
capitals. As the historian Ian Kershaw once wrote: “Trying to define fascism is 
like trying to nail jelly to the wall”. It’s because illiberalism comes in many 
shapes and forms that the fight for progressive democracy would do well to take 
some inspiration from past European dissident movements.

A few weeks ago, writers, artists and intellectuals from across Europe met in 
Bratislava at theCentral European Forum <http://ceeforum.eu/en/>, an annual 
gathering of people who cherish the legacy of dissidents such asVáclav Havel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/dec/18/vaclav-havel>, and believe it 
still carries many useful truths for today. Participants suggested that in 
these times of creeping authoritarianism and blatant intolerance, something 
akin to the dissident movements of the former communist bloc might now be 
reawakened. What’s needed are not new political parties but a wider, more 
inclusive grassroots approach, linking up Europe’s democratically minded beyond 
left-right criteria and beyond borders.

Of course, it is tricky to compare today’s liberal progressives to yesterday’s 
dissidents. Democracy the way we have known it may be in crisis, but it’s 
hardly as if a totalitarian police state – of the sort Havel experienced in 
communist Czechoslovakia – had descended upon us. Still, there is much 
inspiration to be drawn from Havel’s politics of hope. “Hope is not the 
conviction that something will turn out well,” Havel once wrote, “but the 
certainty that something makes sense, regardless of how it turns out.”

François Fillon's victory creates strategy problem for Marine Le Pen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/francois-fillons-victory-creates-strategy-problem-for-marine-le-pen>
Charter 77 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Charter_77>, the movement Havel and 
his dissident friends founded nearly 40 years ago, called for a new brand of 
activism against the autocracy of both communism and fascism. It stood for a 
new type of participatory democracy, “a free, informal, open community of 
people of different convictions, different faiths and different professions 
united by the will to strive individually and collectively for the respect of 
civil and human rights”. Charter 77 was not an organisation, it had no 
permanent body nor formal membership, and it was neither left or right.

Today, western progressive liberals may have to imitate some of this. 
Mainstream rightwing politicians are loth to confront traditionalists, for fear 
of losing votes, and many pander to far-right themes. (In France,Alain Juppé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alain-juppe> has been an exception, not 
unlike Angela Merkel in Germany.) In many countries, the partisan left has 
become too weak, having failed to reach out to the lower and middle classes. We 
may now have reached a point where only cross-partisan, cross-faith, grassroots 
citizen responses can effectively defend liberal democratic values. This means 
breaking out of cultural and identity silos, class warfare and left-right 
polarisation.

New reactionaries believe they can widen their reach more than the organised 
far right can do, because at first glance they aren’t as toxic or threatening 
to democracy. This will surely be Fillon’s strategy in France. Yet beneath that 
veneer of respectability, these groups carry a fair dose of bigotry and social 
regression. They celebrate “French values” instead of humanist ones. They want 
a nationalist creed, not a European one. They welcome Christian migrants, not 
Muslim ones.

If in the age of Brexit, Trump and nationalist demagoguery, the liberal order 
is now under threat, then Havel’s message becomes very relevant once more: it’s 
when the odds are stacked against you that it becomes important to 
“continuously try new things”. Progressive liberals across Europe would do well 
to start thinking like dissidents.
 