
Demonstrating is in the French political DNA. It’s almost as if, for each 
generation, pouring out on to the streets is part of growing up. There is a 
collective ritual to this – we have a national penchant for cathartic moments. 
Historians point to a revolutionary narrative harking back to 1789. But if you 
are looking for some of theromanticism of May 1968 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/jan/20/1968theyearofrevolt.features> in 
the latest unrest, don’t hold your breath.

Riot police crack down on Paris protests against labour reforms
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/riot-police-crack-down-on-paris-protests-against-labour-reforms>
Is France is on the verge of breakdown? Protests against a new labour law have 
led to fuel shortages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/french-dock-workers-storm-le-havre-square-labour-bill>
, after trade union activists started blocking refineries and nuclear power 
plants. The government has had to start making use of the country’s strategic 
oil reserves.

The police have fired teargas at protesters and arrested 77 people; air and 
rail traffic has been partly disrupted; and there were fresh demonstrations 
this week with crowds tens of thousands strong. The dispute over reforms the 
socialist government wants to introduce to liberalise the labour market is now 
two months old – more strikes and protests are planned in the run-up to the 
European football championshipsFrance <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>
 is hosting from 10 June.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffrance-wracked-by-strikes-and-protests-over-labour-bill-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20is%20France%20being%20racked%20by%20strikes%20and%20protests%20over%20its%20labour%20bill%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffrance-wracked-by-strikes-and-protests-over-labour-bill-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20is%20France%20being%20racked%20by%20strikes%20and%20protests%20over%20its%20labour%20bill%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F26%2Ffrance-wracked-by-strikes-and-protests-over-labour-bill-video-explainer&media=>
Why is France being racked by strikes and protests over its labour bill? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/may/26/france-wracked-by-strikes-and-protests-over-labour-bill-video-explainer>
This couldn’t have come at a worse time for the French president, nor for 
Europe at large.François Hollande 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/francois-hollande> hopes to be re-elected 
next year but his ratings are the worst of any postwar French leader’s. His 
Socialist party is split, one side favouring market-oriented reforms, the other 
holding fast to radical-left or anti-capitalist views.

Mainstream rightwing opponents are capitalising on the scenes of chaos. Marine 
Le Pen, the leader of the far-right Front National – whichgained 7 million 
votes in last December’s regional elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/13/front-national-fails-to-win-control-of-target-regions-amid-tactical-voting>
 – is ready to cast herself as the person to restore order. All this is 
happening with France still in a state of emergency after last year’s terror 
attacks.

The country’s European partners are closely monitoring events. With less than 
a month to go to the UK referendum, the Brexit camp could profit from scenes of 
instability across the Channel.

Germany and the European commission, who have long pushed for labour-market 
reforms in France over worries that the country may become the next weak link 
in the eurozone, are scrutinising Hollande: will he backtrack? He has said he 
won’t, but he is also notorious for wavering. He fears another dramatic 
upheaval in the country – something resembling the massive1995 strikes 
<http://libcom.org/history/french-pensions-strikes-1995>, or even the 2005 riots
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2015/oct/22/protesters-clash-with-police-during-2005-french-riots-archive-video>
 in the Paris suburbs.

It would be a mistake to read the latest events as a popular uprising against 
austerity measures supposedly dictated from Brussels – or to draw parallels 
with movements such asSyriza <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syriza> in 
Greece orPodemos <https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> in Spain. The 
occupation of a central square in Paris by theNuit debout student movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/13/nuit-debout-france-occupy-wall-street-1968>
 that began in March may have been compared to other insurgent movements, but 
it has failed to attract similar crowds or to widen its appeal.

Never before, under the Fifth Republic, has a socialist government been 
confronted with this degree of social unrest

It’s true there is strong anti-establishment sentiment in France, but it tends 
to benefit the far-right more than the far-left. After the 2008-9 financial 
crisis struckEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, France did 
not go through the radical economic restructuring, nor the wide-ranging public 
spending cuts, that some southern EU countries experienced. Public spending, 
among the highest in the OECD countries, has continued to grow.

France suffers high unemployment, reaching 24% among 18- to 24-year-olds 
<https://ycharts.com/indicators/france_youth_unemployment_rate_lfs> (and 46% 
among unqualified young people). Liberalising the labour market is meant to 
make it easier to hire; but it will also make it easier to fire people.

France’s labour system is very much two-tier: one part of the population 
benefits from strong protections and solid, open-ended contracts; the rest find 
themselves either out of work or in precarious jobs.French trade unions 
represent only 7% of the active population 
<http://www.franceinfo.fr/emission/le-vrai-du-faux/2015-2016/moins-de-syndiques-en-france-qu-ailleurs-en-europe-13-10-2015-07-04>
, mostly employees already in highly protected sectors – partly because trade 
union finances are closely connected to the public sector and large enterprises.

This produces paradoxes: France’s political culture is such that young people 
are prone to mobilise against any kind of reform, especially if they believe it 
damages their chances of entering “protected” sectors. Many fail to see how 
labour reforms make it easier for them to get a job in the first place. This 
has often been described as France’s “preference for mass unemployment”, over 
more flexible and perhaps less well paid work.

So this may be crunch time for France. Hollande all but wasted the first two 
years of his presidency by failing to make significant economic reforms. 
Belatedly, just one year ahead of the next presidential election, he is trying 
to push forward. But his strategy has zig-zagged and confused everybody. Now he 
has run into aradicalised trade union, the CGT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/french-press-attacks-union-for-preventing-publication-of-papers>
 – whose roots go back to the heyday of France’s Communist party – which has 
decided that actions such as blocking refineries can put it at the forefront of 
a new class war. The other key player in the union movement, the more centrist 
CFDT, has come out strongly in favour of the labour reform.

Within the French left old disputes have returned with a bang. Never before, 
under the Fifth Republic, has a socialist government been confronted with this 
degree of social unrest. It’s true there is political polarisation, as 
elsewhere on the continent. But one specific ingredient is that France has hung 
on rigidly to its welfare state, while other countries moved to reform theirs 
years ago. Nothing like Thatcherism ever happened there, and that’s surely a 
good thing. However, France has also been unable to adapt to globalisation in 
the way others in Europe have done, as if social rights could only be protected 
if nothing changes.

Current events boil down to a show-down between two currents of the left, one 
reformist, and the other backing a labour system the country can no longer 
afford – at least not in the way it has existed for decades. Hollande is hoping 
most French people understand that, but his performance has been unconvincing.

Fast-track legislation and bypassing the parliament hasn’t helped. Yet giving 
up entirely on reforms would not only spell the end of Hollande’s re-election 
hopes, it would set France backwards – and Europe would soon feel the effects.
 