
Fraud in the UK payments industry has soared by 53% in a year as criminals 
resort to increasingly sophisticated tactics to trick people out of their 
personal details and steal their money.

Official industry data shows that a total of 1,007,094 cases of financial 
fraud – involving online and phone banking, debit and credit cards, and cheques 
– occurred between 1 January and 30 June this year. That compares with the 
660,308 cases reported during the same six-month period in 2015.


This means that an incident is happening every 15 seconds, according to 
Financial Fraud Action UK <https://www.financialfraudaction.org.uk> (FFA UK), 
whose members include the major banks and card issuers, and which issued the 
data.


To coincide with the figures, FFA UK and major banks and financial services 
providers have come together for the first time to launch a national campaign 
to combat financial fraud called Take Five.


Related: Email scam costs couple £25,000 – but no one will help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>

This will focus on the financial frauds that directly target customers, such as
phishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/06/how-to-protect-yourself-from-phishing-attacks>
 emails that purport to come from organisations such as banks or HM Revenue & 
Customs, and phone and text-based scams, sometimes dubbedvishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/shortcuts/2015/jan/19/are-you-at-risk-from-vishing>
 and smishing respectively.


Among the biggest growth areas are impersonation and deception scams, which 
involve criminals duping victims into disclosing their details. Fraudsters have 
increasingly been hacking into email accounts and then posing as the builder, 
solicitor or other tradesperson that the consumer has legitimately employed.


Some customers have lost considerable sums. Earlier this year the Guardian 
featuredthe case of Sarah and David Fisher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/04/fraud-scam-email-barclays-lloyds>
, who were conned out of £25,000 after a fraudster posed as their builder and 
emailed them a realistic fake invoice.


Scammers also pretend to be bank staff and police officers to persuade 
consumers to send money to their bank accounts. Last week it emerged that 
criminals had set up a fake NatWest Twitter account, @NatWest_HelpTM, which 
tweeted customers who had got in touch with the bank’s genuine social media 
team, and directed them to a fake NatWest website which asked them for part of 
their pin number and their full password. The account was quickly shut down, 
but in such cases, fake accounts can quickly reappear with a slightly different 
handle.


In 2015, fraud in the UK payments industry totalled £755m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/17/banking-scams-uk-financial-fraud>
. Katy Worobec, the director of FFA UK, said: “Last year banks stopped £7 in 
£10 of attempted fraud from happening. But as the banks’ systems get more 
advanced, fraudsters turn their attention elsewhere and sadly this often means 
tricking people out of their personal details and money.”


Related: How to protect yourself from phishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/jun/06/how-to-protect-yourself-from-phishing-attacks>

For cases involving transfers of money, the banks often refuse to refund 
customers on the basis that they made the payment voluntarily.


The new campaign is designed to remind people “that it pays to stop and think” 
before they respond to any financial requests and share any personal details. 
Its launch came a day after separate research claimed that one in 10 people 
have been the victim of a cyber-attack on their credit or debit card in the 
last year.

This study, from the website comparethemarket.com, found that in 62% of these 
cases, money was successfully removed from the account, with an average of £475 
stolen. It said this equated to 4.5m credit or debit cards cancelled in the 
last 12 months, with more than £2.1bn stolen in total.

 