
Located just behind Amsterdam Centraal station with views looking out across 
the river IJ, Al Ponte is a popular cafe serving a constant stream of commuters 
on their way to and from the nearby ferry port. Not all Al Ponte’s customers 
pay for their coffees, however. Not in the traditional sense anyway.

Al Ponte is one of the businesses participating in Wasted 
<http://www.wastedlab.nl/en/>, a pilot project running in Amsterdam’s Noord 
district which incentivises households to recycle their plastics by rewarding 
them with discounts at local businesses.

When prospective participants sign up they are given bags labelled with unique 
QR codes, enabling the scheme’s organisers to apportion the correct credit to 
each household once the filled bags have been collected. For every bag of 
plastics they produce households earn one green coin.

At present the coins are sent to users in the post, although next year 
Wasted’s organisers want to develop the scheme’s digital currency. As well as 
reducing bureaucracy, this will enable them to engage online businesses in 
offering rewards
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Famsterdam-dutch-recycling-plastics-local-currency-cities-foundation-wasted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b4a2475ad1829eb76a5ae7b98aa9ecea9db4f6%2F63_0_759_455%2F759.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Free%20coffee%20and%20half%20price%20bike%20repairs%3A%20Amsterdam%20rewards%20its%20recyclers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Famsterdam-dutch-recycling-plastics-local-currency-cities-foundation-wasted%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Free%20coffee%20and%20half%20price%20bike%20repairs%3A%20Amsterdam%20rewards%20its%20recyclers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Famsterdam-dutch-recycling-plastics-local-currency-cities-foundation-wasted%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66b4a2475ad1829eb76a5ae7b98aa9ecea9db4f6%2F63_0_759_455%2F759.jpg>
 Wasted coins, made from recycled plastics. Photograph: Cities Foundation 
At Al Ponte, one coin earns users a free second coffee. Meanwhile, over at 
BeekhovenBikes Fietsspecialist’s cycle shop three coins earn users 50% off tyre 
repairs. Discounts on accountancy support, groceries and reiki treatments are 
also included in the list of rewards offered by the 30 or soparticipating 
retailers <http://www.wastedlab.nl/en/current-rewards/>.

Silvia Salani, who owns Al Ponte, says there are days when only one or two 
customers have a coin to exchange and others when that number reaches double 
figures. As well as improving her standing in the community, Salani believes 
being part of the scheme has been positive for business growth as she sees 
those who first came in with friends for free coffees returning as paid 
customers.

Since Wasted was set up in early 2015 by Dutch non-profit the Cities Foundation
 <http://www.citiesfoundation.org/>, more than 700 households have signed up. 
In a previous iteration of the project, staff from the Cities Foundation 
collected the plastics from users’ homes and fed them into the municipal 
recycling scheme. As the project has scaled, however, the city council, which 
subsidises the project, has taken over the weekly collection.

The city council doesn’t normally offer domestic collection of recyclables, 
instead providing Noord’s 87,000 residents with on-street containers. With 
Wasted, however, it has said is keen to support the Cities Foundation’s goal to 
connect waste management with supporting local entrepreneurs.

In a recent survey of Wasted users, 52% of respondents said they had improved 
their waste disposal habits as a result of using Wasted and 23% said they had 
reduced their total plastics consumption. “People start to realise how much 
plastic they produce on a weekly basis and it is pretty distressing,” says 
Francesca Miazzo, founder of the Cities Foundation.

Compostable and edible packaging: the companies waging war on plastic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/26/plastics-food-packaging-microplastics-waste-ocean-pollution-compost-snact-tipa-nestle-usda>
Broader research to date suggests schemes that reward residents to recycle 
have mixed long-term results. Astudy 
<http://www.eunomia.co.uk/reports-tools/investigating-the-impact-of-recycling-incentive-schemes/>
 carried out by independent consultancy Eunomia, commissioned by Serco, shows 
such initiatives have “highly variable” results.

“Unfortunately there’s no real indication that reward schemes outperform 
simply publicising pre-existing recycling scheme information,” says Peter 
Jones, a principal consultant at Eunomia.


While Miazzo acknowledges the long-term challenge, she believes activating 
community participation and creating awareness can help sustain positive 
behaviour: “We want to engage those who don’t usually care about recycling, 
while building a social contract between the community and business owners that 
goes beyond the traditional consumer relationship,” she says.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 