
The performance of a handful of free schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> which were the first to 
open as part of Michael Gove’s flagship education policy will come in for 
scrutiny this week with the publication of their first GCSE results.

Three secondary schools, which opened their doors to pupils in September 2011 
as part of the first wave of free schools, will receive their first full set of 
results on Thursday.

But as the founders of those schools and their pupils await results day, there 
is a growing sense in the sector that what made free schools distinctive is 
being watered down as the government struggles to meet the challenge of 
providing sufficient school places.

Among those watching results closely on Thursday will be Toby Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/17/toby-young-education-secretary-powers-free-school>
, founder of the West London Free School, one of the highest-profile of the 
free school pioneers. He is confident, and is hoping his school’s results will 
be above national and borough average. “I hope our EBacc, Best 8 and Progress 8 
scores are above average too,” he told the Guardian on Tuesday.

Nick Weller, chief executive of the Dixons Academies Trust, which last year 
took over the Kings Science Academy – another of the first wave of free schools 
to open in 2011 – is more cautiously optimistic, with good reason.

The Bradford school has had a troubled history since it was first feted by 
then education secretary Michael Gove. This month theschool founder and two 
staff members were convicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/01/bradford-free-school-trio-could-face-jail-defrauding-government-grants-kings-science-academy>
 of fraudulently obtaining about £150,000 from government grants. Last year, 
the school made national headlines when a supply teacher,Vincent Uzomah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/10/teacher-stabbed-pupil-racist-attack-court-bradford>
, was stabbed in class by a 14-year-old pupil.

“We are quite hopeful about the results,” said Weller. “Even if we are 
slightly disappointed with them, we still expect to exceed the Bradford and 
national averages.”


These are not the first free school exam results: a number of free school 
sixth forms have already received A-level results, primary free schools have 
posted SATs results and secondaries that converted to free schools have had 
GCSE successes.

But what is distinctive about these schools is that their pupils’ secondary 
education from year 7 to 11 has been entirely within the free school model. As 
well as West London Free School and the renamed Dixons Kings Academy, the 
Bristol Free School will receive its first full set of GCSE results.

A small number of other schools including the Stour Valley Community School in 
Clare, Suffolk, which started with more than one year group in 2011, and Batley 
Grammar School in West Yorkshire, which converted from an independent school, 
have already seen pupils throughGCSEs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gcses>, but this year’s cohort are the 
first to be fully educated as free school pupils.

Weller remains enthusiastic about free schools, but says the policy is 
changing. “I think opening a brand new school from scratch gives you a chance 
to be more innovative with your model. It gives you the opportunity to design 
your own school.

“As a member of the educational establishment, I welcomed the opportunity for 
others to come in and break the mould. Nevertheless, as the movement has 
matured and developed, it’s focused much more on existing providers with a 
strong track record.

“It was really radical in the beginning. Now a lot of it is targeted at basic 
need. It began as a movement which was purely about driving up standards. It 
retains some of that motivation, but it’s become much more about meeting basic 
need and growing numbers. I still think it’s one of the most imaginative things 
they’ve done.”

He added: “The big way in which it’s been watered down is that education has 
been swamped by growth in demand in certain cities including Bradford, plus the 
education budget is frozen. There are more children for the same amount of 
money, which means less money.”

Free schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/free-schools> were 
introduced by the Conservative-Liberal Democrat coalition following the 2010 
general election, to enable groups made up of parents, teachers, charities and 
businesses to set up their own schools.

The first 24 free schools opened in September 2011; there are now more than 
450 free schools open or approved to open across England, providing more than 
250,000 new school places. David Cameron, the former prime minister, promised 
to open 500 more by the end of this parliament.

Results may well be strong in this first full cohort of free school GCSE 
candidates, critics will say, because they benefitted from considerable 
financial investment at a time when the policy was in its infancy.

There have nevertheless been well-publicised failures, including the Discovery 
New School, a primary school in Crawley, Sussex, which closed after the 
government removed funding in 2013. Critics also remained concerned about free 
schools opening in areas of low need, as well as the under-representation of 
pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds, andthe huge financial investments in 
individual schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/26/council-leader-money-london-free-school-islington>
. Plus there is the spectre of furtherselection by ability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/07/senior-tories-likely-to-resist-theresa-mays-grammar-schools-agenda>
 being introduced in new free schools, after No 10 indicated that the prime 
minister might lift the ban on new grammar schools.

Dr Rebecca Morris, of the University of Birmingham, who has conducted research 
into free schools and their pupil intake, said: “In some areas free schools are 
providing additional school places in areas where they were very much needed. 
This isn’t the case everywhere though and there are a number of the schools 
which are substantially undersubscribed.

“The original aims of having parents and teachers involved in setting them up 
has only been somewhat realised too; this isn’t necessarily a problem though – 
academic trusts may be in a much more informed and better resourced position to 
set up and run schools.”

She said there was also some variation in the extent to which free schools are 
admitting “balanced” intakes. “Some are very committed to this and it is 
reflected in their admissions (eg the prioritisation of pupil-premium children, 
use of random allocation) but this is a small minority.”


Free school pupils are among hundreds of thousands of 16-year-olds who will 
receive their results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/22/exam-markers-complain-about-students-blue-ink-scribbles>
 on Thursday after a long summer wait. Because of changes to government policy 
in England, those who failed GCSE maths and English last year will have retaken 
this summer, which may drag down the headline figure, but comparisons of 
16-year-olds should show a better picture.


Sarah Pearson, interim director of the New Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Network, a Department for 
Education-funded charity that helps groups bidding to open new free schools, 
said it was still early days for free schools with only a handful receiving a 
full set of GCSE results.


“Amongst these we expect to see some stand-out performances in this year’s 
GCSE results, mirroring A-levels last week,” said Pearson. “Free schools 
continue to be extremely popular with parents right across the country and 
according to Ofsted gradings are significantly more likely to be rated as 
outstanding than any other type of school.”

• This article was amended on 24 August 2016 to clarify that Stour Valley had 
more than one year group when it opened in 2011 and to add a comment from the 
New Schools Network.
 