
Yes, Donald Trump’s politics are incoherent. But those who surround him know 
just what they want, and his lack of clarity enhances their power. To 
understand what is coming, we need to understand who they are. I know all too 
well, because I have spent the past 15 years fighting them.

Over this time, I have watched as tobacco, coal, oil, chemicals and biotech 
companies have poured billions of dollars into an international misinformation 
machine composed of thinktanks, bloggers and fake citizens’ groups. Its purpose 
is to portray the interests of billionaires as the interests of the common 
people, to wage war against trade unions and beat down attempts to regulate 
business and tax the very rich. Now the people who helped run this machine are 
shaping the government.

Trump’s climate denial is just one of the forces that point towards war | 
George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-climate-change-war>
I first encountered the machine when writing about climate change. The fury 
and loathing directed at climate scientists and campaigners seemed 
incomprehensible until I realised they were fake:the hatred had been paid for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/sep/19/ethicalliving.g2>. The 
bloggers and institutes whipping up this anger were funded by oil and coal 
companies.

Among those I clashed with was Myron Ebell of the Competitive Enterprise 
Institute (CEI). The CEI calls itself a thinktank, but looks to me like a 
corporate lobbying group. It is not transparent about its funding, but we now 
know it has received$2m from ExxonMobil 
<http://www.exxonsecrets.org/html/orgfactsheet.php>, more than $4m 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/competitive-enterprise-institute> from a group 
called the Donors Trust (whichrepresents various corporations and billionaires 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/09/secretive-donors-gave-us-climate-denial-groups-125m-over-three-years>
),$800,000 from groups set up by the tycoons Charles and David Koch 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/competitive-enterprise-institute>, and substantial 
sums from coal, tobacco and pharmaceutical companies 
<http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Competitive_Enterprise_Institute>.

For years, Ebell and the CEI have attacked efforts to limit climate change, 
through lobbying, lawsuits and campaigns. Anadvertisement released by the 
institute <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7sGKvDNdJNA> had the punchline 
“Carbon dioxide: they call it pollution. We call it life.”

It has sought to eliminate funding for environmental education, lobbied 
against the Endangered Species Act,harried climate scientists 
<http://blogs.berkeley.edu/2014/08/25/why-defamation-suit-against-climate-denialists-is-the-right-move/>
 and campaigned in favour of mountaintop removal by coal companies. In 2004,
Ebell sent a memo to one of George W Bush’s staffers 
<http://blogs.berkeley.edu/2014/08/25/why-defamation-suit-against-climate-denialists-is-the-right-move/>
 calling for the head of the Environmental Protection Agency to be sacked. 
Where is Ebell now? Oh –leading Trump’s transition team for the Environmental 
Protection Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/17/trump-begins-filling-environmental-posts-with-clowns>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149b1296f9c76dfb4c2c33f7e77c5cc3812ffdbe%2F0_81_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Frightened%20by%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20You%20don%E2%80%99t%20know%20the%20half%20of%20it%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Frightened%20by%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20You%20don%E2%80%99t%20know%20the%20half%20of%20it%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fdonald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F149b1296f9c76dfb4c2c33f7e77c5cc3812ffdbe%2F0_81_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Former campaign manager Corey Lewandowski, like other members of Trump’s team, 
came from a group called Americans for Prosperity. Photograph: UPI/Barcroft 
Images 
Charles and David Koch – who for years have funded extreme pro-corporate 
politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/17/dark-money-review-nazi-oil-the-koch-brothers-and-a-rightwing-revolution>
 – might not have been enthusiasts for Trump’s candidacy, but their people were 
all over his campaign. Until June, Trump’s campaign manager wasCorey Lewandowski
 <https://ballotpedia.org/Corey_Lewandowski>, who like other members of Trump’s 
team came from a group called Americans for Prosperity (AFP).

This purports to be a grassroots campaign, but it was founded and funded by 
the Koch brothers 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2010/08/30/covert-operations>. It set up the 
first Tea Party Facebook page and organised the first Tea Party events. With a 
budget of hundreds of millions of dollars, AFP has campaigned ferociously on 
issues that coincide with the Koch brothers’ commercial interests in oil, gas, 
minerals, timber and chemicals.

In Michigan, it helped force through the “right to work bill”, in pursuit of 
whatAFP’s local director called “taking the unions out at the knees” 
<https://thinkprogress.org/koch-front-group-americans-for-prosperity-take-the-unions-out-at-the-knees-54dbc16a794#.6mfxr1f64>
. It has campaigned nationwide against action on climate change. It haspoured 
hundreds of millions of dollars 
<http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Americans_for_Prosperity> into unseating 
the politicians who won’t do its bidding and replacing them with those who will.

I could fill this newspaper with the names of Trump staffers who have emerged 
from such groups: people such asDoug Domenech 
<http://www.texaspolicy.com/experts/detail/doug-domenech>, from the Texas 
Public Policy Foundation, funded among others by the Koch brothers 
<http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/Texas_Public_Policy_Foundation>, Exxon 
and the Donors Trust;Barry Bennett, whose Alliance for America’s Future 
<https://ballotpedia.org/Barry_Bennett_%28Virginia%29> (now called One Nation 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/news/2015/05/roves-new-group-isnt-new-and-that-could-be-the-point/>
) refused to disclose its donors when challenged; andThomas Pyle, president of 
the American Energy Alliance, 
<http://americanenergyalliance.org/staff/thomas-pyle/> funded by Exxon and 
others <http://www.sourcewatch.org/index.php/American_Energy_Alliance>. This is 
to say nothing of Trump’s own crashing conflicts of interest. Trump promised to 
“drain the swamp” of the lobbyists and corporate stooges working in Washington. 
But it looks as if the only swamps he’ll drain will be real ones, as his team 
launches its war on the natural world.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20far%20is%20too%20far%20for%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20far%20is%20too%20far%20for%20Donald%20Trump%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fhow-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video&media=>
How far is too far for Donald Trump? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/nov/23/how-far-is-too-far-for-donald-trump-video>
Understandably, there has been plenty of coverage of the racists and white 
supremacists empowered by Trump’s victory. But, gruesome as they are, they’re 
peripheral to the policies his team will develop. It’s almost comforting, 
though, to focus on them, for at least we know who they are and what they stand 
for. By contrast, to penetrate the corporate misinformation machine is to enter 
a world of mirrors. Spend too long trying to understand it, and the hyporeality 
vortex will inflict serious damage on your state of mind.

Don’t imagine that other parts of the world are immune. Corporate-funded 
thinktanks and fake grassroots groups are now everywhere. The fake news we 
should be worried about is notstories invented by Macedonian teenagers 
<https://www.channel4.com/news/fake-news-in-macedonia-who-is-writing-the-stories>
 about Hillary Clinton selling arms to Islamic State, but the constant feed of 
confected scares about unions, tax and regulation drummed up by groups that 
won’t reveal their interests.

The less transparent they are, the more airtime they receive. The organisation 
Transparify runs an annual survey of thinktanks.This year’s survey reveals 
<https://onthinktanks.org/initiatives/transparify/transparify-2016-report/> 
that in the UK only four thinktanks – the Adam Smith Institute, Centre for 
Policy Studies, Institute of Economic Affairs and Policy Exchange – “still 
consider it acceptable to take money from hidden hands behind closed doors”. 
And these are the ones that are all over the media.

When the Institute of Economic Affairs, as it so often does, appears on the 
BBC to argue against regulating tobacco, shouldn’t we be told thatit has been 
funded by tobacco companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jun/01/thinktanks-big-tobacco-funds-smoking>
since 1963 
<http://www.tobaccotactics.org/index.php/IEA:_History_of_Close_Ties_with_the_Tobacco_Industry>
?There’s a similar pattern in the US 
<https://onthinktanks.org/initiatives/transparify/transparify-2016-report/>: 
the most vocal groups tend to be the most opaque.

As usual, the left and centre (myself included) are beating ourselves up about 
where we went wrong. There are plenty of answers, but one of them is that we 
have simply been outspent. Not by a little, but by orders of magnitude. A few 
billion dollars spent on persuasion buys you all the politics you want. Genuine 
campaigners, working in their free time, simply cannot match a professional 
network staffed by thousands of well-paid, unscrupulous people.

You cannot confront a power until you know what it is. Our first task in this 
struggle is to understand what we face. Only then can we work out what to do.

• Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot <https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>. A fully linked 
version of this column will be published atmonbiot.com 
 <http://www.monbiot.com/>

 * George Monbiot will be available to comment on this thread for one hour, 
from 10.15am  