
“We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit.” 
If it’s good enough for Aristotle, it’s good enough for us. So what rituals or 
routines can we take up to improve 2017?

Old habits die hard. Here’s how to change your life in 2017 | Gretchen Rubin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/29/old-habits-hard-new-year-resolution-personality-succeed>
We asked our readers about the one small change that has made the biggest 
difference to their lives – here are 20 that might just make the year ahead a 
bit brighter.


1 Cold-water swimming

I suffer with depression and anxiety, and have done for about 10 years. I 
watched a programme calledThe Doctor Who Gave Up Drugs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07w52tp> last autumn. I hated the first 
episode, but watched the second to see how the woman tryingcold-water swimming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/the-swimming-blog/2013/nov/29/cold-water-swimming>
 to help with her depression got on. I was surprised to see it really helped 
her, so decided to give it a go. After my first swim, I was hooked.

Jennifer Brooks, Gloucestershire


2 A daily lunchtime walk

This is a good way to escape from my desk and switch off from work. It’s also 
great to explore the local area and discover hidden gems. It wasn’t a hard 
habit to introduce. When I am busier it’s harder to step outside, but more 
rewarding. Those few moments away help me refocus when I get back to the office.


Ross, London

3 Stop shouting

I stopped shouting a decade ago, and haven’t raised my voice since. I used to 
shout at my small children when I was frustrated; it was an instinctive 
response, but it wasn’t a constructive way of dealing with the situation, and 
it would take hours to recover from the guilt I felt afterwards. My kids often 
didn’t understand why I was so upset. So I stopped shouting. It was hard at 
first (I had to count to 10 to calm down) but now I feel much better and more 
in control. I speak in a measured way and things get done because I have gained 
other people’s respect.


Clara, the south-west

4 Baking bread

No more processed rubbish – the bread I make 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2009/sep/10/bake-your-own-bread> is 
wholesome and full of flavour. It keeps well, too, much better than the 
shop-bought stuff. There is no finer moment than knocking back a bowl of dough 
after its first fermentation. It’s a great way of destressing. Recently I’ve 
been making no-knead bread which tastes good but doesn’t ease stress quite so 
well. I’ve also started making my ownpizzas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/pizza>, which has been just as fun.


Anonymous

5 Mindfulness meditation 


I introduced mindfulness meditation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/jun/09/how-meditation-brought-me-back-from-a-breakdown>
 into my life to help cope with a history of high blood pressure and 
depression. Concentrating on my breathing and telling myself to “live in the 
now” stopped me panicking. At first, I felt I had to lie down in a quiet room, 
light candles and practise for 20 minutes. But now I can do it anywhere. Even 
if you end up doing meditation for three minutes a day it’s worth it. It has 
helped me improve my relationships and career. Mindfulness slows me down, helps 
me accept the things I cannot change and appreciate what and who I have in my 
life. It has made me more grateful.


Elaine Kingett, London


6 Yoga 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14e5fff107a2448680a020667abe42370db8042%2F0_180_4802_2882%2F4802.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers'%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers%27%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff14e5fff107a2448680a020667abe42370db8042%2F0_180_4802_2882%2F4802.jpg>
I started doing yoga <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/yoga> twice a 
week to get rid of headaches. It wasn’t difficult to start because I was 
already exercising, but it took a while to get used to it, because I thought 
yoga looked a bit boring at first. Now I cannot live without it. It’s the one 
thing that helps with my headaches, and it has really improved my quality of 
life.


Amanda, Cape Town

7 Stop bringing work home 

I made a conscious decision to ensure my personal life and relationships were 
my priority away from work, and took work emails off my phone. This has 
actually made me a lot more efficient at work, especially when planning my time.


Anjum Peerbacos, London

8 Unicycle

I started unicycling with the rest of my family about 12 years ago, but every 
week it felt like I was starting all over again, while others progressed. About 
a year ago I saw a physio about an unrelated pain and he noted that I had poor 
abdominal muscle tone. I started doing the exercises he gave me and noticed my 
unicycling was improving. Over the year I have finally learned to mount the 
unicycle. I also had the confidence to take part in a freestyle routine at the 
national championships and am now unicycling to work and back once a week. I am 
still not brilliant, but I am so happy to be able to do this and to see 
definite improvement.


Cathy, Canberra

9 Learn to play a musical instrument

I learned to play the fiddle. I started from scratch (playing Twinkle Twinkle 
Little Star) and can now play over 100 tunes by ear. I can also read music 
slowly and love playing with others. I’m now learning the ukulele, too. It is 
great fun and I feel a real sense of achievement. I did not play anymusical 
instrument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/24/want-to-train-your-brain-forget-apps-learn-a-musical-instrument>
 until my early 50s, and am continuing to improve. It’s also been a great way 
to make new friends.


Marie Therese Allison, Glasgow 

10 Wake up an hour earlier each morning 

I decided to start waking up an hour earlier every morning – 5.30am instead of 
6.30am. I now start my day by doing a few sun salutations, followed by a prayer 
(which I use to be thankful rather than asking for anything), and then write in 
my journal. This change has helped me keep in touch with myself and my emotions.

Kelly, Indianapolis

11 Drink enough water

I used to get awful headaches but then I started to drink at least two litres 
of water a day. After about five years of doing this my headaches have now gone 
away, my skin is soft and clear, and I have more energy. I notice that when I
don’t drink enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/mar/30/drink-water-at-work> for a few 
days my body feels like it’s running at half the rate it should be. This has 
been one of the best things I’ve done for my body.


Emily, Lancashire

12 Cycle to work 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F876b2c07bea03daf0e47f3cf86684f1dc107fb51%2F0_315_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers'%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers%27%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F876b2c07bea03daf0e47f3cf86684f1dc107fb51%2F0_315_4827_2896%2F4827.jpg>
I began cycling to work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jan/20/secret-to-cycling-to-work> last 
summer (it’s only five miles and it’s usually quicker than driving). I did it 
because I felt I wasn’t getting enough exercise. It was also because driving 
and taking public transport through London is expensive and stressful. My 
journey to work is fun now. Some of it involves busy roads (where I find myself 
overtaking queues of cars). But I’ve also discovered some nice quiet signposted 
cycle routes through back streets. I feel healthier and my leg muscles are 
definitely stronger than they were.


Caroline, London

13 Pilates

After a hip operation I started pilates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2006/nov/18/healthandwellbeing.fitness>
 as part of my rehabilitation. It made a huge difference to my mobility so I 
found a local class at the leisure centre. I’ve been going most weeks for 
several years now. I’m nearly 50 but feel about 20 years younger. Pilates 
strengthened and straightened me in key core areas: I can get up from the floor 
without using my hands; I can stand for hours; and I rarely have backache.


Mike, Cheshire

14 Date night 

About three years ago our three daughters were finally old enough to look 
after themselves on a Friday evening, or to go out with their friends. So my 
wife and I decided to make it ourdate night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/sep/26/can-monthly-date-nights-save-your-marriage>
. We go for a meal or drinks, sometimes with other friends. After so many years 
of sacrificing our time for the children it has been wonderful to take my wife 
for a date every week. I really look forward to us spending quality time 
together.

Philip West, Istanbul

15 Tai chi
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a7b3a0c38d030fd8657b8434fb66631762cb95%2F0_0_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers'%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20date%20night%20to%20cold%20showers%3A%2020%20habits%20that%20changed%20readers%27%20lives%20%7C%20Sarah%20Marsh%20and%20Guardian%20readers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Ffrom-date-night-to-cold-showers-20-habits-that-changed-readers-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd1a7b3a0c38d030fd8657b8434fb66631762cb95%2F0_0_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
Twenty years ago I started learning tai chi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/24/luisa-dillner-tai-chi> 
and six years ago it became my daily practice. Every morning I do yoga to 
stretch and then tai chi to balance, settle and ground myself. Tai chi isn’t 
quick to pick up; it took four years just to learn the form – and it’s a 
practice that is never complete. There’s always something more to learn. It has 
helped me slow down and pay attention to the details, emotionally and 
physically.


Keone, Wales

16 Cold showers

I was on a cycling holiday in France in the summer of 2015. The temperature 
was great for cycling, about 27 celsius, and after each day’s ride I looked 
forward to a refreshing shower. At the last hotel I knocked the temperature 
gauge to cold. Brrrrr! I set it back to hot. A couple of seconds later I 
knocked it to cold again. Not so brrrrr – actually, more refreshing. I haven’t 
looked back.


Vanessa Moss, Kendal

17 Something new every day

At the start of 2016 I decided to do one new thing every day. I initially did 
this to keep myself busy after a breakup, but I have kept it up ever since. 
It’s included trying everything from joining a choir to buying a new type of 
tea. It has been so beneficial: I’ve gained new skills and feel braver, more 
spontaneous and ever so slightly more exhausted.


Maria Wylie, Ely

18 Stop looking at the phone after 9pm 

I made this little promise to myself to gain some work-life balance (I was 
addicted to checking my email), but also just to have a bit of quiet time 
before bed. It’s made a huge difference. After the first week I felt noticeably 
much less stressed. I also slept better. Some of my friends complained that I 
missed their messages, but it was nothing that couldn’t wait until the next day.

Anonymous

19 Kickboxing

When I was 37, I started kickboxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2008/jun/16/workandcareers3>. In many 
respects, life was pretty good: I was in a happy, long-term relationship, and 
my job was secure. There wasn’t a huge amount for me to worry about. But I was 
restless, with a nagging feeling that somehow life was passing me by. Forty was 
looming, and I wanted to do something to make me feel more alive. That’s where 
kickboxing came in. I’m a second dan black belt now: the day I got my first 
black belt was the proudest of my life. I try to train at least five times a 
week. At a basic level, it keeps me fit, strong and flexible. But it also keeps 
me sane and sociable.

Sarah Heseltine, London


20 Give up coffee 

I’d become addicted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/mar/07/caffeine-addiction-coffee-drug-energy-drink>
 after going from having one cup of coffee a day to sinking six or even eight, 
and I found I couldn’t think without a cup. I tended to be agitated as a result 
of too much caffeine in important meetings, and once I decided to give it up, 
it was easy – although there are times when I still crave a cup. I’m now more 
relaxed and calmer.

Peter, London

 