
A mix of continuing cuts to social security and public services, squeezed 
wages and rising living costs mean that 2017 is set to be another tumultuous 
year for many. But there are particular socio-economic problems – each growing 
for years – that could reach a tipping point in the coming months. Some will be 
exacerbated by new government policies this year, others by inaction. Here are 
five to watch out for:

In-work poverty

After years of the government peddling the line that being a “hardworking 
family” will help you to get through tough times, it’s a grim irony that 2017 
looks set to be the year of in-work poverty, where you can have a job but still 
have to go to a food bank to eat or evensleep on the street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
. Workers are battling squeezed wages and precarious contracts (we now know 
that those on zero-hours contracts are on average£1,000 a year worse-off than 
employees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/30/zero-hours-workers-1000-worse-off-a-year-than-employees>
), while those who need benefits to top up poverty wages will see themselves 
enduring the problem-plagueduniversal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2016/apr/22/universal-credit-tough-love-for-low-paid-workers>
 and possibly benefit sanctions.

At the same time living costs will go up. Rents continue to rise – taking an 
impossible chunk of income – while just this week there were warnings that 2017 
will bringmore rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
 in the price of fuel, food and other essentials, and the news that credit card 
borrowing hashit a level not seen since the pre-2008 crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
. There have been warnings over the scandal of in-work poverty for years – the 
majority of new housing benefit claimants in 2010 and 2011had a job 
<http://m.insidehousing.co.uk/6521183.article?mobilesite=enabled> – and yet 
only meagre solutions such as the so-called national living wage have been 
offered.

Social care

In the closing weeks of 2016 social care emerged less as a new problem than 
the problem the government could no longer ignore, as an ageing population 
endures 15-minute care slots and young disabled adults are left unable to dress 
or get out of the house. For 2017-18 alone the social care system has an 
estimated funding gap of£1.9bn 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/autumn-statement-2016>.

The £900m top-up frantically proposed in December – made up of a council tax 
rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/15/council-tax-bills-can-rise-by-3-for-two-years-to-help-fund-social-care-says-javid>
 and diverting cash from the new homes bonus fund – suggests a quick patch-up 
job at best. One in three councils may actuallylose money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/28/third-of-councils-to-lose-cash-in-social-care-changes-says-burnham>
 as a result of the government’s changes and these are councils already on 
their knees after cuts of almost£5bn to social care 
<http://www.patients4nhs.org.uk/government-cuts/> over the past four years. 
Worse, because of differing property prices, the council tax precept is worth 
more in affluent parts of the country – so the areas where need is greatest 
will actually get the least help.

As 2017 progresses, the big social care problems may actually be ones barely 
mentioned right now: the pressure that the introduction of the national living 
wage is adding to care costs,the reduction in choice of care for disabled people
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/personal-budget-disabled-funding-cuts-social-care>
, or the massshortage of care workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/21/brexit-care-older-disabled-people-eu-workers-uk>
 that post-Brexit migration restrictions may cause.

Out-of-work sickness benefit cuts
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fin-work-poverty-out-of-work-cuts-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62d067e41981e0c8a711f6b311eb708a3fc44632%2F194_1009_1948_2436%2F1948.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20in-work%20poverty%20to%20out-of-work%20cuts%3A%20five%20horrors%20of%202017%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fin-work-poverty-out-of-work-cuts-2017%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20in-work%20poverty%20to%20out-of-work%20cuts%3A%20five%20horrors%20of%202017%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fin-work-poverty-out-of-work-cuts-2017%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62d067e41981e0c8a711f6b311eb708a3fc44632%2F194_1009_1948_2436%2F1948.jpg>
 The Conservative MP Heidi Allen (pictured visiting the Calais refugee camp) 
has condemned her government’s attacks on disabled benefits. Photograph: Graeme 
Robertson for the Guardian 
Contrary to claims that Tory welfare cuts are over (rather, no new ones are 
scheduled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/no-more-welfare-cuts-under-theresa-may-says-minister-damian-green-end-to-austerity>
), this year will deliver one of the most controversial benefit cuts to date: 
removing £30 a week from many disabled and chronically ill people who are 
unable to work.

From April, new claimants put in the work-related activity group (Wrag) of 
employment and support allowance – disabled or chronically sick people judged 
as too ill to work – willreceive the same as recipients of jobseeker’s allowance
 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/budget-osborne-scraps-wrag-as-part-of-13-billion-a-year-benefit-cuts/>
.As I’ve said from the start 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/cutting-disabled-benefits-wont-work>
, a policy that treats someone unable to work for two years during a multiple 
sclerosis relapse in the same way as a healthy unemployed person out of work 
for a few month, is simply going to force severely ill and disabled people to 
survive long term on a short-term benefit.

Even Theresa May’s own side has noticed. In November several Conservatives 
joined calls topostpone the cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/tory-mps-join-call-to-postpone-disability-benefit-cuts>
, with the MP Heidi Allensaying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/tory-mps-join-call-to-postpone-disability-benefit-cuts>
 that there was “no other piece of legislation or change which I have seen more 
regret about on my side”.

To get a picture of how grim this cut actually is, almost two-thirds of 
Wrag-classified people say they already don’t have enough to live on, with 
nearly a third struggling to afford food. And far from encouraging disabled 
people off sickness benefits, a crossbench review last year found the cut will 
actuallyreduce their ability to take steps into work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/cutting-disabled-benefits-wont-work>
 .

Temporary accommodation

With three street sleepers found dead in December 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/manchester-homeless-crisis-cocktail-cuts-charities-shelter>
 and the number of homeless people rocketing toa quarter of a million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/shelter-homelessness-england-charity-poverty-social-housing>
 in England alone, the homelessness crisis should become increasingly hard to 
ignore in 2017. But in a climate of shrinking social housing and frequent
private evictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/eviction-by-private-landlord-making-record-numbers-homeless-in-uk>
, it’s the growing trend of temporary accommodation – families stuck in 
hostels, women’s refuges, private accommodation, B&Bs – that stands out.

Cutting disabled people’s benefits won’t help anyone return to work | Frances 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/08/cutting-disabled-benefits-wont-work>
In the third quarter of 2016, almost 75,000 households, including 120,000 
children, wererecorded as living in temporary housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/24/squalor-of-temporary-housing-holds-back-uk-homeless-says-report>
. That’s an increase of 9% on the same period in 2015. Almost32,000 more 
children are now enduring this <http:> than in the same quarter of 2010.

The impact can be devastating. Families are often being left to live in what’s 
essentially squalor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/24/squalor-of-temporary-housing-holds-back-uk-homeless-says-report>
: bloodstains, broken windows and even a lack of a bed or a bathroom. Others 
are housed hours away from their schools and health services: local 
authorities, it emerged last year, areunlawfully resettling homeless families 
miles from their local area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/councils-forcing-homeless-families-to-relocate-miles-away>
. It is also hugely costly. Councils have spent£3.5bn on temporary 
accommodation over the past five years <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-38016728>. 
Almost two-thirds of that is in London.

Child poverty

Like a Dickensian parody, the Conservatives saw in Christmas by abolishing the 
child poverty unit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/fears-after-government-abolishes-civil-services-child-poverty-unit>
. After seeing its staffing halved in three years, the unit has now been 
subsumed into the Department for Work and Pensions. This couldn’t be worse 
timing. The Institute for Fiscal Studies projects a50% increase in child 
poverty by 2020 <http://www.cpag.org.uk/child-poverty-facts-and-figures> – with 
2017 seeing several policies set to push more children to breaking point.

In April, the Conservatives’ two-child policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/21/two-child-cap-child-benefit-un-snp>
 will come into force, limiting tax credits and universal credit to the first 
two children in a household. This year will also see the full rollout of the 
extended benefit cap, affecting320,000 children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/01/extended-benefit-cap-hit-116000-families-housing-experts>
. Add to this universal credit and benefit freezes, as well as increasingly 
squeezed wages, and 2017 will be particularly tough for Britain’s poorest 
children.

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours> 