
How did WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> go from 
darling of the liberal left and scourge of American imperialism to apparent 
tool of Donald Trump’s divisive, incendiary presidential campaign?

Thursday brought another WikiLeaks dump of nearly 2,000 emails hacked from the 
Hillary Clinton campaign, allegedly by Russians. As usual, they were 
inside-the-beltway gossip rather than game-changing: the campaign tried topush 
back the Illinois primary 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Politics/wireStory/email-clinton-campaign-move-back-illinois-primary-42783309>
, believing it would make life harder for moderate Republicans.

That has not stopped Trump trying to make hay from the leaked emails and 
deflect attention from allegations of sexual harassment against him. “Very 
little pick-up by the dishonest media of incredible information provided by 
WikiLeaks,” he tweeted on Wednesday. “So dishonest! Rigged system!”

If Trump leaks are OK and Clinton leaks aren't, there's a problem | Trevor Timm
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/wikileaks-emails-trump-clinton-campaign-leaks-media-bias>
Clinton’s speeches to Wall Street banks were apparently revealed in an email 
dump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
 last Friday, just minutes after the release of a video in which Trump was 
caught boasting about groping women – timing that many felt was more than just 
chance. This follows a hack in July designed to embarrass Clinton on the eve of 
the Democratic National Convention.

Robert Mackey 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/08/06/accusing-wikileaks-bias-beside-point/> of 
The Intercept website wrote in August: “TheWikiLeaks Twitter feed 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks> has started to look more like the stream of an 
opposition research firm working mainly to undermine Hillary Clinton than the 
updates of a non-partisan platform for whistleblowers.”

The seeming alliance between Trump and WikiLeaks is an astonishing role 
reversal. In 2010 it was lauded by transparency campaigners for releasing, in 
cooperation with publicationsincluding the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/the-war-logs>, more than a quarter of a 
million classified cables from US embassies around the world. WikiLeaks founder 
Julian Assange became a hero to many.

At the time, Republican politicians expressed outrage at WikiLeaks, but now 
some are seizing on its revelations as potential salvation for Trump’s ailing 
candidacy. Newt Gingrich, the former House speaker, took part in a media 
conference call about an email that purportedly showed Clinton campaign mocking 
Catholics.

Conversely, liberal activists have expressed dismay at the hack of Clinton 
campaign chairman John Podesta’s email account and the calculated timing of the 
release. Neil Sroka, spokesperson for the pressure group Democracy for America, 
said: “There is a huge difference between risotto recipes in John Podesta’s 
emails and the Pentagon Papers. The news value of these Podesta emails is 
fairly limited and the activist value is even less.”

Sroka added: “WikiLeaks is like the internet. It can be a force for good or a 
force for bad. Right now it is propping up a candidate running the most hateful 
campaign in modern times.”

Last week US intelligence officials blamed Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> for previous hacks. It is not yet 
known whether Podesta’s emails were hacked by the Russians, but US officials 
say the attack fits the same pattern. Russian president Vladimir Putin has 
denied the allegation.

Clinton campaign manager Robby Mook told reporters on Thursday: “The 
Department of Homeland Security took the unprecedented step of saying ... 
beyond any doubt that this hack and then the leaking of the emails was 
perpetrated by the Russian government for the purpose of intervening in the 
election and trying to affect the outcome in favor ofDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. This is getting closer and 
closer to the Trump campaign itself.”

All of which raises the question: do Assange, Putin and Trump form a triangle? 
Are they in communication with each other or merely exploiting a coincidence of 
interests?

Trump has praised Putin and numerous links with Russia have emerged this year. 
But on Wednesday he denied any business interests beyond staging Miss Universe 
there. He has contradicted earlier statements about knowing Putin.

Assange was asked by Democracy Now earlier this year 
<http://www.democracynow.org/2016/7/25/julian_assange_choosing_between_trump_or>
 whether he prefers Clinton or Trump. “You’re asking me, do I prefer cholera or 
gonorrhea?” he replied. Sarah Harrison, a WikiLeaks editor, has said it would 
publish documents damaging to Trump if it had them. “It’s not that we’re 
choosing publications to pick a certain line,”she told Bloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-10-11/how-julian-assange-turned-wikileaks-into-trump-s-best-friend>
.

But some observers argue that Assange’s war on Clinton is personal: she was 
secretary of state at the time of the diplomatic cables leak. Her perceived 
secrecy and hawkish foreign policy represents the antithesis of his anti-US 
imperialist worldview. The capricious, nihilistic, non-ideological Trump might 
seem like a kindred spirit by comparison.

Alina Polyakova 
<http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/about/experts/list/alina-polyakova>, deputy 
director of the Eurasia Center at the Atlantic Council think tank in 
Washington, said: “My impression of Julian Assange is that he sees US hegemony 
in the international world order as the biggest problem facing us today. In his 
attempt to bring ‘transparency’, he ends up siding with the very regimes that 
deny transparency and human rights. That’s the irony of my enemy’s enemy is my 
friend.”

She added: “I think the Russian government is in fact using WikiLeaks: the 
connection seems pretty clear to me. Is the Trump campaign tied to WikiLeaks? 
That’s hard to say but I would be surprised if there’s no coordination.”

Russia has uncomfortable associations for WikiLeaks. In 2010 its point man 
there, Israel Shamir,was exposed as an antisemite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/andrewbrown/2010/dec/17/wikileaks-israel-shamir-russia-scandinavia>
 and Holocaust denier. A website, israelshamir.com, carries numerous articles,
one of which comments <http://www.israelshamir.com/article/a-lousy-dancer/>: 
“Ms Clinton decided to blame her spectacular lack of success on Putin, as well. 
If she were honest, she’d admit that she is unpopular, even among her own 
milieu.”

In an email, Shamir denied that Assange is coordinating with Russia. “The 
problem is that incredible revelations of emails are totally suppressed by the 
Clintonesque media,” he wrote. “Instead of discussing Clinton’s hate to 
ordinary Americans, Clinton’s order to assassinate Assange etc, you discuss 
whether Russians are involved. Shame!”

Assange remains holed up at the Ecuadorian embassy in London after claiming 
asylum, where he’s been for four years. Two women in Sweden have accused him of 
rape and other sexual offences, which he denies, citing a wider conspiracy. 
Assange has expressed fears that, if extradited to Sweden, he would be in 
danger of being sent to the US, where he thinks he could face the death penalty.

A former associate of Assange, who did not wish to be named, noted that there 
will be presidential elections in Ecuador in 2017 and the current leader, 
Rafael Correa, has stated that he will stand aside after 10 years in office. 
This could make Assange feel uncertain about his future protection.

“I believe he is basically hoping that Trump will be lenient on him,” the 
former associate said. “It’s aboutJulian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>. I feel he’s just desperate 
and it’s a shame.”


The site has lost its halo in the eyes of what it used to be its core 
constituency, the ex-colleague added. “All the lefties were WikiLeaks softies. 
Now they are getting a different perspective. It’s obvious Julian Assange has 
lost his ability to be neutral.”

But others who know Assange defend him. Vaughan Smith 
<http://www.vaughansmith.com/>, a journalist and former army officer who 
allowed the WikiLeaks founder to stay at his UK home for more than a year, said 
in a text message: “I don’t believe for a minute that Julian is liaising with 
Moscow.

“His whole thing is that he’s not supposed to know the identity of his 
sources, who leave material anonymously to protect themselves. He checks that 
it’s genuine and puts out as much of it as he can. That’s his compact with 
whistleblowers. As for Clinton and Trump? He hasn’t expressed a preference to 
me.”

And some Democratic voters have declined to criticise the leaks, which appear 
to show how the Clinton campaign worked to defeat Bernie Sanders in the primary 
elections.Dave Handy <https://twitter.com/anondescript>, a political organiser 
and Sanders supporter who will now vote for Clinton, said: “I wouldn’t say I’m 
glad but they’re doing a necessary thing.

“Even if it’s a ploy, it’s the truth. No one has denied this.”

He added: “The Democratic party and the Clinton campaign have colluded for the 
last two years to make sure she becomes the nominee and to make sure she 
becomes president. As someone who will vote for her, we can only pray this is 
not how she runs her administration.”
 