
Cities define modern life. They make more money than other places, demand more 
of the people who live in them, and provide more for them too. Except for the 
people who aren’t making money; and if you are the kind who does make money, 
you probably know little about them. Several million humans penned together in 
an unfeasibly small space, and compelled to make life work. “There is no logic 
that can be superimposed on the city,”Jane Jacobs, the urban activist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/jane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen>
, once said. “People make it, and it is to them, not buildings, that we must 
fit our plans.”

Her words are pertinent given the government’s intention to build up to 14 
garden villages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/fourteen-garden-villages-to-be-built-england-48000-homes-green-belt>
, plus larger garden towns across England, each created as “a new discrete 
settlement”. Here at last is a theoretical blank page that gives communities 
the chance to think about what a city or town should look like.

Cities developed in the UK as a result of the industrial revolution, and some 
things have changed surprisingly little. A traffic jam, that modern peril, 
could wreak havoc for hours in 1749. Nearly three centuries on, streets are 
still cleaned mostly by a human with a broom and there are still more people 
than places for them to live. But now stop the clock. Design a city from 
scratch.

Here is the necessary acreage, and here is a serviceable budget. Where would 
you start? Would you build roads straight or curved and how many coffee shops 
would your high street have? Come to think of it, does a city need a high 
street? Just for a minute, imagine what you would like to see. There could be 
community-owned pets that the lonely could walk or love, sheltered park benches 
that turn into divans for those in need of a bed, refuges and freecycle joints, 
vertical transport solutions (lifts) and universal stairlessness to render 
accessibility inarguable. And maybe the best answers would lie in small, simple 
considerations – in evolving our own behaviour, laying new traditions to take 
care of ourselves, each other and our homes. And maybe, so that loneliness 
isn’t stigmatised as antisocial, there could be a sign that reads: “It’s OK to 
feed the pigeons.”

Paula Cocozza

Architecture
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36fbbd4131b441f3f268a06bcd744559ff7eea3b%2F0_195_3865_2318%2F3865.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F36fbbd4131b441f3f268a06bcd744559ff7eea3b%2F0_195_3865_2318%2F3865.jpg>
 8 House in the Ørestad quarter of Copenhagen, designed by the architect Bjarke 
Ingels. Photograph: Kim Petersen/Getty Images/imageBROKER RM 
The garden cities of the early 20th century, and the new towns of 1945-1979, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jun/03/from-garden-city-to-new-towns-why-britain-should-be-proud-of-its-planners>
 have followed the fortunes of the country, making it impossible to generalise 
about them – Peterlee, Cumbernauld, Milton Keynes and Hatfield are not much 
alike.

A key concept of the original garden cities was collective ownership, with 
them owned and managed by some sort of community trust for the benefit of 
residents, rather than in the hands – and for the benefit of – developers such 
as Persimmon andBarratt 
<http://www.barrattdevelopments.co.uk/media/media-releases/pr-2015/pr-04-12-2015>
. This was mostly honoured in the breach in the first generation such as 
Letchworth or Welwyn. But today, a garden city could be run as a Community Land 
Trust, a form of ownership that contains clauses against speculation, stopping 
cities becoming middle-class commuter towns and ensuring their original 
intention – places without hierarchies, slums, “luxury living” colonies or 
class distinctions.

However, co-operative or community ownership is usually elective, favouring 
enthusiasts and those with time on their hands. The new city should aim for the 
universality that council housing once provided, through a system of housing 
allocation that would make housing accessible to anyone that wants it. The best 
model for this is still renting through the local authority.

The “garden” part of the garden city was not about private gardens – though in 
the new towns, most people had these – but about public spaces, whether the 
tree-lined Broadway of Letchworth or the free-flowing green spaces of 
residential Milton Keynes. These are the main things lacking in all new 
development in Britain, from the towering, “stunning developments” in London 
and Manchester to the looping, car-centred closes of the average suburban 
development, all of which take a steamroller approach to topography. 
Imaginative landscaping can give a place a distinctive identity, much more than 
the facile “traditionalist” application of Georgian pilasters and tiled roofs, 
creating compositions in the landscape that town planning here was once noted 
for, but has long since lost.

What we should expect of a new town planned in this way is that it doesn’t 
look planned by developers, but for the public good. Stylistically, it would 
make little sense to be too prescriptive. It should somehow be able to combine 
a cohesive look – so that it feels part of a wider whole (Newcastle and London 
do this with their transport networks, Milton Keynes with its stone 
underpasses, Cumbernauld with its rocky landscaping) – with a certain amount of 
experiment. Probably the best approach to this is to let the various stylistic 
factions of the architecture schools have their own showcases – neo-brutalists 
who want heroic complexes of walkways and streets in the sky,such as Bjarke 
Ingels’ recent work on the outskirts of Copenhagen 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2016/02/03/big-8-house-robin-hood-gardens-smithsons-streets-in-the-sky-failed-says-bjarke-ingels/>
; classicists who want Chipperfield-like colonnades around formal squares; 
self-build cultists who would prefer a scaled-up version of the homemade homes 
built by Lewisham residents in the 1980s, or in Almere in the Netherlands today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/dec/15/almere-dutch-city-alternative-housing-custom-build>
 – all of them could, and should, be part of a new town. All of this would be 
made much easier through public ownership and, as John McDonnell recently 
suggested, publicly owned direct labour organisations, than under the 
yardsticks and value engineers of the volume builders.

Fourteen garden villages to be built in England totalling 48,000 homes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/fourteen-garden-villages-to-be-built-england-48000-homes-green-belt>
One constant throughout should be a showcase of technological and ecological 
ingenuity. It is wasteful to build, as we currently do, from breezeblocks and 
concrete frames that are then clad in brick; saner methods of carbon-neutral 
construction have been available for some time.

All of these things are wholly possible, and elsewhere in Europe, rather 
conservative. And if the plan is to expand the south-east of England yet 
further, we need to do it, and fast. But in a country as imbalanced as ours, to 
build new towns from scratch in the south, when streets remain empty in a city 
as magnificent as Liverpool, is trivial.

Owen Hatherley

Culture
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F115b3afffad918754172e5d76368e6d1f016b360%2F0_150_2003_1202%2F2003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F115b3afffad918754172e5d76368e6d1f016b360%2F0_150_2003_1202%2F2003.jpg>
 Residents need to be able to create their own culture … a festival crowd in 
Berlin. Photograph: lechatnoir/Getty Images 
Cultural planning usually involves exploiting the heritage and resources of 
existing urban areas, but a blank slate has its own advantages. A new city 
should begin by establishing flagship arts venues, whether publicly funded or 
in partnership with business. Obviously a museum, theatre, gallery, cinema and 
concert hall in the centre. Possibly an arena further out that could attract 
bigger artists and become a magnet for music fans in the region. These are the 
basics.

Equally important is the creation of a town-centre cultural quarter, perhaps 
near the university, where the clustering of smaller, cheaper venues such as 
arthouse cinemas, cutting-edge theatres and intimate performance spaces enables 
networking and collaboration as well as attracting tourists. In such areas, 
bars, cafes and clubs bring creative people together and lead to a city 
generating its own art. Official initiatives such as public artworks or a 
community festival can help to establish the quarter’s reputation as a hub of 
creativity and entertainment. As the city organically develops its own 
identity, new venues and cultural centres should cater to the needs of specific 
communities, ensuring diversity and social inclusion.

Cultural planning should be based on the broadest possible definition of 
culture, for example valuing nightclubs as highly as classical musical concert 
halls. With nightlife in particular, authorities and promoters should maximise 
the cultural and economic benefits by working as collaborators rather than 
foes. A liberal licensing regime should be baked into the planning process so 
that clubs can’t be threatened with noise complaints from residents, while the 
canny location of loud venues would minimise friction in the first place. You 
could even create a specialised nightclub quarter.

The biggest challenge for cultural planners is how to sow the seeds for 
residents to produce their own work. Nothing is more beneficial to a city’s 
cultural identity than the ability to foster its own scenes – consider 
Manchester in the 80s – and such efflorescences of creativity depend on the 
ability to survive cheaply. Without affordable flats to live in, studios to 
work in, and venues in which to socialise and showcase their work, young 
artists in any discipline can’t grow.

A persistent irony in existing cities is that thriving cultural quarters tend 
to drive up residential and commercial rents, forcing out the young, creative 
people who made them what they are. In order to preserve existing areas from 
extreme gentrification and enable new ones to flourish, the new city needs to 
prioritise affordable housing, rent controls, community arts facilities, grants 
and progressive licensing laws. You can’t manufacture an internationally famous 
music scene or visual arts boom from the top down, but you can remove many of 
the obstacles that make their evolution more difficult. Twenty years into the 
city’s life, the most culturally dynamic area might be one that the planners 
never even considered, but one that their foresight ultimately made possible.

Dorian Lynskey

Transport
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d27ddf64f1255579709eeb1e3a3d33a2d6b407%2F223_0_4487_4488%2F4487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4d27ddf64f1255579709eeb1e3a3d33a2d6b407%2F223_0_4487_4488%2F4487.jpg>
 Vision of the future … a family plays a board game in their self-drive 
electric car in a 1957 illustration. Photograph: GraphicaArtis/Getty Images 
On reaching the boundaries of a fantasy modern city, the first thing visitors 
should be required to do is check in their car keys at the gates. Electric 
vehicles are tolerated where mobility demands it; for families, the disabled, 
or for deliveries. Driverless pods are legion. But there is no place for the 
diesel car, or older gas-guzzlers. The air is clean and the streets 
uncongested. At least, for now.

Creating some sort of rail-based mass transit would be essential, according to 
David Metz of the Centre for Transport Studies at University College London, a 
former chief scientist at the Department for Transport. “It gives you speedy 
travel in a city, where roads would quickly become congested.”

A new, fully automated underground system just below the surface – or even 
elevated for the views in places – might be slightly more costly to build than 
a tram network, or an electric bus rapid transit system with dedicated lanes. 
But the latter, Metz says, requires wider streets. “You want the good 
interaction between people, the buzz of city life, the social, financial and 
cultural agglomeration benefits. Boulevards create severance between people.”

The city centre would have narrower streets, populated by pedestrians, 
cyclists and fleets of self-driving pods, free to use on set local routes, and 
cheaper than taxis when summoned on demand. The new city’s streets are 
pre-mapped into autonomous vehicles, and its infrastructure built with them in 
mind. Manufacturers finally see a place where driverless technology can quickly 
embed and flourish, with grateful residents freed from the expense and hassle 
of car ownership.

On suburban roads, incentives for pooled, electric vehicles help reduce 
congestion. Buses run on electric, gas, orhuman waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/15/uk-first-poo-bio-bus-bristol-regular-service>
, pioneered by Bristol’s poo bus. Commercial, construction and emergency 
vehicles are still needed, but with few private cars parked on roadsides, the 
city has ample room for dedicated, joined-up cycle lanes.

But the city needs variety and character too: let’s have some inexplicably 
curvy roads, and for-the-hell-of-it expensive flourishes in station buildings, 
making them attractive places to meet and be. Should the new city be 
constructed in the kind of hilly landscape enjoyed by the likes of Sheffield, 
build funiculars, or even a cable car of the type championed by Boris Johnson; 
a concept, says Metz, that only failed in London by being in entirely the wrong 
place. In dense, high-rise parts of city, lifts will be “the ultimate transport 
system for an ageing population”.

Planners should heed the Institute of Mechanical Engineers, which counsels 
that the most sustainable form of transport planning is to persuade people not 
to travel in the first place. Now that most work no longer needs to be hived 
off into industrial estates, attempting to design a city that blends the 
residential and the workplace may help cut commutes.

Yet ending all traffic may be no utopia. “Congestion is a mark of success,” 
adds Metz. A booming metropolis, where more people want to work and live, will 
see ever more strain on the transport network. At some point, commuters to our 
ideal city may still have to suck it up.

Gwyn Topham

Politics
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7ab001e451b6f77c61e621a6c89599c099800d2%2F0_225_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=From%20architecture%20to%20cultural%20life%3A%20how%20would%20you%20design%20a%20city%20from%20scratch%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fgrand-designs-how-to-build-a-garden-village%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7ab001e451b6f77c61e621a6c89599c099800d2%2F0_225_4961_2976%2F4961.jpg>
 Bus shelters are needed – and also places for young people that aren’t bus 
shelters. Photograph: Alessandro Rizzi/Getty Images 
Any city built from scratch, with any ambition, assumes the participation of 
its inhabitants, assumes neighbourliness, a “sense of community”, as its raison 
d’etre. In architectural drawings, this is conveyed by a man on the street, 
mending a bike, plus a child carrying balloons. On the BBC, the “community” is 
religious leaders, plus or minus a do-gooder who runs marathons. None of these 
cut it: the only thing that meaningfully unites people who live alongside one 
another is wanting certain things – improvements, activities, visual 
interventions into unloved spaces, places for young people that aren’t bus 
shelters, but also bus shelters – for their area. This is politics.

The peculiarity of modern politics is that all central governments claim to 
want devolution, or its more fashionable, radical cousin, subsidiarity (the 
delegation of decision-making down to the lowest level at which it could be 
made), but then squeeze budgets so hard that local bodies are left with the 
“choice” of cutting all their children’s centres, or three-quarters of them, 
plus meals on wheels. For local democracy to be meaningful, its decisions have 
to be actionable and its statutory duties (providing housing for the low-waged, 
for instance) have to be doable. It can’t just be lurching from one crisis to 
another on the back of some hokey PFI deal.

Money is necessary but insufficient: the appetite is there for civic 
congregation – as you can see when a hospital is threatened with closure – but 
what alienates people is threefold. First, cliqueyness, jargon, the fear of 
arriving at a conversation that’s already been going on for 15 years, and 
looking foolish. The second is the joylessness of civic space. The third, the 
sense that the invited conversations are usually boosterish, anodyne (tell us 
what’s great about your borough!), deter rather than invite change, have no 
route to change anyway and avoid difficult topics.

Urban utopias take time: you can’t participate civically if you’re spending 
half your wages on rent, and this is ultimately about land value. But, deeper 
than that, there’s a question that slipped out of all political language at 
around the time the language of opportunity came in: what are conditions like 
at the bottom? Leave aside: How easy is it to escape poverty? How is life in 
poverty? Are you working 18-hour days? Are you atomised by your own tiredness? 
Is participation on a list of impossibilities a long way below a holiday? It’s 
important that civic spaces are not only open to a leisure class, or they lose 
their lustre for everyone.

Zoe Williams
 