
Leading shares are moving higher after their recent slide to a six week low, 
ahead of the latest interest rate decision from the Bank of England.

Shire is heading the risers, a couple of day’s after its results, following 
news of a disappointing result for a rival. A clinical trial of Roche’s 
experimental haemophilia medicine, a potential competitor to Shire and Novo 
Nordisk, showed some patients suffering adverse effects. On the basis that bad 
news is good news for someone,Shire <https://www.theguardian.com/business/shire>
 shares are up 179.5p at £46.11. Liberum analysts said:

What are the implications for Shire? We see a successful launch of [Roche’s] 
ACE910 having an impact on Shire 2021 earnings per share of around 10-12% 
versus a scenario where ACE910 fails. In our bearish numbers (which still 
deliver 9% CAGR Shire earnings 16-21), we already assume this ‘worst case’.

However, in our view consensus takes a more positive view for Shire given we 
have yet to see ACE910 P3 data. This news makes an ACE910 failure incrementally 
more likely, suggesting the stock should outperform [today].

Overall the FTSE 100 is up 22.10 points at 6867.52, as the Federal Reserve 
left US interest rates unchanged. But there is still caution as the US 
presidential race becomes too close to call in the run up to polling day. And a 
decision on whether the UK goverment will have to allow a parliamentary vote on 
Brexit will come from the high court shortly. Connor Campbell at Spreadex said:

Caught between the subtle bullishness of last night’s Federal Reserve meeting 
and the potential impact of the Bank of England’s own get together, it is 
another overstuffed trading session this Monday. Add onto that the potentially 
huge decision, set to arrive at 10am, about whether or not Theresa May can 
trigger Article 50 sans parliamentary vote and it is easy to understand why 
things currently feel a bit jittery.

Meanwhile Britain’s service sector has recorded its fastest growth since 
January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-growth-inflation-interest-rates-brexit-business-live?page=with:block-581b04b8e4b029b92ca450bc#block-581b04b8e4b029b92ca450bc>
, but there were also signs of inflation building.

With gold and silver edging down after their recent surge as Donald Trump 
appeared to be in the ascendency,Randgold Resources is down 400p at £71.85 
despite a 7% rise in third quarter production andFresnillo has fallen 52p to 
£17.28.

But Dixons Carphone is up 10.2p to 336.6p after Morgan Stanley raised its 
rating from underweight to equal weight. The bank said:

Dixons Carphone <https://www.theguardian.com/business/dixons-carphone> has 
derated significantly in recent months and consensus is no longer predicting 
much earnings growth in outer years. We believe, therefore, that the 
risk-reward trade off has become much more balanced, so upgrade to Equal-weight.

Morrisons has risen 3.5p to 224.8p following its figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/morrisons-sales-growth-price-cuts>
, helpingSainsbury to move 7.8p higher to 260.7p.


Elswhere Gocompare shares are at 75.9p in the price comparison site’s first 
day of dealing following its demerger from insurance groupesure. Investors in 
esure received one new Gocompare share for each esure one they held.

Esure is at 200p, meaning the total current price of 275.8p is higher than 
last night’s close for esure of 265.8p. Peel Hunt analysts said:

We maintain our hold recommendation but believe esure is now in a stronger 
position to boost shareholder returns.

Nicholas Hyett, equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said:

The demerger comes less than two years after esure took full control of the 
price comparison business. That leaves investors who held esure shares now also 
holding GoCompare shares, and that means holdings in two very different 
businesses.

The remaining esure business is an established player in the motor insurance 
market. A tough sector, but one investors have historically looked to for its 
dividend potential.

GoCompare, by comparison, is a high growth tech stock looking to expand into 
new markets.
 