
Leading shares have moved higher after recent uncertainty, lifted by a revival 
in Deutsche Bank and rising commodity prices.

Travel group TUI is among the biggest gainers so far, up after it raised its 
profit guidance for the year. It said it expected 12%-13% growth compared to an 
earlier estimate of a 10% rise. Holiday firms have been hit by fears of 
terrorist attacks, and concerns about a falling number of UK tourists, thanks 
to the weakness of the pound following the Brexit vote. But TUI said bookings 
from Britain were up 5% in the summer, defying these fears. It is also less 
exposed to troubled Turkey than rival Thomas Cook. Analysts at Stifel said:

In the UK market, demand has remained resilient with TUI benefiting from its 
positioning in the upper end of the mass market with a product offering which 
has improved in recent years. Neither Brexit nor the weakness of sterling 
appears to have impacted demand with revenues and bookings up 5% for Summer 
2016. In Germany, while market conditions are difficult, TUI has increased 
market share and benefited from its more integrated model. Losses in France 
should be materially reduced from the €40m incurred last year, but against this 
profits are expected to be lower in Nordics, largely as a result of reduced 
demand to Turkey and the contribution from Belgium will be impacted by the 
attack at Brussels airport.

Elsewhere hopes that Deutsche Bank could dig its way out of its current 
problems lifted its hard hit shares and supported the banking sector. Barclays 
is 1.75p better at 167.7p whileRoyal Bank of Scotland has risen 2p to 176.6p 
after it agreed to pay $1.1bn to settle some of its US mortgage claims.

Despite little chance of oil producers agreeing to curb output at a meeting in 
Algiers, crude prices have edged higher after their recent falls, with Brent 
0.72% higher at $46.3 a barrel. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at 
stockbroker Interactive Investor, said:

 European equity markets are positive, following oil prices higher, as 
investors eye Algiers in the hope that today’s OPEC meeting will reach some 
compromise. Although an agreement to curb output today would be a major 
surprise, the debate may pave the way for a potential deal at their next 
meeting.

So commodity prices have moved ahead, helping mining companies gain ground. 
Anglo American has added 25.4p to 942.2p while Rio Tinto has risen 66.5p to 
2526.5p.

But Sainsbury is down 7.3p to 243.5p as it reported a 1.1% fall in second 
quarter like for like sales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/28/sainsburys-sales-fall-further-price-cuts-discounters>
 and warned of a continuing tough market.

Royal Mail is down 8.2p at 494.8p on competition fears as Deutsche Post agreed 
to buy smaller rival UK Mail for £243m. Liberum analysts said:

UK Mail competes with Royal Mail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> in bulk letters and parcels. 
We would expect it to become a much more powerful competitor with the backing 
of a much larger, financially stronger and ambitious owner.
 