
Leading shares are edging lower after failing to hit a new peak at the last 
gasp on Tuesday.

A drop in precious metal miners as the market closed has continued in the 
latest trading session. The companies came under pressure as gold dropped 
sharply along with a rising dollar, and although the metal has regained some 
ground, miners are among the main fallers in the index.

Fresnillo has fallen 46p to £16.78 while Randgold Resources is down 165p to 
£71.65.

Overall the FTSE 100 has dipped 18.05 points to 7056.29, despite the pound 
slipping to a new 31 year low against the dollar and a better than expected UK 
services survey for September.

To add to investors’ existing concerns - a hard Brexit leaving the UK outside 
the single market, a potential rise in US interest rates, worries about bank 
balance sheets - came talk that the European Central Bank may start tapering 
its bond buying programme. Rebecca O’Keeffe, head of investment at stockbroker 
Interactive Investor, said:

European equity markets are on the back foot as concerns grow that central 
banks are going to pare back accommodative policy - with the ECB potentially 
tapering bond purchases and previously dovish Fed members ramping up 
expectations of an interest rate rise this year. Both equity and bond market 
valuations have been founded on monetary support from global central banks and 
have arguably become hooked on quantitative easing and low interest rates. The 
possibility of central banks returning to a more normal regime could see taper 
tantrums resume, volatility spike and investors flee.

But positive results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/05/tesco-supermarket-sales-rise-profits-tumble>
 fromTesco have sent the supermarket sector higher. Tesco itself is up 17.5p to 
206.2p closely followed byMorrisons, 2.8p better at 223.4p, and Sainsbury, 3p 
higher at 253.2p.

Among the mid-caps insurer Hastings has dropped 8.7p to 219.8p after a series 
of investors including Neil Utley, who led an original management buyout of the 
business, and non-executive director Richard Brewster sold nearly £100m worth 
of shares at 216p each.
 