
Governments have launched a crackdown on the rampant billion-dollar trade in 
rosewood timber that is plundering forests across the planet to feed a booming 
luxury furniture market in China.

The Convention on the Trade in Endangered Species <https://www.cites.org/> 
(Cites) summit on Thursday placed all 300 species of rosewood under trade 
restrictions, meaning criminals can no longer pass off illegally logged species 
as legitimate.

Rosewood is the world’s most trafficked wild product 
<https://www.unodc.org/unodc/en/frontpage/2016/May/wildlife-crime-assessed-globally-for-the-first-time-in-new-unodc-report.html>
, according to the UN Office of Drugs and Crime, accounting for a third of all 
seizures by value, more than elephant ivory, pangolins, rhino horn, lions and 
tigers put together.

With a beautiful deep red glow, it is the traditional wood used for elite, 
classic-style “hongmu” furniture in China: one huge carved bed was on sale 
recently for $1m. But due to explosive demand from China’s fast-growing middle 
class, the rosewood trade has soared since 2005, multiplying 65 times in value 
and now worth $2.2bn a year.

As a result, the forests of south-east Asia have been rapidly emptying, 
peaking in 2014. Traffickers are now targeting more than 80 other countries 
across the tropics where rosewoods grow, particularly in west Africa but also 
central America. China’s rosewood imports from Africa soared sevenfold between 
2010 and 2014, according to areport from Forest Trends 
<http://forest-trends.org/releases/p/hongmu-consumption-boom>, with $216m of 
west African rosewood imported in the first half of 2016 alone.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5130c7586b9a81ae13cd886251ac1c3e0e79552e%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Furniture%20that%20destroys%20forests%3A%20crackdown%20on%20'rampant'%20trade%20in%20rosewood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Furniture%20that%20destroys%20forests%3A%20crackdown%20on%20%27rampant%27%20trade%20in%20rosewood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5130c7586b9a81ae13cd886251ac1c3e0e79552e%2F0_0_3888_2592%2F3888.jpg>
 Loading rosewood on to trucks at the port of Toamasina, Madagascar. 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Illegal gangs move swiftly from country to country, felling all the trees they 
can find and creating devastating boom-and-bust cycles, said the report. “When 
trees become scarce in one place, or authorities strengthen controls, the shady 
networks quickly move to another country and the deadly cycle of corruption, 
violence and forest destruction starts anew,” said astatement from 
Environmental Investigation Agency 
<https://eia-international.org/report/cycles-of-destruction> (EIA), a Cites 
participant.

China imported 2m cubic metres of logs and wood in 2014, according to the EIA. 
This is equivalent to millions of rosewood trees as only the dark, dense 
heartwood is used: 70-80% of the tree is often wasted.

The devastated forests left behind also no longer provide the charcoal and 
traditional medicines used by indigenous communities. “It is at the heart of 
our rural communities,” said Niger’s Cites delegate. “The demand from Asia 
threatens directly threatens their livelihoods.”

Lisa Handy, at the EIA, said: “We are really thrilled [with the new Cites 
protection]. It’s really in the nick of time to save them from extinction. The 
trade has exploded exponentially in the last decade. Now it really comes down 
to enforcement.”

The importance of protecting the entire Dalbergia genus of rosewood is that 
criminals can no longer pass off illegal rosewood as one of the previously 
unprotected species. “Officials have great difficulty in distinguishing between 
species,” said Guatemala’s delegate to Cites. “It is very difficult for people 
who are not experts, and even sometimes for the experts themselves.”

“This [summit] will be remembered for rosewood and pangolin protection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/pangolins-thrown-a-lifeline-at-global-wildlife-summit-with-total-trade-ban>
,” said Brazil’s delegate, who said there would have been nothing left within 
three years without action.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd091a4e2faadc567ccd2f8b0e2d6ba2df33ae45c%2F0_323_5220_3133%2F5220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Furniture%20that%20destroys%20forests%3A%20crackdown%20on%20'rampant'%20trade%20in%20rosewood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Furniture%20that%20destroys%20forests%3A%20crackdown%20on%20%27rampant%27%20trade%20in%20rosewood&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fwildlife-summit-cracks-down-on-illegal-rosewood-trade%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd091a4e2faadc567ccd2f8b0e2d6ba2df33ae45c%2F0_323_5220_3133%2F5220.jpg>
 Hong Kong customs officials with confiscated Honduras rosewood logs, part of a 
92 tonne shipment found in four 40ft shipping containers originating in Mexico. 
Photograph: Alex Hofford/EPA 
The Cites summit also applied new protection to an African rosewood from 
another genus, known as Kosso, which grows in the dry forests of west Africa. 
It was barely exported in 2009 but exploitation has since soared and it is now 
is now the main rosewood timber imported by China. “The forests have been 
emptied,” said Benin’s delegate to Cites.

Some rosewood species can still be logged under the new rules, but will 
require permits that should only be granted if it is deemed sustainable. The 
rules could be revisited in the final Cites session next week, but this is 
unlikely. Rosewood is also used to make some musical instruments, such as 
guitars, but the new rules will not prevent musicians travelling with their 
instruments.

The new protections enter into force in 90 days, but need action by individual 
nations to have an impact. In 2013, Cites gave similarprotection to every 
rosewood species in Madagascar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/12/protection-madagascar-trees-logging-trade>
, where rampant logging was taking place.

However, the EIA says the Madagascan government has failed to carry out its 
enforcement commitments and, in May 2016, UN secretary general Ban Ki-moon 
called on Madagascar to end corruption and “fight the illegal trafficking of 
natural treasures”.
 