
Thousands of miles from the supermarkets in the west that they supply with 
cantaloupes, a community of Honduran melon plantation labourers say they are 
threatened with dismissal and destitution because they have tried to form a 
union at their Irish-owned company.

The workers – the vast majority of whom are women – are now appealing to US 
and European consumers to boycott products sold by the fruit multinational 
Fyffes until it improves working conditions and allows collective bargaining.


Their home is Choluteca, a municipality close to the border with Nicaragua 
that is one of the country’s poorest regions. For decades, it has also been an 
area where plantation owners have been able to hire, fire and violate labour 
regulations with impunity, thanks to support from local politicians and the 
absence of unions.


Zika threatens Honduras, already one of the world's most dangerous countries – 
in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/gallery/2016/mar/17/zika-threatens-honduras-worlds-most-dangerous-countries-in-pictures>
The level of economic development is apparent on a visit to the fields. We 
drive along a rutted dirt road in a car so rusted that the ground can be seen 
through holes in the floor. Most of the crops by the roadside are sugarcane 
until we reach Finca Santa Rosa, where the pale brown earth is striped with 
dozens of 100m-long plastic sheets that cover the muskmelons.


This is the property of one of three Fyffes subsidiaries – Melon Export, Soled 
and Suragro – in Choluteca. Together, they employ about 2,700 local people to 
clear the soil, plant seeds, spray herbicides and pesticides, turn over the 
melons to prevent sun scorching, and then harvest them.

Workers say they are usually paid less than the minimum wage of about $10 (£8) 
a day for long shifts under a burning sun. Choluteca is notorious as the 
hottest region ofHonduras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/honduras>. But, 
they complain, the company provides no water, no toilets and no medical 
provision if they feel unwell.

“We have to work even if we are sick,” says 65-year-old Maria Gómez, who has 
been with Melon Export for 28 years. “The conditions haven’t improved since I 
started.”


Fyffes says that the Choluteca operation is certified by Primus Labs, a food 
safety consultancy. “They check on the provision of toilets and water, etc. 
Medical provision is provided by an on-site medical team and if the problem is 
bad the worker is treated in a private clinic, such as the union member who is 
currently on long-term sick leave due to his diabetes and also the workers that 
were accidentally exposed to ground treatment chemicals.”

The work is seasonal, lasting only four to six months. Gómez’s situation is 
typical of many workers in developing countries trapped in poverty – with no 
pension or benefits on offer, the 65-year-old has no chance of retiring soon. 
She leaves home at 5am and returns at 6pm, and she has to bring her own 
equipment. “The company gives us nothing. If we don’t bring our own, they won’t 
let us work,” she says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039494402ce867a3e4bbd09f6c39e9b0b302cd9d%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fyffes%20melons%20at%20centre%20of%20labour%20abuse%20claims%20from%20Honduran%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fyffes%20melons%20at%20centre%20of%20labour%20abuse%20claims%20from%20Honduran%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F039494402ce867a3e4bbd09f6c39e9b0b302cd9d%2F0_0_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 Melon plantation workers with their union flag in Choluteca. Photograph: 
Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
The costs are significant for these workers: a hoe (about 100 lempiras, or 
$4), machete (30), sombrero (100), shoes (300), backpack (300), long-sleeved 
shirt (100) and towels (50) to ensure the neck is not exposed to the sun. That 
can amount to an entire week’s income. One union member shows her payslip for 
the previous week – 882 lempiras for a seven-day period. Others say they get 
about 4,400 lempiras each month, 30% less than the minimum wage.

Concerns about health come from the workers’ use of agrochemicals, including 
Gramoxone, which wasbanned by the EU in 2007 
<https://business-humanrights.org/en/eu-court-bans-syngentas-paraquat-herbicide-for-not-meeting-health-standards#c50621>
 but is unrestricted in Honduras. Workers say they are given no protective 
clothing to wear when using the chemical,which has well-documented health risks 
<https://chemicalwatch.com/44/eu-court-annuls-paraquat-herbicide-approval>. 
“They don’t even give us face masks,” Gomez claims.

In response to this allegation, the company told the Guardian that all 
necessary safety equipment is provided. “Primus Labs check that PPE, Personal 
Protective Equipment, is provided to workers. The problem with PPE is that 
workers are trained to use it but in the tropics it becomes uncomfortable and 
so the worker frequently does not wear it.”

Nevertheless, there are accidents. Seventeen female workers were hospitalised 
last December, after beingpoisoned by agrochemicals, according to the UK trade 
union GMB <http://www.gmb.org.uk/newsroom/fyffes-out-of-eti>. Fyffes said this 
was not because the workers were handling pesticides or chemicals, but because 
they were accidentally dropped off downwind of a treatment programme. The 
company said it had paid for treatment at a local clinic and had since reviewed 
procedures to prevent a repeat of the accident.


Workers have been trying to get more say in the way they are treated. To 
improve conditions, two years ago employees set up a branch of the agriculture 
workers’ union Stas. They say they faced opposition from the company and 
threats from the government, but despite this the union now has 107 members.


Among the first to join was Baltazar Cruz, who said he turned down a company 
incentive of 10,000 lempiras to quit the union’s board of directors. He is glad 
he persisted. Soon after joining, he lost several toes in a work-related 
accident. When he asked the company for support, they initially did nothing, he 
said, but the union helped him to secure medical treatment and a stipend.

“The union was very important for me. It’s difficult now, but without them, it 
would be worse,” he says.


Six workers say their employers were putting pressure on them not to join.


“They threaten not to hire union workers. It’s very cruel and oppressive,” 
says the general secretary, Moisés Sanchez Gómez. He says he was sacked this 
year because of his union role. “People here have given their life to the 
company and they get nothing back. I’ve worked for them for 20 years and all I 
have is the shirt on my back.”



 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a02497ebfe3b02f483cdda892117b8308f48b1%2F0_220_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Fyffes%20melons%20at%20centre%20of%20labour%20abuse%20claims%20from%20Honduran%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Fyffes%20melons%20at%20centre%20of%20labour%20abuse%20claims%20from%20Honduran%20workers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Ffyffes-melons-labour-abuse-claims-honduras-workers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a02497ebfe3b02f483cdda892117b8308f48b1%2F0_220_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A melon plantation in Honduras. Photograph: Jonathan Watts for the Guardian 
Fyffes says it is happy to engage with a union, as it does in other countries, 
but acknowledges difficulties in Honduras, saying that the union in Choluteca 
has not been properly constituted or confirmed by the ministry of labour. But 
the company denies it has fired union members.

“All seasonal workers are let go at the end of the season as is typical in 
seasonal agricultural businesses all over the world. These people will include 
union and non-union workers, men and women. It is not the case that the workers 
are sacked – they are on temporary contracts that expire. No permanent worker 
who is a union member has been sacked,” said a company spokesman.

Fyffes insists it provides all necessary safety equipment and refutes claims 
that it fails to pay workers the minimum wage, noting that an inspection of the 
2013-15 payrolls by the Honduran labour ministry found all wages and 
supplements were in line with national laws. Workers argue that the authorities 
are anxious to please the company, and that officials who take their side are 
punished.


The agriculture minister has voiced concern that Fyffes may leave Honduras if 
the workers persist with the union;press reports 
<http://www.freshplaza.com/article/162843/Honduras-Fyffes-confirms-closure-of-melon-firm>
 have also suggested that financial reasons might drive the company to 
neighbouring Guatemala.

Fyffes insists that it has no plans to leave the region, but the government’s 
concerns have left locals in a state of uncertainty. About 90% of the workers 
are women, many are single mothers, and others are elderly. If work for Fyffes 
dried up, Gómez estimates that 700 locals could become destitute. “The people 
here would be left with nothing,” he says.

It would take very little to push people here into abject poverty. One worker, 
Juan Antonio Ramirez, says he needs to pay his property tax or the interest on 
the penalty payment would increase and he would be pushed further into debt. 
Gómez says she would be unable to buy food – the job is essential because 
blight has ruined her small crop of corn.


She supports a boycott of Fyffes unless it stays and accepts the union. “I 
don’t think consumers realise what is going on here. I wish they could come and 
see our situation for themselves. People should not buy these products,” she 
says.

The workers are also fighting on other fronts. Union members have filed 
lawsuits to seek compensation for what they say is underpayment of their wages. 
But the odds are against them. Despite Fyffes’ assurances that it is not 
leaving the region, the town mayor has provoked further anxiety among the 
workers by saying that union organisers will be to blame if the company does 
leave. Patricia Riera, the union’s go-between with the national Festagro 
confederation, says the presidential delegate to the region has warned her that 
she should “stop messing around”.

This is a dangerous place to upset powerful people. Honduras is among the top 
three most murderous nations in the world. Human rights activists, 
environmentalists, journalists and union organisers are frequently targets for 
speaking out. Some cases cause an international uproar, such as thekilling this 
year of Goldman Prize-winning anti-dam campaigner Berta Cáceres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/03/honduras-berta-caceres-murder-enivronment-activist-human-rights>
. Many others killings go largely unreported. Last year, a university activist,
Hector Martinez Motiño, was gunned down in Choluteca 
<http://www.resumenlatinoamericano.org/2015/06/18/honduras-de-luto-asesinado-el-maestro-y-luchador-de-la-resistencia-hector-martinez-motino/>
.

Union members show a threatening note they say was put in their post box last 
month. “Desist from putting together unions or face the consequences … I warn 
you,” the note reads.

While there is no suggestion that Fyffes is behind any threats, the climate of 
fear in Honduras, and the well-documented dangers for activists of all kinds of 
speaking out, mean that Riera says she feels under great pressure and fears for 
her personal safety. She has asked for help from the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Human Rights, but turned down a government offer to provide 
her with a soldier as a guard, because she does not trust the army. When the 
Guardian visited the melon fields, she waited elsewhere in case she was seen by 
company guards.

With tension mounting, she has decided to move to another city for three 
months. It is the first time she has felt forced from her home. “I have to 
leave because of the situation,” she says. “It’s getting too dangerous so I 
need to keep a low profile for a while.”

On its website 
<http://www.fyffes.com/caring-and-sharing/fyffes-and-the-community>, Fyffes – 
which is also the world’sbiggest banana producer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/10/fyffes-merge-chiquita-banana-co-chiquitafyffes>
 – claims “good community relations are part of the work ethic”. It has 
previously come under a critical spotlight forlabour violations on its 
pineapple farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/11/fyffes-accused-disrespecting-workers-rights>
 in Costa Rica. But the company said it has a policy “to dialogue and engage 
with any properly constituted union and is working happily with union members 
in many parts of our business”.


Bert Schouwenburg, GMB international officer, said the concerns raised by the 
government that Fyffes will leave Honduras have created one of the worst 
situations he has seen in his many years in Latin America. “In an area of high 
unemployment where entire communities are blacklisted, this is tantamount to 
threatening them and their families with starvation,” he said. “Fyffes is an 
appalling employer that cares nothing for its workers who toil in boiling heat 
to produce the fruit that makes the company’s profits. They have no respect for 
domestic or international law governing workers’ rights and must be brought to 
book.”

GMB has called on the UK government-funded Ethical Trading Initiative 
<http://www.ethicaltrade.org/> (which is supposed to guarantee collective 
bargaining rights) to eject Fyffes, but so far the demand has fallen on deaf 
ears.

The Choluteca workers have also had support from the Danish union 3F and other 
international groups. In the last month, a delegation of US trade officials and 
labour rights activists from the US, Europe and Latin America visited the area 
and called on Fyffes’s subsidiaries to accept the union and improve working 
conditions.

But with members still being ostracised, union leaders are also seeking help 
from overseas consumers. “People could help us by boycotting products of Fyffes 
until they deal with this situation,” says Gómez.
 