
The G7 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/g7> nations have for the first time 
set a deadline for the ending most fossil fuel subsidies, saying government 
support for coal, oil and gas should end by 2025.

The leaders of the UK, US, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan and the 
European Union encouraged all countries to join them in eliminating 
“inefficient fossil fuel subsidies” within a decade.

“Given the fact that energy production and use account for around two-thirds 
of global greenhouse gas emissions, we recognise the crucial role that the 
energy sector has to play in combatting climate change,” said theleaders’ 
declaration, <http://www.mofa.go.jp/files/000160266.pdf> issued at the end 
their summit in Japan. The pledge first entered into G7 (then known as G8) 
declarations in 2009 but has until now lacked a firm timeline.

Shelagh Whitley, a research fellow at the Overseas Development Institute, 
called it an “historic day” but said 2020 was a more appropriate date if 
governments were serious about their commitments to the global climate deal 
agreed in Paris in December.

Across the G7, subsidies are already falling, assisted by falling commodity 
prices. A notableexception is the UK, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/12/uk-breaks-pledge-to-become-only-g7-country-increase-fossil-fuel-subsidies>
 which increased subsidies by opening up new tax breaks for North Sea oil 
producers. Japan has been criticised for funding new coal projects, bothat home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/17/japans-coal-fired-plants-to-cause-thousands-of-early-deaths-greenpeace>
 andabroad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/02/japan-and-south-korea-top-list-of-biggest-coal-financiers-by-export-credit>
.

“We already see [some in] the G7 going in the wrong direction since Paris. 
Just because they are saying this [about fossil fuel subsidies], it’s not afait 
accompli,” said Whitley. Canada also recently extended 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.ca/2016/03/24/oil-patch-woes-give-federal-liberals-cold-feet-on-cutting-fossil-fuel-subsidies_n_9535232.html>
 some subsidies for natural gas.

The G7 joins the leaders of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/21/oecd-nations-200bn-subsidisies-fossil-fuels-climate-change>
 andthe World Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/13/fossil-fuel-subsidies-say-burn-more-carbon-world-bank-president>
, who have previously called for an end to assistance for fossil fuel projects.

The statement did not define precisely what the G7 consider to be a subsidy. 
The word “inefficient” in the G7 text indicates subsidies that distort energy 
markets. TheOECD estimates 
<http://www.oecd.org/environment/support-to-fossil-fuels-remains-high-and-the-time-is-ripe-for-change.htm>
 that this type of support for fossil fuels within its member states is 
$160-200bn (£109-136bn) each year.

But when the cost of damage from pollution and climate change is factored in, 
the International Monetary Fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/18/fossil-fuel-companies-getting-10m-a-minute-in-subsidies-says-imf>
 has estimated that support increases to a staggering $5.3tn a year, or $10m 
per minute. This is more than the total global spend on human health.

The OECD approach to measuring subsidies is likely to be the yardstick applied 
by the G7. The US and China recentlyasked the OECD 
<https://www.oecd.org/g20/topics/energy-environment-green-growth/> to oversee a 
peer review of each other’s subsidy programme.

Whitley said another significant change from the G7 was the excision of a past 
phrase that focused on subsidies for the “consumption” of fuels. She said this 
meant the G7 could target subsidies for exploration as well, not just the end 
use.
 