
It’s the time of year for students to promise themselves a new start – 
traditionally they’re taking a hard look at their personal habits right now, 
promising themselves no more food binges, fewer late nights and more punctual 
essays.

But how about the state the rest of the world is is in? You could consider 
putting something good into a community.

Emma Jacobs: working on a kibbutz in the Israeli desert

For my generation, rising global temperatures 
<http://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2016/climate-trends-continue-to-break-records/>
 are the norm and a clear threat to our future. It doesn’t help that the US now 
has a president-elect who claims that climate change is a“Chinese hoax” 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en-gb>. So 
it is important that we explore alternative, sustainable ways to live. That’s 
why I’m spending my gap year learning how to farm in the desert and recycle poo.

Studying is stressful – work experience is where the real learning happens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/28/university-holidays-more-important-than-term-time-work-experience-cv>
Yeah, I know, gap yahs <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eKFjWR7X5dU> have been 
roundly mocked as the cliched preserve of those privileged youths who just want 
to “discover themselves”. Butstudies 
<http://thecurrent-online.com/opinions/how-taking-a-gap-year-can-help-you-find-focus/>
 have shown they can be good for personal development and teach skills that are 
beneficial at university and beyond.

So, along with 12 other teenagers, I’m spending a month on Kibbutz Lotan 
<http://kibbutzlotan.com/?lang=en> in the middle of the desert in southern 
Israel. We are a living social experiment: a self-sustaining, ecological 
“village” . My home is a dome made of mud, clay, straw and a waterproofing 
layer of turpentine and recycled cooking oil, which I share with three others. 
It’s a modern hut with a fan, plugs and even air-con. The village has compost 
toilets, solar showers, a sustainable kitchen with biogas and a 
bike-cum-washing machine that provides a work-out.

It’s a massive change from the lives that most of us lead back in London. 
We’ve replaced Starbucks and shellac nails with shovels; it’s taken some time 
to get over the culture shock.

Our days start with an 8 am wake-up: horribly early for me, but late for the 
real kibbutz workers who rise as early as 1 am to milk the cows. We start the 
chores before breakfast: cleaning the kitchen, loos and showers, and “feeding” 
the biogas with yesterday’s food scraps. After breakfast in the communal dining 
hall, we have permaculture and ecology lessons about the ethics of genetically 
modified crops, maintaining compost heaps, caring for the animals and keeping 
morale up throughout the long, hot days. We shovel goat and cow manure and 
build mud walls for the kibbutz kindergarten.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cbd11eb63787db83d426e37b564b48423bad8c%2F0_56_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gap%20year%20stories%3A%20getting%20a%20taste%20of%20communal%20living&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gap%20year%20stories%3A%20getting%20a%20taste%20of%20communal%20living&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50cbd11eb63787db83d426e37b564b48423bad8c%2F0_56_3088_1853%2F3088.jpg>
 Emma Jacobs (middle) builds a mud hut. Photograph: Emma Jacobs 
Working with animal dung is weirdly liberating for us townies. “Being on 
kibbutz has made us feel less materialistic,” says participant Max Klass. He’s 
never worked with animals before but says getting up close to the cows and 
goats is bringing out his “rough and ready side”.

A simpler, more sustainable, ecologically ethical lifestyle is an achievable 
feat if you start on a small scale, adds participant Dan Apter. “People don’t 
know that shovelling shit is such fun.”

I’ve found there’s more to the kibbutz experience than just an ecological 
education. We’re learning to live a truly communal life. It can be tough, but 
living in an “intentional community” feels like valuable training for 
university and a life of work.

Yet even in this utopia, the books have to balance. Like many kibbutzim 
nowadays, this one has beenprivatised 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/d50b3c20-0a19-11df-8b23-00144feabdc0.html?ft_site=falcon&desktop=true>
 to ensure its economic survival. But it is still a place where members debate 
issues such as whether it’s ethical to maintain arefet (dairy), the extent of 
communal responsibility, and how to fairly distribute resources.



Students: is it really a good idea to live with your friends?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/10/students-is-it-really-a-good-idea-to-live-with-your-friends>
This time next year, I’ll be at Leeds University. I may not need to pick 
dates, farm or manage a compost loo there, but I’ll take the broader lessons 
that I’m learning on the kibbutz with me. I know it will affect the decisions I 
make about all sorts of things, from which products to buy to how to use 
transport. And it’s given me all kinds of ideas for the future.

Sam Hickford: volunteering in a Catholic refuge in London
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe144f9b28379d0fbe87fc4509f6a4ac286fbc0%2F0_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gap%20year%20stories%3A%20getting%20a%20taste%20of%20communal%20living&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gap%20year%20stories%3A%20getting%20a%20taste%20of%20communal%20living&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F02%2Fgap-year-stories-getting-a-taste-of-communal-living%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfe144f9b28379d0fbe87fc4509f6a4ac286fbc0%2F0_0_1000_600%2F1000.jpg>
 Giuseppe Conlon House, London. Photograph: Sam Hickford 
My new home is the Giuseppe Conlon House 
<http://www.londoncatholicworker.org/gchouse.html>, a former Roman Catholic 
church in north London. It is a well-preserved Edwardian building with a crypt, 
a confessional and an austere church hall. Nowadays it is the host of an 
intentional community run byLondon Catholic Worker 
<http://www.londoncatholicworker.org/>, and a house of hospitality for refugees.

Practically speaking, this involves a handful of volunteers living 
shoulder-to-shoulder with 20 asylum seekers, who are treated as guests. They 
live here as they pursue their asylum claims, which can take a long time.

The old confessional is now used to store donated tins and vegetables. The 
crypt, which I like to imagine once housed the bones of saints, now contains 
two rooms where people sleep. The church hall is a multi-purpose living space 
where everyone sits for candlelit suppers.

I’m about a month into my gap year now, having committed to a minimum of three 
months here. Perhaps the difference between this and more typical volunteering 
schemes is the authentic sense of community. We do everything as a group, 
regularly gathering for morning and night prayer in the hall among the bin bags 
filled with donated Manchester United jerseys and Queens Park Rangers boxer 
shorts.

Lots of organisations run projects like this: you can contact Diggers and 
Dreamers <http://www.diggersanddreamers.org.uk/>, Eurotopia 
<http://gen.ecovillage.org/en/eurotopia> or WWOOF <http://www.wwoof.org.uk/> if 
you’re interested. I live here for free: meals and lodging are provided as long 
as you pull your weight with the chores. I’m given weekly volunteering expenses 
of £30, which allow me to meet up with friends for the odd drink.

You meet a few characters at a place like this: climate change activists, 
Passionist priests <https://thepassionists.org/> and Servite nuns 
<http://www.servitesisters.org/> frequently pop in to chat and sometimes stay 
for a night or two. This creates a warmth that contrasts with the anonymity of 
the affluent neighbourhood outside.

Life in the community is unlike anything I’ve experienced before. There’s 
little privacy. My room contains a second bed that is usually occupied by 
another guest. The sheer number of people coming and going is difficult to 
adapt to. You’re confronted with your personal flaws when you’ve got company at 
all times – in my case, a tendency to be petty about minor things.

Several times, I’ve needed to invent an excuse to go to a private place in 
some unused part of the house. One of these is the reading room, a cold, dank 
space which no one uses in the winter, where I freeze in solitude for a bit, 
just to get away from the commotion.

But it does make every day exciting. Even at breakfast each morning, I’m bound 
to meet someone new. Many of my friends elsewhere – graduates who now work in 
London or other cities – say their busy lives don’t allow them time to stop and 
make friends, or get to know the area they live in. I feel lucky not to have 
these problems right now.

I think my time here is preparing me for my studies at UCL next year. I am 
learning interpersonal skills, such as managing conflict and counselling, as 
well as solid practical skills: I cook for lots of people and I can deseed a 
donated pomegranate in no time. In many ways, the chaotic life here is like 
that of a student house – with just a few more rowdy housemates.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 