
Some victims of child sexual exploitation are still being described as 
“promiscuous” or said to have made choices when found in abusive situations, an
Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> report says.

The watchdog found improvements in cooperation between police, social care and 
health professionals to protect vulnerable children, but said some officials 
had used language that could leave victims feeling they were responsible for 
their own abuse, while others had an “inadequate” understanding of the signs of 
child sexual exploitation.

The report says a small number of police and social care professionals are 
still using victim-blaming language, two years after a damning report by Prof 
Alexis Jay revealed that in Rotherham alone at least1,400 children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/26/rotherham-children-sexually-abused-report>
 had been subjected to sexual exploitation over an 18-year period.

It states: “In the worst examples the term ‘promiscuous’ was used in relation 
to a clear case of sexual exploitation; the rape of a 15-year-old was described 
as ‘consensual’; and the age gap between a victim and perpetrator was described 
as ‘small’ when the perpetrator was 23 and the child 15. Young people were 
described as ‘making choices’ when they were found in situations of harm or 
risk.”

Any child can be sexually exploited, whether they fit the stereotypes or not
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/apr/04/child-sexual-exploitation-stereotypes-rotherham>
Ofsted along with the Care Quality Commission, HM Inspectorate of Constabulary 
and HM Inspectorate of Probation looked at how the police, probation services, 
youth offending teams, health services and local safeguarding children boards 
dealt with child sexual exploitation in central Bedfordshire, Croydon, 
Liverpool, Oxfordshire, and south Tyneside.

Inspectors found that agencies were better at tackling child sexual 
exploitation, with systematic communication between agencies improving the help 
victims received.

But gaps remain, according to the report. Police did not always identify 
children who ran away from home as being at high risk of exploitation, risk 
assessments were inconsistent and interviews with returning children were not 
always carried out.

The inspectors also found that exploited children were still sometimes forced 
to tell the story of their abuse to several different adults. In one case a 
child had five separate appointments in one week with different professionals, 
risking “the child feeling overwhelmed and disengaging from those who were 
trying to support them,” the report states. In some cases, it says, children 
are waiting too long for support.

Matthew Reed, chief executive of the Children’s Society, said children who 
went missing were still experiencing poor or patchy responses. “Improvements 
are being made and strategies drawn up to tackle the sexual exploitation of 
children. But we know from our work with vulnerable young people across the 
country that many are still being let down,” he said.

Reed called for all children who go missing to be classed as high risk. “When 
a child goes missing it’s vital that authorities take action without delay to 
make sure they are safe and work out what needs to be done to stop them running 
away again. Instead too many children are lumped into a low-risk category that 
dismisses their experience as a temporary absence and makes it harder to 
protect them from harm.”

The report, Time to listen – a joined-up response to child sexual exploitation 
and missing children 
<http://www.gov.uk/government/publications/joint-inspections-of-child-sexual-exploitation-and-missing-children-february-to-august-2016>
, also says not all frontline healthcare staff are able to identify the signs 
of sexual exploitation, and in “too many areas the health community has 
insufficient resources”.

Examples in the report suggest abusers may be changing their modus operandi. 
In Croydon, a dedicated team of child sexual exploitation experts discovered 
that abusers had been taking victims to private residences rather than hotels 
and avoiding taxis, and online grooming was becoming more prevalent.

Rise in child sexual abuse cases threatens other policing, warns chair of 
commissioners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/01/rise-in-child-sexual-abuse-cases-threatens-other-areas-of-policing-warns-chair-of-commissioners>
This may be in response to police crackdowns. In Oxfordshire, a “hotel watch” 
scheme informs hotels about what to watch out for, while in south Tyneside 94% 
of taxi drivers have been trained in identifying child sexual exploitation as a 
condition of receiving a licence, and reports to police from drivers increased 
53% between 2014-15.

Eleanor Schooling, Ofsted’s national director for social care, said that when 
frontline staff took their roles seriously, worked together and built 
relationships with children, child sexual exploitation could be dealt with 
“sensitively and successfully”.

“We have found that strong leadership makes a huge difference. Those areas 
where there was clear direction and a collective will to tackle this issue did 
well by their vulnerable children,” she said. “Practice needs to improve. Local 
authorities, police and health services need to gain a better understanding of 
why children run away from home. We need to understand why the current system 
of return home interviews is not working if we really want to help children who 
go missing.”

Wendy Williams, HM Inspector of Constabulary, said the response of police had 
to be more consistent. “We found variation between, and sometimes within, 
forces as to how children were supported. This needs to improve to ensure 
children receive the support they need,” she said.

Prof Ursula Gallagher, of the Care Quality Commission, said the “overwhelming 
concern” raised by the review was that “understanding of the signs of child 
sexual exploitation by key frontline healthcare professionals is inadequate. 
The healthcare system must recognise and act on its safeguarding 
responsibilities in this area. If it does not, children and young people will 
continue to be let down by services that should have their best interests at 
heart.”

An NSPCC spokesman said while improvements were welcomed, good practice had to 
be followed in every area of the country. “This worrying report exposes a 
patchy care system where all too often agencies are not working together, some 
frontline staff don’t understand what child sexual exploitation is, and 
professionals aren’t always sharing information,” he said. “When a child’s 
safety hangs in the balance, it is crucial that agencies all come together to 
catch them before they slip through the net.”
 