
The charity behind the proposed garden bridge across the Thames in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> has warned that any more hold-ups to 
the controversial and much-delayed project could see it having to be scrapped 
altogether.

While the Garden Bridge Trust <https://www.gardenbridge.london/> insists it 
remains confident the tree and plant-filled pedestrian crossing will be built, 
it has conceded that the delays have affected fundraising and that any more 
significant obstacles could prove terminal.

It was ultimately up to the charity’s trustees, who include the project’s 
originator, the actor Joanna Lumley, to demonstrate the money committed – £60m 
of which comes from taxpayers – was being used prudently, its executive 
director said.

London's garden bridge: the end of the road?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2015/oct/01/london-garden-bridge-lambeth-council-tfl-funding-end-of-road>
“The trustees at every point of the way have to decide whether the project is 
viable, and if it’s prudent to keep going and spending money,” Bee Emmott told 
the Guardian.

“If at any point the hurdles become actual blockages that we can’t remove, 
then we have to reassess whether the project is ultimately viable or not.” 
Emmott added that she remained “confident that we can make progress”.

 Her comments emphasise the seriousness of the delays to the controversial 
bridge, designed by Thomas Heatherwick and intended to run 367metres from South 
Bank to Temple in central London.


Construction was originally due to begin in spring 2016, but a series of 
problems have forced the trust to put contractors on hold, pushing up projected 
costs by £10m to £185m.

Part of the delays are logistical, including complex and ongoing negotiations 
with Coin Street, a community housing trust which holds a long lease on the 
site where the south end of the bridge would land, and must grant permission 
before any work can begin.

The political climate has also changed. The decision to give the bridge £60m 
of public money during a period of austerity, split between the Treasury and 
Transport for London (TfL), was taken whenGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> and Boris Johnson, both 
big fans of the project, were respectively chancellor and London mayor.


Both have now moved on. Johnson’s Labour successor, Sadiq Khan, pledged that 
no more public money would be spent on the bridge and hasasked the Labour MP 
Dame Margaret Hodge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/22/sadiq-khan-sets-up-inquiry-into-garden-bridge-projects-use-of-public-money>
 to examine whether it provides value for money.

Of the £125m that the Garden Bridge Trust needs to raise itself privately, it 
has so fair achieved little over half, with £69m committed.

While Emmott said she was confident the rest would come, she conceded that 
fundraising had proved difficult amid the delays and the unknown timetable of 
Hodge’s investigation.

“It’s very difficult to get new funds committed while you’ve got that level of 
uncertainty,” she said. “We hope that the Hodge review will be concluded soon 
to remove this.”

The bridge has received a mixed reaction since the £60m was committed to it in 
2013. At one point Lambeth council on the south side of the project withdrew 
support, only changing its mind when £20m of the TfL grantwas turned into a 
long-term loan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/02/london-garden-bridge-funding-agreement-lambeth-council-public-money>
.

London’s garden bridge would benefit only the rich | Giles Fraser | Loose canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2016/sep/22/london-garden-bridge-regeneration-bolton-loose-canon>
While supporters say it will more than pay for itself as a driver of tourism 
and a transport link, critics argue it is in an over-crowded section of London 
already well served by bridges.

They also question why taxpayers’ money should go on a link that will be 
privately run and canset its own rules and close at night and for corporate 
events 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/06/garden-bridge-mobile-phone-signals-tracking-london>
.

Paradoxically, the one thing that might save the project is that so much 
public money has already been spent on it. Khan has argued it would cost more 
to cancel the scheme than to go ahead with it.

Emmott said the coming few months were very important for the bridge’s future. 
She placed much of her faith on similar arguments, saying that Hodge should see 
the value for money argument in pushing ahead.

The trust has already spent £36m of the public funds on pre-construction work, 
she said. “If the project terminates at this point we could spend up to an 
additional £9m covering our termination liabilities.

“Value for money, from a pure numbers perspective, would be to deliver the 
project and get the full benefits. The Garden Bridge Trust pays back the TfL 
loan and £20m-plus in VAT. The maths of it is where the value for money 
argument lies.”
 