
It had been three years since I’d met up with my first boyfriend – let’s call 
him Steven. When he walked into a Brixton pub in June, it was a shock. I’d 
first met him well over a decade ago, and back then he was sporty, a bit of a 
health freak: other than the usual occasional student alcohol binge, relatively 
strait-laced. This Steven had dilated pupils, red marks on his arms, and his 
head jerked erratically as he spoke manically. He was addicted to crystal meth, 
and had an abusive relationship with other drugs and alcohol.

Olly Alexander: 'You start to think you're alone and crazy but help is out 
there'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/26/years-years-olly-alexander-singer-mental-health-illness-treatment>
Steven’s story is all too revealing about a silent health crisis afflicting 
gay men. The words “health crisis” in conjunction with “gay men” normally 
conjures up theHIV catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/a-generation-of-artists-were-wiped-out-by-aids-and-we-barely-talk-about-it-robert-mapplethorpe>
 that decimated the gay and bisexual community in the 1980s. In the developed 
world, HIV isno longer the death sentence it once was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/nov/17/hiv-is-no-longer-always-a-death-sentence>
, although the treatment can cause health complications, and in the UK an 
estimated6,500 men who have sex with men live with undiagnosed infections 
<http://www.nat.org.uk/HIV-in-the-UK/HIV-Statistics/Latest-UK-statistics/Men-who-have-sex-with-men.aspx>
. A far greater menace is mental distress – impossible to disentangle from a 
society riddled with homophobia – and the drug and alcohol abuse that can 
follow.

Steven has been clean for 66 days, has enthusiastically taken to treatment and 
volunteers at his local support group. But why – like so many gay men – did he 
succumb to addiction? When Steven came out, at the age of 15 years old, his 
parents drove him to a pseudo-clinic run by fundamentalist Christians to be 
cured of his homosexuality. But he doesn’t speak with bitterness. “I know they 
love me and they were doing the best they could,” he says. “They didn’t know 
what I needed, so they looked to their own experience, a culture that taught 
that if you were gay it was a disaster. You’d be lonely, you’d get Aids, you’d 
find life difficult. They felt they were trying to support me.”

The problem was far broader than his family, though. Coming out as a teenager 
in the early 00s meant almost inevitable bullying at school, a lack of 
awareness of where to find positive role models, and homophobic voices 
amplified by the media. “Taken together, it meant I was isolated and thought 
that I was the problem.” Internalising that shame at such a young age inflicts 
long-term damage – and explains much of his current turmoil.

It’s an issue covered by the former Attitude editor Matthew Todd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/05/matthew-todd-growing-up-gay-trapped-inside-cultural-straitjacket>
 in his utterly brilliant – and disturbing – recent bookStraight Jacket 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/straight-jacket.html>. He identifies a number 
of problems that most gay men, if they were honest, would at least recognise: 
“Disproportionately high levels of depression, self-harm and suicide; not 
uncommon problems with emotional intimacy … and now a small but significant 
subculture of men who are using, some injecting, seriously dangerous drugs, 
which despite accusations of hysteria from the gatekeepers of the gay PR 
machine, are killing too many people.” He lists a disturbing number of gay 
friends, acquaintances and people in the public eye who struggled with 
addictions and took their own lives.

The statistics are indeed alarming. According to Stonewall research in 2014, 
52% of young LGBT people report they have, at some point, self-harmed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/25711600/higher-suicide-risk-for-young-gay-and-lesbian-people>
; a staggering 44% have considered suicide; and 42% have sought medical help 
for mental distress. Alcohol and drug abuse are often damaging forms of 
self-medication to deal with this underlying distress. A recent study by the 
LGBT Foundation found thatdrug use among LGB people is seven times higher than 
the general population 
<http://lgbt.foundation/policy-research/part-of-the-picture/>, binge drinking 
is twice as common among gay and bisexual men, and substance dependency is 
significantly higher.

Why? As Todd puts it: “It is a shame with which we were saddled as children, 
to which we continue to be culturally subjected.” The problem gay people have 
isn’t their sexuality, but rather society’s attitude to it. It is “our 
experience of growing up in a society that still does not fully accept that 
people can be anything other than heterosexual and cisgendered [born into the 
physical gender you feel you are]”. There’s the weight of centuries of hatred 
and bigotry, with legally enforced discrimination only dismantled in very 
recent times. All gay and bisexual men – as well as women and trans people – 
grow up hearing homophobic and transphobic abuse. “Gay” is a word used in the 
playground as the repository forall that is bad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/garethmcleanblog/2008/jan/24/soscottmillsdoesntthink>
. Popular films and TV programmes have largely lacked sympathetic, well-rounded 
LGBT characters, often resorting to crude homophobic tropes. Even the inability 
to hold hands with someone you love in almost any public space is a reminder 
that a depressingly large chunk of the population still rejects you. Coming out 
– a process that isn’t a one-off, but a wearingly repetitive event in different 
contexts – involves constant stress. And for those who think it’s all 
inevitably getting better,since the EU referendum, there’s been a 147% rise in 
homophobic hate crimes 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/brexit-hate-crime-hatred-homophobia-lgbt-147-per-cent-rise-double-attacks-on-gays-lesbians-a7352411.html>
.

Society has damaged – and continues to damage – LGBT people. That’s not to 
overstate the case (and focusing on my experience as a gay man): being gay does 
not mean being in a state of misery. As Todd puts it, there are lots of 
contented, successful gay people, andprogress in recent times has been 
astonishing, including equal marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gay-marriage>. Coming out is like coming 
up for air for the vast majority of LGBT people: the alternative is so much 
more miserable. But this is a health crisis that is not spoken about enough: 
the toxic combination of mental distress, drugs and alcohol abuse.

Breaking the taboo over the mental health crisis among Britain's gay men
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2010/aug/22/gay-attitude-depression-isolation>
It is a crisis that is not being dealt with. Despite the government’s promises 
to grant mental and physical health parity of esteem, last yearMind reported an 
8% real terms drop in mental health services funding since 2010 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/news/mental-health-services-cut-by-8-per-cent/#.WAeOGdfd79J>
. Cuts, according to health thinktank theKing’s Fund, have contributed to 
“widespread evidence of poor-quality care”. 
<http://www.kingsfund.org.uk/press/press-releases/mental-health-services-patient-care>
 Many LGBT services in particular have been devastated: as theTUC pointed out 
in 2014, they were “already coping on a shoestring. Some have faced drops in up 
to 50% 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/equality-issues/lesbian-gay-bisexual-and-transgender-rights/lgbt-services-suffering-result-austerity>
.”

Because of our internalised shame, LGBT people often find it difficult to talk 
about the problems we collectively face. The danger is always of reinforcing 
the damaging stereotypes that have already caused so much distress. But we have 
to confront a crisis that is damaging health and taking people’s lives. Society 
has to take responsibility, too: it is its continued refusal to treat LGBT 
people as equals that is causing so much pain. If Theresa May’s government 
really does want to prove it isn’t just a pound-shop Ukip tribute band, perhaps 
it should take this issue seriously and review David Cameron’s cuts. The lives 
of LGBT people depend on it.

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the 
National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis 
support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countriescan be 
found here <http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 