
About 160,000 UK households are to face higher energy bills in the new year 
after the collapse ofGB Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/27/gb-energy-supplier-folds-blaming-rising-prices>
.

The three year-old gas and power supplier, which pulled in customers with 
cheaper tariffs, blamed “swift and significant increases in energy prices” for 
its failure. The company’s demise creates uncertainty for its account holders, 
but they are not at risk of being cut off as the industry regulatorOfgem 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/consumers/household-gas-and-electricity-guide/extra-help-energy-services/ofgem-safety-net-if-your-energy-supplier-goes-out-business>
 is expected to have brokered a move to an alternative supplier.

“It is with regret that we are informing you that GB Energy Supply is no 
longer trading,” said its managing director, Luke Watson, on the company’s 
website <https://www.gbenergysupply.co.uk/>. “Due to swift and significant 
increases in energy prices over recent months and, as a small supplier our 
inability to forward buy energy to allow us to access the best possible 
wholesale prices, means that the position of the business has become untenable.”

Budget energy supplier folds blaming rising prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/27/gb-energy-supplier-folds-blaming-rising-prices>
Customers are no longer able to log on to GB Energy’s website to access their 
accounts and some took to social media concerned they would lose credit 
balances built up over the summer months. ButOfgem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem> advised account holders to sit 
tight and wait to hear from their new supplier on how they would get their 
money back.

“There is no need to worry as we will ensure your energy supplies are safe,” 
said Rachel Fletcher, Ofgem’s senior partner for consumers and competition. 
“Ofgem are actively working with the industry to ensure your transition to a 
new supplier is as smooth as possible. While this process is under way our 
advice is not to do anything as you can continue to rely on your energy supply 
as normal.”

The government has sought to increase competition in the retail market 
dominated by the “big six” suppliers – British Gas, E.ON, Npower, EDF, Scottish 
Power and SSE . There are now 41 companies competing for British households, 
but the business models of the smaller entrants are now being tested as 
electricity and gas prices start to rise –partly because of the devaluation of 
sterling since the Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/winners-losers-sterling-plunge-brexit>
 vote.

In an interview earlier this year, Watson, a former submariner who worked in 
sales before moving into the energy sector, said it had been fortunate that 
wholesale costs had been low over the past couple of years.

“I think the challenge for independent suppliers will come when there is 
volatility in the wholesale market,” he told the trade magazine Utility Week in 
June. “That is when the hedging strategy comes into play and we are very 
conscious of that ... It is a risk and we are monitoring prices three times a 
day.”

GB Energy previously traded as Altitude Energy Supply from 2013 to 2014 and 
made a loss of £630,018 on sales of £22.2m in 2015. The company operated from 
Preston and had a staff of less than 20 despite its large customer base.

Ofgem will move GB Energy customers on to what is known as a “deemed” 
contract. The watchdog says on its website these are usually more expensive: 
“The supplier takes on more risk, as customers are moved to a new supplier 
quickly without the usual background credit checks. So, they also charge more, 
to make up for this extra risk.”

It is then up to GB Energy customers to ensure they are on the best tariff or 
switch to a new supplier. But with wholesale prices up this year it is unlikely 
they will be able to find a deal similar to their existing plan.
 