
On Saturday domestic gas and electricity supplier GB Energy announced it was 
ceasing to trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/gb-energys-collapse-to-hit-160000-households-with-higher-bills>
. The move leaves 160,000 customers in limbo. What happens next for them – and 
rest of us

Why has GB Energy collapsed?


None of the small “challenger” energy firms that supply gas and electricity 
actually produce it – instead they buy it on the wholesale market, add a 
margin, and sell it on to customers, usually via one of the price comparison 
websites.

GB Energy's collapse to hit 160,000 households with higher bills
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/gb-energys-collapse-to-hit-160000-households-with-higher-bills>
Since launching three years ago, GB Energy had been offering some of the 
cheapest tariffs in order to grab market share. It gathered 160,000 customers 
relatively quickly.

The problem is that the management were caught out by wholesale prices rises. 
The company, which Guardian Money had expressed reservationsabout this time 
last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/24/energy-giants-lower-bills-dual-fuel-tariff-big-six-winter>
, was not forward-buying enough of its energy and was therefore vulnerable to 
wholesale price rises. Ultimately, it was probably supplying energy to some 
households for less that it was paying its suppliers.

Many in the industry have been predicting that a small supplier would go bust 
in exactly this way. It remains to be seen whether any other small suppliers 
with similar business models will follow suit.

What happens if I am a GB Energy customer?

Nothing yet – your lights and central heating will continue to come on as if 
nothing had happened. Behind the scenes, the energy regulatorOfgem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ofgem> is currently in negotiations to 
appoint what is known as a “supplier of last resort”, a company to which all GB 
Energy’s customers will be moved en-mass, probably sometime next week.

Last month the regulator rather fortuitously announced it had put in place a 
safety net 
<https://www.ofgem.gov.uk/consumers/household-gas-and-electricity-guide/extra-help-energy-services/ofgem-safety-net-if-your-energy-supplier-goes-out-business>
 to guarantee that any customer who had built up a big credit balance with 
their supplier won’t lose out.

Domestic energy customers can often be hundreds of pounds in credit at this 
time of the year, ahead of the peak winter usage period when bills are much 
higher. Ofgem is looking to appoint a supplier that will in effect honour any 
credit that GB Energy customers have built up – in return for effectively 
scooping 160,000 customers.

Budget energy supplier folds blaming rising prices
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/27/gb-energy-supplier-folds-blaming-rising-prices>
This looks a tall order given the liability – if half its customers were £300 
in credit this equates to £24m. If no supplier will take on the liability, then 
a levy will be placed on all suppliers to fund this sum, equal to around £1 a 
household.

Affected GB Energy customers who have not yet taken meter readings should do 
so. Ofgem will manage the transfer behind the scenes, and has confirmed that no 
customer will lose out as a result of this.

Will GB Energy customers’ bills rise as a result?

Almost certainly. The deal to which GB customers will be moved is unlikely to 
be one of the cheapest on the market. Most likely it will be on the chosen 
energy supplier’s standard tariff, which typically cost around £1,100 a year 
for average consumption – around £250 a year more than the cheapest deals out 
there.

There is nothing to stop customers then moving supplier from Ofgem’s chosen 
firm, but the advice is to wait until the “last resort” switch has taken place, 
particularly if you have a credit balance as you could lose that by switching 
directly now.

I’m with a small supplier – is mine at risk?

It could be. The challenger suppliers do well when wholesale prices fall, but 
struggle when the opposite happens. The last supplier to go bust was 
Energy4Business, which collapsed in 2008. In the past few years wholesales 
prices have been on the side of the small suppliers, but over the past 12 
months they have gone up around 50%, albeit from a very low base, and there 
will be some very nervous finance directors at a number of smaller suppliers 
this morning.

Collective switching: can clubbing together lower your energy bills?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/17/collective-switching-schemes-lower-energy-bills-best-tariffs>
Seasoned industry expert Doug Stewart, who runs supplier Green Energy UK, says 
he fears the collapse could be the first of many, if there is a harsh winter. 
“The closure of GB Energy is as a result of loss-making tariffs coming home to 
roost. You can’t make losses without having cash to cover them, and when that 
cash is coming from upfront payments made by customers, the whole pack of cards 
comes tumbling down when growth slows or stops. There’s nothing left in the 
bank to pay the creditors, and the customers’ money is all gone,” he says.

Should I switch supplier to a ‘big six’ operator?

Technically there is no reason to avoid the challenger suppliers, as if yours 
goes bust, you as a consumer won’t lose out. That said, lots of switching 
households will be even less keen now to switch to a firm they have never heard 
of. The cheapest current average dual fuel deals cost around £850, but few 
buyers will have heard of the suppliers.

With the cheapest big six supplier tariffs now costing around £880-£890, many 
buyers will decide that the extra cost of moving to an established firm could 
be worth paying.
 