
Back once again

Gee Vaucher created Oh America for experimental hip-hop group Tackhead 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Friendly_as_a_Hand_Grenade>. Recently, though, 
this gouache has enjoyed fresh celebrity, pinging around social media in the 
wake of Trump’s election, andeven gracing the cover of the Daily Mirror 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/gee-vauchers-artwork-oh-america-9231864>.

No more heroes

Vaucher isn’t an obvious people’s favourite. The artist-activist is a purist 
cult figure, whose achievements includefounding a radical open-door commune in 
Essex <http://thequietus.com/articles/10865-gee-vaucher-crass-art-interview> 
with creative partnerPenny Rimbaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/nov/16/penny-rimbaud-crass-book> and 
being a member ofpunk band Crass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2010/oct/24/crass-penny-rimbaud-steve-ignorant>
.

Life through a lens

A political illustrator for the New York Times and New York magazine in the 
1970s, Vaucher’s paintings often take a photo-montage approach:artwork for a 
Rolling Stone review recast the Bee Gees in Sgt Pepper’s style 
<https://www.creativereview.co.uk/introspective-gee-vaucher-crass-trump/> but 
with their faces peeling off to reveal a grey nothing, while the decaying 
street fromCrass’s The Feeding Of The 5000 
<https://crass.bandcamp.com/album/the-feeding-of-the-5000-2> layered 
housewives, children and soldiers plucked from news and adverts.

Last laugh?

In its recent context, it would seem to be an unequivocal thumbs down on the 
state of the States. Yet, ever sensitive to her images’ mutability, Vaucher has 
pointed out that it’s not impossible to imagine another context where the 
statue might be having a giggle behind her hands.

Gee Vaucher: Introspective, Firstsite, Colchester, to Sunday 19 Feb 
<http://www.firstsite.uk/whats-on/gee-vaucher-introspective/>

 * This article was corrected on 16 January 2017. Vaucher worked for the New 
York magazine, not the New Yorker, in the 1970s.
 