
More than 18 years ago, George Michael  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/25/george-michael-pop-superstar-dies-at-53>
was famouslyouted for a “lewd act” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/dec/05/george-michael-interview-music-sex-drugs>
 in a Beverly Hills toilet – and promptly humiliated by institutionally 
homophobic newspapers. Some might have been consumed with shame and grovelled 
before a tabloid press that had assumed the position of hypocritical moralisers 
once occupied by the medieval church. Instead, Michael penned the biggest “fuck 
you” in musical history: Outside, a song that unapologetically flaunted his 
human sexual appetite, and declared war on the hypocrisy of others. Sex was 
natural, the song said; it was the attitudes to it that were not: “There’s 
nothing here but flesh and bone.”

No sanitising or erasing who Michael was. He was a gay man, a gay icon, and 
being gay was central to his identity and his music. Like many gay men, coming 
to terms with his sexuality was a fraught process: he thought he loved women 
and only accepted he was gay in his mid-20s, still years before he told his 
parents. Some are saying: why wait until he was 35 to come out, and only under 
duress?

Coming out wildly differs from person to person: it is an experience imposed 
upon gay men – and all LGBT people – by a society still far from entirely 
accepting us. For a superstar back in the 1990s, it was considerably harder 
than it was today.According to the British Social Attitudes survey 
<http://www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/latest-report/british-social-attitudes-30/personal-relationships/homosexuality.aspx>
, in the year Michael came out half of all Britons thought same-sex relations 
were always or mostly wrong (nearly four in 10 said “always”), while only 23% 
opted for “not wrong at all”. Fromsection 28 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/jul/25/qanda.rostaylor> (only a decade 
old) to a different age of consent, the anti-gay laws were still in place.

Pop superstar George Michael dies aged 53
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/25/george-michael-pop-superstar-dies-at-53>
Coming out should not be some sort of duty for public figures: it is a highly 
personal experience, and life is complicated. But, undoubtedly, Michael coming 
out offered a liferaft to so many LGBT people – not just gay men – struggling 
in a society that judged them and made them internalise shame. It is difficult 
to describe how lonely this experience is. But here was a household name: the 
girls at school – and their mums – fancied him.

Yes, it’s true that the manner in which he was outed became a standard 
playground homophobic trope, a means for bigots to express their revulsion at 
how sordid and morally corrupt they deemed gay men to be. But haters gonna 
hate, as the expression goes – homophobes will latch on to anything to confirm 
their bigoted narrative. For LGBT people consumed with terror at the 
realisation of who they were, to see the man who sang Last Christmas telling 
his tormentors where to stick it was liberating.

In the 1980s and much of the 1990s, gay men were dying in their thousands from 
HIV/AIDS. Much of society alternated between pity, disgust and a sense of 
“they’ve brought it on themselves” as they perished. Michael was among those 
who watched his lover, Anselmo Feleppa, tortured and killed by the illness. His 
No 1 1996 hit, Jesus to a Child, was about this terrible loss, underlining how 
his sexuality and his music cannot, and must not, be divorced.

Being gay and out is one thing, but often it is on the terms of a disapproving 
society. As long as you are sanitised and, preferably, sexless in appearance, 
you can gain acceptance – or so the unspoken pact goes. While once bigots 
persecuted gays,as Matthew Parris noted 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/tto/life/article3938207.ece>, now “they haven’t 
stopped hating, and their new cry is this: ‘Why don’t you just shut up about 
it? Who asked what you get up to in bed, anyway? Your private life is your 
affair but please stop ramming it down our throat [snigger, snigger]’ …”

Michael rejected the unspoken pact. He had an open relationship. He loved 
anonymous sex. “You only have to turn on the television to see the whole of 
British society being comforted by gay men who are so clearly gay and so 
obviously sexually unthreatening,”he told the Guardian’s Simon Hattenstone in 
2005 <https://www.theguardian.com/music/2005/dec/09/popandrock>. “Gay people in 
the media are doing what makes straight people comfortable, and automatically 
my response to that is to say I’m a dirty filthy fucker and if you can’t deal 
with it, you can’t deal with it.” Or as he put it rather enthusiastically on 
Twitter: “I have never and will never apologise for my sex life! Gay sex is 
natural, gay sex is good! Not everybody does it, but … ha ha!”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Singer%2C%20songwriter%2C%20pop%20superstar%3A%20George%20Michael%20dies%20aged%2053%20%E2%80%93%20video%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fgeorge-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary&media=>
Singer, songwriter, pop superstar: George Michael dies aged 53 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/video/2016/dec/26/george-michael-singer-songwriter-pop-superstar-dies-aged-53-video-obituary>
Here was a man who proudly campaigned for LGBT rights, becoming a high-profile 
supporter of HIV charity the Terrence Higgins Trust. He was profoundly 
political in many other ways, too, backing Labour through the trauma of 
Thatcherism andbacking Britain’s striking miners. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/jun/28/celebrity-protest-strike-welfare-state>
 He put on a free concert for NHS nurses to say thank you for looking after his 
dying mum. In 2003, he reworked Faith alongside Ms Dynamite into an anti-Iraq 
war track, and even released a single – Shoot the Dog – that castigated Tony 
Blair’s alliance with George W Bush and the neocons.

I can already here the cries: “Stop politicising him!” It is the cry of people 
who want to erase the aspects of those they admire that contradict their own 
worldview. But when people die, we have a responsibility to remember who they 
actually were, not a sanitised and false version that is palatable to some.

We live in an age where bigots are newly emboldened. They treat supporters of 
anti-racism, feminism and LGBT rights like this: “You’ve had your party, now 
it’s over, and it’s our turn.” It is tempting to turn and retreat. But, as a 
closeted teenager back in 1998, it is impossible not to recall the courage and 
defiance ofGeorge Michael <https://www.theguardian.com/music/georgemichael>. A 
talented and much adored musician, yes. But also a gay man, and a gay icon, who 
made the lives of so many LGBT people that little bit easier.
 