
By March 2015, George Osborne was pulling together his final budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2015/mar/18/budget-2015-george-osborne-pre-election-windfall-inheritance-tax-live-updates>
 before the general election. The austerity chancellor had already hacked 
billions from health, education and social security; now he planned to slash 
billions more. But he had prepared one massive give-away: the complete 
abolition of taxes on savings, worth well over £1bn in lost revenue.

The Brexit vote will kill austerity | David Blanchflower
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/05/brexit-austerity-george-osborne-david-blanchflower-economic-experts-leave-campaign>
It was costly, at a time when the government was cutting to the bone. It was 
unjust, throwing millions at the richest, who needed it least. And it was a 
kick in the teeth to all those whose lives had been turned upside down in the 
past five years. The idea was blocked by Nick Clegg and his Liberal Democrat 
coalition partners.

Osborne’s response is recorded by David Laws, Clegg’s ally in government 
negotiations. It ranks as among the most revealing things ever said about the 
Conservatives’ austerity strategy.

The multi-million-pound spending spree wasn’t justifiable, admitted Osborne, 
according toLaws’ recent memoir, Coalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/mar/23/coalition-david-laws-review-obliteration-lib-dems-worth-it>
. “It will only really be of help tostupid, affluent and lazy people 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3489524/Gove-nuts-Boris-job-David-Cameron-s-simmering-tensions-EU-rebels-laid-bare-minister-s-explosive-memoirs.html>
, who can’t be bothered to put their savings away into tax-efficient vehicles!” 
said Osborne. “But it will still be very popular – we have polled it.”

Disabled people could kill themselves 
<http://www.disabilitynewsservice.com/coroners-ground-breaking-verdict-suicide-was-triggered-by-fit-for-work-test/>
 to put an end to the government’s reign of terror, and the chancellor would 
shrug. Working-class kids could live onfoodbank lunches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/28/rich-poor-children-parents-holiday-food-camps>
 and ministers would claim they had no alternative. But shovelling cash at the 
people seen as undeserving by their very own benefactor? That, Mr Austerity 
would happily do. Anything to buy votes.

Remember that exchange as the moist-eyed tributes to Osborne come in over the 
next few days from his friends in the Conservative party and press. “A great 
chancellor, <https://twitter.com/rbrharrison/status/753319058976702464>” says 
his former aide.The man himself 
<https://twitter.com/George_Osborne/status/753301644918530048> has kept it 
uncharacteristically modest: “I hope I’ve left the economy in a better state 
than I found it.”

If only, George. While at Oxford, Osborne was a member of the Bullingdon Club 
and during his six years at Number 11, he trashed the economy as thoroughly as 
the Bullingdon boys trashed their restaurants.

Osborne used evidence the way a drunk uses lampposts – not for illumination, 
merely to support him in his excesses

Under him, Britain has endured its weakest recovery in well over 100 years. 
The average worker is still worse off than they were before the banks collapsed 
in 2008. The chancellor, who promised amarch of the makers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/mar/23/george-osborne-fuel-tank-british-economy>
, has presided over the collapse of our steel industry. The enemy of government 
borrowing has bequeathed to the nation a public debt burden almost three times 
what it was when Margaret Thatcher was ejected from office.

The arch defender of our credit rating has seen Britain lose its AAA status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/27/property-and-financial-shares-slide-as-referendum-fallout-hits-stock-markets>
. And now he leaves the country staring into what David Blanchflower – the 
former Bank of England rate-setter who predicted the last crash – now warns 
could be “a crisis bigger than Lehman Brothers: a political and economic 
disaster”.

Osborne’s fiscal rules have been either broken or discarded, and where their 
replacement should be is instead a complete vacuum. The man praised for his “
strategic grip <https://twitter.com/nickmacpherson2/status/753322766208733184>” 
by his former permanent secretary admitted last month thathe hadn’t bothered 
<http://www.lbc.co.uk/osborne-must-resign-insists-iain-dale-132772> coming up 
with a post-Brexit strategy. Britain is adrift in what could be the choppiest 
waters in decades without a fiscal policy, a paddle – or even a map.

None of this is accidental. All of it could have been foreseen – indeed, was 
foreseen by some of us 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/08/george-osborne-austeria>
. But it is the direct result of a sniggering callousness that punished the 
poor while rewarding the rich, that promised greater power for the provinces 
while shunting ever more money to central London, that bilked the young of 
their futures while bribing their grandparents all the way to the ballot box.

Austerity is far more than just cuts. It’s about privatising everything we own 
| Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/24/austerity-cuts-privatising-george-osborne-britain-assets>
Perhaps the biggest charge historians will make against the chancellor is that 
his unfair, unreasonable economics helped produce the vote to leave Europe.

At the heart of Osbornomics were two contradictory impulses. First, and most 
important, was his belief that the state was “crowding out private endeavour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/oct/05/george-osborne-margaret-thatcher>
”. His remedy was simple: slash the public sector and cut taxes and – hey 
presto! – you have a flourishing economy. This is what produced the wild 
optimism of those early forecasts of a historic boom in business investment 
(which never came) and thedeficit paid off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/20/worst-uk-deficit-figures-six-years-george-osborne>
 within five years (a deadline that was soon extended to 10 years).

To bolster his case, Osborne used evidence the way a drunk uses lampposts – 
not for illumination, merely to support him in his excesses. He often quoted a 
paper by Carmen Rheinhart and Ken Rogoffpredicting disaster if public debt got 
too high <http://www.nber.org/papers/w15639>. The finding was utterly debunked 
by a20-something student <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thomas_Herndon>, but 
Osborne kept quoting it anyway. The result was that the UK took longer to come 
out of its slump and was robbed of income – until panicky backbenchers forced 
Downing Street to park the strategy and chase growth from any source, 
especially the housing market.

The other part of Osbornomics stemmed from a justified desire to “rebalance” 
the economy, away from the City and London towards other industries and parts 
of the country. That would have required serious analysis and investment. What 
it got was glibness and austerity economics.

The “march of the makers” ended with the collapse of the Redcar and Port 
Talbot steelworks. As for the much-vaunted “northern powerhouse”, it was always 
a branding exercise rather than anything serious. After Clegg lobbied him to 
include Sheffield, he came out of the meeting chuckling to Laws: “George is 
hilarious. He immediately suggested including Sheffield and just dropping 
Leeds.” Sheffield, Leeds: to a Notting Hill boy they’re all oop north, aren’t 
they?

It was all just a hi-vis gag: according to the government’s own figures 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-infrastructure-pipeline-july-2015>
 from last July, of all the spending on infrastructure on which work is 
actually under way, almost 50p of every pound is going to London. The 
north-east is getting less than a penny. Alongside this are the findings of
Steve Fothergill and Christina Beatty 
<http://www4.shu.ac.uk/research/cresr/sites/shu.ac.uk/files/welfare-reform-2016_1.pdf>
, showing how the Tories’ welfare cuts left the prosperous south-east and 
booming inner London almost untouched. According to the authors, the areas hit 
hardest were “older industrial areas, less prosperous seaside towns, some 
London boroughs”. In other words, Brexit-land.

Thatcher and Blair might have left parts of the country battered and feeble, 
but it was Osborne who cut off their life support, by taking away the public 
sector jobs and benefits. It was Osborne who created the post-crash economy of 
low pay and zero-hours contracts, at the apex of which stand the likes of Mike 
Ashley and Philip Green. It was Osborne who took the tax revenue from eastern 
European workers but refused to reinvest it in schools and local government, 
thus stoking community tensions. It was Osborne who indulged in the 
divide-and-rule rhetoric ofskivers v strivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/09/skivers-v-strivers-argument-pollutes>
. He has to take part of the blame for Brexit, even while he no longer has to 
shoulder the responsibility for it.

It’s his successor, Philip Hammond, who will face the news of big businesses 
pulling investment, workers getting less work and shops receiving less money. 
Of Mark Carney admitting the Bank of England has precious little room for 
manoeuvre – as a direct consequence of Osborne’s failure. To save the economy, 
Hammond will have to repudiate Osbornomics. I fear that that remains 
unthinkable for a Tory.

Still, George, what larks, eh? Now on to the non-executive directorships and 
six-figure speeches.
 