
Tis the season to whip out the credit card. As I type, millions of Britons are 
undoubtedly flooding into shops or splashing out online full of festive panic: 
set spending habits to Defcon Christmas. So apologies in advance for the 
Scroogefest, but latest figures confirm Britain’s supposed economic recovery 
rests on a personal debt timebomb. When it runs out is unclear, but run out it 
will.

Latest borrowing figures threaten Osborne's deficit target
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/22/latest-borrowing-figures-undermine-george-osborne-deficit-target>
When George Osborne became chancellor, Britons were spending £67bn less than 
they were earning; according to the Office of Budget Responsibility,they’re now 
running up a £40bn deficit 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/fears-of-new-economic-crash-as-british-families-run-40bn-deficit-a6782221.html>
. Earlier this year, the Centre for Social Justice – set up by Iain Duncan 
Smith himself – reported that total household debt had soared to £1.47tn, the 
highest level ever, and thatBritons were being driven into debt to pay their 
bills 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/levels-of-uk-household-debt-at-record-high-says-think-tank-10295579.html>
. As a nation,household debt makes up around 135% of our personal income 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-economy-idUKKBN0TY1FE20151215>, and 
earlier this year,the OBR suggested that could reach 182% of disposable income 
by 2019 
<http://touchstoneblog.org.uk/2015/02/uk-household-debt-still-amongst-the-highest-in-the-world/>
, up from 169% when Lehman Brothers crashed. In 2013, only three other 
countries out of 53 surveyed had higher total household debt; per capita,
Britain came 11th <http://www.cityam.com/1411501631/debt-map>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fdavid-graeber-what-government-doesnt-want-you-to-know-about-debt-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445962402571%2FKP_573264_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Graeber%3A%20debt%20and%20what%20the%20government%20doesn't%20want%20you%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fdavid-graeber-what-government-doesnt-want-you-to-know-about-debt-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Graeber%3A%20debt%20and%20what%20the%20government%20doesn%27t%20want%20you%20to%20know%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F28%2Fdavid-graeber-what-government-doesnt-want-you-to-know-about-debt-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F10%2F27%2F1445962402571%2FKP_573264_crop_640x480.jpg>
David Graeber: debt and what the government doesn’t want you to know 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/oct/28/david-graeber-what-government-doesnt-want-you-to-know-about-debt-video>
We’ve had weak growth – indeed, not since the 19th century has a recovery been 
so protracted – and it is based on unsustainable foundations. Rather than build 
a new economy based on investment and the industries of the future, Osborne 
made a strategic decision to commit to a failed model of debt. Abandoning the 
long-term economic health of the country for political gain (and indeed it was 
essential to getting the Tories through the May election) is contemptible. The 
longest fall in workers’ wages for generations has played a key role, of 
course; and as the Resolution Foundation has pointed out, unlessBritain’s dire 
productivity levels increase, current increases in wages will stall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/uk-pay-growth-likely-fade-fast-thinktank-warns>
. And then, to maintain flagging living standards, more Britons will turn to 
personal debt.

UK pay rises likely to fade fast, thinktank warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/15/uk-pay-growth-likely-fade-fast-thinktank-warns>
If Labour has a New Year’s resolution, it should be to concentrate above all 
else on an economic alternative that resonates. How do we increase 
productivity? How do we encourage companies to invest? How do we nurture new 
industries in, say, hi-tech and renewable sectors? How do we shift the economy 
away from its dependence on a boom-and-bust finance sector? These are questions 
Osborne has failed to answer, and by doing so,he has placed the country’s 
economic future in grave danger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/10/george-osborne-magician-record-success-budget>
. If there is a jump in interest rates or another global economic shock, our 
country is ill-prepared and badly exposed. And it is Osborne and his fellow 
ministers who are to blame.
 