
Two years ago, I wrote a column 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/14/age-of-loneliness-killing-us>
 for the Guardian in which I argued that what distinguishes our age from those 
preceding it is an epidemic of loneliness. Throughout human history, we have 
been hypersocial animals, dependent on each other for both physical and psychic 
survival.Thomas Hobbes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2009/apr/03/religion-philosophy-hobbes-midgley>
’s claim – that our natural state is a war of “every man against every man” – 
is a myth proposed by someone whose understanding of human evolution was 
confined to the book of Genesis. But the myth is now being realised through the 
religion of our time: a celebration of extreme individualism and universal 
competition. The resulting loneliness, I argued, is a deadly condition, which 
kills as many people as smoking or obesity.

 To my astonishment, the article exploded, and the ripples can still be felt 
today.A documentary it inspired <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b06vkhr5>, 
called The Age of Loneliness, aired recently on BBC1. Several publishers asked 
me to write books on the topic, but I could think of nothing more depressing 
than spending three years sitting on my backside, documenting social isolation. 
There was plenty I wanted to say on the topic. But how?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Floneliness-george-monbiot-ewan-mclennan-songs-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F834c22e410bcf68e056e736c0d5dac7ec952fa1b%2F0_0_1647_1482%2F1647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=George%20Monbiot%3A%20why%20I%20wrote%20an%20album%20of%20anthems%20for%20all%20the%20lonely%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Floneliness-george-monbiot-ewan-mclennan-songs-tour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=George%20Monbiot%3A%20why%20I%20wrote%20an%20album%20of%20anthems%20for%20all%20the%20lonely%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Floneliness-george-monbiot-ewan-mclennan-songs-tour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F834c22e410bcf68e056e736c0d5dac7ec952fa1b%2F0_0_1647_1482%2F1647.jpg>
 The album: Breaking the Spell of Loneliness 
A few weeks later, I dashed out to buy some screws from a hardware shop. Ahead 
of me in the queue was an elderly woman. She lent on the counter, dithering 
about what she wanted and trying to engage the sales assistants in a riveting 
conversation about her state of health. Stuck behind her, I quietly fumed: it 
seemed as if she would never leave.


But as I cycled home, and my frustration ebbed away, I saw what should have 
been obvious: here was a person who seemed desperately lonely. “Where’s your 
empathy?” I asked myself. “Isn’t that what you were writing about?” What if 
that conversation was the only one she would have all day? I felt guilty about 
my feelings in the shop.

When I returned to my desk, I began dashing out a rough poem about a woman 
with little to keep her company but memories, who goes to the shops in the hope 
that she might talk to someone, but discovers that the tills have been replaced 
with automatic checkouts. As I wrote, it seemed to me that it was trying to 
become something else: a ballad. Suddenly I knew what I wanted to do: I wanted 
to write an album.
George Monbiot and Ewan McLennan talk about their new album Breaking the Spell 
of Loneliness 
<https://soundcloud.com/theguardianmusic/george-monbiot-and-ewan-mclennan-on-breaking-the-spell-of-loneliness>
Weeks after I emailed my first song sketch to Ewan, I found an audio file in 
my inbox … I was like a child at Christmas

There were just a couple of minor hitches. I can’t read music, I don’t play an 
instrument and my singing is banned under international law. But I knew who to 
ask. I first heardEwan McLennan <http://www.ewanmclennan.co.uk/> while 
listening toLate Junction <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b0112fz1> on Radio 
3, in 2011. I was transfixed by his voice, his playing and what seemed to be an 
almost supernatural ability to find the heart of a song. He was just 25.

I bought his first album, Rags and Robes, and listened to it over and again. 
Three years later, I heard himinterviewed by Mary Ann Kennedy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p02b2ppt>, whose programmes I’ve followed 
since she began broadcasting on Radio Scotland. He was relaxed and funny, 
politically engaged and plainly fascinated by the roots and text of songs and 
poems.

I did something I have seldom done: I sent him a fan letter. I invited him to 
a talk I was giving in his home city, Bristol. He came and over dinner 
afterwards, we clicked. So, a few months later, with some trepidation, it was 
to him that I sent my idea of collaborating on a themed album.

To my delight, he agreed. I would start by thinking up a story and writing a 
rough sketch, which might incorporate some potential hooks, rhymes and 
choruses. I would send it to him on the understanding that he could do whatever 
he liked with it. I did not try to write to his style, as I knew he would take 
what he wanted and make the song his own.


I wasn’t wrong. A couple of weeks after I emailed the first sketch to him, I 
found an audio file in my inbox, and opened it with the excitement of a child 
at Christmas. It was wonderful – he had turned my base metal into gold. The 
songs he sent back to me were heart-wrenching, capturing sensations I have long 
struggled to express.


The album is a mixture of dark shades and light: sad ballads and stirring 
anthems. We want to use it as a means of not only talking about loneliness, 
but, in a small way, addressing it. With advice from charities working on the 
issue, we are designing our gigs to try to bring people together. I will talk 
about the themes and Ewan will perform the songs. We will encourage people in 
the audience to talk to each other, then it will end up with a party in the 
nearest willing pub. Music naturally makes connections – we want to take it a 
step further.


In one respect, the album is already succeeding, as the collaboration has 
relieved the usual solitude in which we both work, making our lives less 
lonely. I hope it has the same effect on other people.

 * Breaking the Spell of Loneliness is released on 14 October by Fellside 
Records 
<http://www.fellside.com/shop/fe-cd/ewan-mclennan-george-monbiot-breaking-spell-loneliness/>
. Tour dates:monbiot.com/music/ <http://www.monbiot.com/music/>
 