
Berlin has mounted a staunch defence of its policies after Donald Trump 
criticised the German chancellor,Angela Merkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>, for her stance during the 
refugee crisis and threatened a 35% tariff on BMW cars imported into the US.

Germany’s deputy chancellor and minister for the economy, Sigmar Gabriel, said 
on Monday morning that a tax on German imports would lead to a “bad awakening” 
among US carmakers since they were reliant on transatlantic supply chains.

Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great thing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
“I believe BMW’s biggest factory is already in the US, in Spartanburg [South 
Carolina],” Gabriel, leader of the centre-left Social Democratic party, told 
the Bild newspaper in a video interview.

“The US car industry would have a bad awakening if all the supply parts that 
aren’t being built in the US were to suddenly come with a 35% tariff. I believe 
it would make the US car industry weaker, worse and above all more expensive. I 
would wait and see what the Congress has to say about that, which is mostly 
full of people who want the opposite of Trump.”

In an interview with Bild and the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
, the US president-elect had indicated that he would aim to realign the “out of 
balance” car trade between Germany and the US. “If you go down Fifth Avenue 
everyone has a Mercedes Benz in front of his house, isn’t that the case?” he 
said. “How many Chevrolets do you see in Germany? Not very many, maybe none at 
all … it’s a one-way street.”

Asked what Trump could do to make sure German customers bought more American 
cars, Gabriel said: “Build better cars.”

Shares in carmakers BMW, Daimler and Volkswagen fell on Monday morning 
following Trump’s comments.BMW <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bmw> 
shares were down 0.85%, shares in Daimler were 1.54% lower and Volkswagen 
shares were trading 1.07% down in early trading in Frankfurt.

All three carmakers have invested heavily in factories in Mexico, where 
production costs are lower than the US, with an eye to exporting smaller 
vehicles to the American market.

A BMW spokeswoman said a BMW Group plant in the central Mexican city of San 
Luis Potosi would build the BMW 3 Series starting from 2019, with the output 
intended for the world market. The plant in Mexico would be an addition to 
existing 3 Series production facilities inGermany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and China.

Responding to Trump’s comments that Merkel had made an “utterly catastrophic 
mistake by letting all these illegals into the country”, Gabriel said the 
increase in the number of people fleeing the Middle East to seek asylum inEurope
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> had partially been a result of 
US-led wars destabilising the region.

“There is a link between America’s flawed interventionist policy, especially 
the Iraq war, and the refugee crisis, that’s why my advice would be that we 
shouldn’t tell each other what we have done right or wrong, but that we look 
into establishing peace in that region and do everything to make sure people 
can find a home there again,” Gabriel said.

“In that area Germany and Europe are already making enormous achievements – 
and that’s why I also thought it wasn’t right to talk about defence spending, 
where Mr Trump says we are spending too little to finance Nato. We are making 
gigantic financial contributions to refugee shelters in the region, and these 
are also the results of US interventionist policy.”

In brief remarks on Monday, Merkel said of Trump’s comments on Nato and the 
European Union: “We Europeans have our fate in our own hands.” Speaking during 
a press conference with New Zealand’s prime minister, Bill English, she said: 
“He has presented his positions once more. They have been known for a while. My 
positions are also known.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20is%20'smart'%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20is%20%27smart%27%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&media=>
UK is ‘smart’ to leave EU, Trump tells Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/16/uk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
Trump’s remarks on Nato were met more favourably in Moscow, where Dmitry 
Peskov, spokesman for the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, agreed with the US 
president-elect that the alliance was “obsolete”.

“Since Nato is tailored toward confrontation, all its structures are dedicated 
to the ideals of confrontation, you can’t really call it a modern organisation 
meeting the ideas of stability, steady growth and security,” he said.

But Trump’s suggestion that the US could lift its sanctions on Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/trump-suggests-he-may-drop-russia-sanctions-if-moscow-helpful>
 in exchange for an agreement to reduce the countries’ nuclear arsenals 
elicited a cooler response.

Peskov said Russia had not been conducting talks with the US about nuclear 
arsenal reduction and said cancelling sanctions was not a political goal in 
Russia.

“Russia wasn’t the initiator in introducing these restrictions, and Russia, as 
the president of Russia has underlined, doesn’t intend to raise the issue of 
these sanctions in its foreign contacts,” he said.

Last month, Putin said Russia needed to strengthen its strategic nuclear 
forces. Leonid Slutsky, a Russian MP, said he “wouldn’t connect these two 
issues and make the cancellation of sanctions a negotiating point in such a 
delicate area as nuclear security”.

Konstantin Kosachyov, head of the foreign affairs committee in the Russian 
senate,said <https://ria.ru/politics/20170116/1485754500.html> the cancellation 
of sanctions was “definitely not an end in and of itself for Russia”.

“It’s not even a strategic goal for which something needs to be sacrificed, 
especially in the security sphere,” he told state news agency RIA Novosti. “We 
think [sanctions] are a bad legacy of the departing White House team that need 
to be sent after it into history.”

Following Trump’s election victory in November, Merkel had offered the 
president-elect close cooperationon the basis of the shared values of 
“democracy, freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/europe-leaders-cannot-hide--nerves-amid-donald-trump-congratulations>
, and respect for the law and the dignity of man, independent of origin, skin 
colour, religion, gender, sexual orientation, or political views”.


Gabriel, who is expected to run as the centre-left candidate against Merkel in 
Germany’s federal elections in September, said Trump’s election should 
encourage Europeans to stand up for themselves.

“On the one hand, Trump is an elected president. When he is in office, we will 
have to work with him and his government – respect for a democratic election 
alone demands that,” Gabriel said. “On the other hand, you need to have enough 
self-confidence. This isn’t about making ourselves submissive. What he says 
about trade issues, how he might treat German carmakers, the question about 
Nato, his view on the European Union – all these require a self-confident 
position, not just on behalf of us Germans but all Europeans. We are not 
inferior to him, we have something to bring to the table too.

“Especially in this phase in which Europe is rather weak, we will have to pull 
ourselves together and act with self-confidence and stand up for our own 
interests.”


Merkel’s spokesman, Steffen Seibert, said the chancellor had read the Trump 
interview “with interest”, but declined to comment in more detail until the 
president-elect had been sworn in. “We are now waiting for President Trump to 
start his term and will then work closely with the new government,” he said.

Martin Schäfer, a spokesman for the German foreign ministry, rejected Trump’s 
labelling of the EU as a “vehicle for Germany”. He said: “For the German 
government, Europe has never been a means to an end, but a community of fate 
which, in times of collapsing old orders, is more important than ever.”

The foreign ministry also rejected Trump’s criticism that creating “security 
zones” in Syria would have been considerably cheaper than accepting refugees 
fleeing the war-torn country. “What exactly such a security zone is meant to be 
is beyond my comprehension and would have to be explained,” said Schäfer, 
adding that there had not been enough willingness among the international 
community to lend military support to create a no-fly zone in Syria.

Pierre Moscovici, European economic affairs commissioner, also found fault 
with Trump’s assertion that other European countries would follow in Britain’s 
footsteps and leave the EU.

“I’m not worried, I think this idea that Brexit is going to be contagious is a 
fantasy, a bad fantasy,” Moscovici told reporters in Paris. “Brexit is not a 
great thing,” he said, warning Trump that comments advocating a break-up of the 
EU would not get the trans-Atlantic relationship off to the best start.
 