
Duel (1971)
The debut movie by a fresh-faced Steven Spielberg, this taut thriller stars 
Dennis Weaver as a boring, Flanders-a-like travelling salesman who is 
relentlessly stalked by the murderous driver of a huge, rusting tanker. His 
crime? Overtaking, of course. With a plot laser-focused on angry driving and 
only a few lines of dialogue, Duel is Hitchcock for the highway – and it’s set 
in same the rolling Californian desert where The Grand Tour’s opening sequence 
kicks off.

From The Grand Tour to Kerouac – the romance of the road trip
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-grand-tour-amazon/2016/nov/18/from-the-grand-tour-to-kerouac-the-romance-of-the-road-trip>
Drive (2011)
This stylish neo-noir harks to independent thrillers of the 70s such as Taxi 
Driver and The Warriors. Starring a stoic Ryan Gosling as a getaway driver 
caught between protecting a young family and serving his criminal clients, it 
gave the world a sex symbol in a satin jacket and some memorably violent 
moments. Also, it’s jammed full of classic cars, crafty getaway driving and 
pulsing synth music. Beaded seatbacks need not apply.

On the Road (2012)
Perhaps the story that started them all, this freewheeling adaptation of Jack 
Kerouac’s essential road novel is a mash-up of music video visuals and a 
gorgeous young cast throwing themselves across 1950s America in classic cars. 
It’s sexy, smoky and rammed full of landscapes that’ll make you want to just 
get behind the wheel and go.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfb292257b08ecc70091ebbd6abb79b9cd78ad36%2F0_49_1544_926%2F1544.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%20for%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20with%20nine%20classic%20motoring%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%20for%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20with%20nine%20classic%20motoring%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcfb292257b08ecc70091ebbd6abb79b9cd78ad36%2F0_49_1544_926%2F1544.jpg>
 All that road going: Sam Riley hammers away as Jack Kerouac’s alter-ego, Sal 
Paradise, in On the Road. Photograph: Allstar/ICON FILM 
DISTRIBUTION/Sportsphoto Ltd./Allstar 
The Hangover III (2013)
A series that started as the ultimate lads’ night out ends in this 
surprisingly pacy crime caper as The Wolfpack face off against their old pal 
Chow (Ken Jeong) and his gangster enemy John Goodman in a series of mishaps 
that take in Mexico, Arizona and of course their spiritually wasted home of Las 
Vegas.

Death Proof (2007)
This Tarantino-directed thriller gleefully apes the murky exploitation movies 
of the 70s and 80s. Genre hero Kurt Russell plays Stuntman Mike, a psychotic 
movie veteran who pursues a gang of fiesty female survivors in his demonic 
“death proof” cars. A love letter to classic road movies such as Vanishing 
Point, this is shameless fun.

Need for Speed (2014)
Knuckles don’t get much whiter than on this ride. Based on the genre-defining 
game, this high-octane brofest features Breaking Bad’s Aaron Paul as a street 
racer on a cross-country pursuit to avenge his fallen friend’s death at the 
hands of fancy-dan badguy Dominic Cooper. Need for Speed doesn’t waste too much 
time on emotion, barely pausing for punch-ups between the supercar-smashing 
action. Also, Michael Keaton has a role in it, which means it’s legitimate 
cinema. Beat that, Birdman.

End of Watch (2012)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6555174620d645de92e26d5ea11de655982753%2F0_88_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Get%20ready%20for%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20with%20nine%20classic%20motoring%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Get%20ready%20for%20Amazon%E2%80%99s%20The%20Grand%20Tour%20with%20nine%20classic%20motoring%20films&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fthe-grand-tour-amazon%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fget-ready-for-amazons-the-grand-tour-with-nine-classic-motoring-films%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdf6555174620d645de92e26d5ea11de655982753%2F0_88_2000_1199%2F2000.jpg>
 Jake Gyllenhaal and Michael Pena in 2012’s gritty End of Watch. Photograph: 
Allstar/STUDIOCANAL 
There’s nothing like the power of sheer, macho friendship to make a movie 
classic. With this flick about two LA beat cops who fall foul of a Mexican drug 
cartel, that’s the only rule. Shot in a convincing documentary style, it packs 
in some bone-crunching crashes and realistic urban chase scenes.

Clockwise (1986)
The Grand Tour would be nothing without a liberal dose of British humour - and 
this often-overlooked entry is a perfect example of that national wit. John 
Cleese plays his best nearly-Fawlty as a punctuality-obsessed headmaster on a 
cross-country sprint to make a speaking engagement on time. The film is a 
showcase for Cleese’s manic physicality, squeezing in some nostalgia-baiting 
70s and 80s British cars for good measure.

Fast Five (2011)
“This just went from mission impossible to mission in-frickin’-sanity” is, as 
one character in this heist-cum-street racing movie puts it, the order of the 
day. Smashing together Vin Deisel and The Rock like action figures, this movie 
puts cars, shoot-outs and muscles front and centre. Now considered to be the 
high point of the seven-part Fast and Furious franchise, the plot can be summed 
up in one word: vroom.

Check out classic road movies and more on Amazon Prime Video 
<https://aax-eu.amazon-adsystem.com/s/click?d=forester-did&ex-fargs=%3Fsr%3DP%26m%3D3%26c%3D1627974002%26a%3D1802705002%26up%3D1501005002&ex-fch=416619&rd=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.amazon.co.uk%2Fdp%2FB01J93ZNN2%3Fref%3Ddvm_uk_3pdi_3pd_TGT_10_16&cb=>
 