
It wasn’t hard to spot the freeriding fans in our group. We were the ones who 
greeted our guide’s early-morning announcement – “unfortunately, because of 
high winds, the new gondola is closed and we can’t connect with the pistes of 
the other Ski Circus resorts as planned; I’m afraid we’ll have to spend another 
day in Fieberbrunn” – with ear-to-ear grins.

A tiny Tirolean town in the Kitzbühel Alps, just 800 metres above sea-level 
and with a mere 43km of marked pistes, Fieberbrunn has for some years had a 
reputation among in-the-know freeskiers and snowboarders, in Austria and 
beyond, for a Tardis-like wealth of gnarly backcountry terrain. Its reputation 
was endorsed in 2009 when the Freeride World Tour, the planet’s premier 
big-mountain competition, first made it a fixture on its annual five-nation 
roster (the tour arrives here this year on 6 March).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff077333a21d1592eeef90a63a4e2e1e6d1fe518e%2F0_292_4351_2612%2F4351.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff077333a21d1592eeef90a63a4e2e1e6d1fe518e%2F0_292_4351_2612%2F4351.jpg>
 Rupert Mellor (in red trousers) makes the most of the ‘bad’ weather in 
Fieberbrunn. Photograph: Rasmus Skov Jensen/skisport.dk 
<http://www.skisport.dk/> 
Happily coinciding with a fall of 40cm of new snow, our first day on 
Fieberbrunn’s steeps, glades and bowls had brought us descent after 
exhilarating descent through silky, untracked powder. Expertly led by Martin 
Leitinger from local guiding outfit Freeride Base, we bounced down mini pillow 
lines by the trees on the Henne’s lower slopes, tackled a few heart-in-mouth 
chutes from the top of the Lärchfilzkogel and barrelled down a gloriously long, 
swooping run dubbed Big Mom.

Great little ski resorts: Alpbach, Tyrol, Austria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/feb/07/great-little-ski-resorts-alpbach-tyrol-austria>
And so far, we hadn’t even made a dent in the mighty Wildseeloder, with its 
highly technical 50-degree pitch (the Freeride World Tour’s event venue of 
choice). The insiders’ tip for last run of the day is a west-facing epic that 
drops a full 1,200 metres to Pletzergraben. With a further 40cm of snow falling 
that night, our reluctance to commit to a piste-bound day was sealed.

For off-piste skiers, Fieberbrunn is blessed with a topography that puts a 
large and varied expanse of terrain at your ski tips straight from the lifts, 
without even a short hike. “Easy up, wild down” is the resort’s unofficial 
motto. Locals also claim the spot is aschneeloch, a “snow hole” whose geography 
catches the lion’s share of the region’s precipitation, which can add up to 50% 
more over a season than in neighbour Kitzbühel.

This year, Austria’s little big mountain has, with the opening of the nippy 
new TirolS gondola, joined Ski Circus, a group of lift-linked resorts that 
comprises popular Saalbach, Hinterglemm and Leogang, and now claims to be 
Austria’s largest interconnected ski area, with 270km of runs and 70 lifts. As 
such, it brings together giant supergroomers, world cup courses, snow parks, 
floodlit slopes, luge runs, endless family-friendly facilities and 
Fieberbrunn’s rugged riches on a single ticket.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab276a653e689d645d4f27d7edc6cb6b52cbf831%2F0_330_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab276a653e689d645d4f27d7edc6cb6b52cbf831%2F0_330_5760_3455%2F5760.jpg>
 New gondolas linking Fieberbrunn with Ski Circus resorts are set to alter the 
town’s character Photograph: rolart-images.com 
It’s a change that is not without controversy, and when it comes to the town’s 
future as part of a large commercial ski area, the jury, at local level at 
least, is still out.

“Fieberbrunn has always felt a bit like the locals’ little secret,” says 
Leitinger. “And some are worried that the Ski Circus connection will change the 
place too much, that too many people will come. At the moment, it can take a 
couple of weeks for new snow to get all tracked out, if you’re prepared to put 
in 10 or 20 minutes’ hiking. And the locals who are crazy for freeriding worry 
that will change.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fd9e537744609d608d3898dd626f22eafb51e9f%2F0_73_5610_3365%2F5610.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Give%20me%20Fieber%3A%20freeriding%20in%20Fieberbrunn%2C%20Austria&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F20%2Faustria-off-piste-ski-resort-fieberbrunn-winter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fd9e537744609d608d3898dd626f22eafb51e9f%2F0_73_5610_3365%2F5610.jpg>
 The area is popular with families and beginners too. Photograph: Roland 
Defrancesco 
But he added: “The new gondola has given access to a whole other freeride 
area, adding perhaps 30% more off-piste terrain. Plus, of course, we have more 
than 200km of new pistes to play with whenever the snow’s not right for 
freeriding. One worry, though, is cost. There are no Fieberbrunn-only lift 
tickets now; you have to buy a Ski Circus pass, which costs more. But most of 
the people who live here work in skiing or tourism, so generally the change is 
seen as a great opportunity.”

Leitinger told us his rent has just leaped up by 20%, and the concrete 
skeletons of a few new holiday apartment blocks have sprung up around the town 
but, in general, visible signs of major changes to the Fieberbrunn experience 
are few.

The best European ski resorts for beginners
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/oct/17/best-ski-resorts-for-beginners-europe>
It’s still a cosy, unpretentious town with a few laid-back bars, family-run 
restaurants and a heroically provincial disco or two. The day when it can offer 
the kind of full-service convenience and international sophistication its Ski 
Circus peer resorts have been finessing for decades is years away.

Its comparatively low profile has traditionally meant lower prices. For those 
happy with distinctly low-key après options and short (and, with a lift pass, 
free) bus rides between town and lift, Fieberbrunn offers attractive deals.

It looks likely, then, that it won’t be only on days with a high-wind lift 
lockdown that visitors get to enjoy this little ski town’s high-performing 
terrain in the relaxed, uncrowded and friendly conditions that have always been 
its hallmarks – at least for a few more seasons.

• The trip was provided by Pillersee Valley Tourist Board 
<http://www.kitzbueheler-alpen.com/de/pillerseetal/urlaub-skifahren-langlaufen.html>
 andTirol Tourist Board <http://www.tyrol.com/>. Schloss Hotel Rosenegg 
<http://www.schlosshotel-rosenegg.com/> in Fieberbrunn has doubles from £86 
B&B. Airlines includingeasyJet <http://easyjet.com>, Monarch 
<http://monarch.co.uk> and British Airways <http://ba.com> fly to Innsbruck or 
Salzburg from several UK cities from about £90 return. Resort transfers were 
provided by re available throughFour Seasons Travel <https://www.tirol-taxi.at/>
 