
Relatives of those who died in the Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> bin lorry crash have failed in their 
attempt to bring a private prosecution against the driver who killed six people 
after he fainted at the wheel.

Senior judges at the appeal court in Edinburgh rejected the case – brought by 
the family of three of the crash victims – that 59-year-old Harry Clarke should 
be put on trial in an exceptionally rare private criminal prosecution, after 
warning that to allow it would “open the floodgates” for similar prosecutions.

The family of three of the victims of the 2014 crash, Erin McQuade and her 
grandparents Jack and Lorraine Sweeney, pursued the highly unusual legal route 
after the Crown Office refused to charge Clarke over their deaths, despite a 
fatal accident inquiry finding that he had lied about his medical history.

Stephenie Tait, 29, Jacqueline Morton, 51, and Gillian Ewing, 52, also died in 
the crash.

The relatives, as well as the driver, were granted legal aid for the case in 
March by the Scottish government’s justice secretary, Michael Matheson.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fglasgow-bin-lorry-crash-private-prosecution-driver-harry-clarke-rejected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a96e967200ca725ae555754c090562535260e3%2F0_0_1972_3076%2F1972.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20bin%20lorry%20crash%3A%20private%20prosecution%20against%20driver%20rejected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fglasgow-bin-lorry-crash-private-prosecution-driver-harry-clarke-rejected%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20bin%20lorry%20crash%3A%20private%20prosecution%20against%20driver%20rejected&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fglasgow-bin-lorry-crash-private-prosecution-driver-harry-clarke-rejected%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26a96e967200ca725ae555754c090562535260e3%2F0_0_1972_3076%2F1972.jpg>
 Harry Clarke, who was driving a bin lorry when it crashed killing six people. 
Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA 
At the time, Matheson said: “Private prosecutions are, and should remain, 
exceptionally rare inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. 
However, in light of the unique and special circumstances of this case, which 
raises fundamental questions that have not previously been tested in case law, 
Scottish ministers believe it is in the public interest that all parties are 
adequately represented.”

The fatal accident inquiry in the summer of 2015 heard that Clarke had a 
history of health issues including a previous blackout in 2010 at the wheel of 
a stationary bus, but he had repeatedly failed to disclose his medical 
background to his employers or the DVLA.

Six people were killed and eight seriously injured after the out-of-control 
bin lorry ploughed into a crowd of pedestrians in Glasgow city centre just 
before Christmas, scattering pedestrians “like pinballs”, in the words of 
onlookers.

The accident happened at 2.30pm on Monday 22 December on busy George Square 
when the area was teeming with Christmas shoppers and visitors to the ice rink 
and amusements in the square.

The judges Lady Dorrian, Lord Menzies and Lord Drummond Young had been 
considering the bill for criminal letters since hearing final arguments in the 
case in October, and ruled on Friday that the family could not pursue a private 
prosecution of Clarke.

The court also rejected a similar plea for a private prosecution of motorist 
William Payne lodged by the families of students Mhairi Convy and Laura 
Stewart, who were knocked down and killed in Glasgow in 2010.

The two women, who were aged 18 and 20, were walking in the city’s North 
Hanover Street when a Range Rover being driven by William Payne mounted the 
kerb and hit them after he blacked out at the wheel.

During earlier hearings, which could not be reported at the time, the lord 
advocate James Wolffe QC argued there was “not sufficient evidence to support 
prosecution” in either case. He also argued that prosecutors must be free to 
take unpopular decisions.

John Scott QC, representing Clarke, told the court that the prosecution bid 
wanted to rely on the fatal accident inquiry conclusions, but the determination 
of the sheriff was not admissible in evidence. The solicitor advocate said 
other parties had started considering private proceedings in other cases, and 
to grant this one could “open the floodgates”.
 