
Long before social media demanded you compress your misogyny into 140 
characters, there were postcards (carrying gruesome images of a woman’s tongue 
being sliced in two, or mean ditties about opinionated wives) should a 
gentleman wish to publicly advertise his disdain for the opposite sex.

Examples of this curious anti-suffragette stationery, with its Edwardian 
postmarks, nestle in the temperature-controlled storeroom of theGlasgow Women’s 
Library <http://womenslibrary.org.uk/> alongside thousands of other items of 
feminist significance: whole archives from long-defunct campaign groups, stacks 
of the seminalSpare Rib magazine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/may/28/spare-rib-the-top-10-reads-from-the-archives>
, as well as rarely collected domestic artefacts – cookery books, knitting 
patterns, and journals – that document the lives of individual women across the 
past century.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9fc95f1c05f9b865ed1be9018b8f1f79686feb%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a9fc95f1c05f9b865ed1be9018b8f1f79686feb%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 Cookery books at the Glasgow Women’s Library. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
When Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, officially opened the 
renovated premises in the former Bridgeton Public Library in Glasgow’s East End 
last November, she described the facility, whichcelebrates its quarter-century 
this month 
<http://womenslibrary.org.uk/2016/09/01/join-us-in-celebrating-25-years-of-glasgow-womens-library/>
, as a “national treasure”. Now recognised as a collection of national 
significance and the only accredited museum dedicated to women’s history in the 
UK, the GWL’s current bevvy of supporters reads like a roll call of Scotland’s 
most gallus women: comedianSusan Calman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/susan-calman> recently launched her memoir 
there, interviewed by broadcasterMuriel Gray 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/murielgray>; while national poet Jackie Kay
 <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jackiekay> and writers AL Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alkennedy>, Denise Mina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jul/29/crimebooks.features> and Louise 
Welch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/05/louise-welsh-crime-genre-interview>
 have all contributed work to an anniversary fundraising book. But the success 
of the library is as much to do with the endurance of grassroots activism and 
the work of two visionary women –Adele Patrick and Sue John 
<http://womenslibrary.org.uk/about-us/our-team/library-staff/> – who recognised 
the power of heritage before it was sexy.

The concept was first developed by Women in Profile 
<http://womenslibrary.org.uk/tag/women-in-profile/>, a feminist arts group, 
co-founded by Patrick as a counter to the mainly male offerings that dominated
Glasgow’s 1990 City of Culture programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/mar/29/communities.europeancapitalofculture2008>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd67f516a7989a207ebb22b2f61a3d16f96c34471%2F0_96_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd67f516a7989a207ebb22b2f61a3d16f96c34471%2F0_96_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The power of heritage … Adele Patrick and Sue John at the Glasgow Women’s 
Library. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
It was a time of powerful global backlash against feminism – documented in 
Susan Faludi’s book, Backlash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2005/dec/13/classics.gender> – but in 
Scotland, Patrick recalls, there was a “perverse flowering”, with Edinburgh’s 
ground-breakingZero Tolerance anti-violence campaign 
<http://www.zerotolerance.org.uk/>, Glasgow’s library and Scotland’s first 
feminist magazineHarpies and Quines 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/13109644.Scots_feminist_title_is_poised_for_a_comeback/>
. The library proper began a year later as a small volunteer-run effort in a 
shopfront in Garnethill, later squatting with theLesbian Archive and 
Information Centre 
<http://www.womenslibrary.org.uk/laic/laictimeline/laictimeline.html> on 
Trongate, before being offered temporary accommodation in Glasgow’s venerable
Mitchell Library 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/libraries/the-mitchell-library/pages/home.aspx>, 
only to discover its collection had grown too big. Funding, or the lack of it, 
has been a constant struggle over the decades.

Today, with more than 20,000 books and 300,000 archival items, all donated, 
the GWL has expanded to take on 22 paid staff alongside about 100 volunteers, 
with guaranteed funding from CreativeScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> for the next two years. A combination 
of Scottish government grants and public donations of more than £1m paid for 
the revamp of the Grade B-listed library building in Bridgeton, which is now 
its first permanent home. “We are in a golden period now,” says John, “when we 
are talking to national galleries and national libraries as equals. It’s an 
unrecognisable landscape since the early 90s, and very different from the 
parlous state that other libraries find themselves in.”

“There’s no other library in Europe like it,” adds Patrick. “It’s not purely 
academic, not hand in glove with government; some of it just feels like a crazy 
accident.”

Over the past month, the library has welcomed visitors from Kuwait, the US, 
Canada, England, Wales and, most crucially, their immediate neighbours in the 
East End. “We brought the community with us,” explains Patrick. “People have 
impressions of this area, whether that’s sectarianism or poverty, or that it is 
very white, but we work with a lot of BME women.”

The team immediately hired an audience worker who drew a one-mile line around 
the new building and set out to meet everyone within it.

It was also about bringing west to east, says Patrick, referring to the city’s 
geographical division between the well-heeled West End and the impoverished 
east. “People who are most marginalised don’t think they have a place in 
galleries or archives.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4939c16262aa260ab40bcaf13d56228d6d417917%2F0_503_5376_3337%2F5376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Glasgow%20Women%E2%80%99s%20Library%3A%20a%20treasure%20trove%20that%20shows%20how%20far%20feminism%20has%20come&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fsep%2F19%2Fglasgow-womens-library-feminism-museum-womens-history-uk-cookery-books-spare-rib-anti-suffragette%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4939c16262aa260ab40bcaf13d56228d6d417917%2F0_503_5376_3337%2F5376.jpg>
 Dress patterns at the Glasgow Women’s Library. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for 
the Guardian 
Meanwhile, as researchers continue to sift through this remarkable domestic 
treasure trove, hidden gems continue to reveal themselves. Recently, one of the 
many knitting patterns was found to have been devised by a woman who was a 
Polish spy in the second world war – she had written it in code.

For John, the library’s flourishing marks an acceptance of a truth that she 
and Patrick have always embraced. “There has been a shift in understanding now, 
and an acceptance of the idea that women can preserve their own heritage – and 
about the power of that heritage.”

Other women’s archives in the UK

The Women’s Library

Established in 1926, as the Library of the London Society for Women’s Service, 
it includes the personal archives of the Guardian’s Mary Stott and Jill 
Craigie. Its primary objective today is to document women’s lives in Britain. 
It is now housed at the London School of Economics.

Nottingham Women’s Centre

The only library of its kind in the East Midlands, it has managed to retain 
most of its original, and often rare books and magazines

The Feminist Archive South

Based at Bristol University, and, north, at the University of Leeds, this 
collection includes personal and organisational archives, conference papers, 
dissertations and books, as well as complete print runs of journals like Spare 
Rib, Shrew, and Scarlet Woman.

The Women’s Liberation Music Archive

This collection pays tribute to the 1970s and 80s feminist musicians who 
incorporated political and social messages into their music. Its collection is 
housed at the University of Bristol Special Collections.
 