
The global green movement is preparing for the fight of its life against 
efforts byDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> to 
rollback action on climate change, with a surge in fundraising, planned court 
challenges and a succession of protests.

Environmental activists said the election of a climate change denier as US 
president, along withthe prospect of former vice-presidential nominee Sarah 
Palin and various oil billionaires holding senior posts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/climate-change-trump-administration-environmental-protection>
, has prompted an “outpouring” of donations.

This week, comedian, John Oliver, used his show to urge viewers to give to the 
Natural Resources Defense Council, while EarthJustice, a specialist in 
environmental law, reported a “substantial increase” in donations to wage the 
expected legal battles ahead. The Sierra Club said it has had 9,000 new monthly 
donors since election day, more than they had in the year to date.

After spending eight years cheering and occasionally scolding Barack Obama, 
environmentalists are now moving on to a war footing. Campaigns will be pitched 
around climate action and protecting national parks, with green groups claiming 
that public support for these things means that Trump has no mandate to tear 
them apart.

Donald Trump presidency a 'disaster for the planet', warn climate scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
With Congress and the White House in Republican hands, the message will have 
to resonate in conservative ears rather than just energise the base.

“We won’t be in a defensive crouch for the next four years, licking our 
wounds,” said Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, America’s 
largest green group. “If Trump tries to go backwards on climate change he’ll 
run headlong into an organised mass of people who will fight him in the courts, 
in Congress and on the streets.”

May Boeve, the director of international climate group 350.org, which during 
the Obama presidency fought and won against the Keystone oil pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/06/obama-rejects-keystone-xl-pipeline>
 that is now back on the agenda, said building alliances with Trump’s heartland 
would be key.

“The best way to unite a progressive coalition with working class voters is to 
push for a 100% renewable energy economy that works for all,” she said. “Clean 
energy remains the greatest potential job creator in the 21st century, while 
climate change is still our greatest threat.”

The group said it was “preparing for the fight of our lives”, planning a mass 
mobilisation of people in Washington DC to put pressure on Trump, and a 
separate effort to push Obama to use his final days in office to pursue green 
measures, such as stopping thecontroversial Dakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/15/dakota-access-oil-pipeline-construction-delay-court>
.

Environmentalists said that, while Trump’s hand in the courts and Congress 
might be stronger than it was when they fought against George W Bush, one key 
difference was that businesses were now convinced of the need for curbing 
emissions. At the UN climate talks this week in Marrakech, a coalition of 
businesses including Kellogg’s and Mars,urged leaders to commit to long-term 
carbon plans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/16/john-kerry-we-will-fight-to-keep-us-in-the-paris-climate-deal>
.

“Ten years ago, US business wasn’t on board about tackling climate change,” 
said Craig Bennett, CEO of Friends of the Earth in the UK. “This time round you 
have a situation where US businesses and businesses more globally [support 
action], so this time around the environmental movement does not feel like it 
is on its own. We’re much better placed to fight this.”

In the UK, a cross-party group of MPs and environment groups has already begun 
meeting to discuss how to respond to anti-environmental rhetoric from the Trump 
administration, and how to deal with the consequences of the president elect 
delivering on his promise to withdraw fromthe Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-key-points>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1cfc2551c0ee17a05a54105952fd1b3c152c726%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20green%20movement%20prepares%20to%20fight%20Trump%20on%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20green%20movement%20prepares%20to%20fight%20Trump%20on%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1cfc2551c0ee17a05a54105952fd1b3c152c726%2F0_0_4724_3149%2F4724.jpg>
 Campaign group 10:10 cover London’s Parliament Square with pin wheels to 
highlighting public support for clean energy. Photograph: Andrew Aitchison/In 
Pictures/Getty Images 
Climate campaigners are planning a protest outside the US embassy in London on 
Friday night at the prospect of the country pulling out of the Paris accord. “I 
am absolutely sure this will be one of many. There is another in a week. There 
will certainly be demonstrations on his inauguration day,” said Phil Thornhill, 
who is organising the protest that he hopes will attract a few hundred people.

On inauguration day, activists in Britain are also planning to drop “Build 
bridges, not walls” banners from all of London’s bridges – and potentially 
famous bridges elsewhere – to call on Trump to rethink any regressive steps on 
climate change.

In Australia, the Trump victory is driving an intensified focus from 
environmentalists to put a stop to a proposed coalmine there, which would be 
the biggest in the already coal-rich nation, and one of the biggest in the 
world.

Indian company Adani has been trying for years now to get approval to develop 
a $16bn (£13bn) coal mine in outback Queensland, as well as an expanded port on 
the country’s Great Barrier Reef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/22/abbot-point-coal-terminal-expansion-given-green-light-by-greg-hunt>
 coast so the coal can be exported.

Stopping the mine has already been a major focus of the climate movement in 
Australia, with several court cases challenging its environmental approvals, 
including on the grounds that the emissions its coal will produce will 
contribute to climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/may/06/greg-hunt-argues-theres-no-definite-link-between-coal-and-climate-change>
.

But after millions of working class voters in the US were convinced to vote 
for Trump – their concerns not adequately addressed by the Democrats or the 
climate movement – green groups in Australia are concerned there may be a risk 
of something similar happening there. And that could end up giving strengthened 
political support to the controversial mine.





GetUp is a campaigning group in Australia, which raises money through 
crowdfunding and says it fights for human rights, economic justice and 
environmental sustainability.

Paul Oosting, national director of GetUp, told the Guardian he’s concerned the 
hard right in Australia were adopting similar tactics to those adopted by Trump.

But he said they have plans to undermine that.

“At the last federal election, GetUp targeted the hard right of Australian 
politics, because they hold Australia back on issues like global warming, and 
public health and education,” Oosting said.

That strategy appeared to be effective. “What we found was that if you listen 
to people’s concerns, and highlight the threats to their interests posed by the 
hard right, people seize the chance to turf them out,” said Oosting.



Oosting would not reveal details of the strategy, but said they would use 
similar tactics they found successful during the federal election, and apply it 
against the Adani mine.

GetUp is not alone. There is a consensus growing among environmental groups in 
Australia that Adani should be a primary focus of the climate movement there.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadfd3ee820be3477a4986ea3aebf450a1dec3dd3%2F0_0_4676_3117%2F4676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20green%20movement%20prepares%20to%20fight%20Trump%20on%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20green%20movement%20prepares%20to%20fight%20Trump%20on%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F18%2Fglobal-green-movement-prepares-to-fight-trump-on-climate-change%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fadfd3ee820be3477a4986ea3aebf450a1dec3dd3%2F0_0_4676_3117%2F4676.jpg>
 Activists in Australia dress as bleached, dead coral to call for greater 
protection of the Great Barrier Reef. Photograph: Justin Hawk/Greenpeace/AAP 
Image 
Geoff Cousins, president of the Australian Conservation Foundation, said his 
organisation, which is currently fighting the mine’s approval in the country’s 
highest court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/19/adani-carmichael-coalmine-faces-new-legal-challenge-from-conservation-foundation>
, is going to redouble its efforts to stop the mine.



“We’ve commenced discussions with possible financiers [of the mine] – we met 
with banks and we will redouble those efforts. And we’re looking at a whole 
range of inventive measures that I’m not at liberty to discuss at the moment,” 
he said.
 