
Global warming myths can never be permanently killed. Once debunked, a climate 
myth will go into a state of hibernation, waiting for enough time to pass that 
people forget the last time a scientific stake was thrust through its heart. 
The myth will eventually rise from the grave once again, seeking out victims 
with tasty, underutilized brains to devour – every zombie’s favorite meal.

And so we have the long-debunked conspiracy theorist myth 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/surface-temperature-measurements-advanced.htm> 
that scientists are falsifying temperature data to conjure global warming and 
frighten the masses. The story goes that in the raw temperature data from the 
continental USA, the second-hottest year on record was 1934, behind 2012. Inthe 
data adjusted by scientists <http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/cag/>, 1998 was the 
hottest year on record in the USA, until that record was broken in 2006 and 
then shattered in 2012 (1934 comes in 4th). The raw data are the gold standard, 
so this proves that climate scientists are falsifying data, right?

Wrong. Really, about as wrong as humanly possible. Scientists make adjustments 
to the raw data to remove factors that we know introduce biases and false 
trends. For example, temperature stations were once observed and data recorded 
in the afternoon, butlater the observations switched to the mornings 
<http://www.ncdc.noaa.gov/monitoring-references/faq/temperature-monitoring.php>
. Since mornings are colder than afternoons, that change introduced a cool bias 
into the raw data. Other factors that require adjustments include changes in 
the temperature monitoring system instrument setups, and the movement of 
temperature stations from one location to another.

Scientists have put substantial effort into accounting for all these changes 
that introduce known biases in the raw data across thousands of temperature 
monitoring stations. It’s not a vast conspiracy to trick us into buying solar 
panels; it’s just good science, which even contrarian climate scientists don’t 
dispute. In fact, when we compare raw and adjusted temperature data across the 
surface of the whole planet, the difference between the two is barely 
noticeable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Fglobal-warming-zombies-devour-telegraph-fox-news-brains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F25%2F1403708278515%2Fa4f5e773-849c-4414-97d2-c7a71078f728-1020x1020.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Global%20warming%20conspiracy%20theorist%20zombies%20devour%20Telegraph%20and%20Fox%20News%20brains%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Fglobal-warming-zombies-devour-telegraph-fox-news-brains%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Global%20warming%20conspiracy%20theorist%20zombies%20devour%20Telegraph%20and%20Fox%20News%20brains%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2014%2Fjun%2F25%2Fglobal-warming-zombies-devour-telegraph-fox-news-brains%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2014%2F6%2F25%2F1403708278515%2Fa4f5e773-849c-4414-97d2-c7a71078f728-1020x1020.png>
 Comparison of global temperatures from raw and adjusted Global Historical 
Climatology Network (GHCN) v3 data, created by Zeke Hausfather. 
Yet we suddenly have Christopher Booker at The Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/environment/10916086/The-scandal-of-fiddled-global-warming-data.html>
 andFox News' Sean Hannity 
<http://www.hannity.com/articles/content-476261/global-warming-panic-12491924/> 
claiming that climate scientists are ‘fabricating’ and ‘manipulating’ the raw 
temperature data, despite the fact that evenmost contrarian bloggers see right 
through this myth 
<http://reason.com/blog/2014/06/23/did-nasanoaa-dramatically-alter-us-tempe>. 


So what happened? Shauna Theel at Media Matters documented the path that this 
zombie myth took 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2014/06/24/fox-news-cites-birther-to-claim-nasa-faked-glob/199871>
, starting from a fringe denialist blog, making its way up the conservative 
media echo chamber ladder until it reached media outlets likeThe Telegraph and 
Fox News that purportedly care about factually accurate reporting.

Tony Heller, a birther 
<http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2012/10/04/obama-runs-into-problems-without-his-teleprompter/>
who <http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2013/11/28/a-history-of-birthers/> 
criticizes climate science under thepseudonym 
<http://www.desmogblog.com/steven-goddard> "Steven Goddard," wrote a blog post 
<http://stevengoddard.wordpress.com/2014/06/23/noaanasa-dramatically-altered-us-temperatures-after-the-year-2000/>
 that claimed "NASA cooled 1934 and warmed 1998, to make 1998 the hottest year 
in US history instead of 1934." After theDrudge Report 
<http://www.drudgereportarchives.com/data/2014/06/23/20140623_110251.htm> 
promoted a report of this allegation by the conservative British newspaperThe 
Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/earth/environment/10916086/The-scandal-of-fiddled-global-warming-data.html>
, conservative media fromBreitbart 
<http://www.breitbart.com/Breitbart-London/2014/06/23/Global-warming-Fabricated-by-NASA-and-NOAA>
 toThe Washington Times 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2014/jun/23/editorial-rigged-science/> 
claimed the data was "fabricated" or "faked." On June 24, Fox & Friends picked 
it up, claiming that "the U.S. has actually been cooling since the 1930s" but 
scientists had "faked the numbers".

Let’s take a few more shots at this zombie myth to see if we can send it back 
to its grave, temporarily.

 * Scientists make adjustments to remove known biases in the raw data. Average 
surface temperatures over the continental USA have indeed warmed by more than 
1°F since the 1930s. 
 * Even if you don’t trust those adjustments, raw and adjusted global 
temperature data are nearly identical. The USA represents less than 2% of the 
Earth’s surface. 
 * On top of that, the warming of the atmosphere only accounts for about 2% of 
the warming of the planet <http://skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=12> as a 
whole. The oceans account for more than 90% of global warming, and have been 
heating up at a rate equivalent to 2 Hiroshima atomic bomb detonations per 
second since the 1950s, and4 per second over the past decade 
<http://4hiroshimas.com/>. 
Hence this particular myth is based on 2% of 2% of global warming, but it’s 
not even accurate for that 0.04%. The zombies are suggesting that we should 
rely on raw data that are known to be riddled with biases, and are claiming 
that scientific efforts to correct for those biases are part of some vast 
conspiracy.

Some advice for journalists – the next time you hear a global warming myth 
that sounds too good to be true, before letting the zombie snack on your brains,
check SkepticalScience.com first 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/surface-temperature-measurements-advanced.htm> 
to see if it’s riddled with scientific debunking bullet wounds.
 