
It’s familiar news by now. Oxfam’s figures have gone viral: the richest 1% now 
have more wealth <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35339475> than the rest of 
the world’s population combined. Global inequality is worse than at any time 
since the 19th century.

 For most people, this is all they know about global inequality. But Oxfam’s 
wealth figures don’t quite tell the whole story. What about income inequality? 
And – more importantly – what about inequalities betweencountries? If we expand 
our view beyond the usual metrics, we can learn a lot more about how unequal 
our world has become.


The first thing to say about Oxfam’s numbers is that they present a very 
conservative picture. Given that the rich hide so much of their wealth in tax 
havens and secrecy jurisdictions, it is impossible to know how much they really 
have. Recent estimates suggest thatup to $32tn 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-offshore-wealth-idUSBRE86L03U20120722> is 
stored away in tax havens – around one sixth of the world’s total private 
wealth. If we were to add that to Oxfam’s metrics, inequality would look much, 
much worse.

My Arab Spring: 'I envisioned a new Syria, but it never materialised'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/apr/07/my-arab-spring-aleppo-new-syria-never-materialised>
But that’s wealth. Many analysts object that we shouldn’t be measuring wealth 
inequality, but ratherincome inequality. This has been a major criticism of 
Oxfam’s numbers. And when you look at income inequality, it doesn’t seem so 
bad. At least not according to the dominant narrative.Branko Milanovic 
<https://twitter.com/BrankoMilan?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, one of the world’s leading experts in global income inequality, argues that 
while inequality is getting worsewithin countries, on a global scale it is 
actually getting better.

We can measure income inequality with the Gini index 
<http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV.GINI>. A score of 0 represents 
total equality and a score of 1 represents total inequality, where one person 
has everything and everyone else has nothing. According to Milanovic, the 
global Gini indexhas decreased slightly 
<https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/16935>, from 0.72 in 1988 to 
0.71 in 2008. So perhaps we shouldn’t be overly worried about inequality.

The Gini index is a troublesome measure, though, because it only captures 
relative changes. If the incomes of the rich and the poor increase by the same
rate, then the Gini index remains the same, even though absolute inequality is 
increasing. In other words, if person A has $10k and person B has $100k, and 
then both of them double their income, the Gini remains the same, even though 
the income gap will have grown from $90k to $180k.

Economist Robert Wade argues that this is a highly misleading measurement 
<http://triplecrisis.com/our-misleading-measure-of-income-and-wealth-inequality-the-standard-gini-coefficient/>
, as it obscures the true extent of inequality. We should be using the absolute 
Gini index, he says. So what happens if we do that? We see thatinequality has 
exploded 
<http://www.economics.ox.ac.uk/Department-of-Economics-Discussion-Paper-Series/the-global-distribution-of-income>
 over the past few decades, from 0.57 in 1988 to 0.72 in 2005.

Inequality between countries has been increasing by orders of magnitude over 
the past two hundred years

But hold on, you might say. Income inequality among individuals might be 
getting worse, but surely the gap between poor countries and rich countries is 
narrowing. The international development industry is helping to bridge the 
chasm between the west and the rest, right? This is a common opinion; I hear it 
all the time from students at the London School of Economics, where I teach. 
After all, “convergence theory 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Convergence_(economics)>” holds that, because 
poor countries grow at a faster rate than rich countries, over time the gap 
between the two will automatically diminish.

Unfortunately, it’s not true. In fact, history shows exactly the opposite. 
Inequality between countries has been increasing by orders of magnitude over 
the past two hundred years, and shows no signs of slowing.

There are a few ways we can look at this. Probably the most common way to 
think about global inequality is to measure the gap between the richest and 
poorest countries in real income per capita. Using data fromthe Maddison Project
 <http://www.ggdc.net/maddison/maddison-project/home.htm>, we see that in 1960, 
at the end of colonialism, people living in the world’s richest country were 33 
times richer than people living in the poorest country. That’s quite a 
substantial gap. But then by 2000, after neoliberal globalisation had run its 
course, they were a shocking 134 times richer. And that’s not counting extreme 
outliers, like small oil-rich kingdoms in the Middle East or tiny offshore tax 
havens. This isn’t convergence. To quote Lant Pritchett, it’sdivergence, big 
time <http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/1813-9450-1522>.

Anti-corruption protests around the world - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/mar/18/anti-corruption-protests-around-the-world-in-pictures>
If we look at it in absolute terms, it’s just as bad. From 1960 to today, 
based on the data from the Maddison Project, the absolute gap between the 
average incomes of people in the richest and poorest countries has grown by 
135%.

Of course, this metric overstates inequality by focusing on countries at 
either extreme. We can correct for this by looking at regional differences. The 
best way to do this is to measure the gap, in real terms, between the GDP per 
capita of the world’s dominant power (the United States) and that of various 
regions of the global South. Using World Bank figures, we see that since 1960 
the gap for Latin America has grown by 206%, the gap for sub-Saharan Africa has 
grown by 207%, and the gap for South Asia has grown by 196%. In other words, 
the global inequality gap has roughly tripled in size.

Over the past few decades inequality has become so bad that, in 2000, 
Americans were nine times richer than Latin Americans, 72 times richer than 
sub-Saharan Africans, and a mind-popping 80 times richer than south Asians. 
These numbers give us a sense for how unfairly the global economy distributes 
our planet’s wealth.

Forget 'developing' poor countries, it's time to 'de-develop' rich countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2015/sep/23/developing-poor-countries-de-develop-rich-countries-sdgs>
It doesn’t matter how you slice it; global inequality is getting worse. Much 
worse. Convergence theory turned out to be wildly incorrect. Inequality doesn’t 
disappear automatically; it all depends on the balance of political power in 
the global economy. As long as a few rich countries have the power to set the 
rules to their own advantage, inequality will continue to worsen. The debt 
system, structural adjustment, free trade agreements, tax evasion, and power 
asymmetries in the World Bank, the IMF, and the WTO are all major reasons that 
inequality is getting worse instead of better.

It’s time we face up to the imbalances that distort our global economy. 
There’s nothing natural about extreme inequality. It is man-made. It has to do 
with power. And we need to have the courage to say so.

 * This article was amended on 7th April 2016. Due to a mathematical error an 
earlier version said that “since 1960 the gap for Latin America has grown by 
306%, the gap for sub-Saharan Africa has grown by 307%, and the gap for South 
Asia has grown by 296%. In other words, the global inequality gap has roughly 
tripled in size”. The gap has indeed tripled, but the percentages should read 
206%, 207% and 196%.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter.
 