
2016: a year so bad it’s become an adjective. A much-loved celebrity dies; a 
coup happens somewhere; an unhinged demagogue wins the US presidency: the 
response, invariably, has been, “Oh, how 2016!” If you are British and of a 
vaguely progressive bent, there have been two major exceptions this year. The 
first was Zac Goldsmith being thumped in the London mayoral elections. And now 
the second. Zac Goldsmithlosing a vanity byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
 in his own constituency.

Richmond Park marks the start of a new, cross-party rejection of Brexit | Hugo 
Dixon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/richmond-park-cross-party-rejection-brexit-zac-goldsmith-lib-dems-sarah-olney>
No mercy for this loser. Goldsmith is a multimillionaire chancer who attempted 
to seize the London mayoralty with a shameful and shamelesslyracist campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/15/london-mayoral-race-zac-goldsmith-accused-of-playing-with-fire>
. He knew exactly what he was doing. He attempted to defeat his opponent by 
smearing him as the pawn of Islamist extremists. “I don’t think it was a dog 
whistle because you can’t hear a dog whistle,” as seniorLondon Tory Andrew Boff 
put it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/zac-goldsmith-attacked-by-senior-tory-over-tactics-in-london-mayor-election>
. “Everybody could hear this.”

At a time when prejudice against Muslims is widespread, this was not simply 
reckless, it was dangerous. It would have legitimised bigotry. If one of the 
most diverse cities on Earth elected such an individual after such a campaign, 
a powerful – and alarming – message would have been sent.

There is a longstanding tradition in this country of rich white men doing 
terrible things but then being swiftly rehabilitated. Just months after his 
unforgivable campaign, you could already see this creep to respectability 
happening with Goldsmith, a man who repeatedly refused to apologise for what he 
had done. The government’s decision in favour of a third Heathrow runway led 
him to resign both from the Tories and from his seat. “Ah bravo, man of 
principle,” came the line. It was nonsense.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lib%20Dem%20Sarah%20Olney%20beats%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20to%20win%20Richmond%20Park%20byelection%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Flib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video&media=>
Lib Dem Sarah Olney beats Zac Goldsmith to win Richmond Park byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/02/lib-dem-sarah-olney-beats-zac-goldsmith-win-richmond-park-byelection-video>
A man of such riches could afford a byelection without the resources of his 
party. The Conservatives stood aside for him, making a mockery of the idea he 
was an independent. He claimed to be the anti-Heathrow candidate, but all of 
his main opponents were too. This was no referendum on Heathrow, as he claimed. 
In this vanity byelection, it was a referendum on two things: the Tories’ 
Brexit agenda and Goldsmith himself. And the good people of Richmond Park made 
their opinion on both issues clear, overturning a huge 23,015-vote majority.

Goldsmith’s defeat has consequences. It inflicts damage on Theresa May, who 
indulged his vanity. It is a blow to her chaotic approach to Brexit. It may 
make an early general election – which could only realistically be disastrous 
for Labour – less likely as nervous Tory MPs in the south-west eye a Lib Dem 
resurgence that could turf them out. Or it could, counterintuitively, make an 
early election more likely as the government’s majority is whittled away.

Labour needs to learn lessons too. There were fewer votes for the candidate 
than there are members in the constituency

Labour needs to learn lessons, too. There were fewer votes for the Labour 
candidate than there are Labour members in the constituency: understandable, 
given tactical voting. But Labour has to ensure its voice does not disappear in 
the Brexit debate.

But consequences aside, rejoice. Why not? It has been an astonishingly 
terrible year, one in which xenophobic populism has stomped all over the 
western world, where much-loved greats have died, where you almost dreaded to 
check the news. Goldsmith’s defeat is testament to human decency. He had a 
choice about how he ran his mayoral campaign. He chose to wage a dangerous 
campaign of bigotry. And now he has lost twice, his political career is over, 
and his reputation is trashed. Good riddance.
 