
Six months. That, roughly, is how long the wait is until Game of Thrones, due 
“in the summer”, returns. Until then, you could busy yourself by ticking off a 
few of those New Year’s resolutions you have no interest in achieving, like 
running, or learning French, or reading books that aren’t Game of Thrones. You 
could finally get round to bingewatching House of Cards, despite the fact that 
a large part of you really doesn’t want to. Or you could scratch that sword and 
skullduggery itch by immersing yourself in a bloody tale of warring kings and 
odysseys to far-off lands. You could catch up with Vikings, one of the best and 
most under-appreciated quasi-historical TV epics of the past decade. Then you 
could bask in the knowledge that you’ve made completely the right decision.

Vikings follows the pillaging-and-plundering exploits of famous Norse warrior 
Ragnar Lothbrok. A legendary figure of the history and folklore of the ninth 
century, Lothbrok was the first Viking to cross the North Sea to England, and 
the first to raid France. Ragnar’s actual existence is disputed – it’s commonly 
assumed he’s an amalgam of various other derring-doers – but his character in 
the show is no less compelling for his possible fictitiousness; a farmer with 
an impossible dream who blooms into the leader of an entire people, by way of 
cunning, cruelty and insatiable curiosity. Oh, and killing.

Because, like all the most interesting TV characters of recent years (and 
virtually everyone in George RR Martin’s tomes), Lothbrok is not a good person. 
His trade is murder and robbery, after all. There is no black and white, only 
grey: he lies, cheats, betrays and butchers, forever questioning his own 
actions and succumbing to the easy road of temptation. Azure-eyed ex-underpant 
model Travis Fimmel puts in a career-defining turn as Lothbrok. That his 
fidgety, howling, transmogrative performance has never met with any award is 
something of a travesty.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ebf8c57e382e36bb94253d6575b6a29d6453f4a%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20withdrawal%20syndrome%3F%20Try%20Vikings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20withdrawal%20syndrome%3F%20Try%20Vikings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ebf8c57e382e36bb94253d6575b6a29d6453f4a%2F0_0_7360_4417%2F7360.jpg>
 A warrior in her own right … Lothbrok’s wife, Lagertha. Photograph: Amazon 
Prime 
The web of supporting characters, too, is strong. Lothbrok’s wife, Lagertha, 
is a politically astute warrior in her own right (for a society so at ease with 
rape and pillage, it was an oddly egalitarian society). There’s Lothbrok’s 
brother Rollo, jealous of his sibling’s home life and burgeoning fame; and 
Floki, his eccentric, eyeliner-sporting confidant – an axe-wielding oddball and 
master shipbuilder. Special mention must also go to Linus Roache (son of 
William, AKA Ken Barlow) as the deliciously dastardly King Eckbert of Wessex.

At this point, three-quarters of the way through the show’s fourth season, 
narratives are spread over thousands of miles, each locale – again, like Game 
of Thrones – rich with its own seam of intriguing characters and power-plays. 
And the show is happy to kill off characters it’s spent so long developing, 
too, which gives each story arc an air of unpredictability (at least to those 
who haven’t cribbed the history pages of Wikipedia).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ec788256118b10ac511fe289fc0b9cebbb1ab50%2F0_0_4341_3829%2F4341.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Got%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20withdrawal%20syndrome%3F%20Try%20Vikings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Got%20Game%20of%20Thrones%20withdrawal%20syndrome%3F%20Try%20Vikings&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fgame-of-thrones-withdrawal-syndrome-try-vikings%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ec788256118b10ac511fe289fc0b9cebbb1ab50%2F0_0_4341_3829%2F4341.jpg>
 Nary an episode goes by without swords-a-swinging … Vikings. Photograph: 
Amazon Prime 
Don’t let all this talk of characters give you the impression that Vikings 
scrimps on the action, though. Nary an episode goes by without 
swords-a-swinging: the violence is brutal and bloody, without crossing too far 
into gratuitousness. And the battle scenes are exciting and epic, with some 
sequences (such as a vast assault on Paris) easily standing up against the best 
scuffles on the show with dragons in it. This is a good-looking production, and 
if there is a vast budgetary disparity between this show and HBO’s, it is 
rarely evident on-screen.


Throw in a smattering of the supernatural, constant talk about gods – the cool 
Norse gods, like Odin – and no small helping of the bared flesh now compulsory 
when dramatising any story involving royalty, and you’ve got a show that’s 
tailormade for someone who likes their TV sword-based and a tiny bit silly.

There are other options, of course. The BBC’s soon-to-return The Last Kingdom 
shares many actual characters with, and tells a similar tale to, Vikings, only 
from the opposite, Anglo-Saxon perspective. And most recently there’s Tom 
Hardy’s hugely enjoyableTaboo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/07/taboo-recap-episode-one-tom-hardy-devilish-welcome-unholy-hero>
, which – despite its gruff grunting to the contrary – is about as dark and 
gritty as a limerick about a man from Nantucket. But perhaps the ideal thing to 
sate your Westerosian appetite is right here – four seasons’ worth, in 
bingeable, streamable form on Amazon Prime.

So don’t worry. Winter is coming. But until it does, there’s Vikings. 

 