
A petition opposing a retrospective rise in the cost of student loans that 
obtained 120,000 signatures in just a few days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/04/government-under-pressure-over-student-loans>
 has been rejected by the government.

Campaigner Alex True, who began the petition while doing his finals at Durham 
University, said he was “disappointed and disheartened” at the government’s 
response.

Graduates who keep on paying after they’ve cleared their student debts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/05/graduates-student-debt-loan-system>
The petition <https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/131167> focused on a 
promise made in 2010 that from April 2017 the student loans repayment threshold 
of £21,000 would be upped each year with average earnings.

It argued that “the government has now backtracked on this promise, freezing 
the threshold at £21,000. Graduates will now pay more on their student loans”.

But the Department for Business, Innovation and Skills said in a statement 
posted on the petition site: “Freezing the repayment threshold ensures that the 
student support system remains affordable to the taxpayer and all students can 
access a university education, irrespective of their ability to pay.


“This government is ensuring higher education is open to more people than ever 
before, and application rates from disadvantaged young people seeking to go to 
university are currently at record levels. But higher education and further 
education must remain affordable to the taxpayer.”

True said: “Obviously I am very disappointed with the manner of the response. 
It failed to address that making retrospective changes to a loan agreement 
without the consent from both parties should not be possible.


“In the consultation process the government completely ignored the 
consultation responses, which opposed making retrospective changes.”

But BIS said: “All responses to the consultation were considered carefully in 
the wider context of the detailed analysis of impacts, including on the public 
finances.”

Student loans: the next big mis-selling scandal?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/may/28/student-loans-next-mis-selling-scandal>
True argues that during the consultation it was made clear to ministers that 
the change to terms and conditions came after borrowers had made their original 
decision, and that such changes would not be permitted by commercial lenders.

He added that it sets a precedent for the likelihood of further retrospective 
changes.

Petitions that garner 100,000 approvals can lead to a debate in parliament 
about the issue. However, a debate is not guaranteed and are decided by the 
parliamentary petitions committee rather than government departments or 
ministers.
 