
Theresa May wasted no time in wielding the axe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/michael-gove-sacked-as-theresa-may-appoints-new-cabinet>
 over what her allies cuttingly called David Cameron’s “chumocracy” when she 
arrived at No 10 last summer. It was a formidable display of political power — 
but it may yet come back to haunt her.

Michael Gove’s latest excursion into controversy, pipping the prime minister – 
and her foreign secretary, Boris Johnson – to a personal meeting with Donald 
Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-uk-interview-tory-times>
, is just the latest in a series of headaches created for May by the powerful 
figures she dispatched to the backbenches.

Gove, sacked as justice secretary, was a special, and especially unlamented 
case, on the day of the long knives that also saw, among others, Nicky Morgan, 
Anna Soubry and Theresa Villiers unceremoniously dispatched.George Osborne had 
already been shown the door the previous day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/philip-hammond-appointed-chancellor-as-george-osborne-exits>
.

Michael Gove: I made mistakes in leadership bid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/michael-gove-brexit-vote-ruined-friendships-may-cameron-boris-johnson>
Those Tory MPs not already alienated by Gove’s decision to back Vote Leave, 
had been outraged by his treacherous last minute entry into the leadership 
race, blowing up Boris Johnson’s hopes, and effectively handing the crown to 
May.

But the irrepressible Gove took little time to bounce back. The former 
journalist, who is known to be close to Rupert Murdoch,swiftly took up a 
£150,000 post as a columnist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/05/michael-gove-returns-times-columnist-book-reviewer>
 at his old home on the Times, which he uses to cajole and criticise the 
government.

No 10 did not appear to have been warned about Gove’s interview with Trump, 
carried out in the president-elect’s glitzy New York headquarters, alongside a 
journalist from German publication Bild.

One insider said it would be a “good read”; but the spectacle of her erstwhile 
leadership rival winning the ear of the most powerful man in America, while she 
has yet to secure a firm date for a face-to-face meeting, can’t have been 
welcome to May.

And the timing is less than ideal, too, as Downing Street tries to clear the 
political airwaves in advance of what is being billed as a decisive speech on 
Brexit on Tuesday.

One Gove ally suggested the prime minister was reaping the consequences of 
throwing so many of her colleagues onto the political scrapheap.

And Gove has been far from alone in being prepared to demonstrate he feels no 
need for the approval of No 10. Morgan, who succeeded him as education 
secretary, made an enemy of May in October,by questioning her cherished policy 
of expanding grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/nicky-morgan-grammar-schools-plan-could-undermine-progress>
, and was later cut from a meeting with the prime minister after questioning 
her choice of legwear,in a highly embarrassing spat quickly dubbed trousergate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/09/morgan-cut-from-meeting-with-may-after-criticising-pms-leather-trousers>
.

Soubry, who was a junior minister in the business department, has become the 
de facto leader ofa group of rebels dubbed by some the “new bastards” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/theresa-may-meet-tory-new-bastards-opposed-to-hard-brexit>
, who are fighting for Britain to retain membership of the single market after 
Brexit. Meanwhile, Villiers has been shouting for the sidelines, calling for a 
hard Brexit.

George Osborne, a close friend of Gove’s, has so far made few forays into 
public debate,aside from continuing to call for the strengthening of the 
Northern Powerhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/george-osborne-to-chair-northern-powerhouse-partnership>
. But there are rumours in Westminster that he has been quietly aiding and 
abetting some of his rebellious parliamentary colleagues.

Gove’s transatlantic adventure was read by some as a hint that he could yet 
leave Westminster to return to journalism – perhaps even, as an ally of Rupert 
Murdoch’s, to edit the Times. But it also demonstrated that he remains a 
formidably well-connected political player.

Meanwhile, Gove’s colleagues were intrigued by the spectacle of the 
opinionated pair – Gove and Trump – exchanging views: one said, “you have to 
wonder which talked the most!”
 