
The government has moved to crack down on unscrupulous employers by appointing 
a new boss to lead the collection of government bodies tasked with stamping out 
exploitation in the workplace.

Prof Sir David Metcalf, a founding member of the Low Pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> Commission and former chairman of the 
Migration Advisory Committee, was named on Thursday as the first director of 
Labour Market Enforcement

He will be devising a new strategy on how three bodies – the Gangmasters and 
Labour Abuse Authority (GLAA), the Employment Agency Standards Inspectorate 
(EAS) and HM Revenue and Custom’s national minimum wage enforcement team – 
share information and work together.

The issue of worker exploitation has risen up the political and news agendas 
over the past year, after scandals including the exposure howworkers at the 
retailer Sports Direct were receiving less than the national minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

Since then Theresa May has raised the topic of the treatment of workers in her 
first Conservative party speech as prime minister last year, when she said: “If 
you’re a boss who earns a fortune but doesn’t look after your staff … I’m 
putting you on warning. This can’t go on anymore 
<http://press.conservatives.com/post/151378268295/prime-minister-the-good-that-government-can-do>
.”

At the same time, the government commissioned Matthew Taylor, a former Downing 
street adviser to Tony Blair, to conduct an independent review into modern 
employment practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/i-tell-theresa-may-working-lives-review-modern-employment-zero-hours-flexibility>
 to ensure the UK’s employment rules keep up to date to reflect new ways of 
working.

Metcalf will report to the home secretary, Amber Rudd, and business secretary, 
Greg Clark.

The role will mean that, for the first time, the GLAA, the EAS and HMRC will 
centralise their intelligence, allowing the director “to draw up an annual 
strategy targeting sectors and regions which are vulnerable to unscrupulous 
employment practices”.

The business minister Margot James, said: “The government is determined to 
make sure the economy works for all. That’s why we are investing £1.7m in a 
national minimum and living wage awareness raising campaign alongside a record 
£25.3m on national minimum and living wage enforcement next year to make sure 
the UK’s lowest paid workers get the pay rise they deserve.”

The moves came after longstanding concerns about the levels of funding granted 
to HMRC’s minimum wage enforcement unit as well as confusion over when the GLAA 
would begranted new investigatory powers that were announced last May 
<http://www.gla.gov.uk/whats-new/latest-press-releases/16516-powers-and-remit-to-change-at-gla/>
.

The creation of the director of labour market enforcement role, now filled by 
Metcalf, was announced at the same time, when it was stated that the GLAA would 
be given “a broader remit and stronger powers to tackle labour exploitation 
across the economy, introducing the capacity to search and seize evidence and 
investigate modern slavery where it relates to labour abuse and other offences”.

The additional powers form part of the Immigration Act 2016, which ultimately 
could lead to criminal prosecutions and prison sentences of up to two years for 
businesses which mistreat their workers.

The GLAA was expected to be able to utilise its new investigatory powers from 
last autumn, but the Home Office now predicts they will be available from this 
spring.

Metcalf, who will also be working alongside the independent anti-slavery 
commissioner, said: “While the UK is by and large a fair and safe place to 
work, there are still rogue employers who exploit their workers and undercut 
honest businesses. This will not go unpunished.”

 