
Senior figures from Britain’s music industry have called on the government to 
help them defeat “profiteering” touts at an industry summit on live music 
ticketing.

Agents, promoters and musicians met to discuss how to ensure tickets go 
directly to fans rather than beingtraded purely for profit via secondary 
websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
such as Viagogo and Get Me In!


Several of them warned that politicians were not doing enough to protect the 
live music industry, which was worth £904m to the economy in 2015 according to 
the lobby groupUK Music <http://www.ukmusic.org/>.

Prof Michael Waterson, who led a government-backed review into ticketing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
, admitted during the event he fears his proposals for solving the problem may 
be “pushed into the long grass”.

Campaign group FanFair Alliance <http://fanfairalliance.org/about/> said touts 
were “profiteering via under-regulated resale sites”.

“We urgently need government to address these failings and make legislation 
effective for the digital age,” it said in a statement.

What sorcery is this? A £140 ticket for new Harry Potter play now costs £8,327
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/13/harry-potter-cursed-child-ticket-resale-prices>
Ben Lovett, a founding member of the band Mumford & Sons, said: “They [touts] 
are doing it very secretly because they know it’s morally wrong but it’s not 
currently legally wrong so there are no repercussions.”


He called for measures to tackle the use of bots, automated programmes that 
help touts harvest tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
 quickly for resale at a markup.

Ian McAndrew, founder and chief executive of Wildlife Entertainment, who has 
worked with acts such as Arctic Monkeys and Travis, said existing consumer 
rights law was being ignored and called for touts who flout it to be penalised.

The Labour peer Lady Hayter, who also spoke at the event, said legislation was 
“absolutely key”.


But Waterson said he was growing concerned at the lack of government action. 
“I understand that it’s delayed,” he said. “I’m concerned that it will be 
pushed into the long grass. I do intend to raise the issue if I don’t get a 
response. I haven’t had one.”

The summit, organised by the Music Managers’ Forum <https://themmf.net/> and 
live music website Songkick in London on Tuesday, comes amid mounting dismay 
that touts can hoover up tickets the moment they go on sale and then list them 
on secondary websites forhuge markups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/13/harry-potter-cursed-child-ticket-resale-prices>
.

Bands such as influential US rock outfit Pixies have taken their own steps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/10/pixies-lead-battle-against-ticket-touts>
 to combat touting in an attempt to loosen their grip on the UK market.

Waterson’s review proposed new measures to address secondary ticketing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
, including an investigation into whether existing consumer rights law is being 
broken.


The Consumer Rights Act demands that ticket resellers publish information such 
as the face value of the ticket and the seat number, but Waterson said 
enforcement of the rules was patchy.

“We want to see the existing legislation in the Consumer Rights Act enforced,” 
said Matt Jones, the chief executive of Songkick.


Waterson told the summit he was concerned that the issue had been a low 
priority with “very little focus on enforcing the legislation”.

His review urged secondary ticketing websites to make more effort to identify 
traders who use the sites purely to make money and suggested setting up a 
licensing system for touts.

Ticket resale is illegal or strictly limited in countries such as France, 
Italy and Norway.

The government is expected to wait for the result of a Competition and Markets 
Authority report into whether ticket companies are complying with the law, 
which is due by the end of the year.

The digital and creative industries minister, Matt Hancock, gave a speech on 
protecting UK artists 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/minister-for-digital-and-culture-creative-industries-speech>
 last week but did not address ticketing.

A spokesperson for the Department for Culture Media and Sport said: “The 
government’s response to Professor Waterson’s report will be published in due 
course.”
 