
Prior to email, how did you get in touch with a colleague at another 
university? You phoned the general switchboard and the operator would put you 
through. Typically this would involve several return trips while a misheard 
name was corrected through a process of elimination. A direct line was, at that 
time, simply out of the question, owing to the national phone number shortage. 
You may think I’m making this up but I’m not. When you moved house you often 
had to wait months for a phone number to become available.

Universities have survived wars and dictatorships. They will survive this too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/27/universities-survive-vote-european-eu>
On one memorable occasion I called a university in a modest-sized town to be 
greeted with: “The university”. As I was making numerous calls that day, this 
gave me less reassurance than I sought. Yet I was, and remain, very struck by 
the response. This was clearly someone who, for much of the day, answered the 
phone to students wanting to know the time of a lecture or to ask for an essay 
extension, or to a friendly local trader following up an invoice. It was not a 
voice expecting, say, an offer of an exciting new opportunity, not that this 
was what was on my mind either. The mix of local civic pride and narrow 
horizons left a deep impression on me.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%20vice%20chancellor%20worried%20about%20post-Brexit%20funding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%20vice%20chancellor%20worried%20about%20post-Brexit%20funding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio&media=>
Oxford vice-chancellor worried about post-Brexit funding – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/sep/22/oxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio>
And it is an impression that has returned in post-referendum, 
immigration-control Britain. Having done so much to build up theinternational 
standing of the UK’s universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/22/oxford-becomes-first-uk-university-to-top-global-rankings>
, are we on a tipping point to proud insularity yet inevitable decline? Take, 
for example, the government’s intention toreduce the number of visas 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/23/theresa-may-plans-new-immigration-crackdown-on-student-visas/>
 for overseas students. This, alone, is virtually guaranteed to lead to a fall 
in theUK’s standing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/19/universities-fear-uk-global-reputation-in-jeopardy-brexit>
 in at least those of the international league tables for which the proportion 
of international students is one of the factors taken into account.

Brexit fears may see 15% of UK university staff leave, group warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/25/brexit-may-force-15-of-staff-at-uk-universities-to-leave-warns-group>
Rankings, though, matter much less than reality. Consider staff recruitment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/25/britain-universities-depend-openness-dont-let-brexit-destroy-it>
. Whether or not there are formal restrictions, the changing atmosphere will 
not be good for attracting the international staff that characterise highly 
successful departments. Universities often talk about bringing in the “world’s 
best” but that can’t really be the aim. After all, there are not enough of the 
very best to go round. What we need is to bring in staff who are both excellent 
and rather different from what we already have, to refresh the gene pool and 
protect against complacency. At the moment we reap the benefit of having one of 
the most open academic job markets in the world.

Internationalisation of UK universities over the past few decades has been 
staggering, especially at postgraduate student level. To give a sense of the 
proportions, in2014-15 
<https://www.hesa.ac.uk/data-and-analysis/publications/students-2014-15/introduction>
, 71% of full-time master’s level students and more than half of PhD students 
came from overseas. This now makes it impossible to sustain our present 
university system on the basis of demand from home students alone. Falling 
demand will mean course closures, and perhaps even the closure of universities, 
most likely in those parts of the country that can least afford it, where the 
university is a major employer.

Academics feel blight of Brexit – from cancer research to peat projects
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/02/academics-brexit-research-peat-fears-eu-funds>
And if the overseas students cannot come to the UK, where will they go? Well, 
as they tell you at business school, today’s customer is tomorrow’s 
competition. Universities around the world, especially in the EU, have 
significant numbers of staff who were educated in the UK, and are fully capable 
of providing an innovative curriculum in English. In time UK universities would 
have felt this pressure in any case, but government policy promises our 
competitors a rosy future.

The apparent silver lining, I suppose, is that slackening of demand will make 
it easier for the rising generation of UK students to get the place of their 
choice. The cloud, though, is that when they get there, they will find even the 
best universities to be less interesting, diverse and dynamic places than they 
may have been expecting.
 