
Perhaps the most embarrassing aspect of the so-called “special relationship” 
between Britain and the US – besides the fact that it’s so clearly unrequited, 
with Britain using the term while the US doesn’t – is the neediness. Time and 
again, London abases itself in its desperation to be noticed by Washington, and 
especially by the White House – no matter how appalling the incumbent of that 
office.

The arrival of Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
has triggered yet another demonstration of this least appealing British habit, 
with a humiliating scramble among Britain’s politicians to be the first to 
shake thereportedly short-fingered hand 
<http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/03/how-donald-trump-became-the-short-fingered-vulgarian>
 of the next president. Nigel Farage won that competition, bagging that famously
anti-elitist snap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/farage-trump-buddy-photo-ukip>
 of the two men in the billionaire’s gold elevator. That set off a furious 
effort by Theresa May to get in there quick,despatching her two most senior 
aides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/05/theresa-mays-aides-visit-donald-trump-team-before-leaders-meeting>
 to Trump Tower to arrange a meeting. We now know that she followed that up 
with a personal letter to Trump, invoking Winston Churchill, as all British 
pleas for the special relationship must.

Related: Donald Trump's first UK post-election interview: Brexit a 'great 
thing' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>

We know of that thanks to Michael Gove, who has landed the coveted spot of 
runner-up to Farage, doubtless much to Downing Street’s irritation, with his
Times interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
 with the president-elect. It’s not clear whether the encounter between the two 
was a journalistic exercise – in which case it represents an admirable scoop 
for Gove and the paper – or a political one, with Gove receiving an audience in 
recognition of his service as a prime Brexiteer. Indeed, the interview sits in 
the no man’s land between politics and journalism.

Whichever hat he was wearing, reporter or MP, Gove honours the tradition of 
British neediness. A video clip of the encounter captures Trump condemning 
Barack Obama’s declaration during the EU referendum campaign that Britain would 
be, as Trump puts it, “at the back of the line” for a post-Brexit trade deal. 
Eagerly, Gove jumps in: “And now we’re at the front of the queue?” But Trump 
brushes him off with a non-answer: “I think you’re doing great!”

Later he gives the Brexiteers just enough to keep them happy, promising that 
“we’re gonna get something done very quickly”. He also pats Britain on the head 
several times, saying how much his mother loved the Queen and how proud he is 
of his Scottish roots which, he notes, have led him to “watch my pennies” – an 
observation bound to go down well in Dundee and Arbroath.

The greater significance of the interview comes in its less parochial 
passages. It’s alarming, for example, that Trump voices more condemnation of 
Angela Merkel than he can muster for Vladimir Putin. He describes the German 
chancellor’s decision to admit one million refugees as a “very catastrophic 
mistake” – though, tellingly, he does not call them refugees but “illegals”. 
The notion that people might be fleeing slaughter rather than migrating in 
order to rip off a rich, western country seems beyond his grasp.

Related: Trump wants a UK-US trade deal 'signature ready' for Brexit in 2019, 
says Gove - Politics live 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/16/trump-wants-a-uk-us-trade-deal-signature-ready-for-brexit-in-2019-says-gove-politics-live>

The incoming president also hints at lifting sanctions imposed on Russia for 
its annexation of Crimea, without any requirement that Russia shift policy in 
that area. (A mutual reduction in the US-Russian nuclear arsenals will be 
enough.) He describes Nato, viewed by most of America’s allies as the bedrock 
of the western alliance, as “obsolete”. And he implies that theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, regarded for 60 years as a strategic 
partner of the US, has had its day and that other EU members will, and should, 
be following Britain out of the exit.

In other words, this was an interview to bring a delighted smile to the face 
of Putin, who naturally sees both the Nato and EU as encroaching threats to 
Russian power. Of course we must accept Trump’s word that he is not a 
compromised asset of the Kremlin. But it’s striking how much he talks like one.

Above all, the Gove/Trump encounter provides a useful glimpse into what the 
future of direct media accountability of the US president will look like. You 
can see why Trump Tower granted the former minister his hour. It’s the same 
reason Trump gives regular access toSean Hannity of Fox News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/24/donald-trump-immigration-reform-sean-hannity-fox-news>
. He would prefer to be questioned only by those who are ideological 
sympathisers.

Gove provided regular reassurance of that, seeing no reason to challenge Trump 
on anything. So when the new president slammed the invasion of Iraq, Gove was 
too polite to note that Trump is on tapesupporting that decision 
<http://edition.cnn.com/videos/politics/2016/09/30/howard-stern-donald-trump-support-iraq-war-sot-lemon-tonight.cnn>
. (“Are you for invading Iraq?”Trump was asked 
<http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2016/02/19/trump-endorsed-iraq-invasion-in-2002-radio-interview.html>
 on 11 September 2002. His reply: “Yeah, I guess so.”) The MP was similarly 
happy to let the billionaire assert that the EU’s uselessness was proved by the 
fact that he was blocked from building asea wall to protect a Trump golf course 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/may/26/donald-trump-wants-to-build-a-wall-to-save-his-golf-course-from-global-warming>
 on the Irish coast from the effects of the same climate changeTrump calls a 
“hoax” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/24/donald-trump-bunker-climate-change-views>
.

Instead, Gove was in New York to serve as a cheerleader, to gloss over Trump’s 
inconsistencies and outright ignorance on assorted topics – “intelligence takes 
many forms”, Gove writes kindly – and topose for a souvenir photograph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
 in which both men give a thumbs up, a framed cover of Playboy just over Gove’s 
shoulder. (Note the contrast with Bild’s Kai Diekmann, with whom Gove shared 
the interview: in his photo with the president-elect, Diekmann’s hands remain 
safely in neutral.)

In Trump’s world, this is how the press should always behave – and the 
ever-courteous Gove was only too happy to oblige.
 