
A group of headteachers of non-selective secondary schools in Kent have 
written to the education secretary to voice their “deeply held, vehement 
opposition” to government plans to expandgrammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/grammarschools> across the country.


The group’s views are significant as they work in a county where the 11-plus 
and selection are still in place, so they have firsthand experience of the 
impact of grammar schools on non-selective schools in the area and the children 
who attend them.

Grammars plan will not help in 96% of areas in England, analysis finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/grammar-schools-local-authorities-england>
The letter to Justine Greening, signed by 33 headteachers of Kent’s secondary 
non-selective schools and academies, was sent as thegovernment’s consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/schools-that-work-for-everyone> on 
extending selection in education closed on Monday. It warns of “philosophical 
and systemic flaws” in the proposals and calls for selection in Kent and 
elsewhere to be abandoned rather than expanded.

Kent is one of the few remaining authorities in England with a selective 
system. One headteacher of a non-selective secondary who did not want to be 
identified said he was appalled that more children across the country might 
have to go through the same experience that Kent children face as a result of 
government proposals.

The letter, which follows a similar one from concerned headteachers in Surrey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/surrey-headteachers-express-vehement-opposition-to-grammar-schools-plan>
, says the advantages for pupils in selective schools are obvious – a 
confidence boost, a sense of success for selected pupils and their parents, and 
a culture of high expectations and aspirations.

Those that are not selected, however, are left with a sense of being second 
best, the letter says. “It certainly serves to erode self-confidence, to limit 
aspirations and develop a culture of ‘second best’ that good leaders in 
non-selective schools then spend time undoing so that they can unlock the 
students’ true potential,” it says.

Surrey headteachers express 'vehement opposition' to grammar schools plan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/surrey-headteachers-express-vehement-opposition-to-grammar-schools-plan>
“The reality is that the students were not selected – this is a clear message 
and one that is hard to take and even understand for an 11-year-old. We 
challenge the government to provide convincing evidence to parents, school 
leaders and children that not being selected aged 11 will motivate any child to 
make better progress than before.”

The heads argue there is no compelling evidence on which to base the 
development of a new wave of grammar schools. “The experience of school leaders 
in Kent should be valued and heard,” the letter says.

“Kent has one of the widest gaps between the achievement of disadvantaged and 
non-disadvantaged students. The very existence of a two-tier selective system 
is the biggest cause of this inequality.”

Many in the education sector have made submissions to the government arguing 
there is no evidence that grammar schools have a positive impact on social 
mobility. Among them is the National Association of Head Teachers.

“The evidence does not support the expansion of grammar schools. They do not 
contribute to social mobility and will distract attention from the things that 
really matter,” said Russell Hobby, the union’s general secretary.

Earlier on Monday a report 
<http://epi.org.uk/report/grammar-schools-policy-options/> by the Education 
Policy Institute saidless than 4% of local authority areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/grammar-schools-local-authorities-england>
 in England would see a boost to educational attainment from new grammar 
schools and attract the necessary parental support to make them a success.

The Department for Education said: “Our proposals are about creating more 
choice, with more good school places in more parts of the country. We want to 
do this by lifting the ban on new grammars, and harnessing the resources and 
expertise of universities, faith schools and independent schools. We welcome 
contributions to the consultation and will respond in due course.”
 