
Less than 4% of local authority areas in England would see a boost to 
educational attainment from new grammar schools and attract the necessary 
parental support to make them a success, according to a new analysis.

The report by the Education Policy Institute <http://epi.org.uk/> said only 
six of the 152 local authorities appeared to have the necessary conditions for 
new grammars to work.

The study, labelled “highly speculative” by the Department for Education, 
comes on the final day of thegovernment’s three-month consultation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/schools-that-work-for-everyone> 
aboutTheresa May’s plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 for the first wave of new grammar schools in decades.

Theresa May's grammar school claims disproved by new study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/23/theresa-mays-grammar-school-claims-disproved-by-new-study>
The EPI published a report in September which concluded, like the majority of 
other studies into the subject, that there is no evidence that grammar schools 
have a positive impact on social mobility.


A followup study sought to examine the possible effect of new selective 
schools in all 152 local authorities in England by examining the effects of 
building a grammar school and assessing where the demand existed.

The first test uses a series of criteria, for example whether an area already 
has sufficient selective places that new grammars would potentially risk 
attainment elsewhere or where there are numerous high-performing non-selective 
schools which could be undermined.

The study used YouGov polling to conclude that support for grammar schools 
tended to concentrate where they already existed. Expanding grammar places in 
the majority of these areas would hamper attainment in other local schools, the 
report said. Taken together, the report found only six local authorities had 
both clear public support for more grammars and sufficient pupils who might 
benefit from them.

Separately, the EPI examined the idea of quotas for disadvantaged children 
entering grammar schools to mitigate the way they tended to disproportionately 
recruit children from more affluent backgrounds, something the government has 
mooted as a possibility.

But as well as being politically difficult – the report predicted that parents 
from so-called “just about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
” families would be furious if their children missed out on a grammar place to 
lower-performing but poorer pupils – the overall benefit to disadvantaged 
children’s attainment would be tiny.

This showed “the challenge the government faces if it wishes to introduce new 
grammar school places without having a detrimental effect on either the 
attainment of pupils who don’t get a place, or on other high performing 
schools,” said Jon Andrews, who wrote the report.

Angela Rayner, the shadow education secretary, said while the government had 
allocated an extra £200m in funding for grammars, overall schools spending 
would fall. “This is yet more damning evidence this government is only looking 
out for a privileged few rather than the many who are being left behind,” she 
said.

Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, said grammar schools “fail the test 
when it comes to improving social mobility”, adding: “The best way to help 
pupils from disadvantaged backgrounds is to invest more in their education, not 
create a divisive two-tier system.”

As the consultation closed, the National Association of Head Teachers 
<http://www.naht.org.uk/> reiterated its opposition to the plan. “The evidence 
does not support the expansion of grammar schools. They do not contribute to 
social mobility and will distract attention from the things that really 
matter,” said Russell Hobby, the union’s general secretary.

A DfE spokesman said: “We held a consultation to help us establish how we can 
create more good school places for children of all backgrounds by removing the 
ban on grammar schools and this report is a crude attempt to second guess what 
that consultation will conclude.”
 