
Claims by Theresa May that grammar schools have proved to be great engines of 
social mobility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 have been undermined by figures showing that the vast majority of grammars 
admit only a tiny proportion of children from the poorest families.

As pupils return after the Christmas break, official figures show that in many 
grammar schools, less than 1% of the total pupil intake receives free school 
meals (an indicator of the poorest families). Only one of the 163 selective 
schools in England takes in more than 10% from this least well-off group.

Critics of May’s plans to expand the number of grammar schools – one of her 
few firm policy announcements since entering No 10 last July – say the figures 
expose her central justification for the controversial plans as entirely bogus, 
as better-off families tend to monopolise school places at the expense of the 
poor.

Grammar schools cannot help 90% of children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
An official consultation on the government’s plans for more grammars  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/23/theresa-mays-grammar-school-claims-disproved-by-new-study>
closed before Christmas and a bill to take forward the proposals is expected to 
be announced in the Queen’s Speech in spring – despite large numbers of Tory 
MPs and much of the House of Lords being strongly opposed.

Analysis of the official data by former Labour education spokeswoman Lucy 
Powell shows that, on average, just 2.6% of children in grammars are on free 
school meals, compared with 14.6% in secondary schools across the country. 
Eligibility for free school meals is calculated according to family income, 
both earned and from benefits.

Sir William Borlase’s grammar school in Marlow, Buckinghamshire, had, in 2016, 
just three pupils on free school meals (0.3% of its pupil total), and many 
others did little better. More than 20 other grammars had fewer than 10 pupils 
who met the criteria and at well over half, less than 5% of pupils were from 
poorer families.

Analysis by Powell’s team shows that if children on free school meals were to 
be admitted to grammars in the same proportion as those going to non-selective 
schools – in those parts of the country where there is selection – grammars 
would have to admit 13,500 more such children.

“The idea that grammar schools are engines of social mobility is compete 
nonsense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
,” said Powell. “They are the enemy of social mobility for the many. There are 
pitifully few children from low-income backgrounds at grammar schools. All the 
evidence shows us that bright children from all backgrounds do just as well at 
good comprehensives.

“Ministers should focus on spreading excellence across the whole system, 
ensuring there are enough excellent teachers and that head teachers have 
sufficient resources.”

As part of their consultation, ministers have sought views on how grammar 
schools can increase the number of lower-income children they serve.

Powell plans to table amendments to any bill to ensure that the plans give far 
greater opportunity to children from less well-off families.

Critics of the prime minister’s plans also dispute claims that children from 
disadvantaged families perform better in selective schools than in 
non-selective ones. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
 