
Ranging from Cleopatra’s invention of the vibrator to a Dutch shopkeeper’s 
accidental discovery of the existence of sperm, a comic book detailing the 
history of sex, which became a surprise hit inFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france> earlier this year, is due out in 
English in October.


The Story of Sex <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/sex-story.html> takes in 
medieval impotence trials and the contraptions used to stop 19th-century 
schoolboys from touching themselves – as well as Cleopatra’s bee-filled 
calabash and the Dutch shopkeeper who discovered sperm after masturbating on 
his microscope. It was published in France in April and sold more than 20,000 
copies in its first month on sale. Written by Philippe Brenot, a psychiatrist 
and director of sexology at Paris Descartes University, and illustrated by 
Laetitia Coryn, the comic-strip history has now been translated into English by 
Will McMorran, and will be published in the UK on 27 October by Penguin Press.

“We were all surprised by the way in which The Story of Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> was received in France,” said 
Brenot. “Laetitia and I worked every day for a year on a long history of 
humanity and sexuality. We had no idea of the importance of the volume which we 
were in the middle of writing … [But] it was reprinted before its release … and 
reprinted a month later.”

Penguin said that although the book was “told with wit and humour”, it also 
tackles “many vital and serious topics, covering a history of repressive laws 
that discriminated against women and LGBT communities, genital mutilation and 
the use of pornography in a digital age”. It is also, added the publisher, the 
“only history of sex in graphic novel form”.

Brenot believes the reason the graphic novel has sold so well in France is 
because there is no equivalent work. “The Story of Sex tells a story which has 
never been told before, because it combines anthropology, sociology, psychology 
and history for a more accurate understanding of this fundamental dimension of 
humanity,” he said.

Moving through the centuries, from before civilisation to the present day, the 
book covers everything from creation myths to sex robots.

“At the start of this third millennium, sexuality seems to be all around us – 
within easy reach, shown on our screens, talked about in the media – but, 
paradoxically, it’s rarely explained and almost never taught,” Brenot writes in 
his introduction. “In our schools there is no real sex education. At the very 
most, some information about contraception and STDs. But nothing that helps to 
understand the nature of intimate relationships, or the difficulties of 
developing these, or the vital link between respect and equality between 
partners, or questions about sexual orientation … And in this educational void, 
the internet and porn offer themselves as models.”

Five of the sexiest scenes in literature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/23/five-of-the-sexiest-scenes-in-literature>
Brenot hopes, he added, to write a follow-up, considering the history of 
sexuality in other civilisations such as ancient China.
 