
Farmers made hay but rampant grass growth in 2016 made life hard for 
butterflies and even puffin chicks, according to a review of the year’s 
wildlife and weather by theNational Trust <https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/>.

The nation’s ever more variable weather brought both booms and busts, with 
brambles and birds doing well, and slugs flourishing. But bumblebees dipped and 
owls found field voles hard to find.

Farmers found a late spring and a gloomy June challenging, with disappointing 
grain harvests. But thesecond hottest September on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/13/uks-hottest-september-day-since-1949-32c-heathrow>
 meant bringing in the crops was trouble-free, as well as leading to an autumn 
of spectacular colours in woodlands.

2016 State of Nature report: wildlife winners and losers - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/gallery/2016/sep/14/2016-state-of-nature-report-wildlife-winners-and-losers-in-pictures>
The National Trust <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/national-trust> is the 
country’s biggest farmer, with 2,000 tenants, the biggest landowner after the 
Forestry commission, and has conducted its annual review for a decade.

“In those 10 years, we’ve noticed pulses of unsettled weather become the 
norm,” said National Trust nature expert Matthew Oates. “We last enjoyed a good 
summer in 2006.” Winters have become generally milder and summers wetter, he 
said, which is in line with the trend anticipated by climate change scientists.

“Many species [are now] struggling in the face of climate change and more 
intensive farming practices,” Oates said. “Long term, changes in how we manage 
land have also led to wildlife declines – with more than half of species
experiencing a drop in numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/may/21/uk-species-struggling-wildlife>
 in the last 50 years.”

A cold wet spring followed by mild and damp conditions in May and June 
resulted in extraordinary grass growth, which shot up a third faster than in 
previous years. This presented a feast for cattle and sheep, as well as 
boosting hay-making: the number of hay bales doubled at the Trust’s Packwood 
House in Warwickshire, for example.

But the rapidly rising grass also squeezed out the small plants on which many 
bees and butterflies rely. On the Purbeck peninsula in Dorset, marbled white 
butterfly numbers plummeted by 73% compared to 2015, while common blue 
butterflies fell 23%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d1c91bc945dc47f139763f3c805809500781ac8%2F0_560_4376_2839%2F4376.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grass%20was%20greener%20but%20wildlife%20struggled%20in%20muggy%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grass%20was%20greener%20but%20wildlife%20struggled%20in%20muggy%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d1c91bc945dc47f139763f3c805809500781ac8%2F0_560_4376_2839%2F4376.jpg>
 A marbled white butterfly. Lots of grass swamped smaller plants that 
butterflies feed on. Photograph: Ian Ward/National Trust Images 
At Lytes Carey in Somerset, bumblebee numbers fell 85%, as the wildflowers in 
field margins were outgrown by grass. However, at nearby Collard Hill, careful 
grazing helped the large blue butterfly fare better.

Profuse grass growth also presented a problem for young puffins on the Farne 
Islands <https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/farne-islands>. “The wet spring meant 
that vegetation grew like mad and the poor pufflings struggled to make their 
way through the tall grasses out to sea,” said Gwen Potter, the National 
Trust’s countryside manager for the Northumberland coast.

The mild, humid conditions were ideal for flies though, which was good news 
for some birds, if not for farmers. “It was a bad summer for flies,” said Kath 
Birkinshaw, a sheep farmer at Ashes Farm in the Peak District, who said “fly 
strike” – maggots – had afflicted some flocks.

“But it was good for house martins. The birds never usually spend any time on 
the farm, but in mid-August 300-400 stayed a week on the farm,” she said. Flies 
like wet summers,as do slugs 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-36166774>, which have plagued 
gardeners. However, wasps do not, with the National Trust reporting numbers 
crashing in many areas.

Also scarce were field voles, the favourite prey of barn owls. The voles go 
through three to four years of breeding boom and bust and 2016 appears to have 
been a deep trough, according to the National Trust, with no barn owl broods 
seen at Malham in the Yorkshire Dales or atDyrham Park 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/dyrham-park>, near Bath.

Autumn was dry and mild, turning the leaves on trees into a kaleidoscope of 
colours, although topsy-turvy weather earlier in the year saw confused sycamore 
trees on the Dolmelynllyn estate in Snowdonia, shedding leaves in late July, 
after a hot spell in May was followed by a cold start to the summer.

Autumn – Keats’s season of “mellow fruitfulness 
<http://www.bartleby.com/101/627.html>” – is apple harvesting time and there 
were mixed fortunes in the orchards. In the south-east, a lack of rain led to 
smaller apples than usual, according to Alison Capper, chair of theNational 
Farmers Union <https://nfu.org/>’s (NFU) horticulture board. But in the West 
Midlands, where Capper’s Worcestershire orchards are, and in Somerset, wet 
weather arrived just when needed.

“The rain came at a crucial moment late in the season, leaving us with lovely 
sweet and juicy apples,” said Rachel Brewer, cider maker at Barrington Court in 
Somerset. “There may be some sore heads in Somerset this winter: sweet apples 
means that our cider will be strong.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda8baeda48cb2b39767829d48daae957e24d0258%2F0_0_5320_3540%2F5320.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Grass%20was%20greener%20but%20wildlife%20struggled%20in%20muggy%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Grass%20was%20greener%20but%20wildlife%20struggled%20in%20muggy%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fnational-trust-2016-review-wildlife-weather-bees-butterflies%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda8baeda48cb2b39767829d48daae957e24d0258%2F0_0_5320_3540%2F5320.jpg>
 Apples at Barrington Court, Somerset, where well-timed rain made this year’s 
crop juicy and sweet. Photograph: John Millar/National Trust Images 
Dry conditions late in the year in the east also caused problems for arable 
farmers sowing crops for 2017. “For the chaps out east, we had a bit of 
drought,” said Tori Morgan, the NFU’s adviser on combinable crops. “There have 
been some problems with oilseed rape not germinating properly. It has been so 
dry there hasn’t been the moisture needed to get that kickstarted.”

Overall cereal harvests were well below average 
<https://cereals.ahdb.org.uk/markets/market-news/2016/october/06/adas-harvest-report-7-week-10-13.aspx>
 for barley and rape, and just under for wheat, all thanks to gloomy early 
summer weather. “There was a lack of light over June, so we did not get the 
grain fill needed,” said Morgan. The upside was that the smaller, dense grains 
were packed with the protein needed to meet top quality milling requirements, 
helping British farmers exploit a poor year in France.

Morgan agrees with the National Trust assessment that the weather is becoming 
more unsettled, noting that December has seen both very warm and cold weeks. 
“Variability is increasing and farmers have got to try to work out a way to 
manage that volatility in the weather,” she said.

Globally, 2016 will be the hottest year on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
, but Capper is hoping for a proper winter. “What we really want now is a cold 
snap through January and February and then an early start to spring in March,” 
she said. “Fruit crops and hops like a good winter chill: it helps with 
vernalisation, ie it helps them shut down properly. That means they will start 
with renewed vigour.”
 