
Greece <https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> is facing another bailout 
standoff with its creditors amid reports that eurozone countries will refuse to 
release additional funds to it this month.

Athens has frustrated its peers in the single currency by implementing only 
two of the 15reforms that were a condition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/27/greece-submits-reform-proposals-to-eurozone-creditors-with-a-warning>
 of last year’s rescue package.EU officials told German daily Handelsblatt 
<https://global.handelsblatt.com/edition/507/ressort/politics/article/brussels-to-withhold-greek-bailout-money>
 that Greece has delayed privatising state assets, adding to the frustrations 
of eurozone finance ministers who will discuss progress on Friday.

Further funds are due to be disbursed under the European Stability Mechanism 
(ESM), which will give Greece up to €86bn (£72bn) of financial assistance by 
2018 in return for reforms.

After approving a first tranche of €10.3bn this spring, of which €7.5bn has so 
far been released, the 19 finance ministers are due to disburse the rest this 
month but might withhold payment for the rest of the year. A further finance 
ministers’ meeting is planned for 21 September.

A year after the crisis was declared over, Greece is still spiralling down
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/13/greek-economy-still-spiralling-down-year-after-crisis-declared-over>
The gridlock report came after the head of the ESM said at the weekend that 
Greece should be able to secure at least short-term debt relief measures but 
only if it began implementing the remaining reforms.

“We have been working on these measures and they could be implemented very 
soon,” Klaus Regling told Greek newspaper Ta Nea.

“We hope the government implements remaining prior actions very soon,” he 
added. EU officials are demanding that Athens pushes on with plans to set up a 
new privatisation fund, sell specific state assets, and reform its civil 
service.

Eight years into the country’s financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/13/greek-economy-still-spiralling-down-year-after-crisis-declared-over>
, life has become harder for most Greeks.Unemployment is the highest in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/06/grexit-back-on-the-agenda-economy-unravels-reforms>
 and one survey in June found that extreme poverty had risen from 2.2% of the 
population in 2009 to 15% – a total of 1.6 million people – last year.

Longer-term relief to help the country reduce its crippling debt of 176% of 
GDP will not follow until after the end of the bailout, Regling said. However, 
the International Monetary Fund – which is not participating in Greece’s third 
rescue programme – has insisted that long-term relief including debt 
forgiveness must happen sooner.

The Greek finance minister, Euclid Tsakalotos, warned last week that the 
country’s next aid payout may be delayed because the government had failed to 
qualify for it, although he insisted any hold-up would last “for days, not 
weeks”.

Greek media said Athens faced a monumental task to push through the highly 
unpopular reforms and secure the last “desperately needed” €2.8bn of funding, 
followed by the start of long-promised debt restructuring talks by the end of 
the year.

The government is counting on the talks as a consolation prize to offset a 
hugely unpopular austerity package including spending cuts, tax hikes and 
pension reductions required by the bailout, the newspaperKathimerini said 
<http://www.ekathimerini.com/211736/article/ekathimerini/news/govt-reform-speed-dents-eu-trust>
.

It added that the noises emanating from Brussels “speak volumes about eurozone 
countries’ confidence levels” in the Greek government, while hampering the 
ability of the prime minister,Alexis Tsipras 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, to announce even modest 
measures to help people worst affected by Greece’s prolonged economic crisis.
 