
There is notable distress at the death of former Labour peer Lord Janner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/19/greville-janner-obituary>. His 
family, understandably, say he will be deeply missed and there are plaudits 
from those who admired his community advocacy.

Lord Janner dies aged 87
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/19/lord-janner-dies-aged-87> 
But there is also visceral anguish among those who claim that as children, 
they were abused by the former grandee. He may always have denied their 
accusations, and he would never have faced a proper trial, having been judged
incapable because of advanced dementia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/19/lord-janner-dies-aged-87>. But 
they might have had their day in court, by dint of a “trial of the facts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/02/lord-janner-will-be-found-unfit-to-stand-trial-over-child-sex-abuse-allegations>
” scheduled for April. Who knows what they might have derived from that? Some 
may have moved towards closure. Even that prospect now seems more distant. It’s 
hard to imagine a messier, more unsatisfactory conclusion to a public interest 
case than this.

And it seems right to lay at least some of the blame at the feet of the 
authorities. Consider the inordinate length of time that elapsed between 
allegations against the peer and the start of credible proceedings. He was the 
subject of three police investigations over more than 20 years, none of which 
led to prosecution. At his death he was 87. Aged 67, he might have been better 
able to defend and account for himself. His family have strongly asserted his 
innocence. All sides were ill served by the refusal of the authorities to take 
the matter seriously until it was too late.

It seems right to lay at least some of the blame at the feet of the authorities

Consider the debacle surrounding this latest attempt to bring him to trial. 
Alison Saunders, the director of public prosecutions, ruled him unfit to be 
charged, wholly underestimating the public distaste for having a matter of such 
import decided behind closed doors. That decision was overturned in April by an 
independent tribunal that sanctioned a rare “trial of the facts”, a hearing 
without possibility of criminal conviction. Enter Mr Justice Openshaw, who 
ruled a fortnight ago that with a “progressive decline in his dementia”Janner 
would indeed be unfit to plead <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-35027705> in any 
normal trial.

One can accept that the legal system may have reached a conclusion that best 
served the public, and yet be concerned that the route to it seemed shrouded 
and tortuous. The public may well have been unnerved by the sorry spectacle of
Janner’s confused appearance at Westminster magistrates court in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/14/lord-janner-makes-first-court-appearance-over-child-sex-abuse-claims>
. But it was necessary, not least for those who level allegations. The public 
had a right to know – and observe – what was being done in its name, and why.

Could a “trial of the facts” still go ahead? The strong indication is that it 
will not and that instead the Janner file may be passed toLowell Goddard’s 
inquiry into historic child sex offences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/09/thousands-child-abuse-victims-invited-testify-truth-project-lowell-goddard-independent-inquiry>
. This has within its remit an examination of “allegations of child sexual 
abuse linked to Westminster”.

This is second best, but hopefully it means the matter won’t easily become a 
footnote. Janner is now beyond question – some will claim, beyond justice – but 
there are related issues outstanding. With persistent rumours of intervention 
from high places, it would, for example, serve the public good to know by what 
means he escaped meaningful prosecution over two decades. Lord Janner is gone, 
but others with questions to answer may still be here.
 