
Because America is entirely governed by two political parties, passage of 
legislation usually requires bipartisan support in US Congress. However, the 
Republican Party isthe only major political party in the world that denies the 
need to tackle climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/05/the-republican-party-stands-alone-in-climate-denial>
. Therefore, for several years any hope of passing climate legislation hinged 
upon breaking through the near-universal opposition among Republican 
legislators. A number of groups have focused on doing just that.

In the wake of the 2016 US election results, I contacted these groups to 
assess their feelings about the prospects of US government action on climate 
change in the near future. The general sentiment was understandably one of 
discouraged pessimism, but each group identified glimmers of hope.

Citizens’ Climate Lobby’s success and growth

Citizens’ Climate Lobby <https://citizensclimatelobby.org/> (CCL) is one of 
the leading grassroots climate organizations in America, and has also expanded 
rapidly internationally. The group has seen explosive growth in recent years, 
now hosting chapters in 356 of America’s 435 congressional districts (over 
80%), with a membership approaching 50,000 strong.

Under the CCL proposal 
<https://citizensclimatelobby.org/carbon-fee-and-dividend/>, carbon pollution 
is taxed at the source, and 100% of the revenue is returned to taxpayers via a 
regular rebate check. It’s a bipartisan solution – liberals get their desired 
carbon pollution tax, while conservatives get a free market policy that doesn’t 
grow the size of government. Moreover, modeling projects that the policy will 
havea net overall positive effect on the economy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jun/13/how-revenue-neutral-carbon-tax-creates-jobs-grows-economy>
.

Citizens’ Climate Lobby has also achieved several significant successes. The 
group was involved in spearheadingthe Gibson Resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/17/republican-congress-climate-change-action-rebellion>
, in which 15 Republican members of Congress called for action to tackle the 
risks posed by climate change. CCL was also the driving force behind the 
creation ofthe House Climate Solutions Caucus 
<http://citizensclimatelobby.org/climate-solutions-caucus/> – a group currently 
comprised of 10 Republican and 10 Democratic members of Congress exploring 
bipartisan climate policy solutions. And CCL initiated theCalifornia state 
government’s Resolution urging the federal government to pass a revenue-neutral 
carbon tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/29/california-has-urged-president-obama-and-congress-to-tax-carbon-pollution>
.

According to CCL Executive Director Mark Reynolds, the 2016 election didn’t 
change group’s strategy. As Reynolds told me, because Democrats are already on 
board with climate policy:

Our path to legislation has always gone through the Republican Party.

As an organization with a long history of working with Republicans on climate 
policy, now that the Republican Party controls US government, CCL is now more 
relevant and important than ever. Reynolds told me that since the election 
results, traffic to CCL’s website has increased eightfold, and attendance of its
weekly introductory calls 
<https://citizensclimatelobby.org/join-weekly-intro-call/> has spiked from an 
average of about 20 to 200 last week.The majority of Americas who are unhappy 
with the election results 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/14/on-trump-and-climate-america-is-split-in-two-by-these-demographics>
 have become galvanized, which bodes well for grassroots support of climate 
solutions.

Reynolds also sees an opportunity for Republicans to take control of the 
climate issue aftermany liberals rallied against a revenue-neutral carbon tax 
proposal in the state of Washington 
<https://grist.org/election-2016/james-hansen-vs-naomi-klein-state-carbon-tax-splits-national-climate-hawks/>
. This opens up a window for the Republican Party to take ownership of one of 
the best policies to tackle climate change. As Donald Trump might put it, a 
revenue-neutral carbon tax is “a great deal” because it efficiently addresses 
the problem while boosting the economy, and the rebate protects American 
wallets from rising energy prices.

Niskanen Center: GOP could replace regulations with carbon tax

The Republican Party has thus far opposed all climate policies in Congress, 
but the Supreme Court ruled that the EPA must regulate carbon pollution, and it
began doing so under President Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
. Some have proposed that the easiest way for the GOP to eliminate those 
government climate regulations – which party leaders abhor, butmost Republican 
voters support 
<http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/majority-of-republicans-support-regulation-of-carbon-dioxide-as-a-pollutant/>
 – would be to replace them with free market legislation.

For example the Niskanen Center <https://niskanencenter.org/about/> is a free 
market think tank that supports this type of policy, and hasproposed swapping 
EPA regulations for a revenue-neutral carbon tax 
<http://niskanencenter.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/03/The-Conservative-Case-for-a-Carbon-Tax1.pdf>
. The group’s president Jerry Taylor wrotea detailed post about the prospects 
of a carbon tax <https://niskanencenter.org/blog/carbon-tax-rip/> under the 
incoming Republican leadership, which is well worth reading. Taylor thinks that 
Republican leaders are now less likely to propose a climate tax than prior to 
the election for several reasons.

First, they will likely devote the next several years to delaying, weakening, 
and/or eliminating the EPA regulations, rather than replacing them. Because of 
the Supreme Court decision,eliminating the regulations will be difficult 
<http://www.vox.com/energy-and-environment/2016/11/10/13587474/donald-trump-obama-climate-policy>
, but since Trump will appoint at least one justice to the court, it may not 
fully survive legal challenges. However, if it does survive, the next president 
could fully restore the EPA regulations if Congress declines to replace them 
with legislation. While this offers a glimmer of hope that the GOP could pass a 
climate bill, it’s doubtful that party leaders will be so forward-thinking.

Second, the election results made it clear that climate denial will not hurt 
most Republican politicians in elections. Third, while many Republican members 
of Congress privately accept the reality of climate change and the need to 
address it, and Niskanen has identified several who would be willing to 
introduce climate legislation if the opportunity were to present itself, Taylor 
believes the election results make such a political opportunity less likely.

R Street Institute sees other opportunities

The R Street Institute <http://www.rstreet.org/about/why-r-street/> is a free 
market think tank that has likewisemade the conservative case for a 
revenue-neutral carbon tax 
<http://www.rstreet.org/op-ed/why-republicans-should-reconsider-their-blanket-opposition-to-a-carbon-tax/>
. The group’s president Eli Lehrer believes the chances of carbon tax 
legislation would have been low regardless of the election outcome. As he told 
me:

A carbon tax would be a possibility in the context of broad tax reform and if 
such reform moves forward as it may, I suppose there is some chance it could be 
part of a package … A carbon tax per se is not highly likely and is not 
something we plan to push ourselves right now but it is not impossible either.

R Street Energy Policy Director Catrina Rorke elaborated where she sees 
opportunities in cutting carbon pollution under the incoming government:

We’re focused on streamlining regulatory barriers to entry to electricity 
markets, an obstacle that plagues emerging and advanced technologies with 
characteristics quite different from their predecessors. We also think we can 
make major strides in updating the way the federal regulatory machine works, 
given that the underlying legislation is outdated and insufficiently flexible 
... If politics is the art of the possible, we’re really going to see some 
interesting things happen -- for governance and for the climate.

Climate future looks dim, but there are glimmers of hope

These groups were generally pessimistic about the prospects of a climate bill 
coming from the next Congress, but they did spot glimmers of hope, and the 
future isn’t set in stone. In its 2016 Congressional lobbying effort, CCL 
reported that Republican members of Congress were 10 times more likely to be 
receptive to the group’s message than to be hostile, up from a 3-to-1 ratio 
just two years ago. Many GOP policymakers recognize the threats posed by 
climate change, at least in private. As Jerry Taylor noted, they just need the 
political opportunity for climate legislation to present itself.

That political opportunity would require something to change – for Republican 
climate leadership to be rewarded rather than punished. It’s difficult to 
envision that change happening in the next few years, but not impossible. 
Groups like CCL will continue working behind the scenes to help make it happen. 
In the meantime, the R Street Institute foresees other opportunities to chip 
away at US carbon pollution levels.

It’s not an encouraging landscape for protecting future generations from a 
climate catastrophe, but at least there’s hope. And if the GOP crushes that 
hope over the next four years, it seems likely that the Democratic Party will 
have a good chance to restore it in 2020.

 