
Schools and teachers across the world have embraced Carol Dweck’s theory of 
growth mindset 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/15/four-questions-encourage-growth-mindset-students>
 in the hope of helping students to fulfil their potential. Popular strategies 
include tweaking the way teachers givefeedback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/10/seven-ways-to-give-better-feedback-to-your-students>
, encouraging self-reflection throughquestioning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/15/four-questions-encourage-growth-mindset-students>
 and, crucially, praising processes instead of natural ability.

Related: How to be happy: a guide for teachers (and everyone else) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/dec/09/how-to-be-happy-a-guide-for-teachers-and-everyone-else>

But many educators feel they could be doing more. A recent survey 
<http://www.edweek.org/media/ewrc_mindsetintheclassroom_sept2016.pdf> found 
that 98% of teachers believe that if their students have a growth mindset it 
will lead to improved student learning, but only 20% of them believe they are 
good at fostering a growth mindset and 85% want more training and practical 
strategies.

Thankfully, a growing body of research is giving us better insight into how to 
best foster a growth mindset – here are some techniques you may not have used 
yet.

Explore multiple strategies

Let’s try a quick experiment. Can you separate these six animals into two 
groups of three? The animals are dog, budgie, shark, bear, goldfish and fox. 
You could separate them into pets v non-pets (dog, budgie and goldfish v shark, 
bear and fox), fur v non-fur (dog, bear and fox v budgie, shark and goldfish), 
or four legs v those without four legs (dog, bear and fox v goldfish, shark and 
budgie). There are multiple ways to get to the required outcome.

Showing that there are multiple strategies to work out an answer helps to 
develop growth mindset – this was the finding froma research paper that looked 
at teaching strategies in a maths class 
<https://searchworks.stanford.edu/view/11059824>. Researchers found that if 
students are only taught to work out a problem in one way and are unsuccessful 
with that strategy, they may take this as evidence that they lack ability for 
the whole subject. If you teach using multiple strategies, however, they are 
more likely to persist if the first strategy doesn’t work for them.

Be stealthy

Some research suggests that growth mindset strategies should be used stealthily
 
<https://labs.la.utexas.edu/adrg/files/2013/12/PDK-Yeager-Walton-Cohen-2013.pdf>
, because students may behave differently if they are aware that they are 
undergoing an intervention. This is known asthe Hawthorne effect 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hawthorne_effect>.

Related: Fomo, stress and sleeplessness: are smartphones bad for students? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/08/children-mobile-phone-distraction-study-school>

These researchers state that “stealthy approaches don’t feel controlling and 
don’t stigmatise students as in need of help, which could do more harm than 
good”. Stealthy interventions could include getting the students to create the 
guidance themselves, for example by writing to younger students to explain how 
the brain can grow.

Engage parents

A paper published  <http://pss.sagepub.com/content/27/6/859.abstract>last year 
found “no clear link” between a parent’s mindset and their child’s. What did 
make a difference, however, was how parents reacted to setbacks.

The researchers noted that “it may be that parents, like children, have 
mindsets that shape their own goals and behaviours, but that these beliefs are 
relevant to shaping children’s beliefs only if they lead to practices that 
children pick up on”. It is hard to accurately guess someone’s beliefs; actions 
can be more easily interpreted.

They note that an intervention targeting parents’ mindsets could be used to 
teach them how failure can be beneficial, and how to react to their children’s 
setbacks in a way that encourages motivation and learning.

Look at your own mindset

A research paper posed the question to teachers 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022103111003027>: one of 
your students gets a low mark in their exam (65%) – what do you think of this 
student’s ability and how would you respond? Those with a fixed mindset took 
this as evidence that the student did not have a talent for maths and were more 
likely to respond with a “comfort focus” (along the lines of “It’s OK, not 
everyone is good at maths”).

Teachers with a growth mindset believed it was too early to make a judgment on 
the child’s maths ability and were more likely to offer “strategy focus”, which 
included tips on how to get better and tackle challenging questions.

Related: The science of resilience: how to teach students to persevere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/12/science-resilience-how-to-teach-students-persevere>

Students who received comfort strategy reported being less motivated than 
those who had received the strategy approach, and when asked how they thought 
they would do on their next exam, comfort-focused students estimated about the 
same level (65%) whereas the strategy-focused students estimated significantly 
higher (80%).

This research suggests that teachers mindsets and beliefs influence their 
teaching strategies, which in turn influences student motivation and 
self-expectation. So don’t just consider ways to help your students think 
differently, but explore your own thought processes too.

Bradley Busch is a registered psychologist and director at InnerDrive 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/>. Follow @Inner_Drive 
<https://twitter.com/Inner_Drive?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 on Twitter.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 