
Sevenoaks council has become England’s first financially self-sufficient local 
authority - despite unprecedented public sector cuts threatening the future of 
services.

The Kent district council’s ground-breaking financial independence 
<http://www.sevenoaks.gov.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/243884/Sevenoaks-DC-Efficiency-Plan.pdf>
 uniquely frees it from reliance on its dwindling government grant to run 
services.

The achievement – thanks largely to the council’s investment in a money-making 
property portfolio that includes a supermarket and petrol station – led to it 
being crowned overall winner of this year’s Guardian Public Service Awards on 
Tuesday night.

David Brindle, the Guardian’s public services editor and co-chair of the 
judging panel, said: “Sevenoaks has blazed a trail for all of English local 
government. Ministers plan to phase out central grants by the end of the 
decade, but the detail is still being thrashed out.

Guardian Public Service Awards 2016 Public Servant of the Year winner: Helen 
Backus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-public-servant-of-the-year-winner-helen-backus>
“While others haggle over the numbers, Sevenoaks has picked up the ball and 
run with it. What it has achieved has taken vision, initiative and nerves of 
steel at a time of unprecedented uncertainty for town halls.”

The Conservative-run district council turned to commercial property in order 
to plug the widening gap caused by year-on-year reductions to its central 
government grant. This year it received £633,000 in revenue support grant - 
next year it gets nothing.

Today the council’s expanding property portfolio includes a former working 
men’s club and an office block. It is currently planning to develop and own a 
hotel on the site of a car park. Not only does this innovative economic 
development strategy enable the authority to stand on its own two feet, but it 
also completely turns on its head the traditional local government ethos that 
eschews risk taking and outsources to the lowest bidder.

“If we had told our members 10 years ago that in 2016 they would be the proud 
owners of a petrol station, a supermarket, a former working men’s club and an 
upmarket office block, and be planning to develop and own their own hotel we 
would have been met with expressions of disbelief and caution,” says council 
policy officer Margaret Carr. “However, they realised that doing nothing was 
the worst of all options.”

That view is shared by council leader Peter Fleming, who says that Sevenoaks’s 
journey marks “a complete change between central and local government” and 
proves there are “models out there” that can be replicated in other councils.

Sevenoaks’s ambition to become financially independent began in earnest in 
2011, when it became the first district council to develop a 10-year budget. 
Knowing local government could not plan a future based on funding from 
Westminster, Sevenoaks set out its intention to be financially self-sufficient 
with a new finance and property plan. The 2011 Localism Act, designed to 
increase local decision-making, gave it the freedom to expand its existing 
economic development strategy.

Investment strategy

Last summer its members approved borrowing £10m at a low interest rate, and 
used the money for its property investment strategy. The council has its own 
trading company, plus a separate economic development and property team.

The buying and building of new assets is complemented by a focus on 
collaboration and customer service. The motto “the customer is anyone who isn’t 
me” drives how staff approach both colleagues and external partners. Fleming 
says staff are encouraged to think beyond their own department and the working 
culture is stronger because everyone is directly employed by Sevenoaks – not by 
contractors: “We can deliver better services if the people who work for us 
actually work for us.”

The decision not to outsource services was also key to its financial 
independence, according to Pav Ramewal, Sevenoaks’s chief executive: “If you 
control all of your costs then it is easier to make savings ... if you have 
outsourced services and there are changes in [how you want to run] the service, 
that requires a change in the contract – and the contactor charges for that.” 
The council employs fewer than 400 people, manages around 70 services and has a 
local population of around 115,000 (49,000 households).

Forward thinking

As councils wrestle with the need to improve services, while facing massive 
cuts in the central government grant that enables them to deliver such support, 
innovative solutions will need to be found. Despite concerns voiced by some MPs 
over local authorities’ commercial acumen, Sevenoaks council is confident its 
strategy will continue to provide services without needing to rely on 
government funding.The Essential Guide to Financial Stability 
<http://www.lgiu.org.uk/essentialguide/financial-sustainability/>, a Local 
Government Information Unit report published in April, cited the model as an 
example to inspire other councils.

Ramewal believes its success is partly down to forward thinking: “Unless 
you’ve got plans in place, you’re going to find yourself with significant 
problems. You have to plan early.”

In addition, the council believes that winning the Guardian Public Service 
Awards will mean its work on financial self-sufficiency can be shared more 
widely and beyond local authorities. This, adds Fleming, could have a positive 
impact on the perception of councils: “There’s an issue about how not just 
local government sees itself, but how the wider public sector see councils.”
 