
Guards at the Faslane submarine base on the Clyde were authorised to shoot 
anti-nuclear protesters if there were a risk of sabotage,Margaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> was told after a 1988 
break-in that left her furious.

An incursion in October that year reached a control room onboard HMS Repulse, 
prompting the then prime minister to write on a memo: “I am utterly horrified. 
Examples of slackness in sensitive matters keep coming to light. I must have an 
urgent report. We could have been put in grave danger.”

Documents released to the National Archives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nationalarchives> on Friday show an inquiry 
into the commando-style night raid found a catalogue of security errors. Coils 
of barbed wire had been removed ahead of engineering works and an alarm system 
deactivated in the police monitoring room.

Revealed: Thatcher aide wanted to use Prince William to hobble CND
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/21/margaret-thatcher-officials-plan-cnd-protests-prince-william>
A Ministry of Defence <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ministry-of-defence> 
(MoD) police patrol that might have found the intruders was on a tea break and 
there were only three Royal Marine sentries on duty when there should have been 
four. Some floodlights were defective.

A Royal Marine sentry on the jetty radioed to raise the alarm, but did not 
open fire because “he did not consider the intruders to be hostile within the 
definition of his rules of engagement”.

The following year, the then defence secretary George Younger told Thatcher: 
“The rules of engagement governing the armed guards on the Polaris jetties have 
been amended, with the agreement of the law officers, to make clear that they 
may, as a last resort, open fire to prevent a perceived threat of sabotage not 
only to the nuclear warheads but also to the submarine.”

Ten military personnel and three senior MoD police officers were facing 
disciplinary proceedings, while 42 recommendations for remedial action had been 
adopted, including the new rules of engagement.


Younger warned that precautions should be taken to prevent IRA attacks. “We 
have also considered further how to protect alongside ... submarines from 
attack from the seaward side,” he wrote.

“The threat there comes from three possible sources: surface craft on the 
Gareloch carrying demonstrators or terrorists, terrorist[s] firing handheld 
long-range weapons or mortars from the hillside, and underwater intruders.”

 