
The Guardian and Observer’s 2016 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/please-help-us-help-child-refugees-survive-the-winter>
 has raised over £1,750,000 for child refugees, making it the second biggest 
charity fundraiser in the papers’ histories.

More than 17,500 readers donated to the four-week appeal, which closed on 
Sunday night. The money will be shared betweenthree charities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
 supporting young refugees:Help Refugees <http://www.helprefugees.org.uk/>, 
Safe Passage <http://safepassage.org.uk/>, and the Children’s Society 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/donate/help-child-refugees-fleeing-war-and-violence>
.

The charities thanked readers for their generosity, saying the donations would 
make a huge difference to the lives of thousands of children, both those facing 
a bleak winter in the refugee camps, and those attempting to rebuild their 
lives in the UK.

The charities supported by the Guardian and Observer 2016 appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/the-charities-supported-by-the-guardian-and-observer-2016-appeal>
The charities provide a range of support, from supplying emergency aid to 
refugee camps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/09/help-refugees-we-will-never-abandon-them>
 to enabling unaccompanied refugee children tofind legal sanctuary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/01/eritrean-refugee-tragedy-guardian-observer-appeal-safe-passage-charity>
 with relatives in the UK, and providing support to help youngstersadapt to life
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/23/charity-rebuilding-lives-refugee-childrens-society-guardian-observer-charity-appeal>
 in Britain.

Matthew Reed, the Children’s Society’s chief executive, said: “The generosity 
of the Guardian and Observer readers has been overwhelming. £1.75m is an 
incredible amount and we are extremely grateful for every single penny donated. 
The money raised will make a huge difference to the lives of the child and 
young refugees we work with, helping them to rebuild their lives here in the 
UK.”


Josie Naughton, a co-founder of Help Refugees, said: “This morning thousands 
of refugee children woke up in tents in sub-zero temperatures across Europe. 
HelpRefugees <https://www.theguardian.com/world/refugees> will ensure the 
generous donations from the Guardian readers go towards improving the lives of 
these very children.

“Throughout the entire appeal we have been overwhelmed by the generosity and 
support we have received and want to thank everyone who donated, as well as the 
Guardian and Observer.”

Neil Jameson, executive director of Citizens UK <http://www.citizensuk.org/>, 
which oversees Safe Passage, said: “We have been overwhelmed by the support of 
Guardian and Observer readers. We will be putting the funds raised to immediate 
use; as Greece sees refugees camping in sub-zero temperatures, our team are 
working hard to identify those who have a legal right to safe passage.

“In the longer term, the funds will be used to open safe and legal routes to 
many more refugees, as well as supporting communities to build a welcoming 
environment here in the UK.”

The 2015 appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/15/readers-generosity-charity-appeal-success-thank-you>
, in support of six refugee charities, raised £2.6m. The previous highest 
amount raised was £1.4m in 2004 in the wake of the tsunami disaster.
 