
The chancellor, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, has suggested Britain 
could transform its economic model into that of a corporate tax haven if the EU 
fails to provide it with an agreement on market access after Brexit.

In an interview with the German newspaper Welt am Sonntag, Hammond said that 
if Britain were closed off from European markets after leaving the EU, it would 
consider abandoning a European-style social model with European-style taxation 
and regulation systems, and “become something different”.

Theresa May to say UK is 'prepared to accept hard Brexit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
The chancellor made his remarks in response to the suggestion that “the 
impression on the European continent is that your government sees the future 
business model of the UK as being the tax haven of Europe”.

Hammond responded that “most of us who had voted remain would like the UK to 
remain a recognisably European-style economy with European-style taxation 
systems, European-style regulation systems etc. I personally hope we will be 
able to remain in the mainstream of European economic and social thinking. But 
if we are forced to be something different, then we will have to become 
something different”.

Asked to clarify his remarks, Hammond said: “We could be forced to change our 
economic model, and we will have to change our model to regain competitiveness. 
And you can be sure we will do whatever we have to do.

“The British people are not going to lie down and say ‘too bad, we’ve been 
wounded’. We will change our model and we will come back, and we will be 
competitively engaged.”

Hammond’s rhetoric seemed to be at odds with the message he tried to convey to 
his German counterpart 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/phil-hammond-seeks-to-assure-germany-over-smooth-path-to-brexit>
, Wolfgang Schäuble, during a trip to Berlin last week, namely that the UK had 
no desire to disrupt the EU during its divorce from the bloc.

In his interview with Welt am Sonntag, Hammond also emphasised that 
restricting immigrationwould be the British government’s priority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 during negotiations. “We are aware that the message from the referendum is 
that we must control our immigration policy,” he said.

Unlike in previous interviews, the chancellor would not be drawn on a 
guarantee that highly skilled workers from the EU would still be allowed to 
settle and work in the UK. “Assuming you hold a German passport, you can travel 
to the UK to do business and to travel, of course,” he said. “The question is 
about the freedom to travel for work, the freedom to settle and the freedom to 
establish a business.”

Reports suggest the prime minister, Theresa May, is looking into restricting 
access for EU workers 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/how-theresa-may-plans-to-reduce-immigration-after-brexit/>
 for “every sector and every skill level”.

The chancellor, however, rejected his interviewers’ suggestion that the UK and 
the US, traditionally the leading champions of capitalism and free trade, were 
“turning their back to the world”.

Philip Hammond seeks to assure Germany over 'smooth path' to Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/phil-hammond-seeks-to-assure-germany-over-smooth-path-to-brexit>
“I would reject that emphatically,” Hammond said. “I can’t speak for what is 
going on in the US, that is a different political movement. But in my judgment, 
it would be a mistake to read the Brexit vote as being part of the same strand 
of thinking that has formed in the US.

“If you look at the media and the reporting during the Brexit referendum 
campaign, there was no anti-trade rhetoric. It was the exact opposite.”

Hammond said he was hopeful that the terms of Britain’s exit from the EU and 
its new status could be discussed in parallel once the government hadtriggered 
article 50 by 31 March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
.

“The treaty is clear that the negotiation of an exit agreement has to take 
account of the future relationship between the parties. To do that we have to 
talk about the future relationship. So we would expect that we would discuss 
the topics in parallel,” he said.

At the same time, he conceded that it could be necessary to create an interim 
deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/brexit-committee-demands-transitional-deal-and-parliamentary-vote>
 to cover the “period between Britain leaving the EU and the full introduction 
of a long-term future arrangement between the UK and the EU”.

“In such a case, we would have to decide what happens in the period between 
leaving the EU and the commencement of such an agreement in the interim 
period,” he said.
 