
The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is Theresa May’s chauffeur. It must be a 
ghastly job. He has to drive the economy towardsBrexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, with no instructions, no 
map and no clear road ahead. Meanwhile, he has three blind mice in the back 
seat: David Davis, minister for I-haven’t-a-clue, Liam Fox, minister for 
what-on-earth-is-happening, and Boris Johnson, minister for Oh-Christ!

Autumn statement: OBR says Brexit impact could be even worse than feared - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live>
All Hammond’s polished autumn statement  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
could do yesterday was toy with the one buzz-phrase in May’s vocabulary of 
spin. It was caring for the “just about managing” – a perfect description of 
the chancellor. His time in office seems doomed to depend on Brexit and 
uncertainty. May’s government looks ever more like a caretaker administration, 
holding the fort until the coming of a new dawn, yet with no idea of what or 
when that dawn might be.

The prime minister’s decision to put her three Brexiteers into key negotiating 
posts in the cabinet seemed tactically cunning. As strategy, it looks 
increasingly dumb. All the signs emanating from London and Brussels suggest the 
only sensible way forward, for Britain and the EU, is for the softest possible 
interpretation of Brexit, followed by another referendum on its terms. The 
government must give a route map of this path, however much it enrages the 
fundamentalists.

Meanwhile, May and Hammond badly need to find a non-Brexit theme to their 
regime. The chancellor yesterday tinkered with welfare cuts, housing supply and 
infrastructure, all in the cause of the “just about managings”. This took the 
form of slowing welfare reforms and meddling at the margins of tax bands and 
minimum wages.

At a glance: autumn statement – 26 key points
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance>
As for housing, Whitehall policies remain dictated by the all-powerful 
builders’ lobby, craving state subsidies to increase demand and push up prices 
in the south-east.Hammond pledged £1.4bn for 40,000 “affordable” homes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-social-housing>
, which appears to be just £35,000 each. This is despite overwhelming evidence 
that Britain’s key housing resource is buried in the inefficient distribution 
of what is already built. The need is for smarter regulation of the existing 
housing stock, not more subsidy. On that, the modest new controls on rental 
fees are at least welcome.

Hammond had sadly inherited his predecessor’s infatuation with the great god, 
infrastructure. To George Osborne it was nothing short of Lenin’s 
“electrification of the Soviet Union”. This is despite the fact that most 
infrastructure is code for investment demanded by the private sector from the 
public sector. It is a welfare state for capitalist fast-learners.

To any chancellor, infrastructure is a gift. It is headlines today, and 
postpones payment until tomorrow – if not the day after. ACentre for Policy 
Studies report 
<http://www.cps.org.uk/publications/factsheets/infrastructure-can-be-a-bad-investment/>
 excoriates the wildness of this spending. It points out that half of China’s 
boom in infrastructure is now reckoned to harm growth. In Britain state capital 
spending is virtually uncontrolled, because it is buried in future debt. 
Hospital PFIs have saddled the nation with a staggering £200bn in debt. The 
McKinsey consultancy estimates rail projects on average go 44% over budget, and 
exaggerate their benefits by 50%.

We are divided by more than north and south | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/we-are-divided-by-more-than-north-and-south>
Hammond this week boasted he would spend £1.1bn on roads, a genuinely pressing 
need. But it is ludicrously paltry, at one fiftieth of what he is about to 
spend on a single, upmarket railway line, the glamorous HS2. There are a dozen 
more worthwhile rail projects languishing. How can Hammond possibly tell health 
carers or the poor he is penniless? Infrastructure is political eye candy.

In his speech the chancellor rightly drew attention to the “damaging imbalance 
in economic growth across the whole country”. He went further, adding that “no 
developed economy has such a gap between its capital city and its second and 
third cities”. So what does he mean to do about it?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Hammond's%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Hammond%27s%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights&media=>
Philip Hammond’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/23/philip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights>
The latest Legatum prosperity index 
<http://www.prosperity.com/download_file/view/2884/1692> puts Britain near the 
top at creating prosperity, but not so good at sharing it. This is despite a 
not ungenerous welfare state. The reason is that sharing is not just about 
fiscal transfers. It reflects a deep imbalance of the country’s economic 
geography.

Nothing the government does is relieving this imbalance. Cities in the north 
of England are among the most poverty-stricken in western Europe. Their jobs 
flee to the south-east, followed by their young. Their local government is as 
indigent as their population. Media hysteria about housing and health is in 
reality about housing and health in the capital.

If the northern economy is depressed, London’s must be the most overheated in 
Europe. Yet Hammond heats it even more. He tips housing subsidies into the 
south-east. He spends ever more on transport in the south-east. He does nothing 
to decentralise public sector employment to the north. Subsidies for 
universities, charities and the arts are concentrated on London.

The government’s four megaprojects – Heathrow, HS2, the Oxford-Cambridge 
expressway and the forthcoming Crossrail 2 – are massive, and all in the 
south-east. They hurl public money at the wealthiest parts of the country. This 
merely piles pressure on housing, schools and welfare in the south-east. As for 
HS2, every study of high-speed rail indicates that it benefits the richer end 
of the corridor.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-says-autumn-statement-offers-no-hope-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20McDonnell%20says%20autumn%20statement%20'offers%20no%20hope'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-says-autumn-statement-offers-no-hope-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20McDonnell%20says%20autumn%20statement%20%27offers%20no%20hope%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fjohn-mcdonnell-says-autumn-statement-offers-no-hope-video&media=>
John McDonnell says autumn statement ‘offers no hope’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/23/john-mcdonnell-says-autumn-statement-offers-no-hope-video>
Britain’s greatest historical investment in housing and welfare is in the 
towns and cities of the north of England, Wales and Scotland. Houses lie empty, 
schools unused. Unless the government intends this to go to waste, rotting into 
a dependency culture and dragging down the rest of the economy, it must find 
ways to revive it.

Making it easier for Birmingham to get to London is not a national priority, 
getting fast from Manchester to Leeds is. Crossrail is not a priority, 
cross-Pennines is. Boosting London’s outbound tourism with more runways is not 
a priority, boosting northern tourism is. London does not need more bridges, 
the north’s ports most certainly do.

Hammond should tax London more heavily and the north more lightly. He should 
move London’s universities and research institutes to the provinces. He should 
beautify northern cities. This has nothing to do with Brexit, except that 
rebalancing the economy is an essential response to Brexit’s challenge. Relying 
on London as the nation’s workhorse is fair neither on London nor on the 
provinces. It is certainly not sensible.

• This article was amended on 29 November 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Stalin’s “electrification of the Soviet Union”. It was Lenin who led the mass 
electrification project that began in 1920.
 