
Being a tenant is lonely. Where do they turn when landlords or letting agents 
bully them into paying more,unlawfully evict them, or refuse to carry out 
repairs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/tenants-safe-homes-landlords-private-rented-shelter>
? For once the news is good: the Bristol-based tenants rights groupAcorn 
<http://www.acorncommunities.org.uk/its_rental> is looking to raise money to 
pay for staff in order to become a genuine nationwide tenants union, with all 
its concomitant admin costs.Living Rent <http://www.livingrent.org/> (which 
campaigns for renting rights in Scotland) is also hiring a staff member.

Tenants need safe homes and landlords should be forced to provide them | Penny 
Anderson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/tenants-safe-homes-landlords-private-rented-shelter>
Tenants need someone to represent their interests. Their homes are (in England 
at least) easily sold beneath their feet, and no-fault eviction notices destroy 
security. Renters move forlornly between frequent short-term lets, their lives 
precarious and peace of mind fleeting (althoughnew laws will improve our lot in 
Scotland <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-34477176>).

Tenants in the London borough of Hackney have Hackney Renters 
<https://hackneyrenters.org/> to speak for them, and nationally Generation Rent 
<http://www.generationrent.org/> campaigns in the media. Both are excellent but 
too busy to provide individual representation, for example in court. The 
solution is obvious: a properly funded, well-organised professional tenants 
union. Judging by the problems shared onAcorn’s Facebook group 
<https://www.facebook.com/groups/1660798970871566/1839276953023766/?notif_t=group_activity&notif_id=1481550857879414>
 what’s needed is advice, advocacy and mediation during disputes with owners.

Landlords have the Residential Landlords Association <https://www.rla.org.uk/> 
yodelling loudly for their cause. More invidious for tenants are letting agents 
who vociferously defend buy-to-let investors’ interests, sometimes against the 
needs and rights of the tenants paying rent. Agents have their own group, the 
Association of Residential Letting Agents, which speaks for landlord rights as 
part of its remit. But still landlordsfeel hard done by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/10/buy-to-let-landlords-vilified-lending-crackdown-tax-hike-profit-loss>
.

One of the most vexatious aspects of letting agents is the notorious and 
pointless quarterly inspection, where they stroll around the flat noting minor 
faults. It would be satisfying to call up the tenants union rep to accompany 
them on their mission, to record faults in the property, recommend repairs or 
improvements, and speak to rent officers when assessing rent levels (where this 
is still a possibility).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fexploitation-exploitation-exploitation-a-property-show-for-millennials-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F10%2F1457609793481%2FKP_1832518_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Exploitation%2C%20Exploitation%2C%20Exploitation%3A%20a%20property%20show%20for%20millennials%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fexploitation-exploitation-exploitation-a-property-show-for-millennials-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Exploitation%2C%20Exploitation%2C%20Exploitation%3A%20a%20property%20show%20for%20millennials%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F14%2Fexploitation-exploitation-exploitation-a-property-show-for-millennials-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F3%2F10%2F1457609793481%2FKP_1832518_crop_640x360.jpg>
Exploitation, Exploitation, Exploitation: a property show for millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/mar/14/exploitation-exploitation-exploitation-a-property-show-for-millennials-video>
Working tenants struggle because of dwindling legal aid and because the 
growing burdens on Citizens Advice force them to pay for legal advice and to 
represent themselves at possession hearings. The largest single cause of 
homelessness is a private tenancy ending for no fault (often a so-called “
revenge eviction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/23/revenge-evictions-landlord-evict-us>
” after a renter requests repairs). A properly staffed and funded tenants union 
is not merely desirable, but essential in a world where many police forces are 
still ignorant of the fact that wrongful or unlawful eviction is a crime with 
the potential for a prison sentence. Tenants need support, as many are 
terrified by the very thought of a court appearance and, when confronted by a 
landlord’s legal team must conduct their own case.

At the moment, renters are stuck. They rely on an informal yet occasionally 
effective network of pro bono legal advice or wisdom from the shared experience 
of fellow sufferers, yet some tenants are scared by the very sight of a court 
letter. Imagine if we had house lawyers or a firm on retainer?

A tenants union could speak up for their interests at Westminster and 
Holyrood, ideally even sponsoring an MP (or MSP). We also need active 
interventions, as when Acorn in Bristol picketed a property after bailiffs were 
due toevict a family 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/neighbours-in-bristol-blockade-home-to-prevent-revenge-eviction-after-mum-complains-about-damp/story-29734741-detail/story.html>
.

A tenants union would mediate to resolve disputes over repairs, and stand up 
for tenants at risk of eviction, either by providing legal representation or 
accompanying tenants to meetings and hearings, and negotiating with errant 
landlords and their agents intent on emphasising the apparent powerlessness of 
tenants by feeding their fear.

Unfair letting fees ban? Truth is the agents just got too greedy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/nov/26/unfair-letting-fees-ban-agents-greedy-exploitation>
Tenants rarely actually trash their homes. But landlords are known to save 
money by hiring “tenancy eviction specialists” to throw tenants out. It would 
be wonderful to have a union to watch our back: someone to call if intimidating 
heavies are hammering on the door.

When tenants misbehave, landlords lose money. When landlords misbehave, 
tenants lose their home. And thanks to Acorn in England and Living Rent in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> a tenants union is starting 
to look like a reality. With millions of tenants in the UK’s private sector, 
even a small monthly subscription would pay for properly resourced staff. 
That’s a lot of voters. The formation of a tenants union is one sign that this 
sleeping tiger is awake and starting to roar.
 