
After his meetings with Theresa May, I gather, Barack Obama has expressed true 
astonishment to his aides over Brexit. “They’ve got no plan,” he has said. 
“They’ve just got no plan.” In the prime minister’s first six months, this 
private assessment has hardened into something close to a general orthodoxy: 
namely that May and her colleagues haveestablished no clear strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/brexit-plan-will-not-be-published-until-february-says-davis>
 for Britain’s departure from the European Union. But what if the 
soon-to-be-ex-president is wrong?

To adapt Sherlock Holmes: we see but we do not observe. This prime minister is 
not a great exponent of euphemism, metaphor and rhetorical trope. 
Instinctively, she says what she means. The natural response of a political and 
media class raised on spin, dog-whistles and devious code is to look for hidden 
meaning or the absence of any meaning at all.

When May says that “Brexit means Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/04/theresa-may-refuses-to-guarantee-brexit-pledges-on-immigration-and-nhs>
”, it feels like a dereliction of cryptographic duty to take her at face value. 
Yet her method is, and has always been, to disclose her intentions 
straightforwardly but according to her own timetable. As she reportedly says to 
allies: “I don’t care if people think I’m stupid for a bit.”

On Tuesday at Lancaster House she will deliver her long-awaited statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
 on the government’s plans – potentially the most significant speech on the EU 
by a prime minister sinceDavid Cameron unveiled his referendum blueprint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/jan/23/david-cameron-uk-exemption-eu>
 in January 2013. In so doing, she will relax her own rule that there shall be “
no running commentary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/07/theresa-may-not-provide-running-commentary-on-brexit-negotiations-video>
” on Britain’s negotiating strategy. But this statement was the price exacted 
by the Commons in December for MPs’ commitment to “respect the wishes of the 
people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-three-live-updates>
” and trigger article 50 before the end of March – a price worth paying for 
such an undertaking.

Every word, every phrase, every inflexion will be analysed within an inch of 
its life. How could it be otherwise? The burden of expectation borne by this 
speech is crushing. It reflects months of work by the PM, her closest aides and 
cabinet colleagues, advised by senior officials such as Jeremy Heywood, the 
cabinet secretary, and Oliver Robbins, the permanent secretary for the 
Department for Exiting theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Theresa May to say UK is 'prepared to accept hard Brexit'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-uk-is-prepared-to-accept-hard-brexit>
Yet, whatever the prime minister says, it is intrinsic to the exercise that 
she will disappoint as well as please. In too many minds, “Brexit” has ceased 
to be an institutional process and become a telos: a destination, even a 
utopian outcome, in which a newly emancipated Britain will hurtle towards 
unspecified glories.

The hardcore of the speech will be a readiness for straight withdrawal from 
the EU: from the single market, the jurisdiction of the European court of 
justice, the common security and defence policy, the common agricultural 
policy, the works. No half measures. Out means out.

Is this “hard Brexit”? Only if you see the choice between hard and soft 
varieties as a one-off decision, a fork in the road, a light switch. In 
practice, they are better understood as sequential phases rather than 
adversarial options. First we leave; then we rebuild a multilayered 
relationship with the EU based on, but not confined to, the deal reached by 
March 2019. That, at least, is the theory.

Though muscular Brexiteers will be delighted by May’s commitment to a clean 
break with the EU, they will be less pleased by her remarks on the need to give 
and take as we negotiate a completely new pact with the remaining 27 member 
states. As Mayherself said last April 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/home-secretarys-speech-on-the-uk-eu-and-our-place-in-the-world>
: “The reality is that we do not know on what terms we would win access to the 
single market. We do know that in a negotiation we would need to make 
concessions in order to access it.” That we are leaving is not in dispute. That 
our new alliance with the EU will bear a cost is the next big argument.

Those who know May well suggest that a precedent is under our very noses. As 
home secretary sheopted out of 130 EU crime and policing measures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/10/theresa-may-european-union-eurosceptics-conservative-party>
 – before opting back in to 35, including theEuropean arrest warrant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/european-arrest-warrant>. This, broadly, is 
the model she will try to follow.

Indeed, the work has already begun. In Whitehall, detailed analysis of more 
than 50 industrial sectors is under way to inform future commercial and 
migration strategy. The Brexit secretary, David Davis, has already floated the 
idea ofcontinued contributions to Brussels in return for targeted access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/brexit-secretary-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access>
 to particular markets.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=David%20Davis%20suggests%20UK%20would%20consider%20paying%20for%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=David%20Davis%20suggests%20UK%20would%20consider%20paying%20for%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fdavid-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video&media=>
David Davis suggests UK would consider paying for single market access 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/01/david-davis-suggests-uk-would-consider-paying-for-single-market-access-video>
The government is quietly committed to Britain’s post-Brexit participation in 
EU patent protection. Having laboured so hard to ensure we signed up to the 
arrest warrant, it is difficult to imagine May not seeking a successor deal.

The question is whether the 27 will buy any of this. As the Guardian disclosed 
at the weekend, Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator,is seeking a 
“special” relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/13/eu-negotiator-wants-special-deal-over-access-to-city-post-brexit>
 with the City of London after Britain’s departure – one that will protect the 
access of the remaining member states to Britain’s financial services. Since 
Europe is our largest market for such services, this is no small breakthrough.

Theresa May is trapped between a rock and a hard Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/theresa-may-is-trapped-between-a-rock-and-a-hard-brexit>
That said, there remains a deeply ingrained resistance on the continent to any 
deal that encourages the notion of an EU a la carte. Last monthAngela Merkel 
told her party congress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/brussels-eu-summit-leaders-push-quick-divorce-cameron-germany-brexit>
 that “we will not allow any cherry-picking”. As one senior British ex-minister 
puts it: “Nobody in Europe sees this as an opportunity. It is something they 
have to manage and handle. But it’s a big mistake to imagine that they see this 
as an exciting chance for everyone to benefit.”

We shall soon discover whether Britain’s position as the EU’s largest export 
partner – accounting for 16% of its traded goods – is sufficient leverage to 
secure an advantageous deal. Remember that the Canada-EU trade negotiations 
almost failed becauseWallonia’s regional parliament took against them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/eu-canada-free-trade-deal-ceta-in-jeopardy-belgium-wallonia-parliament-vote>
.

All this lies ahead of the prime minster. Her immediate challenge is to calm 
the political seas around her, and to introduce a measure of realism to a 
national debate still shrill with anticipation and dread. She will make demands 
of ardent leavers as well as disappointed remainers.

Amid the cacophony, she will seek to assert her authority. For authority is 
what she will need most of all as she undertakes the toughest international 
negotiations to face a prime minister in recent memory. Unlikely as it sounds, 
Brexit is the easy bit.
 