
The head of Germany’s central bank has warned that London’s position as a 
financial centre would be dealt a severe blow if the UK left the single market 
because banks would be denied the right to operate across the 27 remaining 
members of the EU.

The “hard Brexit” option – favoured by some leading Conservative eurosceptics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/tory-eurosceptics-push-for-hard-brexit-eu-single-market>
 – would mean banks would automatically be stripped of their ability to conduct 
business across the EU and open the door for Frankfurt to take business away 
from London, the Bundesbank president, Jens Weidmann, said.

In an interview with the Guardian, Weidmann emphasised that banking 
“passporting rights are tied to the single market and would automatically cease 
to apply if Great Britain is no longer at least part ofthe European Economic 
Area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/28/the-norway-option-what-is-it-and-what-does-it-mean-for-britain>
” (EEA).

The question over passporting rights is a crucial issue for Britain’s 
financial services industry since they allow firms to use London as a hub for 
serving clients from across the EU, without the need for licences in individual 
countries. Its importance appeared to be emphasised by data published on Sunday 
showing thatforeign banks with affiliates in the UK account for a large share 
of international banking activity in London 
<http://www.bis.org/publ/qtrpdf/r_qt1609w.htm>. 

Central bankers group issues stark warning on world economy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/18/central-bankers-group-bis-stark-warning-world-economy>
In the wake of Britain’s vote to leave the EU, the foreign secretary, Boris 
Johnson, had tried to assure US banks that the UK would retain its passporting 
rights even if it left the EEA, as many of Johnson’s allies are pushing for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/18/tory-eurosceptics-push-for-hard-brexit-eu-single-market>
.

But Weidmann appeared to quash such a compromise, describing passporting 
rights as “crucial” for the City ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> because a lack of them could force 
companies to relocate to financial centres on the continent such as Frankfurt.

“Of course several businesses will reconsider the location of their 
headquarters. As a significant financial centre and the seat of important 
regulatory and supervisory bodies, Frankfurt is attractive and will welcome 
newcomers. But I don’t expect a mass exodus from London to Frankfurt.”

In a wide-ranging interview, the Bundesbank president warned of reading too 
much into signs that the British economy had already weathered the turbulence 
of the Brexit vote. “Britain hasn’t even applied to leave yet,” Weidmann said 
when asked whether the remain camp’s “Project Fear” had been exposed as 
scaremongering.

“To assume on the basis of the developments so far that there won’t be any 
negative consequences would be to draw false conclusions. Great Britain is very 
closely tied to the EU andGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>. 
If you reduce these relations to that of a third country, it will suppress 
economic growth in Britain.”

Speaking to a group of European newspapers including the Guardian, Germany’s 
Süddeutsche Zeitung, France’s Le Monde and Italy’s La Stampa at the Bundesbank 
headquarters in Frankfurt, Weidmann also warned the remaining EU members 
against trying to compensate for Britain’s breakaway decision with steps 
towards further integration.

“For many of its citizens, Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> has indeed lost its shine and 
become a projection screen for the downsides of globalisation and migration. 
Likewise, the usual instincts of the EU institutions to answer crises with 
“more Brussels”, more integration, no longer resonates with the public. 
Integration cannot be an end in itself, it has to make sense.”

Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/european-central-bank>, has argued that 
monetary union required a political union in order to flourish, but Weidmann 
said he saw no willingness among governments in Germany, France or Italy to 
cede control over theirbudgets. “On the contrary, national governments and 
parliaments don’t want Brussels to interfere. We can also see this in the 
treatment of the EU budget rules, which are being increasingly put into 
question.”

Weidmann, the head of Germany’s central bank since 2011 after working as an 
adviser to Chancellor Angela Merkel, showed no solution to the standoff between 
southern and northern members of the eurozone.

Asked if there were reasons to revise Italy’s current course of austerity and 
budget discipline given thatRome is cutting its growth forecast 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-italy-economy-idUSKCN11J1CN>, Weidmann said: 
“The real question is, does Italy have an austerity policy at all? In view of 
the high debt levels, budget consolidation is of tantamount importance, also to 
avoid any doubt about sustainability of its public debt.”

Macron: block UK financial firms from selling to eurozone after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/09/uk-financial-firms-cant-sell-to-eurozone-after-brexit-says-emmanuel-macron>
The 48-year-old warned of the risks that came with extending the ECB’s low 
interest rate policy beyond next March: “The longer the low-interest phase 
continues, the bigger the risks of an ultra laid-back monetary policy. Under no 
circumstances must we keep interest rates low for longer than price stability 
requires. Resulting difficulties for individual financial institutions or 
national budgets must not deter us from normalising monetary policy once it is 
necessary to do so.” The ECBleft the single currency area’s main interest rate 
at 0% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/08/ecb-keeps-interest-rates-at-0>
 at its meeting earlier this month.

Reflecting on the changing status of central banks over the last seven years 
of the European debt crisis, Weidmann said he shared some concerns, voiced by 
activist groups such as Occupy, that financial institutions had become more 
powerful than elected governments.

“Central bankers are increasingly under pressure to solve all sorts of 
problems that extend way beyond monetary policy. After Brexit, everyone turned 
immediately to the central banks and relied on us to calm the waves and give 
politics the time to sort itself out.

“The financial crisis and politicians’ indecisiveness have pushed us into a 
new role, and we allowed it to happen. As a result, we intervene ever more 
deeply in individual markets and now have a problematic proximity to financial 
policy,” Weidmann said, pointing to the ECB’s role within the troika – 
alongside the EU and the IMF – during the Greece debt crisis.
 