
In 1996, You’ve Been Framed host Jeremy Beadle unveiled his big new project. 
Beadle’s Hotshots was a series in which he invited members of the public to 
submit sketches and short films they’d made at home. The show vanished without 
trace almost immediately, because nobody thought the idea of watching handmade 
footage from Joe Ordinaries at home would ever catch on. Then someone invented 
YouTube and proved everyone wrong.

Now, in 2017, You’ve Been Framed host Harry Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/harry-hill> has unveiled his big new 
project. The Remote Controller is an upcoming show where the British public are 
asked to pitch ideas for new television programmes to a panel of industry 
experts. It sounds like an unholy amalgamation of Dragons’ Den, Gogglebox and 
the failed 2004 1am ITV experiment Shoot the Writers. The Remote Controller 
sounds like it’s going to sink without trace almost immediately.

If that’s the case, this would be especially bad news for Harry Hill. Since he 
stopped making thematchless TV Burp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/feb/03/harry-hill-tv-burb>
 in 2012, Hill has floundered to find the next big thing. His X Factor musical 
I Can’t Sing closed after six weeks. You Cannot Be Serious – a sort of 
sport-based TV Burp hosted by Alistair McGowan and produced by Hill – lasted 
barely a month. The Harry Hill Movie came and went without fanfare. Worst of 
all, Hill’s brilliantly nightmarish fever-dream reimagining of Stars in Their 
Eyes befuddled so many ITV viewers that it has basically been airbrushed from 
history.

Now (aside from You’ve Been Framed, which doesn’t count) Harry Hill fans can 
only take solace in Harry Hill’s Tea-Time, his silly Sky1 cookery show that 
barely anyone watches, despite its sketches about forcing dog food into 
hairdryers.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2l6-TnzYlcc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2l6-TnzYlcc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D2l6-TnzYlcc&media=>
 Looked at from afar, this struggle to find a new format seems logical. After 
all, Hill isn’t a mainstream comedian by any stretch – he’s far too intelligent 
and esoteric to ever be mistaken for, say, Keith Lemon – and TV Burp looks more 
and more like a one-off hit that blew up and overshadowed the rest of his 
career. Equally logical is the idea behind The Remote Controller; viewers 
apparently aren’t interested in any of his ideas any more, so why not serve 
them up a big bowlful of their own?

Whether it’ll work or not is anyone’s guess. On paper, the thought of asking 
viewers to think up TV formats for free – a job that’s usually incredibly well 
paid – smacks of laziness. It’s a sort of do-my-job-for-me arrogance, a 
shrugging reliance on user-generated content that has simply not worked in the 
history of the medium. On paper, it sounds awful.

Then again, on paper Harry Hill presents Stars in Their Eyes didn’t brace 
anyone for a recurring sketch where a furious Adele impersonator repeatedly 
attacked Hill for abducting her newborn baby either. The joy of Harry Hill is 
seeing how splenetically he can regurgitate terrible-seeming ideas. Nobody can 
predict what The Remote Controller will be like, or what berserk treats he’ll 
wring from it. Harry Hill might be down, but he isn’t out. Fingers crossed he 
proves everyone wrong.
 