
Ministers approved additional funding for an academy chain last year despite 
having serious concerns about it, a government investigation has revealed.Last 
November 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/nicky-morgan-no-tolerance-of-areas-where-majority-of-pupils-fail>
 the then education secretary, Nicky Morgan, awarded Stockport-based Bright 
Tribe, one of five “top performing academy sponsors”, an undisclosed share of 
£5m to take on struggling non-academy schools. But an Education Funding Agency
report [pdf] <http://bit.ly/2fVf2Z6> last week discloses that as far back as 
July 2015 the government had received “allegations concerning non-compliance” 
with the rules on the trust’s contracts with companies and on its interactions 
with firms connected to trustees.

This initial review in 2015 “highlighted a number of breaches of the 
[academies financial handbook]”, says the EFA report. After a follow-up 
investigation this year, Bright Tribe is making changes to the way it operates.

Bright Tribe is not the only trust among Morgan’s “top five” to have faced 
recent controversy. Ten days ago, a leaked draft EFAreport 
<http://bit.ly/2eNJgIG> on Wakefield City Academies Trust (WCAT) reportedly 
identified a string of leadership problems. And recent claims by WCAT that the 
chain was now well-placed to “turn around” schools were dealt a blow last week 
when Brookfield primary in Mexborough, South Yorkshire, which it took over in 
August 2015, was placed in special measures.

Ofsted <http://bit.ly/2eF51cD> found safeguarding arrangements at Brookfield 
were inadequate, the governors had not met since February, that the school had 
serious teacher recruitment and retention problems, and “systems to hold 
leaders to account are in disarray”.

These chains were lauded only a year ago as among the strongest in the north 
of England.

Bright Tribe responded: “Bright Tribe Trust is grateful to the Education 
Funding Agency for their help and support over the last 15 months. We will 
continue to work positively with the EFA.”

Dr John Hargreaves, chair of Wakefield City Academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/academies> Trust, said: “We are seeing 
positive signs our schools are being turned around. Two Ofsted reports will 
soon provide further evidence, as will our trust key stage 2 results. On the 
Brookfield Ofsted report, he said this was “unacceptable and the children and 
wider community deserve better”.

Hargreaves has said 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/exclusive-extreme-dfe-concern-over-academy-trust-paid-ceo-ps82k-15>
 that all the EFA’s recommendations are being implemented. The DfE says: 
“Academies are subject to a strict system of oversight and breaches of the 
rules are rare.”

Four Weddings and a controversial school


A lavishly funded new free school, set to open next to two “outstanding” 
comprehensives in Islington, north London, is being lined up as a joint project 
between the film company that produced Four Weddings and a Funeral, Billy 
Elliot and Love Actually, and an academy chain run by a Tory party donor.

The as yet unnamed school for 11- to 18-year-olds, specialising in film, is 
likely to be sponsored by the Meller educational trust, set up by businessman 
and DfE non-executive director David Meller, and the Brit-film companyWorking 
Title <https://www.theguardian.com/film/working-title>, Islington council 
officials were told at a meeting last week that included Working Title’s 
co-founder Tim Bevan. The government plans to sell luxury housing on part of 
the site to help fund the project.

All very glamorous – but will it succeed? The DfE had has already spent £33.5m 
just on buying the site for the school, a“staggering waste” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/26/council-leader-money-london-free-school-islington>
 according to Islington’s leader, Richard Watts. Perhaps this sounds a modest 
sum to Meller, who reportedly sold his Mayfair mansion last yearfor £40m 
<http://bit.ly/1A9WzMz>.

Some might also have concerns about Meller’s academy sponsorship record: 
Ofsted has rated two of the six schools he sponsors as “requires improvement”.

Watts has written to the DfE asking that the site instead be used for 
affordable housing for teachers.

The DfE says: “We have purchased [the site] and plan to use it for educational 
purposes. We are currently considering options; no decisions have been taken 
and we will release further information in due course.”
 