
The muffled phone line made the voice in Lagos sound small and distant but 
there was no mistaking the sense of determination. Ebun-Olu Adegboruwa, a 
Nigerian lawyer, was explaining how he intended to take on Coca-Cola, the 
world's largest soft drinks company.

He claims to be acting for some 4,000 people in the port area of Apapa, many 
of them poor and illiterate, who believe that a local bottling plant has stolen 
their livelihoods. A lawsuit is planned accusing the company of polluting a 
lagoon by pumping untreated waste into the water and killing fish. "Like many 
multinational companies operating in Africa, Coca-Cola is guilty of double 
standards," he said. "They do what they are unable to do in America and Europe. 
We feel cheated. People are roaming the streets with no means of making a 
living."

Welcome to the Coke side of life. The planned legal action is just the latest 
in a litany of alleged human rights and environmental abuses in developing 
markets that has made Coca-Cola a cause celebre. When self-described anarchists 
interrupted the carrier of the Olympic torch on route to Turin ahead of this 
year's winter games, it was not the athlete's running shoes they objected to, 
it was the presence of Coca-Cola, which had spent $66m (Â£35m) to become the 
main sponsor. Coke is the new Nike.

The latest issue to hobble the company is the renewed allegation that its 
flagship drink in India contains 27 times the maximum permitted amount of 
pesticides. A study published by an agency of the UK's Department for 
Environment, Food and Rural Affairs this week said it detected none of the 
toxins found by a New Delhi organisation. Nevertheless, a quarter of India's 
states have imposed partial or total bans so far. Coke's defenders claim the 
bans are politically driven.

Hunger strike

Long-simmering claims of ignoring labour abuses in Colombia are still the 
biggest piece of mud sticking to Coca-Cola, as well as environmental issues in 
India. A hunger strike was reported last month outside a Coca-Cola plant in 
Mehdiganj, Uttar Pradesh, which ended when the state government agreed to study 
charges of pollution and exhaustion of water supplies.

It faces further allegations of union-busting in Pakistan, Guatemala and 
Nicaragua, and exhausting water resources in El Salvador. In Turkey last year a 
suit was filed alleging that Coke ignored the intimidation and beating of union 
activists. Over the summer Coke has faced legal action of a different kind from 
a disgruntled former business partner in Uzbekistan, who accused the company of 
shady dealings with the country's authoritarian government. All allegations are 
denied.

At the very least, Coca-Cola has an image problem. Students in about 10 US 
universities have banned Coca-Cola drinks, many stirred up by the veteran 
labour activist Ray Rogers and his Killer Coke campaign. He has targeted 
universities in a strategy of whipping up anxiety about the firm's human rights 
and environmental record. An individual boycott "may pale in comparison to the 
revenues they still generate but students in particular are important," he 
said. "If a student gets hooked on a product, they've hooked a consumer for the 
next 40 or 50 years."

Postal workers

New York University is the most prominent to sever ties with Coke - its 40,000 
students voted in December to remove vending machines and clear cafeteria 
shelves of all its products. "There's a segment of the student population who 
felt very strongly about it," said Josh Taylor, an NYU spokesman. "We've taken 
Coke out of all our dining halls." Protests have also reached Europe and 
Canada, although the UK's National Union of Students recently voted down a 
similar ban.

But the campaign against Coke has spread beyond students. Postal workers in 
the US have urged the removal of vending machines from post offices, and 
teachers' unions in New York and California have passed resolutions calling for 
Coke's removal from schools.

In Britain, Coke has been promoting the launch of its latest brand extension, 
Coke Zero, a sugar-free version for men apparently too manly to buy something 
with Diet in the name. The company will hope the brand will perform a little 
better than its last big launch in the US: C2, a low-carbohydrate version of 
Coke that came on to the market just as the low-carb trend was beginning to 
wane.

Coca-Cola has drifted in the past decade, suffering from under-investment, 
heavy job cuts and management upheaval. It has lost almost a third of its 
market value since 2000 and was, symbolically, overtaken by PepsiCo in terms of 
market capitalisation in December.

The company has been wrong-footed by consumer trends after years of being the 
world's best-selling soft drink. Fizzy drinks sales are stagnant in developed 
markets but while its arch-rival Pepsi was launching energy drinks, bottled 
water and fruit juices to appeal to a new health-conscious consumer, Coke fell 
behind. The firm still relies on carbonated drinks for 85% of its sales. 
Success in developing markets - Coke claims it is sold in more than 200 
countries - is crucial for growth.

Coke's critics are largely a ragtag bunch but the company has been unable to 
drown out the background noise, despite an annual marketing budget of $2bn. It 
began a campaign to counter what it dismisses as rumour, slander and urban 
myth. But it probably does not help that Coca-Cola is a symbol of America just 
as the superpower's role in the world has come under increasing scrutiny.

Ed Potter, Coke's head of labour relations, said: "We are probably the 
best-known brand in the world and so therefore we become a target ... It has 
less to do with our practices than to make the point of an individual. If you 
ask why don't they do the same thing with Pepsi, it is because it has no 
cachet. The well-known examples of Colombia and Turkey fit into that category. 
There is no substance to the claims being made but the urban myth is more 
attractive than wanting to know what the facts are."

He said the company had "engaged more actively" with students, including a 
Washington DC summit last year, and was trying to respond more quickly to 
issues around the world when they do arise. It has put out its second social 
responsibility report.

In an effort to silence the drumbeat of criticism, Coke has engaged the 
International Labour Organisation to assess its practices in Colombia. It has 
also commissioned a study of its business in India, by a nonprofit 
organisation, the Energy and Resources Institute. It has taken out advertising 
in the US student press and signed up to the UN Global Compact in March - the 
world's largest voluntary corporate responsibility initiative. "The student 
campaign has stalled," said Potter. "There are not that many individuals 
involved - but they make a lot of noise."

Jeff Seabright, Coca-Cola's vice-president for environment and water 
resources, said he had been to Kerala twice this year, over a factory that 
notoriously closed two years ago after claims that it had depleted the local 
water table. "The high court in Kerala appointed a panel that found the cause 
was severe drought and that Coke had not been the cause," he said. "In fact, we 
have invested in rainwater harvesting." The issue, he insists, is one of 
perception.

He said Coca-Cola's volume had grown by 35% since 2000 but that more efficient 
processes had cut net water usage by 1%. He said it was unclear what had 
polluted the lagoon in Lagos but said the company would build a waste-water 
treatment plant as soon as the government allowed.

Fearful 

Activists are critical of Coke's counter-PR campaign and unlikely to be 
silenced soon. War on Want's Joe Zacune has catalogued alleged abuses in 
Coca-Cola: The Alternative Report and went to India last year to examine the 
claims. Of Kaladera, Rajasthan, he said: "The people are very, very angry. 
Farmers took me to their wells to show me how water levels had fallen. They are 
so fearful of their livelihood and kept using the term 'dark zone' and said 
we'll end up abandoning this area."

Local people took him to see equipment that Coke installed to collect water 
and replenish aquifers. "There was one in the grounds of a college. They said 
Coke had set it up but there had been no maintenance and it had broken. The 
students had ripped it down and the metal girders were twisted. There is anger, 
resentment and complete frustration. This isn't stuff you can find out unless 
you visit these remote and inaccessible places," he said.

Jeremy Moon, a professor of corporate social responsibility at Nottingham 
University, suggested that Coke was perhaps going through the same growing 
pains as other multinationals. "Being a branded company clearly brings 
opprobrium," he said. "If you look at Nike or Reebok, probably they have better 
practices than anyone else in their supply chains but because they are branded, 
they are targeted.

"It's a paradox. In many cases these companies have become leaders in 
corporate social responsibility [CSR] ... they come under criticism and then 
work to demonstrate that they are doing the right thing. They come under 
further criticism and lift standards still further. Nike's latest CSR report is 
a revelation for the amount of information they give."

Whether all the negative publicity will really have any impact on Coca-Cola 
sales is another question. Rita Clifton, head of the consultancy Interbrand, is 
doubtful. She reckons Coke is still the world's most valuable brand, ahead of 
Microsoft.

"It depends on how much people love the brand and how serious the issue is," 
she says. "If people like a product and it's convenient then they will probably 
carry on buying it. People are radical in research questionnaires and 
reactionary at the checkout ... People like to carry on doing what they like 
doing."

Image problem

Nigeria
 Allegations that Coca-Cola killed fish by pumping untreated waste into a 
lagoon near Lagos

Italy 
 Protesters disrupt relay of Olympic torch on route to Turin winter games

India
 Charges that drinks contain 27 times the permitted levels of pesticides and 
water reserves have been depleted

Colombia, Guatemala, Nicaragua
 Claims of ignoring anti-union abuses

United States
 Universities, postal workers and teachers vote to remove products

Turkey
 Allegations of ignoring intimidation and beatings of union activists

Uzbekistan
 Linked to authoritarian government
 