
Here are some stories about the world we now inhabit…

• In February this year, Bangladesh Bank was hit by the biggest bank robbery 
in historywhen thieves got away with $101m 
<https://www.wired.com/2016/05/insane-81m-bangladesh-bank-heist-heres-know/>. 
The heist was accomplished not by tunnels or explosives, but by acquiring the 
access codes for theSwift global messaging system 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Society_for_Worldwide_Interbank_Financial_Telecommunication>
, which is what banks use to securely pass payment orders to one another. The 
criminals used Swift to instruct the US Federal Reserve to transfer money to 
their accounts. Then they cunningly erased their digital fingerprints by 
modifying the bank’s software.

• In June 2015, the US Office of Personnel Management 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Office_of_Personnel_Management_data_breach> 
revealed that its computer systems had been hacked and that the hackers had 
stolen the social security numbers, names, dates and places of birth, and 
addresses of 21.5 million people, including some who had undergone background 
checks for sensitive government posts.

• In October 2015, nearly 157,000 customers of the UK telco TalkTalk had their 
personal data stolen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/06/nearly-157000-had-data-breached-in-talktalk-cyber-attack>
 in a massive intrusion into the company’s computer systems. Police later 
arrested six teenage boys in connection with this cyber attack.

• In the past two years, hospitals worldwide have found themselves on the 
receiving end of a vicious type of cyber attack. Medical staff suddenly find 
that their hospital’s computer systems are locked and inaccessible to them 
because they have been secretly infiltrated. They then receive a message 
telling them that their data will be unlocked on payment of a ransom in 
Bitcoins. The European police agency Europol now reckonsthat the threat from 
“ransomware” 
<http://phys.org/news/2016-09-europol-ransomware-cybercrime-threat.html> has 
eclipsed all other forms of online theft and extortion.

Over the past year, someone has been probing the defences of the companies 
that run critical pieces of the internet

• Two months ago, a young Italian woman killed herself 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/tiziana-cantone-sex-tape-suicide-internet-meme-revenge-porn-naples-a7307041.html>
 because she was traumatised by online abuse after an intimate video that she 
had sent to a friend was widely “shared” across the web. As soon as the images 
went viral, she was subjected to jeering comments, Photoshopped screenshots and 
cruel parodies that, in the end, tipped her over the edge.

• In June, it was revealed that two agencies of the Russian government had 
hacked into the computer systems 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/all-signs-point-to-russia-being-behind-the-dnc-hack>
 of the Democratic National Committee. Shortly before the Democratic convention 
that nominated Hillary Clinton, WikiLeaksreleased thousands of emails and 
attachments 
<https://motherboard.vice.com/read/guccifer-2-claims-responsibility-for-dnc-email-dump>
 stolen during the breach, some of which were distinctly unhelpful to Clinton 
and useful to Donald Trump.

• On 21 October, a series of distributed denial-of-service (DDoS) attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/21/ddos-attack-dyn-internet-denial-service>
 caused widespread disruption of internet activity in the US. The attacks 
involved directing huge amounts of bogus traffic at servers belonging to Dyn, a 
company that is a major provider of domain name services (DNS) to other 
companies. For a time this severely affected major websites – including 
Twitter, Pinterest, Reddit, GitHub, Etsy, Tumblr, Spotify, PayPal, Verizon, 
Comcast and the PlayStation network. The attack was conducted using a huge 
botnet of unsecured “internet of things” devices such as home webcams and 
broadband routers.

• According to Bruce Schneier, a leading security expert, over the past year 
or so, someone has been probing the defences of the companies that run critical 
pieces of the internet. These probes,Schneier says 
<https://www.schneier.com/blog/archives/2016/09/someone_is_lear.html>, “take 
the form of precisely calibrated attacks designed to determine exactly how well 
these companies can defend themselves, and what would be required to take them 
down. We don’t know who is doing this, but it feels like a large nation state. 
China or Russia would be my first guesses.”

Welcome to cyberspace.

It didn’t used to be like this. In the first decade after the internet we use 
today was switched on, in January 1983, cyberspace was a brave new world – a 
glorious sandpit for geeks and computer science researchers. There was, in that 
magical virtual world, no crime, no spam, no commercial activity and little 
concern about security – largely because “netizens 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Netizens-History-Impact-Usenet-Internet/dp/0818677066/ref=as_li_ss_tl?ie=UTF8&qid=1480030203&sr=8-1&keywords=Hauben+Netizens&linkCode=sl1&tag=meme11-21&linkId=72ceed6e8550246e640708e6dfaf9ecf>
” (for that is what they were called) knew one another, or at least knew what 
their institutional affiliations were. Discussion groups (then called 
newsgroups) were formed around every conceivable topic, no matter how arcane. 
(Early on, there was a vigorous argument about whether there should be a 
discussion group on sex, and when one finally appeared, someone else insisted 
that logically there should therefore also be newsgroups on drugs and 
rock’n’roll. So those were set up too.) Codes of conduct, etiquette and social 
norms evolved to regulate – or at least moderate – online behaviour, reduce 
“flame wars”, and so on. It was, in a way, a kind of wonderland, and it gave 
rise to the techno-utopianism embodied in John Perry Barlow’s “Declaration of 
the independence of cyberspace <https://www.eff.org/cyberspace-independence>”, 
which began: “Governments of the industrial world, you weary giants of flesh 
and steel, I come from cyberspace, the new home of mind. On behalf of the 
future, I ask you of the past to leave us alone. You are not welcome among us. 
You have no sovereignty where we gather...”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F530dacea26678d05989811e5e53f05fb3ad88808%2F0_40_4168_2500%2F4168.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F530dacea26678d05989811e5e53f05fb3ad88808%2F0_40_4168_2500%2F4168.jpg>
 In June, Russian agencies hacked into the computers of the Democrat National 
Committee, accessing emails that damaged Hillary Clinton and helped Donald 
Trump. Photograph: USA/Rex/Shutterstock 
What it came down to was this: in the decade 1983-93, cyberspace and 
“meatspace” (Barlow’s term for the real, physical world) were effectively
parallel universes. They existed side by side, and for the most part the 
inhabitants of meatspace knew nothing of the virtual world.

But from 1993 onwards, all that began to change. The main catalysts were the 
world wide web, theMosaic browser 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mosaic_(web_browser)> and AOL. The web provided 
non-geeks with an answer to the question: what is this internet thing for? 
Mosaic, the first modern browser, showed them what the web could do and, more 
importantly, what it could become. Demand for access to the internet exploded.
AOL <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AOL> met the demand by providing a reliable, 
easy-to-configure, dial-up service for millions of people, and so brought the 
“redneck hordes” – ie people unfamiliar with the mores and customs of the 
netizen era – on to the internet. Scenting profits, companies and pornographers 
scrambled for a piece of the action, closely followed by scammers and spammers 
and all kinds of other undesirables.

The result was that the parallel universes gradually merged, and we wound up 
with the composite networked world we now inhabit – a world that has the 
affordances of both cyberspace and meatspace. Which helps to explain why we are 
having such trouble coming to terms with it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe40ade4f1095f265488b49c4c4320f1687a2402b%2F0_197_4782_2870%2F4782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe40ade4f1095f265488b49c4c4320f1687a2402b%2F0_197_4782_2870%2F4782.jpg>
 In October 2015, nearly 157,000 TalkTalk customers had their personal details 
stolen by six teenage boys. Photograph: Zmeel Photography/Getty Images 
This blended universe is a strange place, simultaneously wonderful and 
terrifying. It provides its users – ordinary citizens – with services, delights 
and opportunities that were once the prerogative only of the rich and powerful. 
Wikipedia, the greatest store of knowledge the world has ever seen, is 
available at the click of a mouse. Google has become the memory prosthesis for 
humanity. Services such as Skype and FaceTime shrink intercontinental distances 
for families and lovers. And so on.

But at the same time, everything we do on the network is monitored and 
surveilled by both governments and the huge corporations that now dominate 
cyberspace. (If you want to see the commercial side of this in action, install
Ghostery <https://www.ghostery.com/> in your browser and see who’s snooping on 
you as you surf.) Internet users are assailed by spam, phishing, malware, fraud 
and identity theft. Corporate and government databases are routinely hacked and 
huge troves of personal data, credit card and bank account details are stolen 
and offered for sale in the shadows of the so-called “dark web 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/darkmarket.html>”. Companies – and public 
institutions such as hospitals – are increasingly blackmailed byransomware 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ransomware> attacks, which make their essential 
IT systems unusable unless they pay a ransom. Cybercrime has already reached 
alarming levels and, because it largely goes unpunished, will continue to grow 
– which is why in some societies old-style physical crime is reducing as 
practitioners move to the much safer and more lucrative online variety.

“All human life is there” was once the advertising slogan for the now-defunct 
News of the World. It was never true of that particular organ, which 
specialised mostly in tales of randy vicars, celebrity love triangles, the 
foolishness of lottery winners and similar dross. But it is definitely true of 
the internet, which caters for every imaginable human interest, taste and 
obsession. One way of thinking about the net is as a mirror held up to human 
nature. Some of what appears in the mirror is inspiring and heart-warming. Much 
of what goes on online is enjoyable, harmless, frivolous, fun. But some of it 
is truly repellent: social media, in particular, facilitate firestorms of 
cruelty, racism, hatred and hypocrisy – as liberals who oppose the Trump 
campaign in the US have recently discovered. For a crash course in this darker 
side of human nature, read Jon Ronson’s bookSo You’ve Been Publicly Shamed 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/so-you-ve-been-publicly-shamed.html> and weep.

S o we find ourselves living in this paradoxical world, which is both 
wonderful and frightening. Social historians will say that there’s nothing new 
here: the world was always like this. The only difference is that we now 
experience it 24/7 and on a global scale. But as we thrash around looking for a 
way to understand it, our public discourse is depressinglyManichean 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Manichaeism>: tech boosters and evangelists at 
one extreme; angry technophobes at the other; and most of us somewhere in 
between. Small wonder thatManuel Castells <http://www.manuelcastells.info/en>, 
the great scholar of cyberspace, once described our condition as that of 
“informed bewilderment”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005ef1ae828e1c0f3649e717849f927111b2d15b%2F0_216_5187_3111%2F5187.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Has%20the%20internet%20become%20a%20failed%20state%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Fhas-internet-become-failed-state-crime-cyberspace%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F005ef1ae828e1c0f3649e717849f927111b2d15b%2F0_216_5187_3111%2F5187.jpg>
 According to IT journalist Sean Gallagher, the internet ‘looks a lot’ like New 
York of the late 70s: ‘There is a cacophony of hateful speech, vice of every 
kind… and policemen trying to keep a lid on all of it’. Photograph: Alain Le 
Garsmeur/Getty Images 
One way of combating this bewilderment is to look for metaphors. The idea of 
the net as a mirror held up to human nature is one. But recently people have 
been looking for others. Sean Gallagher, the IT editor of Ars Technica, for 
example, reaches for an urban reference. “In the New York City of the late 
1970s,”he writes 
<http://arstechnica.com/information-technology/2015/02/fear-in-the-digital-city-why-the-internet-has-never-been-more-dangerous/>
, “things looked bad. The city government was bankrupt, urban blight was 
rampant, and crime was high. But people still went to the city every day, 
because that was where everything was happening. And despite the foreboding 
feelings hanging over New York at the time, the vast majority of those people 
had at most minor brushes with crime.”

“Today,” he continues, “we all dabble in some place that looks a lot like 
1970s New York City – the internet. (For those needing a more recent simile, 
think the Baltimore ofThe Wire.) Low-level crime remains rampant, while 
increasingly sophisticated crime syndicates go after big scores. There is a 
cacophony of hateful speech, vice of every kind... and policemen of various 
sorts trying to keep a lid on all of it – or at least trying to keep the chaos 
away from most law-abiding citizens. But people still use the internet every 
day, though the ones who consider themselves street smart do so with varying 
levels of defences installed. Things sort of work...”

They do. But the weakness of the NYC metaphor is that the city was eventually 
cleaned up and a kind of order restored. So in that sense, it’s an unrealistic, 
optimistic scenario for the net. Consequently, those who fear that humanity 
will struggle to get a grip on cyberspace reach for more alarming metaphors. 
Could it, for example, become some kind of “failed state” like contemporary 
Somalia, with, as Gallagher puts it, “warring factions destroying the most 
fundamental of services, ‘security zones’ reducing or eliminating free 
movement, and security costs making it prohibitive for anyone but the most 
well-funded operations to do business without becoming a ‘soft target’ for 
political or economic gain”?

Our dilemma is that while the future of cyberspace is unknowable, we need to 
think about it because it affects us all

The Fragile States Index <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fragile_States_Index>, 
an annual report published by the US thinktank the Fund for Peace and the 
magazineForeign Policy, defines a fragile state as one “whose central 
government is so weak or ineffective that it has little practical control over 
much of its territory; non-provision of public services; widespread corruption 
and criminality; refugees and involuntary movement of populations and sharp 
economic decline”.

Some, but not all, of this maps neatly on to cyberspace. There is, for 
example, no central government that has effective control over the network’s 
“territory” (though the US, for historical reasons, has had more influence over 
it than any other nation, much to the annoyance of the Russians and the 
Chinese). In fact, one of the central problems posed by the network is that it 
is a global system in aWestphalian 
<http://culturalrelations.org/Pages/he_4.html> world of sovereign states and 
local laws.

Our dilemma is that while the future of cyberspace is unknowable, we need to 
think about it because it affects us all. The standard method that large 
corporations and governments use for this purpose is by imagining a set of 
possible futures or scenarios and assessing the implications of each one. The 
aim is not to “predict” the future, but to try and sketch the range of 
possibilities that we might have to deal with.

As far as cyberspace is concerned, the most interesting set of scenarios I’ve 
seen come from a US thinktank, theAtlantic Counci 
<http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/>l. Its analyst, Jason Healey, sets out 
<http://www.atlanticcouncil.org/images/files/publication_pdfs/403/121311_ACUS_FiveCyberFutures.pdf>
 five candidates:

• Status quo: a continuation of what we now have. “Cyberspace is generally a 
safe place in which to do business and to communicate with others, even though 
criminals continue to engage in multimillion-dollar heists and steal millions 
of people’s personal details; national foreign intelligence agencies poke and 
prod for military and industrial secrets.”

• Conflict domain: essentially an extrapolation of the militarisation of 
cyberspace that we are already seeing – a world in which cyberwarfare becomes 
common.

• Balkanisation: cyberspace has broken into national fiefdoms: there is no 
single internet, just a collection of national internets.

• Paradise: cyberspace becomes an overwhelmingly secure place where espionage, 
warfare and crime are rare.

• Cybergeddon: cyberspace degenerates into a virtual failed state with all 
that that implies. Think modern-day Mogadishu.

Some of these are more implausible than others. Healey’s “paradise” scenario 
is pure fantasy. And the power of internet corporations – plus the reach and 
dominance of national intelligence agencies such as the NSA – suggest that some 
kind of (possibly repressive) order would be restored long before “cybergeddon” 
would be reached.

So we’re left with two real possibilities – some blend of Balkanisation and 
inter-state conflict, both extrapolations of trends that we can already observe.

If this is indeed how things pan out, I know one scholar, a distinguished 
professor of international relations, who won’t be in the least surprised. 
Sixteen years ago, in a conversation about the internet, he asked me if I 
really believed that the internet represented a fundamental challenge to 
established power structures. I replied vehemently in the affirmative – 
because, in my techno-utopian fervour, I did believe. He smiled but said 
nothing, and so eventually I asked him what he thought. “We’ll see, dear boy,” 
he replied. “We’ll see.”

He’s still around, as wise as ever. And I am a recovering utopian.

John Naughton’s most recent book, From Gutenberg to Zuckerberg: What You 
Really Need to Know About the Internet 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/from-gutenberg-to-zuckerberg.html>, is 
published by Quercus
 