
Never cross parents of young children on the hunt for the Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> must-have toy. It is a 
rule novelist Sara Gruen failed to heed when she snapped up $23,000 (£18,000) 
worth of this year’s answer to Cabbage Patch Dolls and Furbies to resell. Now 
her pursuit of a fast profit could ruin her financially, as well as destroy her 
reputation among irate parents.

The Water for Elephants author has been accused of being a Grinch stealing 
Christmas after she spent $23,595.31 on eBay for 156Hatchimals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/hatchimal-christmas-toy-you-cant-get-christmas-best-seller>
 toys with a view to selling them on at a profit. The auction website restricts 
sales of toys likely to pull in counterfeiters.

Money raised by auctioning the Christmas must-have was intended to fund the 
defence of “an innocent man who’d run out of options while serving life without 
parole”, Gruen said. She told the Philly Voice she had run up debts of $150,000 
fighting for the unnamed man.

Gruen used her credit card to purchase the Hatchimals, which are lying in 
boxes around her house as she tries to shift them and avoid losing all her 
money. “It felt like I got hit with a freight train,” she said about the moment 
she realised she could not resell the toys oneBay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/ebay>. “I waited until the next morning 
to tell my husband that I’d completely ruined us. He should have murdered me. I 
ran up the credit cards for this. But he feels sorry for me. He feels bad that 
I feel bad. I married a saint.”

Hatchimals are furry creatures that emerge from an egg and grow before your 
eyes. They have become the top-selling toy in the UK, Canada and the US, after 
supplies from manufacturer Spin Master ran out. Such is the frenzy for them 
that Gruen expected to turn a profit, despite paying almost three times their 
retail price.

“I figured I could still sell them at a profit and put a dent in the extremely 
hefty lawyer fees I’m accruing in my fight to get the wrongfully convicted 
man’s case back before the supreme court,”she wrote in a post on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/SaraGruenBooks/>.

Her readers reacted angrily to the news, accusing her of exploiting children 
in order to make money. “It’s awful a person like her buys all these and then 
gets stuck with them while trying to make extra money off the parents,” wrote 
one irate parent. “It’s sad that a lot of kids will be very upset this 
Christmas because of greedy people like you.” Another wrote on her Facebook 
page: “You’re reselling for $189 each. If anything less, you should be ashamed 
of yourself.”

Guen rejected accusations that she had cynically destroyed the Christmases of 
small children across America. “I did not, contrary to popular opinion, scoop 
them off shelves to prevent kids from getting them. The day afterBlack Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, I decided they were really 
cool and probably going to be popular and so I bought the ones I got on eBay. 
ALL of them.” She added: “If you want to blame me [for] the death of Christmas, 
be my guest.”

Not all her readers reacted with scorn. Some have offered support and 
encouraged her to sell them through her own online outletThe Gruen Zoo 
<https://the-gruen-zoo.myshopify.com>, where she is now offering Hatchimal 
purchasers a signed copy of one of her books.
 