
Fitness for all the family was the key tenet of former Davis Cup tennis 
captain David Lloyd’s pioneering health club vision. Since 1982, when the first 
venue opened near Hounslow in west London, the concept has grown to incorporate 
top-notch sports coaching for young and old, holidays, social events and much 
more across more than 80 clubs in the UK.

In 2016, the heart of a David Lloyd Club is the DLicious cafebar, which 
provides a perfect place to meet, or unwind after a hard gym or group-exercise 
session. Here members can tuck in to healthy snacks or larger meals – after 
all, what’s the point of working out if your diet means you are not fuelling 
yourself as best you can, so that you can reach your fitness potential?

Win an annual family membership to David Lloyd Clubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/david-lloyd-clubs/2016/sep/21/win-an-annual-family-membership-to-david-lloyd-clubs>
DLicious cafebars have something for everyone, with family areas, kids’ 
playframes and quiet lounges for the grownups, too. They’re ideal for meeting 
friends for a coffee, a drink, or a meal from the carefully tailored, 
seven-page menu.

DLicious serves up a variety of tasty low-calorie dishes and protein-heavy 
power foods, which are essential post-workout. And for those with a sweet tooth 
there is a cluster of tempting treats – but whatever members opt for, their 
decision will be informed by each item’s calorific value. Indeed, meals with 
fewer than 600 calories are marked out in order to assist members, as are 
vegetarian and gluten-free dishes. For instance, breakfast – which is served 
until midday – might consist of porridge topped with raspberry and pomegranate 
compote and sunflower seeds (286 kCal), or possibly warm pancakes with unsmoked 
grilled bacon, roasted hazelnuts and maple syrup (687 kCal). The vegetarian 
club breakfast may also appeal, with two free-range poached eggs, baked 
vegetarian sausages, half a grilled beef tomato, flat mushroom, spinach and 
baked beans (478 kCal).

Light dishes – served from noon – include award-winning Mexican black bean and 
chicken soup (320 kCal), chilli chicken wings (441 kCal), and fish fillet 
sandwich (852 kCal).

Also available are a number of salads, such as superfood (poached flaked 
salmon, mixed leaf salad, broccoli, spring onions and cashew nuts, served with 
a lemon and chive dressing – 544 kCal), and grilled steak and stilton (just 316 
kCal).

In addition there are flatbreads and jacket potatoes, and plenty of healthy 
burgers, items from the grill, David Lloyd Club favourites (such as salmon 
fillet and spicy bean chilli), and pastas and noodles.

And when it comes to juices and smoothies you can add a 30g protein shot, or 
swap your juice for coconut water for no extra charge. There is also a 
comprehensive children’s menu.

DLicious cafebars also provide a wide range of coffees and teas, including 
espresso, latte, cappuccino and hot chocolate, so they really do cater for all 
the family.

Try a three month membership 
<https://ad.doubleclick.net/ddm/trackclk/N178802.133705GUARDIAN.CO.UK/B10366666.139477975;dc_trk_aid=311730881;dc_trk_cid=75125694;dc_lat=;dc_rdid=;tag_for_child_directed_treatment=>
* today – enquire now.

*Terms and conditions apply
 