
The headteachers’ professional body <http://www.naht.org.uk/> has condemned 
Theresa May’s plans for more grammar schools in a formal submission calling for 
more investment in early-years education instead, theObserver has learned.

An unpublished document submitted to the Department for Education is 
understood to be scathing aboutthe prime minister’s belief that selective 
education will improve social mobility. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>

It notes that damage to children’s life chances is done in the early years. 
The gap between children with free school meals and their peers in passing five 
or more GCSEs, including in English and maths, grows to 60% by the time pupils 
reach the last year of primary school.

When children who have received high-quality early-years education start 
school, they are up to eight months ahead of their peers in literacy and 
language skills.

Details of the submission by the National Association of Headteachers – which 
represents heads and deputies in all sectors of education in England, Wales and 
Northern Ireland – can be revealed as a new analysis from the House of Commons 
library shows that four of the five areas where disadvantaged children perform 
worst, compared with their wealthier peers, are in areas where secondary 
education is fully or partially selective.

Grammar schools cannot help 90% of children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/25/grammar-schools-weak-comprehensives-hope>
The attainment gap also widened in 19 of the 35 fully and partially selective 
areas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/23/school-quality-gap-attainment-research>
 (54%) in 2013-14 and 2014-15, which are the latest years for which data is 
available.

In September the prime minister announced her intention to allow both new 
selective schools to open and existing schools to become grammars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
.

The general secretary of the NAHT, Russell Hobby, would not comment on the 
details of the association’s formal submission but confirmed that the body was 
opposed to May’s proposals. The government consultation closes on Monday.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fheadteachers-reject-grammars-theresa-may-education-schools-divisive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a874f53f712c5934ae8dbca18cd89c76b14f888%2F0_0_3935_2362%2F3935.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Headteachers%20denounce%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20plan%20for%20more%20grammar%20schools&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fheadteachers-reject-grammars-theresa-may-education-schools-divisive%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Headteachers%20denounce%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20plan%20for%20more%20grammar%20schools&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fheadteachers-reject-grammars-theresa-may-education-schools-divisive%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3a874f53f712c5934ae8dbca18cd89c76b14f888%2F0_0_3935_2362%2F3935.jpg>
 Theresa May has claimed that creating more grammar schools would improve 
social mobility. Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Hobby said: “The evidence does not support the expansion of grammar schools: 
they do not contribute to social mobility and will distract attention from the 
things that really matter.

“Instead of this divisive and risky reform, we need a firm focus on the most 
pressing issues within education: getting great teachers for the pupils who 
need them most, supported by confident leaders and with access to an evidence 
base of what works.”

The Observer view on grammar schools | Observer editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/10/observer-view-on-grammar-schools>
In September eight out of 10 NAHT members voted to oppose the plans to open 
more grammar schools. Hobby added: “School leaders know that selective school 
systems, using flawed and inaccurate tests, do not create schools that work for 
everyone. It is too late to address educational and social disadvantage at age 
11 and it is impossible to fairly determine academic ability with a single 
pass-or-fail test.

“Yes, we must do more for social mobility. The priorities are: good-quality 
education in the early years; strong and broad foundations at primary that 
build a love of learning; and – desperately needed now – appropriately 
qualified subject teachers at secondary. All of these goals rest on effective 
recruitment and sufficient funding.”

Lucy Powell MP, the former shadow education secretary who now chairs the All 
Party Parliamentary Group (APPG) on nursery schools and nursery classes, said 
there was a broad and growing coalition in parliament opposed to further 
grammar schools.

She said: “Ministers are failing to heed the warning from headteachers that it 
is a deep pool of excellent teachers and enough resources that will help them 
make a difference and narrow the education divide, rather than fetishising 
grammar schools as a silver bullet to tackle the social mobility crisis.

“There is a growing alliance in parliament against the expansion of selective 
education. If the prime minister continues to ignore the evidence of what works 
in education, she will see her grammar school plans blocked.”

Later, a Department for Education spokesperson said: “Our Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> that Work for Everyone 
consultation puts forward proposals to allow more grammar school places to be 
created where parents want them, but only on the basis that strict conditions 
are met which will ensure they contribute to the improvement of the wider 
schools system.

“Our proposals are about creating more choice, with more good school places in 
more parts of the country. We want to do this by lifting the ban on new 
grammars, and harnessing the resources and expertise of universities, faith 
schools and independent schools.”
 