
The headteacher of a Margate school that turned away dozens of children for 
breaking the school uniform policy has vowed to continue with the crackdown, 
and is considering an even stricter dress code.

Matthew Tate, the new head of Hartsdown academy, was at the centre of a media 
storm on Tuesday after 50 pupils were sent home for wearing inappropriate 
clothing.Angry parents gathered at the gates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/06/police-called-school-pupils-sent-home-wrong-uniform-hartsdown-academy-margate>
 of the 900-pupil school and a member of the public called the police.

On Wednesday, 20 pupils were turned away for flouting the uniform rules. The 
crackdown prompted a wider debate about uniforms as children returned to 
schools after the summer holidays, with some parents applauding the move, and 
others saying it was too strict.

Tate said he had written to parents in July telling parents the dress code 
would be strictly enforced, and this was “adequate warning”.


He and his team pulled up pupils for wearing trainers, carrying their blazers 
in their bags, and sporting skirts that did not meet the code.

Tate told the Guardian he and senior teachers would be at the gates each 
morning to “welcome children into the school, and part of that welcoming is 
checking their uniform”, he said.

This will happen “every day while I’m headteacher here”, with no relaxing of 
the standard, he said.

Some parents have asked for a stricter uniform than Hartsdown’s black blazer 
and black trousers or skirt, such as kilts for girls or blazers that are unique 
to the school, Tate said. He plans to consult his governors over this.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhartsdown-academy-pupil-describes-uniform-upset-but-head-defends-clear-message-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hartsdown%20Academy%3A%20pupil%20describes%20uniform%20upset%20but%20head%20defends%20%E2%80%98clear%20message%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhartsdown-academy-pupil-describes-uniform-upset-but-head-defends-clear-message-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hartsdown%20Academy%3A%20pupil%20describes%20uniform%20upset%20but%20head%20defends%20%E2%80%98clear%20message%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fhartsdown-academy-pupil-describes-uniform-upset-but-head-defends-clear-message-video&media=>
Hartsdown Academy: pupil describes uniform upset but head defends ‘clear 
message’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/sep/07/hartsdown-academy-pupil-describes-uniform-upset-but-head-defends-clear-message-video>
The stricter uniform is part of efforts to improve standards at the school, 
which was rated “good” by Ofsted in 2014. Inspectors noted that it did well for 
such a deprived area, where only 24% of children achieved five A*-C grades at 
GCSE this year.


“This school has not been successful enough for our children,” Tate said, 
adding that a “minority of children and parents” had been allowed to “set the 
tone for the school”.

Pupils reported that behaviour was notably better since the tighter standards, 
he said. “I care far too much about our children to allow children to do 
whatever they wish … Improve uniform and you improve behaviour.”

On Wednesday, TV cameras and reporters were at the school gates alongside 
parents waiting to pick up their children. One headline called him a “Gestapo 
headmaster”, while other parents spoke of examples of clothing that had been 
ruled non-compliant, such as shoes with a small brown trim or a skirt that was 
not pleated.

Tracey North, whose year 7 son, Jack, was sent home, told the Guardian: “He 
was wearing black trainers, which I quite understand wasn’t on the list, but 
the way I was treated and turned away yesterday, I felt very belittled ... He 
missed his first day of secondary school. I was in tears.”

She added that the rules seemed to be being applied inconsistently. “There 
were girls this morning that were let in yesterday who weren’t allowed in 
today. He said this school needs picking up.”

Another mother, Sharon King, said her son, William, had been banned from 
wearing trainers despite having had a hip operation after being hit by a car. 
“It’s not what he [Tate] was saying, it’s how he did it ... My point was that 
year 7s should have a bit of leniency.”


King said she had since spoken to Tate and had now resolved the situation. “We 
agree he has to take a firm stand. I wouldn’t have gone about it that way but I 
understand what he’s trying to achieve.”

She said the first day of the crackdown was “like a scene from St Trinian’s”.

Tate expected some confrontation with parents and was “ready for this 
reaction”, he said, although he was taken aback by being described as a 
“Gestapo headmaster” – which he said was offensive. Tate said: “It’s been 
difficult, and I’m sure mistakes have been made. I’m sure there will be cases 
where children are walking through in trainers and teachers have missed it.”

“The main error I want to improve and I think we already have done [is that] 
there was confusion about things I didn’t think were confusing, such as what 
school shoes are.” In his view, school shoes are black, leather and preferably 
lace-up. The school is seeking advice from a chiropractor on shoes that won’t 
harm children’s feet.

He said the police were not called on Tuesday, but were passing by and saw the 
disturbance. Kent police said they were called by a member of the public who 
had seen the melee.

“The majority of our children and the majority of our parents are great 
people,” Tate said. “They hate it when we are known as a scruffy school.”


He said: “There’s a minority of children who have no intention of compliance 
with the uniform and their parents are backing them. The issue is that for 
fairness and reasonableness we have taken a zero-tolerance approach and are 
saying everything has to be right, down to the details.”

And those who do not comply, he said, will have to find another school.

 