
In the remote western plains of Texas, the Midland-Odessa region is separated 
from the nearest major city by hours of open road. So when the Planned 
Parenthood clinic in Midland closed down in late 2013 – a casualty of 
legislative cuts that targetedPlanned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood> directly – it served 
as an isolated experiment in what happens when the government defunds the 
largest women’s healthcare provider around.

“I hate to say it, but I think an awful lot of women just opted to go without 
care,” said Mike Austin.

‘Please, I am out of options’: inside the murky world of DIY abortions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/home-abortions-emails-secret-world>
Austin is chief executive of Midland Community Healthcare Services (MCHS), a 
federally-funded network of providers that has emerged as the only major 
alternative to Planned Parenthood in the area. His clinic offers all of the 
same services the Midland Planned Parenthood once did, including contraception, 
cancer screenings and STI tests, to the same kind of patients, low-income women 
who rely on the public safety net for their healthcare.

In fact, just before the Planned Parenthood clinic shut down, the two 
providers made a plan to minimize the fallout. Planned Parenthood sent nearly 
5,000 patient medical records – up to 1,000 belonging to active patients – 
directly to MCHS.

But to Austin’s dismay, only about 100 former Planned Parenthood patients ever 
showed up at his door.

“We are seeing a subsequent rise in STDs and a subsequent rise in unplanned 
pregnancies,” Austin said. He believes they could be linked. “And I’m sitting 
here going, ‘See? I told you so. This is what happens.’”

In the weeks ahead, members of Congress will replicate Midland’s experiment on 
a grand scale by defunding Planned Parenthood across the country. They will do 
so in the form of a budget that blocks Planned Parenthood from acceptingMedicaid
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/medicaid>, the government-funded 
insurance for low-income individuals.

It’s a move Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have 
long framed as a rebuke of Planned Parenthood’s role in providing abortions – 
even though Medicaid is prohibited from covering abortions by law, and only 
half of Planned Parenthood clinics even offer the procedure.

What Medicaid does do is allow Planned Parenthood to provide contraception, 
cancer screenings and STI tests to 1.5 million patients in the public safety 
net at some 650 health centers for no cost. About two-fifths of the 
organization’s $1.3bn annual budget derives from public funding. Without the 
reimbursements Medicaid provides, a spokeswoman for the Planned Parenthood 
said, an unknown number of those centers will have to close.

House speaker Paul Ryan of Wisconsin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/wisconsin> recently predicted that federally 
funded health centers – like the one in Midland – could pick up where Planned 
Parenthood left off. “They’re in virtually every community,” he said at a 
recent town hall, “providing the same kinds of services.”

But public health officials such as Austin, who work in states where Planned 
Parenthood’s presence is already in decline, are sounding the alarm. They say 
the loss of Planned Parenthood would imperil the health of thousands of women 
who already face high barriers for care.

And some of the strongest voices in opposition come from Ryan’s own backyard.

“They’ve never replaced the services of Planned Parenthood,” said Gail Scott, 
director of health in Jefferson County, Wisconsin. Her county, which lost the 
Johnson Creek Planned Parenthood in 2013, bumps up against Ryan’s congressional 
district. “I’m not pro-abortion or anything,” she said. “But I can tell you 
nothing ever replaced those services for uninsured people.”

The clinics in Johnson Creek closed because lawmakers in Wisconsin, as in Texas
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/texas>, approved a series of family 
planning cuts targeted directly at Planned Parenthood. Today, Scott said, when 
the Jefferson County health department gets calls from low-income women looking 
for a place to obtain contraception, staff recommend they travel to another 
county – where there’s still a Planned Parenthood.

Chippewa County, Wisconsin, also lost its Planned Parenthood clinic. Jean 
Durch, the county health director at the time who is now retired, recalled that 
after the closure, there was no place in Chippewa for women to receive STI 
tests, even though her department sought the funding to make it happen.

“We never were able, before I retired, to pick up the full complement of 
services” of Planned Parenthood, she said.

And Shawano County, Wisconsin, which is experiencing a flare-up in gonorrhea 
and which the state government recently designated a hot-spot for new chlamydia 
infections, is still feeling the pressure. After the Planned Parenthood there 
closed, former patients faced significant waiting lists to see a doctor at 
local community health clinics. The health department didn’t know where to send 
women for certain services.

“The clinic that closed in Shawano served the whole county,” said Jaime 
Bodden, the Shawano County health director. Not just women on Medicaid, she 
said, but women with stingy insurance and women with no insurance at all. Now, 
the county health department is virtually on its own as it combats the region’s 
rising STI rates.

“It’s something that we still often talk about,” she said. “We say, ‘Wouldn’t 
it be nice to have Planned Parenthood in town?’”

‘A national healthcare disaster’

Planned Parenthood officials say Wisconsin would continue to be hard-hit if 
Congress went through with its plans for defunding. A disproportionate number 
of its patients there are Medicaid beneficiaries and women of color – groups of 
people who already face barriers to accessing care.

Already, some of their patients are worried about gaps in their health care if 
Planned Parenthood were to disappear.

“I have to get that care,” said Courtney Kessler, 22, of Madison, Wisconsin, 
who has a family history of ovarian cancer and has gone to Planned Parenthood 
for cancer screenings and contraception for seven years. She is on a public 
safety net program that covers the costs. “I don’t know where else I would go. 
I would have to spend time finding somewhere else to go, and worry about: can I 
afford it? And worry about: am I getting the same quality of care I get with 
Planned Parenthood? It’s only making it more difficult for people already 
having struggles.”

Planned Parenthood operates 22 locations in 15 Wisconsin counties, with just 
two providing abortion services. A new survey conducted byHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Management Associates, a 
healthcare consulting firm, and paid for by Planned Parenthood, concluded that 
in seven of those counties there are no viable alternatives to Planned 
Parenthood for family planning services. In four other counties, there is only 
one viable alternative. Two counties that would have no alternative if Planned 
Parenthood were to close – Racine and Walworth – comprise part of speaker 
Ryan’s district.

The notion that overnight they can serve two million more people who need 
reproductive health services is absurd
Sara Rosenbaum, professor of health policy 
The survey also concluded that many alternatives offer limited hours and do 
not stock all the most effective contraceptives – making it questionable that 
they are truly alternatives to Planned Parenthood.

Raegan McDonald-Mosley, Planned Parenthood’s chief medical officer, said this 
pattern holds across the country. In 332 of the 491 counties where it had 
locations in 2010, the latest year numbers were available, Planned Parenthood 
served at least half of the women obtaining contraception through the public 
safety net. In 103 of those counties, Planned Parenthood was the only safety 
net provider for family planning.

“We play a hugely important role in family planning safety net around the 
country,” said McDonald-Mosley. If those clinics were no longer options for 
many women, “It would truly be a national healthcare disaster.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fplanned-parenthood-congress-wisconsin-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55f34008bbf17f038befa037183ea752c2f480c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Healthcare%20without%20Planned%20Parenthood%3A%20Wisconsin%20and%20Texas%20point%20to%20dark%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fplanned-parenthood-congress-wisconsin-texas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Healthcare%20without%20Planned%20Parenthood%3A%20Wisconsin%20and%20Texas%20point%20to%20dark%20future&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fplanned-parenthood-congress-wisconsin-texas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff55f34008bbf17f038befa037183ea752c2f480c%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A woman has her blood pressure checked at a women’s clinic in San Juan, Texas. 
Photograph: Delcia Lopez/Reuters 
Proponents of defunding Planned Parenthood have circulated their own surveys. 
In 2015, lawmakers and anti-abortion activists distributed maps and lists 
claiming there were thousands of government-funded health clinics able to take 
on Planned Parenthood patients.Several 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2015/09/louisiana-said-women-could-go-dentist-if-planned-parenthood-were-defunded>
news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/19/ohio-pro-life-senators-planned-parenthood-defund>
outlets 
<https://rewire.news/article/2015/10/22/rights-answer-gutting-planned-parenthood-elementary-schools-homeless-shelters-jails/>
 revealed that these lists included dentists, jails and food banks.


Still, many of the dots on such maps represent clinics that really do offer 
the same services as Planned Parenthood. The question is, can they take on 
potentially millions of new patients?

Many public health advocates are skeptical.

Jailed for ending a pregnancy: how prosecutors get inventive on abortion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/abortion-pregnancy-law-prosecute-trump>
“Planned Parenthood treats about two million women on Medicaid and community 
health clinics in total serve about 25 million – everybody from infants to 
90-year-olds,” said Sara Rosenbaum, a professor of health policy at George 
Washington University who has worked in the field of community health for 
several decades.


“They have wait lists for the people they’re serving today, much less having 
to absorb all of Planned Parenthood’s patients as well,” she continued. “The 
notion they can suddenly ramp up their capacity to absorb all of the services 
Planned Parenthood can offer, the notion that overnight they can serve two 
million more people who need reproductive health services is absurd. It 
displays, to my mind, an astounding ignorance of how the health system works.”

‘Texas illuminates what may happen’

Planned Parenthood hasn’t produced an estimate of how many of its clinics 
might close, and where if the group were defunded.

In Texas, though, a nascent body of research suggests that excluding Planned 
Parenthood from the safety net has negative consequences even when the cuts 
don’t force clinics to shut their doors.

These studies have measured what happens not when Planned Parenthood clinics 
closed, but when women enrolled in Texas’ Medicaid-like program can no longer 
use their insurance at Planned Parenthood. One study, from the Texas Policy 
Evaluation Project of the University of Texas-Austin, followed women in Midland 
(before the clinic shut down) and Houston who relied on Planned Parenthood for 
Depo Provera, an injectable contraceptive. They found that 20% of women who 
wanted to stay on Depo-Provera missed their next dose.

These women faced a small but real increase in their odds of getting pregnant. 
About 25% became pregnant – versus just 8% of the women who didn’t miss their 
next dose.

The other four out of five women in the survey who wanted another dose, got 
one. But it wasn’t always free, and it wasn’t always straightforward. 
Forty-three percent of these women reported that it cost them time or money to 
find a new provider. In Midland, because other providers were scarce, 65% of 
the women surveyed kept going to Planned Parenthood, even though it now meant 
paying out of pocket.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Frepublicans-planned-parenthood-congress-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Republicans%20trade%20blows%20with%20Planned%20Parenthood%20president%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Frepublicans-planned-parenthood-congress-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Republicans%20trade%20blows%20with%20Planned%20Parenthood%20president%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fsep%2F29%2Frepublicans-planned-parenthood-congress-video&media=>
Republicans trade blows with Planned Parenthood president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2015/sep/29/republicans-planned-parenthood-congress-video>
 Cecile Richards, in a congressional hearing in September 2015. 
Defunding Planned Parenthood, in other words, didn’t necessarily stop women 
from relying on Planned Parenthood for health care – it just forced them to 
replace the state’s money with their own.

“These results should be cautionary to states considering similar measures,” 
the study warned. “They contradict the claim that Planned Parenthood could be 
removed from a statewide program with little or no consequence.”

Another study found that after Texas kicked Planned Parenthood out of the 
Women’s Health Program, there were drops of more than 30% in reimbursement 
claims for some of the most effective methods of contraceptives (although not 
birth control pills). The drops were only observed in counties where women had 
previously used local Planned Parenthood affiliates. That study also measured a 
small but real uptick in births by women on Medicaid, although there are other 
explanations besides the loss of Planned Parenthood.


“Texas’s experience illuminates what may happen on a larger scale,” said Joe 
Potter, a UT Austin researcher. “Each person involved in the program had to go 
find a new provider. And whether or not the new providers have the training, 
experience, and bureaucratic set up so women can get care promptly is a big 
question mark.”

Austin, who runs the clinic in Midland, says the problem isn’t just that local 
health clinics might not have the capacity. In fact, he was one of few public 
health officials interviewed who felt that federally funded healthcare clinics 
really could provide for Planned Parenthood’s patients – eventually.

Texas measure requiring burial of fetal remains may herald wave of similar laws
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/texas-fetal-remains-burial-cremation-law>
“Logistically, yes, it can happen,” he said. “But it can’t happen for free or 
overnight. In Dallas or Austin, you could be talking about 10,000 people being 
displaced into the community health system. I’m sure [local clinics] would do 
their best, but it would take a ramp-up to do it.”

A Texas health department survey 
<https://hhs.texas.gov/sites/hhs/files//twhp-capacity-survey-results.pdf> of 
the state indicates that the capacity to absorb Planned Parenthood patients 
might exist. But the problem, as Austin’s experience attests, is getting all of 
the same patients that Planned Parenthood once served through the door. Clinics 
like his also have an extremely limited ability to advertise their existence. 
Women know what Planned Parenthood is and the services it offers. And MCHS 
doesn’t employ the same medical professionals as Planned Parenthood – people 
that patients have trusted for years with personal and sometimes embarrassing 
issues.

All these could be reasons why hundreds of Planned Parenthood patients, unless 
they moved or found other care, never transferred to Austin’s clinic.

Recently, MCHS moved most of the 5,000 records it inherited from Planned 
Parenthood into storage.

“It broke my heart,” Austin said. “Here’s 5,000 people who have basically been 
thrown out on the street. What happened to them? I can only account for about a 
hundred of them. What happened to the rest?”
 