
Hedgehogs that have had a hind leg amputation can struggle to groom 
themselves, so are more likely to harbour ectoparasites. I had noticed that 
Sweetpea, my resident hedgehog, had been flailing her shortened leg as she 
tried to scratch using her phantom limb. But it was still a shock to spot her 
emerging from her nest with one side of her body studded with ticks. They 
clustered in the folds of her right ear and along her right flank, where the 
coarse skirt of fur met the quill line.

Specieswatch: Ixodes ricinus (tick)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/24/specieswatch-tick-lyme-disease>
Picking her up for a closer look I could see that the creatures were at 
various stages of engorgement. The newly attached, unfed, ticks were flat, 
red-brown and as tiny as sesame seeds. Those that had begun to feed had 
wrinkled, dimpled bodies, like aged, semi-deflated balloons, while the bloated, 
fully engorged, individuals resembled glossy, dove-grey, pearls.

Ticks are often associated with wild terrain, from the South Downs to the 
Scottish Highlands, but these highly adaptive arachnids are prevalent in urban 
parks and gardens.

Rather than make use of the dry, hay-lined, hedgehog boxes I had provided, 
Sweetpea had meticulously woven a hibernaculum from fallen leaves, allium seed 
heads and damp grass clippings – an ideal humid dwelling for ticks to quest and 
ambush an unsuspecting host.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhedgehogs-distress-at-tick-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3c482ea3dbaedbae64ba685d549e21c956efe65%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hedgehog's%20distress%20at%20tick%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhedgehogs-distress-at-tick-invasion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hedgehog%27s%20distress%20at%20tick%20invasion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhedgehogs-distress-at-tick-invasion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3c482ea3dbaedbae64ba685d549e21c956efe65%2F0_0_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 A hedgehog exploring at night. Photograph: Danita Delimont/Getty Images/Gallo 
Images 
There are more than 20 species of ticks in Britain, but the two most commonly 
found on hedgehogs areIxodes hexagonus, regarded as a specialist hedgehog tick, 
and the more generalistI ricinus. 

Both species are hard-bodied with a dorsal shield that completely covers the 
male’s upper body and partially covers the female’s. The shield protects them 
from damage and desiccation. To the untrained eye it is difficult to tell the 
species apart, but thehexagonus has a hexagonal shield, whereas the ricinus 
shield is round.

Picking up the odd tick shouldn’t harm a healthy hedgehog, but blood loss from 
a heavy burden can cause anaemia. Sweetpea is habituated to handling so I was 
able to coax her to uncurl and begin the painstaking task of removing the 
bloodsuckers using a tool shaped like a claw hammer. She huffed and bristled as 
I hooked and twisted them, their harpoon-like mouthparts disengaging from her 
skin with a satisfying pop.


Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 