
Unilever, one of the world’s biggest food companies, has promised that by the 
end of next year it will have added a V logo to500 of its products 
<https://www.unilever.co.uk/news/press-releases/2016/unilever-forms-new-pioneering-partnership-with-the-european-vegetarian-union.html>
, ranging from mayonnaise and pasta sauce to margarine.


But why would a company selling mainly vegetarian products want to start 
promoting that these products are, as we already know, vegetarian?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhellmanns-mayonnaise-flora-unilever-vegetarian-logo-flexitarians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71c8f70c460629fe160db763eaddfea59fea901%2F114_124_1216_1519%2F1216.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hellmann's%20aims%20to%20woo%20flexitarians%20by%20branding%20its%20mayo%20as%20veggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhellmanns-mayonnaise-flora-unilever-vegetarian-logo-flexitarians%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hellmann%27s%20aims%20to%20woo%20flexitarians%20by%20branding%20its%20mayo%20as%20veggie&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fhellmanns-mayonnaise-flora-unilever-vegetarian-logo-flexitarians%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa71c8f70c460629fe160db763eaddfea59fea901%2F114_124_1216_1519%2F1216.jpg>
 Unilever’s V logo. Illustration: European Vegetarian Union 
Unilever <https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> says it will make it 
easier and quicker for consumers to identify which of its brands are 
plant-based. It’s part of a plan to attract flexitarians, people who want to 
reduce their meat consumption, to its products.

 “Opting for a flexitarian diet is no longer a niche trend but one which has 
immense mainstream appeal,” says Andre Burger, vice president of foods at 
Unilever UK and Ireland. “We want to make it easier for our vegetarian and 
flexitarian consumers to identify which of our products meet their dietary 
needs and to encourage more informed and healthier eating choices.”

The V logo would also be easily recognised by non-vegetarians, says Unilever. 
This is supported by anecdotal evidence from the European Vegetarian Union 
(EVU), which designed the logo. Supermarkets that use the logo in Austria said 
that about 80% of products are bought by non-vegetarians.

While welcoming moves by food companies to encourage more plant-based eating, 
food campaigners say there is no evidence that it persuades more people to cut 
meat and livestock-based foods in favour of vegetarian ones.
 Hellmann’s mayonnaise’s current ‘suitable for vegetarians’ label will be 
replaced by the V logo. Photograph: Tom Levitt 
“I am not too sure of the added value of adding it to products such as 
mayonnaise as I am sure most people already know they are vegetarian,” says 
Duncan Williamson, food adviser at WWF. “One of WWF’s messages around 
sustainable diets is you need to eat less (and better) meat, you don’t need to 
go vegetarian or vegan. I am not sure a V label says this.”

EVU has also been criticised 
<http://www.foodnavigator.com/Market-Trends/The-meat-companies-making-vegetarian-food-Mainstreaming-sustainable-eating-or-dangerous-double-standards>
 for allowing meat manufacturers to use the V logo on their vegetarian produce. 
But with around40% of Britons 
<https://www.forumforthefuture.org/sites/default/files/files/Role_of_plant_based_diets_Oct16_FINAL_2(1).pdf>
 identifying themselves as semi-vegetarian, the EVU says it is happy to support 
businesses such as Unilever in trying to boost sales.

“This is a landmark moment for the EVU because it is the first time we have 
been able to partner with a company that intends to bring so many of its 
products under the V label scheme,” says Floris de Graad, spokesman for the EVU.

Other brands using <http://v-label.eu/about-v-label#whythislabel> the V logo, 
which first appeared in 1996, include Alpro and Karma, which each pays an 
annual licence fee to the EVU for every product that bears the logo.
 