
Andy Burnham launched his bid to be mayor of Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 on a promise to introduce ambition to the people of the north. “It’s hard 
growing up in the north: if you say you want to be a doctor, lawyer or MP you 
get the mickey taken out of you,” he said in May, which could use some 
mickey-taking of its own, were it not for all the things he’s said subsequently.

Andy Burnham: election of Trump was a cry for change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/andy-burnham-election-trump-cry-for-change>
He has spent the intervening months really drilling down into the kind of 
leader he wants to be, and emerges as a man who can “confront hard truths”, an 
honest Stark to the corrupt metropolitan Lannisters. So, for instance, he told 
the Commons on Wednesday: “Our reluctance in confronting this [immigration] 
debate is undermining the cohesion of our communities and the safety of our 
streets.”

Previously known as a man who could change his mind over the course of a 
sentence, Burnham has had a reinvention Madonna would envy. He is now the 
decisive champion of northern Labour, which is like regular Labour, except 
tougher, and without all that tedious elitist respect for facts (a 
comprehensive takedown of the link between immigration and the “safety of our 
streets” can be found inBusiness Insider 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/labour-mimicking-ukip-andy-burnham-immigration-2016-12?r=US&IR=T>
, from the Office for National Statistics, the LSE, or indeed, from almost 
anywhere).

Politically, “northern Labour” is a development to which Burnham personally 
will probably turn out to be unequal, yet it should be taken seriously: how 
should southern Labour respond? What about those, in any region, who value
freedom of movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/06/freedom-of-movement-eu-uk-brexit-negotiations-theresa-may>
, who think there are arguments for and against thesingle market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/01/single-market-lite-britain-eu-brexit>
 but would like to hear the most intelligent of them and not the least, who 
value openness generally and think a narrow and bordered approach is, at best, 
unhelpful and, at worst, self-sabotaging? CouldSadiq Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> build a political movement 
around London Labour? As relations between the mayor and the government look
ever more fraught and unproductive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/09/sadiq-khan-government-abandoning-southern-rail-passengers-aslef-drivers-overtime-ban>
, he may as well find some enjoyable way to occupy himself.

If you could run your county as a country, what would your borders look like? 
How strict, how open, how humane?

I would like to propose a thought experiment. Immigration is the issue on 
which no party, bar Ukip, has internally reconciled itself. The Conservatives 
claim to have resolved it, but what in fact they have done is to coalesce 
around a vocabulary – listening hard to people’s “concerns”, bringing it down 
to the “tens of thousands” – which nobody really believes meaningful. The 
Liberal Democrats may have a coherent creed of openness, or there may just be 
so few of them, in such a state of siege, that to ask about their differences 
is pointless. And Labour has been trapped in the same godawful dance since 
Gordon Brown traducedthe good name of Gillian Duffy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/29/gordon-brown-gillian-duffy-bigot>
 in 2010: people who don’t want to have the conversation at all, on one side – 
and on the other, people who feel that any interrogation of the substance of 
their anti-immigrant position is just more elitist sneering.

What would happen if immigration was a devolved issue? Leave aside for the 
time being the practicalities of having internal regional borders, and imagine 
how this debate would go. How many immigrants do you want in your constituency, 
or county?

The Greater London argument, if I made it, would go something like this: 
unlimited numbers of students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/14/most-britons-do-not-see-foreign-students-as-immigrants-survey-shows>
, since they generate wealth and knowledge and use the NHS for barely anything 
except beta-blockers and STIs; a decent andhumane number of refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/29/uk-is-failing-to-take-fair-share-of-syrian-refugees-says-oxfam>
; skilled labour as businesses required it; unskilled labour where it was part 
of a mutually agreed zone of free movement, but not where it was deliberately 
recruited (as in the care sector) as a means of wage suppression.

In Lincolnshire, the conversation might look different: there might be voices 
calling for no unskilled migration, but instead of being taught their manners 
by out-of-touch Londoners, they could debate directly with thefarmers who rely 
on it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/13/farmers-fear-eu-referendum>. 
They could thrash out the trade-offs between them. In Yorkshire, people with 
“concerns” could flesh out who they were concerned about: they could talk 
student numbers with the chancellors of their universities; refugee numbers 
with their neighbours; freedom of movement with their businesses. If the answer 
came back “none” – no refugees here, which I find unlikely, given that 
Sheffield was the nation’s firstCity of Sanctuary 
<https://cityofsanctuary.org/about/> – so be it. That’s what devolved democracy 
is about.

In having a more granular and practical discussion, individual employers might 
be forced to confront the impact of low wages, rather than statisticians 
breezily pronouncing that wages might be stagnant, but that isn’t immigration’s 
fault. Regions wouldn’t need to be gleefully informed by the liberal 
commentariat that they were only worried about foreigners because they didn’t 
know any: they could do their own maths and reach their own conclusions.

Consensus has been reached, broadly, that we need to have an “honest 
conversation” about immigration. But, instead, we have politicians of varying 
degrees of populism, ventriloquising what they’ve decided people think – and 
when told that they are wrong, complaining that you can’t say anything these 
days without being called a racist.

A better place to start would be, if you could run your county as a country, 
what would your borders look like? How strict, how open, how inclusive, how 
humane? How would that affect your local economy, your civic institutions, the 
future of your communities? Of course it is hypothetical, but it would foster 
understanding, between one interest and another, one region and another. At the 
moment, we’re dealing in half-truths, untruths and mistrust; in this dusk of 
unspoken resentments, only Farage-alikes can operate.
 