
On the Today programme on Radio 4 on Wednesday, Mishal Husain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/23/mishal-husain-radio-4-today> 
called outex-Vanity Fair editor Tina Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/apr/07/tina-brown-our-speakers-have-taken-on-bigger-misogynists-than-trump>
 for suggesting Hillary Clinton shouldditch the “Sgt Pepper trouser suits” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-36478571> and “own her inner bitch … 
[be] the fierce-faced Hillary with the black shades and the BlackBerry”.

“It’s interesting that you say the clothes matter,” interjected Husain, using 
the word “interesting” in the double-edged sense that also means “clearly 
preposterous”. “In the 21st century, to a young feminist … [does] her 
appearance, the actual clothes she wears, matter?”

Of course the clothes themselves don’t matter. But Brown’s point was that the 
shades-on, back-of-a-motorcade Hillary is the persona that young female voters 
“find cool”, and are therefore more likely to vote for. In the era of 
personality politics, critiquing a politician’s wardrobe is just another way of 
asking: who would you rather have a pint with? When we discuss what politicians 
wear, we are talking about the same fundamental issues – what are they really 
like, what would they be like to hang out with – as when we debate which leader 
we’d go to the pub with.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7511f765605b53e9c38e8b29a3ff71c59e35d8f%2F0_0_2177_2992%2F2177.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%E2%80%99s%20wardrobe%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20but%20not%20from%20a%20fashion%20perspective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%E2%80%99s%20wardrobe%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20but%20not%20from%20a%20fashion%20perspective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb7511f765605b53e9c38e8b29a3ff71c59e35d8f%2F0_0_2177_2992%2F2177.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton in one of her trademark trouser suits. Photograph: 
Rex/Shutterstock 
It might be a self-evidently nonsensical way to talk about political 
allegiance, but there is no denying that modern voters care about what 
politicians are like as people. What they wear – along with the pint issue, and 
family photos on holiday, andGordon Brown’s favourite biscuit 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1221180/Biscuitgate-After-24-hours-dithering-Gordon-Brown-finally-confesses-favourite-dunk.html>
 – is part of that conversation. And however irrelevant it may seem, it’s a 
conversation that won’t go away any time soon. Yes, it is sexist that we tend 
to talk about women in terms of what they wear and men in terms of whether they 
would get their round in, but both questions are pretty idiotic, so it’s not 
exactly an inequality battle worth picking.

Brown advised that Hillary should adopt a neutral uniform to starve debate 
about her outfits of oxygen. The irony is that it is exactly this attempt at a 
uniform that backfires on female politicians. The “Sgt Pepper trouser suits” 
that Brown pokes fun at are the look most associated with Clinton, from her 
days as New York senator and secretary of state, when cheery block colours with 
a mandarin collar were her trademark look. Defaulting to a signature shape of 
suit, and varying only the colour, is a sartorial tactic that female 
politicians such as Clinton and Angela Merkel have borrowed – logically – from 
the men around them.

What is illogical is the way in which we hold women to a higher standard of 
style than we do men. Looking presentable and appropriate will pass muster for 
a man, but we expect more of women. To paraphrase Ginger Rogers, women in 
politics have to do what the men do, but backwards in high heels and while 
wearing on-trend yet age-appropriate clothes, patriotically flying the flag for 
their country’s top design talent and without spending extravagantly. We want 
them to have the Michelle Obama knack of dressing in a way that is 
simultaneously formidable and warm. The likability problem is real for Clinton, 
and clothes are part of it. As Andrew Sullivan wrote in New York magazine two 
months ago 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/04/america-tyranny-donald-trump.html>
, “the idea of welcoming [Hillary] into your living room for the next four 
years can seem, at times, positively masochistic”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c08798f2a3f9af98cdbf23ac328d444830caef2%2F856_513_1273_1591%2F1273.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hillary%20Clinton%E2%80%99s%20wardrobe%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20but%20not%20from%20a%20fashion%20perspective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hillary%20Clinton%E2%80%99s%20wardrobe%20matters%20%E2%80%93%20but%20not%20from%20a%20fashion%20perspective&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fshortcuts%2F2016%2Fjun%2F08%2Fhillary-clinton-wardrobe-matters-but-not-fashion-perspective%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c08798f2a3f9af98cdbf23ac328d444830caef2%2F856_513_1273_1591%2F1273.jpg>
 Woman in white: Clinton on the podium. Photograph: Justin Sullivan/Getty Images
That fashion is a battle Clinton can’t win is illustrated by how often even a 
strategist of her experience changes tactics. A year ago, when she joined 
Instagram, posting a rail of clothes in red, white and blue, captioned “Hard 
choices”, it seemed a sign that she was ready to engage with style and visual 
messaging. (She has a strong support base within the US fashion industry. Anna 
Wintour is a formidable fundraiser on her behalf; Marc Jacobs wore a Vote 
Hillary T-shirt at his most recent New York fashion week show.) Within six 
months, however, she had battened down the sartorial hatches, sticking to 
plain, muted colours and banishing her once-signature pearls.

Recently, her wardrobe has stepped back up a gear – the high sophistication 
(and accompanying $12,000 price tag) of a Giorgio Armani jacket she wore in 
April raised some eyebrows, while a newly acquired taste for white jackets has 
led to comparisons to Olivia Pope,Kerry Washington’s political fixer character 
in the TV drama Scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2013/jun/28/kerry-washington-scandal-interview>
, and speculation that Clinton was hoping to project a “new beginnings” message 
with the colour of purity. Clothes are never just about clothes. But more to 
the point is that politics, these days, is rarely just about politics.
 