
Twenty years ago, almost to the week, Bob Dole, then the Republican nominee 
for president, slipped andfell off a stage 
<http://articles.latimes.com/1996-09-20/news/mn-45687_1_bob-dole>. He was 73, 
and his aides moved fast to put a positive spin on the tumble: if he can fall 
down and get right back up again, that proves he’s fit enough for the White 
House!

But that’s not how most people saw it. Earlier that same day Dole had offered 
congratulations to the Brooklyn Dodgers 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/09/19/opinion/the-artless-dodger.html>, a team 
that had not existed for four decades. (They became the Los Angeles Dodgers in 
1958.) By nightfall TV comedians were renaming the candidate Bob Old. His 
already ill-starred campaign never recovered.

Eight things that are more important than Hillary's pneumonia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/hillary-pneumonia-more-important-things-donald-trump>
This is the precedent that will currently be terrifying the Hillary Clinton 
team, as they watch the endlessly replayed clip of hercoming close to collapse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-leaves-911-ceremony-after-feeling-overheated>
, knees buckling as she’s helped into a car following Sunday’s 9/11 memorial 
events in New York. Veteran Clintonites remember that Dole moment well, for it 
was Bill Clinton who benefited, comfortably winning re-election less than two 
months later. Now they fear history is repeating itself – with Hillary on the 
wrong side.

Are they right to be anxious? Could the image of a frail Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>, coupled with the belated 
admission that she is suffering from pneumonia, prove devastating for her 
candidacy? Suddenly that is the central question of the 2016 contest – and it 
touches on far more than the nasty turn the candidate endured on Sunday.

The reasons for Democrats to worry are obvious. For months, with next to no 
evidence, Donald Trump has been ventilating the claim, long nurtured among 
rightwing conspiracists, thatClinton has a severe and secret illness 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/giuliani-hillary-clinton-illness-videos-000000972.html>
.

It’s been a doubly effective strike for Trump. First, by claiming that 
68-year-oldClinton lacks “strength and stamina” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/12/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-day-wrong-florida-video>
, or that she “sleeps a lot”, the Republican, who’s 70, has been able to tap 
into the lingering sexist belief that a woman is too weak to lead. Second, the 
notion that Clinton has hidden this frailty plays nicely into the view, held by 
some 60% of the US electorate, that she is dishonest anduntrustworthy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-radical-transparency-trump-accusations-dishonesty-whitewater-emails-health>
.

Until Sunday Clinton defenders were able to hit back, dismissing the first 
line of attack as rank misogyny and the second as unfair exaggeration. But by 
fainting in view of a camera, and by initially concealing a pneumonia diagnosis 
that came on Friday, Clinton has allowed Trump to claim vindication. If he has 
not yet done an “I told you so” tweet, it’s only because he doesn’t have to.

No less damaging are the practical implications. Those who’ve had the illness 
– including those much younger than Clinton – say that recovery demands total 
rest and can take seven or eight weeks. She simply does not have that kind of 
time.

Even if she lightens her campaign schedule, she cannot retreat to her bed 
between now and 8 November. The first TV debate with Trump, a key moment in any 
campaign and one that many suspect will determine this race, is just two weeks 
away. Preparation for that is exacting. What if Clinton forces herself to work, 
or to do at least a few appearances on the stump, and is visibly unwell again?

Hillary Clinton’s best riposte to Trump? Radical transparency | Jill Abramson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/11/hillary-clinton-radical-transparency-trump-accusations-dishonesty-whitewater-emails-health>
All this matters in the US especially because of the particular relationship 
Americans have with their president. The White House is not quite like, say, 10 
Downing Street. Americans are electing not merely a head of government, but 
also a head of state and national figurehead. There can be an almost primal 
need to see the president as a protector, the alpha lion strong enough to 
ensure the safety of the pride.

Of course there have been sick men in the Oval Office: Franklin Roosevelt used 
a wheelchair, whileJohn F Kennedy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2002/11/17/us/in-jfk-file-hidden-illness-pain-and-pills.html?pagewanted=all>
 had regular steroid injections for excruciating back pain. But both men 
concealed their frailties from the US public: they knew the voters would 
struggle to accept weakness in the man they hail as the chief.

Clintonites looking for reassurance can extract a morsel of consolation from 
the procession of young, fit pundits on the US airwaves sharing their own 
pneumonia experiences, saying they were knocked sideways by it – but bounced 
back to full strength.

They’d also note the curious, and surely gender-related, tendency for Hillary 
to poll better when she has shown vulnerability: her numbers rose when she 
seemed to shed a tear during her 2008 primary battle against Barack Obama, and, 
10 years earlier, when she was the injured party during theMonica Lewinsky 
scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/13/monica-lewinsky-wasnt-betrayed-feminism>
.

Those with the rosiest tint to their spectacles would also note that when the 
media are talking about Clinton’s health, at least they’re not talking about 
her earlier consignment of half of Trump’s supporters into the “basket of 
deplorables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/hillary-clinton-basket-of-deplorables-donald-trump>
” as racists, sexists and Islamophobes – a gaffe that meant she was already in 
trouble even before she crumpled in New York.

There have been sick men in the Oval Office: Roosevelt used a wheelchair, 
while Kennedy had injections for back pain.

The whole episode, with its focus on both Clinton’s health and honesty, has 
confirmed again that she is judged by not one but two double standards. The 
most obvious isgender 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2016/10/fear-of-a-female-president/497564/?utm_source=atltw>
. Trump’s “strength and stamina” line is just part of a constant and 
decades-old pattern of faulting aspects of Clinton that would barely be noticed 
in a man.

Criticised for shouting too loud on the podium or for using her hands too 
much, or for a thousand other flaws, she said recently that she’s often doing 
no more than emulating theoratorical style 
<https://twitter.com/filmguitarist/status/773991245420998657> of the men she’s 
admired. But what we accept in them, too many find unappealing in a woman.

But there’s another double standard that’s costing her dear. Clinton is judged 
as a politician, held to the standards expected of a serious elected official. 
Her opponent is not.

It’s undeniable that it has long been the Clinton modus operandi to reveal 
little, and only when forced. That has fed the impression, for nearly 25 years, 
that the Clintons are hiding dark and terrible secrets. Once they let in the 
light, reporters usually find there’s barely anything there: witness the 
Whitewater “scandal”, talked up as the next Watergate, but whichamounted to 
nothing <https://www.theguardian.com/world/2000/sep/21/hillaryclinton>. Or 
Clinton’s alleged culpability for the jihadi attack inBenghazi 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/news/republicans-11-hour-gift-to-hillary-clinton-20151023>
 which leftthe US ambassador and three other Americans dead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/12/chris-stevens-us-ambassador-libya-killed>
.

So 60% of Americans think Clinton is dishonest, yet an analysis of her 
statements 
<http://m.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2016/08/hillary-clinton-one-americas-most-honest-politicians>
 showed she was more truthful than every prominent US politician, including 
Bernie Sanders, bar one: Barack Obama. And now she has promised to release more 
medical records.

Trump, meanwhile, is such a compulsive liar 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/john-cassidy/donald-trumps-big-lies-at-the-commander-in-chief-forum>
 it’s almost impossible to keep up. (His lies aboutwhat he saw on 9/11 
<https://twitter.com/MarlowNYC/status/774852355967873024> could fill a small 
pamphlet on their own.) Yet somehow this is seen as part of the shtick, part of 
Trump being Trump – and he’s rarely called on it. So while Clinton was 
relentlessly grilled during anNBC special 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/clinton-trump-veterans-forum-debate-preview-moderators-elections-2016>
 last week abouther emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/08/colin-powell-hillary-clinton-email-state-department?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, Trump was unchallenged when he breezily claimed that he opposed the Iraq war 
before it started – even though he’son tape 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/02/donald-trump-iraq-war-219471> supporting 
it.

This is Clinton’s fate, to be doubly judged by double standards. She is a 
woman and an establishment politician – and now she is ill. Politically, if not 
medically, her condition is critical.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-day-wrong-florida-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20mocks%20Clinton%20for%20mental%20stamina%20then%20gets%20the%20day%20wrong%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-day-wrong-florida-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20mocks%20Clinton%20for%20mental%20stamina%20then%20gets%20the%20day%20wrong%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-hillary-clinton-day-wrong-florida-video&media=>
Trump mocks Clinton for mental stamina then gets the day wrong - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/aug/12/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-day-wrong-florida-video> 