
When David Cameron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> 
departed Downing Street, he left three white elephants grazing the Whitehall 
grasslands. They had been awaiting their fate for years, kept going with fodder 
slipped them by their kindly keeper, George Osborne. Cameron never made up his 
mind what to do with them and so left them to his successor. Their names were 
Hinkley, HS2 and Heathrow.

Top anti-Heathrow Tories will miss vote on third runway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/08/heathrow-third-runway-expansion-boris-johnson-justine-greening-miss-commons-vote>
To Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> they have 
become talismans of her muscular approach to infrastructure. She could have 
shot them on sight and directed their upkeep to good causes. But white 
elephants are not without defenders. Each had been portrayed as the embodiment 
of Britain’s industrial greatness. If May wanted to look good, she should 
shower them with largesse, not kill them.

Last month she gave Hinkley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/29/hinkley-point-ministers-sign-go-ahead-for-nuclear-power-plant>
, the sickest of the beasts, a loving hug. Yesterday, it was the same for HS2. 
Next week, we are told, the trio will be completed with Heathrow. It is said 
that they will together consume over £100bn of public money. This is a 
stupefying sum for a government supposedly short of cash.

An old Treasury joke has a project for a bridge to the moon. Advocated as 
feasible by some boffin, a headline-hungry minister secures “seed money” to 
“scope options”. Consultants gather like bees to honey, followed by 
construction lobbyists. Reports are funded to boast that Britain would be in 
the van of moon-bridging. UK plc would be at the top table. There would be 
“massive spin-off”. The steel industry would revive. Thousands of jobs would be 
created from Scunthorpe to Kent. All opposition to the moon bridge is dismissed 
as defeatist, as showing a lack of enterprise, of patriotism, of care for 
jobs-’n’-growth. Doubts of the project’s feasibility are rebutted with reports 
from PwC and McKinsey proving that, if you spend enough public money, you will 
indeed get to the moon.

Our three white elephants are all bridges to the moon. There is no 
constituency of expert opinion behind any of them.Hinkley Point C 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/hinkley-point-c> was always a blind alley 
in the vexed world of nuclear power generation, a giant reactor that has never 
worked and may never. Such is the financial state of its French builder, EDF, 
that doubt still consumes its future. When announced by the government last 
month, the reasons given for proceeding were entirely political. It would help 
the French, please the Chinese, create jobs. For taxpayers and consumers who 
must pay for it, it is a dreadful deal. But like all such projects, as 
economics deflates, politics inflates.

HS2 is different 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/sep/19/hs2-rail-project-jobs-bonanza-high-speed-rail-industry-leaders>
 only in the obscurity of its origins. Back in 2010 it was Cameron’s 
back-of-an-envelope alternative to a new runway at Heathrow, which he had sworn 
not to build. A fast train would relieve the airport of pressure from internal 
flights. The last sane inquiry into HS2, byRod Eddington 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20090104005813/http:/www.dft.gov.uk/about/strategy/transportstrategy/eddingtonstudy/>
 in 2006, dismissed such new-fangled networks as costly and time-wasting. 
Worse, they tended to “acquire a life of their own … and prove difficult and 
unpopular to stop, even when the benefit-cost equation does not stack up”. 
Never a truer word was spoken.

HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> was seized on by Osborne, eager for a 
symbol of his youthful machismo. It was like Bilbo’s ring. Every Treasury 
official, Whitehall economist, Commons committee and thinktank have given it 
thumbs-down for value. It was energy inefficient and low on any priority list 
for new capacity. Its only serious backers are those with money in it, largely 
consultants drawing down millions a year in fees from the government. Ministers 
have been, in effect, paying lobbyists to lobby ministers for a project no one 
wants except the lobbyists. It is trains on southern, western and north-western 
routes that are desperate for investment, not commuters into Euston.

In all three cases, May could easily have decided the other way, with no 
damage to her reputation as investment-friendly

Osborne’s friend, chief executive of Manchester city council Howard Bernstein, 
told me early this year he had switched to preferring new transport links in 
the north –so-called HS3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/oct/27/what-is-hs3-proposed-sub-penning-rail-line-explained>
 – over HS2. Even the line’s champions, former transport minister Andrew Adonis 
and lobbyist Jim Steer, now doubt the practicality of bringing HS2 into Euston, 
rather thanhalting it at Acton 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/hs2-terminus-must-be-moved-to-west-london-while-euston-station-is-redeveloped-9384599.html>
. Driving through Primrose Hill and Camden will be a nightmare, causing a 
decade of chaos and delays to west coast mainline services. The cost in 
inconvenience will be astronomical.

The third elephant is Heathrow. May is next week expected to overturn 
Cameron’s “no ifs, no buts” rejection of the third runway 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/29/theresa-may-told-she-can-win-heathrow-expansion-vote-in-parliame/>
. She will approve the only major expansion of an airport over a built-up area 
in Europe and unleash merry hell on west London.

There is no reason for a third runway at Heathrow beyond lobbying by its 
operator Heathrow Airport Holdings, the former BAA. London airports are not 
about business but about leisure. It is reasonable (and cheaper) to expand 
Gatwick and build a high-speed link to London’s “third airport” at Stansted. In 
2008 BAA was itself planning to move its hub from Heathrow to Stansted, until 
Gordon Brown suddenly gave Stansted to Manchester “to promote competition 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-14196639>”. The waste of Stansted is a 
scandal, British planning at its worst.

The last transport secretary, Patrick McLoughlin, never got a grip on his two 
white elephants. On HS2 he lacked the guts at least to reverse priorities and 
build HS3 first. It was hoped his successor, Chris Grayling, might be made of 
sterner stuff. Clearly not. The lion’s share of transport investment for the 
next decade is to be blown on an unnecessary luxury train, while Heathrow will 
become a lawyer’s feast.

In all three cases, May could easily have decided the other way, with no 
damage to her reputation as investment-friendly. The alternatives were 
perfectly desirable infrastructure: smaller Chinese power stations, HS3 in the 
north and Gatwick/Stansted. All would have been quicker to build.

Instead we have been given a worrying insight into the performance of the 
prime minister’s policy team. As in decisions on obesity, grammar schools and 
immigrant registers, there is a sense that May’s staff are out of their depth, 
unable to scrutinise policies passing across their desks. It is always easier 
to take the quickest route to a headline. As a result, we are saddled with 
three of the worst and most extravagant projects inflicted on British taxpayers 
in a generation.
 