
A campaign group representing EU nationals living in the UK has urged 
ministers to reform Home Office permanent residency procedures after it emerged 
people werebeing told to prepare to leave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
 because of minor paperwork issues.

Representatives of the3million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/the3million-campaign-group-letter-theresa-may-eu-citizens-in-uk-right-to-remain>
 said the case of Monique Hawkins, a Dutch woman who has lived in the UK for 24 
years but received a Home Office letter advising her to make preparations to 
leave, showed the application process was too complex.

“We need reform of the system, this is a massive bureaucratic task,” said 
Nicolas Hatton, a French citizen and founder of the grassroots organisation 
campaigning for the rights of EU citizens.

German neuroscientist also told to leave UK after residency rejection
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/29/german-neuroscientist-told-to-leave-uk-residency-application-rejected-monique-hawkins>
“This is just one example of the numbers of people who are getting rejection 
letters. This is happening every day. I think the point here is that we have 
got a system that does not work, it cannot deal with the registration of three 
million people. It is a massive bureaucratic task that even the government has 
got to realise has to be addressed.”

The more than three million EU nationals living in the UK are not required to 
register their presence in the country but many have rushed to apply for 
permanent residency as a way ofguaranteeing their rights after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/18/government-unilateral-eu-citizens-right-to-remain-brexit-roger-casale-nicolas-hatton>
. But growing numbers complain they are being erroneously rejected.


The immigration lawyer Jan Doerfel criticised what he called the “refusal 
mindset” at the Home Office. “Hawkins’s case highlights the tick-box exercise 
approach of the Home Office,” he said.

“There is definitely a refusal mindset whereby any ambiguity is resolved 
against the candidate. When they haven’t got a yes/no answer they move to 
reject.”

The Tory MP Dominic Raab, who intervened on Hawkins’s behalf, said he thought 
EU nationals who were settled in the UKbefore the referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/03/number-migrants-revealed-eu-referendum-hmrc-national-insurance>
 should be protected but that other EU countries had to agree to reciprocate.

“I have always made clear I believe we should protect the rights of existing 
EU nationals here at the time of the referendum, and it has been the EU that 
rebuffed the early UK efforts to provide reciprocal clarity on this,” said 
Raab, who supported leave.

The Home Office has issued statements since the referendum telling EU citizens 
that their status in the UK has not changed. But it has been inundated with 
permanent residency applications from EU nationals who fear their rights will 
be eroded post Brexit.

The number of outstanding applications 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/eu-citizens-in-uk-home-office-residency-applications-right-to-remain-before-brexit-talks>
 went from 37,618 in June 2015 to almost 100,000 “currently in progress” in 
July 2016, including those seeking permanent residence cards and documents for 
non-EU family members of European citizens.

Earlier this week, the Guardian revealed that Hawkins had her application for 
permanent residency rejected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/dutch-woman-with-two-british-children-told-to-leave-uk-after-24-years>
 because she included a solicitor-certified copy of her passport rather than 
the original, which she said she needed for travelling to the Netherlands to 
handle the paperwork generated by the death or her father.

“As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay in the United Kingdom you 
should now make arrangements to leave,” Hawkins’s rejection letter stated.

The Cambridge University graduate is married to a British man and they have 
two British children. She decided to apply for permanent residency after the 
referendum.

Hawkins said she never thought she would be deported but when she phoned the 
Home Office to discuss the decision communicated to her in October, four months 
after her application, she was told her case could not be discussed on the 
phone or by email. She described her treatment by the Home Office as being as 
absurd as a Monty Python sketch.

She has reapplied after obtaining a Dutch identity card, which allowed her to 
submit her passport.

A German national, Lars Graefe, who has been in the UK since 1988, received a 
similar letter. An aerospace executive, he travels every week and said he could 
not surrender his passport for the six-month period it can take the Home Office 
to process applications.


“Clearly the Home Office don’t know how to deal with EU citizens,” he said. 
“If you were in the private sector and treated customers like this you would be 
sacked.”

Doerfel called for a review of the Home Office procedures and a return to more 
practical practices. “What we need is for the Home Office to go back to the 
system in the 1970s, 80s and even the 1990s where case workers engaged with 
applicants and contacted them if issues arose, that would resolve things so 
much quicker than this idea of refusing and then appealing. It would be cheaper 
for the state, more humane and probably [result in] quicker resolution of 
immigration applications,” he said.


 