
As forecasts go, it’s acutely grim: over the next five years, British families 
face aworse squeeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/uk-living-standards-squeeze-will-be-worse-than-after-global-crash?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 on their living standards than after the global financial crash.

Prime minister Theresa May talks of the “just about managing” families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-jams-rhetoric-just-managing-families-autumn-statement>
 but a more apt term would be the “already struggling”. As Brexit slows the 
economy and further social security cuts bite, it will be the people already on 
the edge – battling low wages, slashed benefits, or ill health – who will be 
hit again.

UK living standards squeeze 'will be worse than after global crash'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/24/uk-living-standards-squeeze-will-be-worse-than-after-global-crash>
The question becomes, how are they supposed to cope? Or, to put it another 
way, when the state keeps pulling back, who or what fills the gap?

Six years into vast cuts to public services and social security, Britain has 
not only seen a new era of poverty withmass evictions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/nov/13/tenant-evicted-record-levels-benefit-cuts-bedroom-tax>
,hunger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/06/more-than-8-million-in-uk-struggle-to-put-food-on-table-survey-says>
, anddebt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/23/wages-fall-poverty-trade-unions>
, but also a new era of ad hoc charity. 

The Joseph Rowntree Foundation has reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/27/million-people-uk-living-destitution-joseph-rowntree-foundation>
 that in a typical week in 2015, almost 200,000 households had to turn to 
charity for food, clothes, shelter and toiletries. I’ve seen the reality of 
this first hand: fromSharewear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/britain-clothes-banks-poverty-sharewear>
, a clothes bank in Nottingham, giving low waged parents coats and shoes for 
their children, or a local mum and fundraiser in Bournemouthbringing toilet 
rolls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/decent-toilet-roll-kids-delighted-hope-for-food>
to a family living in a B&B, to nationwide volunteers, many of them disabled 
themselves,gifting food parcels <http://www.biscuitfund.org/> for a dad who 
couldn’t feed his daughter after a benefit sanction. 

In this age of cuts, charity isn’t the only alternative to government: both 
social enterprises and the private sector are routinely offered up as 
substitutes.

Outsourcing to the private sector has some notorious consequences, such as the 
use of15-minute slots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/jun/21/privatisation-social-care-workforce-careers>
 in social care. It is not purist ideology to recognise that when profit comes 
from meeting citizens’ basic needs, “saving money” - ie, cutting corners – is a 
genuine risk.

On the other hand, schemes like Your Own Place 
<http://www.yourownplace.org.uk/our-people/our-social-enterprise/>, where care 
leavers can learn basic skills, like budgeting and cooking, show there can be 
strength in a hybrid. That scheme is a social enterprise funded by Big Lottery 
and Lloyds, run from a Norwich city council flat.

There are few simple answers when it comes to the place of charity, social 
enterprise, and the private sector but the issue goes to the very crux of how 
we wish to run society.

If campaigners put energy towards social enterprise or charity, is it tacit 
approval of the government’s failure? When people need help, does it really 
matter where that help comes from? This is particularly pressing for those on 
the left, as advocates of a well-funded welfare state face a decade in which 
public spending shrinks and need only grows. Frankly put, theorising that the 
stateshould be providing a decent safety net is little help to the cancer 
patient who’s been found “fit for work” and can only eat because of a food bank.

Child homelessness this Christmas will hit eight-year high, says Shelter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/child-homelessness-christmas-eight-year-high-shelter-12000-children-temporary-accommodation>
But at the same time, acknowledging that a mechanism like a charitable 
enterprise is doing vital work shouldn’t mean we should be distracted from the 
bigger picture. Hospital beds for malnutrition have nowtrebled in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/25/huge-rise-in-hospital-beds-in-england-taken-up-by-people-with-malnutrition>
 over a decade. The number of childrenhomeless at Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/child-homelessness-christmas-eight-year-high-shelter-12000-children-temporary-accommodation>
 is about to hit an eight-year high.

The reality is that this country is facing a scale of hardship that is 
teetering on disaster. And it’s only large-scale change – to create social 
housing, educational opportunities, higher wages, a fairer social security – 
that can make a dent in that.

It may suit the Conservatives if we forget it, but modern nations have 
governments for a reason.


 