
“My name is Courtney and I live around the corner,” says Courtney Barnett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/courtney-barnett>, but we know this already.

It’s Saturday afternoon and the global rockstar is performing with her 
partner, the singer-songwriter Jen Cloher, at Melbourne’s Northcote Social 
Club. She is back on her home turf and she’s here to help the blue-banded bee. 
Yes, an actual bee.


It might be the most charming gig I’ve ever attended. There’s no mosh pit. 
Instead, toddlers sit crosslegged at the front. The crowd are relaxed; the 
small gig feels like a house concert and Barnett is greeted like an old mate 
just returned from travelling.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaede74481d11e0aa0ce0772e0f154e943cc60ae%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honey%2C%20I'm%20home%3A%20Melbourne%20buzzes%20as%20Courtney%20Barnett%20plays%20gig%20for%20native%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honey%2C%20I%27m%20home%3A%20Melbourne%20buzzes%20as%20Courtney%20Barnett%20plays%20gig%20for%20native%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaede74481d11e0aa0ce0772e0f154e943cc60ae%2F0_0_960_720%2Fmaster%2F960.jpg>
 A planting day at Merri creek featuring an appearance by Courtney Barnett 
(second from right). Photograph: Jen Cloher 
2016 has been a big year for Barnett, but also for bees. While Barnett has 
appeared on Saturday Night Live and played high-profile music festivals around 
the world, the plight of bees has beenhighlighted in global environmental 
campaigns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/01/bees-added-to-us-endangered-species-list-for-the-first-time>
. Remember those poignant photos of polar bears on melting icecaps? Well, bees 
are the new polar bears.


The blue-banded bee is an Australian native and while it is not endangered – 
yet – many of the wildflowers and grasses that it helps to pollinate, like the 
matted flax-lily, are. And, owing to habitat destruction, the bee is struggling 
to get from one place to another.


The gig has been organised by Friends of Merri Creek 
<http://www.friendsofmerricreek.org.au/>, a low-key environmental group which 
care for the waterway that trickles through Melbourne’s northern suburbs. The 
much-loved green corridor has been painstakingly revegetated over the past 30 
years and the group received a publicity boost when Barnett and Cloher joined 
and began attending planting days.


Bee pollination isn’t the sexiest of causes but a genius crowd 
<https://pozible.com/project/the-rockin-bee>funding campaign 
<https://pozible.com/project/the-rockin-bee> spearheaded by Cloher led to the 
Blue-Banded Bee Band – comprised of Barnett, Cloher, the Orbweavers and Steph 
Hughes – committing to playing an intimate gig for the campaign’s top 
supporters. The combination of native bees and Melbourne musicians proved 
marketing dynamite and the campaign exceeded expectations to raise $25,073.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b5efec0c77231b7bade332a788509846fc8ef6%2F99_0_3066_1840%2F3066.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Honey%2C%20I'm%20home%3A%20Melbourne%20buzzes%20as%20Courtney%20Barnett%20plays%20gig%20for%20native%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Honey%2C%20I%27m%20home%3A%20Melbourne%20buzzes%20as%20Courtney%20Barnett%20plays%20gig%20for%20native%20bees&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fhoney-im-home-melbourne-buzzes-as-courtney-barnett-plays-gig-for-native-bees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F44b5efec0c77231b7bade332a788509846fc8ef6%2F99_0_3066_1840%2F3066.jpg>
 The blue-banded bee. Photograph: Brian Bainbridge 
This will be matched by $15,000 from Victoria’s Department of Environment, 
Land, Water and Planning and the funds will help establish pollination 
“stepping stones” between matted flax-lily populations along the creek.


Splendour in the Grass and Falls festival owner bought by Live Nation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/05/splendour-in-the-grass-and-falls-festival-owner-bought-by-live-nation>
At the Northcote Social Club, the beer and bee puns flow. The artists and 
organisers are given jars of local honey to thank them for volunteering their 
time and a toddler dressed as a bee periodically ambles on to the stage to 
rapturous applause.


“I hope you’re tipping the bar staff,” Barnett quips. She used to serve pints 
here before her music career took off. No wonder it feels like a house concert.
Melbourne <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/melbourne> – and its bees 
– are lucky to have her back.

 