
The Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> government will 
seek to ban a third member of the city’s parliament, expanding a campaign to 
remove pro-democracy advocates after two pro-independence legislators were 
barred from taking their seats.


The government will file a lawsuit  
<http://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1299427-20161129.htm>against 
pro-democracy Lau Siu-lai this week or early next week, alleging she was not 
sincere when she took the oath of allegiance last month.

Pope's possible deal with China would 'betray Christ', says Hong Kong cardinal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/28/pope-china-vatican-deal-would-betray-christ-says-former-hong-kong-bishop>
The move comes after a Hong Kong court barred 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/hong-kong-bans-pro-democracy-politicians-after-beijing-rewrites-oath-law>
 Yau Wai-ching and Sixtus “Baggio” Leung from taking their seats after the pair 
launched a dramatic anti-China protest during a swearing-in ceremony.

Beijing and the Hong Kong government have taken an increasingly hostile stance 
towards elements of the city’s democracy movement. Elections in September saw 
six candidates who support self-determination or outright independence swept 
into the legislature.


After Yau and Leung’s provocative protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/hong-kong-pro-democracy-oath-snub-china>
, Beijing intervened, amending Hong Kong’s mini-constitution in the most direct 
intervention in the city’s politics since Britain handed Hong Kong over toChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 1997.

Lau read the oath, which requires lawmakers to swear allegiance to the “the 
Hong Kong special administrative region of the People’s Republic of China”, in 
slow motion,taking 10 minutes to read the 77-word declaration. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=606&v=uhqTsyG6aJ8> That attempt 
was invalidated, but she was allowed to retake the oath and eventually sworn in.

In the court ruling banning Yau and Leung, the judge said the pair “manifestly 
refused … to solemnly, sincerely and truly bind themselves” to Hong Kong’s 
laws, citing statements the judge said showed they made “a wilful and 
deliberate attempt … to insult China”.

The Guardian view on independence for Hong Kong: made in Beijing | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/the-guardian-view-on-independence-for-hong-kong-made-in-beijing>
Although Lau was able to retake her oath, she said on Facebook “a slow reading 
of the oath shows that it was fabricated”. Those words may come back to haunt 
her if a judge determines she did not solemnly declare allegiance toChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, thereby qualifying her to be removed 
from her role.

The widening scope of the lawsuits could imperil other lawmakers who staged 
protests during the swearing-in ceremony. While many read the required text, 
some added language that could expose them to government lawsuits.

One lawmaker shouted: “Democratic self-determination, autocracy will die,” at 
the end of his oath, while others quoted Gandhi or held signs, in a more subtle 
jab at Chinese authorities.

Britain handed Hong Kong to China under a framework known as “one country, two 
systems”, where the territory was allowed to maintain freedom of expression and 
an independent judiciary, liberties that do not exist in mainland China.
 