
Hong Kong’s <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> government signalled 
that it would attempt to disqualify four pro-democracy legislators on Friday, 
aftersuccessfully barring two others from the city’s parliament in an 
unprecedented attack on popularly elected lawmakers. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/hong-kong-bans-pro-democracy-politicians-after-beijing-rewrites-oath-law>


The government will file a lawsuit seeking to unseat Lau Siu-lai, Nathan Law, 
Edward Yiu and Leung Kwok-hung by declaring their oaths of office invalid,local 
media reported <http://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1300067-20161202.htm>. 

A Hong Kong court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/hong-kong-bans-pro-democracy-politicians-after-beijing-rewrites-oath-law>
 disqualified Yau Wai-ching and Sixtus “Baggio” Leung from taking their seats 
after the pair launched a dramatic anti-China protest during a swearing-in 
ceremony in October.

Ban upheld against Hong Kong MPs who mocked oath of allegiance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/ban-upheld-against-hong-kong-mps-who-mocked-oath-of-allegiance>
In recent months, the Chinese and Hong Kong governments have become 
increasingly hostile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/police-and-protesters-clash-in-hong-kong-pro-democracy-march>
 to calls for self-determination and independence in the former British colony.

Elections in September saw six candidates who support self-determination or 
outright independence swept into the legislature, including Yau, Leung, Law, 
Lau and Yiu.

Many in Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> disagreed with 
Yau and Leung’s protest, which included displaying flags that said “Hong Kong 
is not China” and using a expletive to refer to China. However, the four others 
were seen as far more moderate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhong-kong-beijing-sixtus-leung-yau-wai-ching-4-more-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e6757f55b849b3a1f1d7901234b08e2f5d6a07b%2F0_86_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%20government%20seeks%20to%20bar%20four%20more%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhong-kong-beijing-sixtus-leung-yau-wai-ching-4-more-mps%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%20government%20seeks%20to%20bar%20four%20more%20MPs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhong-kong-beijing-sixtus-leung-yau-wai-ching-4-more-mps%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2e6757f55b849b3a1f1d7901234b08e2f5d6a07b%2F0_86_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Yau’s protests included displaying a flag in parliament declaring ‘Hong Kong 
is NOT China’. Photograph: Bobby Yip/Reuters 
“This is a very serious challenge to the entire pro-democracy political 
community,” said Law, at 23 the youngest person ever elected to the chamber. 
The move is a “suppression of political power” design to tip the balance of 
power in favour of pro-Beijing lawmakers, he continued.

If enough lawmakers in the pro-democracy camp are ejected, the group would 
lose veto power over major legislation, one of the most powerful tools in a 
parliament stacked with pro-establishment legislators.

After the government filed the first lawsuit to disqualify the two 
pro-independence lawmakers,Beijing intervened, rewriting Hong Kong’s 
mini-constitution in a rare use of power. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
 The move signalled the Chinese authorities’ strong opposition to allowing 
dissenting voices into the legislature.

Leung Kwok-hung, popularly known as “Long Hair” and a member of the 
legislature for more than a decade, has been jailed several times for political 
protests from within the chamber. He vowed to fight the charges during an 
impromptu press conference outside his office, wearing his signature Che 
Guevara T-shirt.

Lawmakers are required to swear allegiance to the “the Hong Kong special 
administrative region of the People’s Republic of China”. Lau read the oath in 
slow motion,taking 10 minutes to read the 77-word declaration. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=606&v=uhqTsyG6aJ8> That attempt 
was invalidated, but she was allowed to retake the oath and eventually sworn in.

In the court ruling banning Yau and Leung, the judge said the pair “manifestly 
refused … to solemnly, sincerely and truly bind themselves” to Hong Kong’s 
laws, citing statements the judge said showed they made “a wilful and 
deliberate attempt … to insultChina”. <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>

Law quoted Gandhi and stated his opposition to the current president of the 
legislature. It is not yet clear exactly what aspects of the oaths the 
government will challenge.

Any lawmakers who are disqualified would have to be replaced in a by-election, 
which is supposed to occur within 21 days after all appeals are exhausted.
 