
Hong Kong’s high court has banned two young pro-independence activists from 
the city’s parliament, plunging the former British colony deeper into an 
intensifying political crisis.

One week after Beijing issued a highly unusual ruling designed to stop the 
newly elected politicians taking office, the court on Tuesday told Yau 
Wai-ching, 25, and Baggio “Sixtus” Leung, 30, that they had been disqualified 
from their positions.

The judge Thomas Au Hing-cheung ruled that the pair, who launched a dramatic 
anti-China protest during their swearing-in ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/hong-kong-pro-democracy-oath-snub-china>
 last month, could no longer take up their seats since they had “manifestly 
refused … to solemnly, sincerely and truly bind themselves” to Hong Kong’s laws.

'We didn't do anything wrong': banned Hong Kong politician on her oath-taking 
protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/we-didnt-do-anything-wrong-banned-hong-kong-politician-yau-wai-ching-oath-taking-protest>
During that ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/hong-kong-pro-democracy-oath-snub-china>
, Yau and Leung, who have both called for a complete split with mainland China, 
altered the text of their oaths, declaring allegiance to the “Hong Kong 
nation”. They also unfurled banners that said “Hong Kong is not China” and used 
an expletive to refer to China.

The protest enraged officials in Beijing and led Hong Kong’s chief executive 
to launch an unprecedented legal challenge, seeking to remove the pair from 
office.

Legislators must swear allegiance 
<http://www.basiclaw.gov.hk/en/basiclawtext/chapter_4.html> to “the Hong Kong 
special administrative region of the People’s Republic of China”, according to 
the Basic Law, the city’s mini-constitution.


But the judge ruled that acting “in concert and deliberately” the pair had 
made “a willful and deliberate attempt … to insult China” during the ceremony 
and had not sought to suggest otherwise.


His ruling 
<https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/15/breaking-localist-lawmakers-face-ejection-from-hong-kong-legislature-as-govt-wins-legal-challenge/>
 said unchallenged evidence showed Yau and Leung had sought to promote Hong 
Kong’s independence from China as well as “to make a mockery of China and the 
People’s Republic of China in a derogatory and humiliating manner”.

Speaking outside the court after the verdict, with Yau by his side, Leung 
said: “The judgment simply reflects that the elections inHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> are meaningless and their result 
can be easily overturned by the government.”

“We have no hesitation that we will go forward with an appeal,” he added, 
choking back tears. “We have no regrets in taking our part in defending Hong 
Kong.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20bars%20Hong%20Kong%20pro-democracy%20politicians%20from%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20bars%20Hong%20Kong%20pro-democracy%20politicians%20from%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report&media=>
China bars Hong Kong pro-democracy politicians from office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/07/china-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report>
Before the court’s ruling, Beijing’s parliament, the National People’s 
Congress,invoked a seldom-used power to rewrite 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
 Hong Kong’s Basic Law. Those wishing to hold public office must “sincerely and 
solemnly” declare allegiance toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>, 
the NPC said.


The move was the most direct intervention in the city’s politics since Britain 
handed over Hong Kong toChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 
1997, and dealt a major blow to a campaign led by the city’s younger generation 
for greater autonomy or outright independence.


At the time of the handover, the city was allowed to keep many freedoms and an 
independent judiciary under a framework known as “one country, two systems”. 
But many say those freedoms have been increasingly restricted in recent years, 
and Beijing has the final say over a wide range of political issues.

The day before Beijing released its ruling, there were violent clashes with 
police after more than 10,000 people marched through Hong Kong’s financial 
centre, protesting against Chinese interference.
 