
More than 2,000 lawyers and activists have paraded through Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> in silence and dressed in black 
to protest against Beijing’s unprecedented intervention in the former British 
colony’s supposedly independent legal system as a means of ousting two 
democratically elected pro-independence politicians.

The demonstration, reportedly only the fourth of its kind 
<https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/04/hong-kong-lawyers-hold-silent-march-beijings-decision-intervene-legco-oath-row/>
 since Hong Kong returned to Chinese rule in 1997, comes a day after Beijing 
issued a rare and highly controversiallegal interpretation 
<http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2016-11/07/c_135811504.htm> of Hong Kong’s 
mini-constitution to preventtwo young activists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
 from taking up their seats in the 70-seat parliament.


'Festering pustules': the two pro-democracy activists who are targets of 
China's wrath
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/festering-pustules-two-pro-democracy-activists-targets-chinas-wrath>
“I really don’t know how long Hong Kong can take it,” said Audrey Eu, a 
pro-democracy politician who was among those to join the march going from 
outside the high court to the court of final appeal on Tuesday afternoon.

The Civic party chairwoman, who like many of the protesters had come in black 
funeral attire, accused Beijing of seriously undermining the city’s autonomy 
with its actions.


“They think that by … taking away people’s rights [to take office] then Hong 
Kong people will become silent. But it doesn’t work like that. The more severe 
the attack, the more repression there is, very often the reaction goes 
stronger, particularly among young people,” Eu said.


“A lot of people feel that if measured response and rational discussion does 
not help then maybe they are going to go further down the road of violence – 
and that really does not bode well for Hong Kong.”


Sixtus “Baggio” Leung, 30, and Yau Wai-ching, 25, the two politicians at the 
centre of the storm, were elected to Hong Kong’s legislative council in early 
September, carried into office by a wave of discontent at what many perceive as 
Beijing’s growing meddling in the former colony’s affairs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b26b3309304ea77d50db7f9d2f0d43a934802c4%2F0_303_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20'meddling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20%27meddling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6b26b3309304ea77d50db7f9d2f0d43a934802c4%2F0_303_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 Lawyers and law students gather outside Hong Kong’s high court. Photograph: 
Alex Hofford/EPA 
But the two firebrands set themselves on a collision course with China’s 
rulers last month when they used their swearing in ceremonyto lash out at 
Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/hong-kong-pro-democracy-oath-snub-china>
, unfurling flags that read “Hong Kong is not China”.

On Monday, China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> reacted to what it 
appears to have viewed as an unforgivable affront by issuing an interpretation 
of Hong Kong’s Basic Law that in effect bars the pair from taking up their 
parliamentary roles.


Experts described the move as China’s most direct intervention in the 
semi-autonomous city’s legal system since handover.


Li Fei, the deputy head of China’s most important legislative panel, told 
reporters Yau and Leung were “national and ethnic traitors”, adding ominously: 
“All traitors and those who sell out their countries will come to no good end.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=China%20bars%20Hong%20Kong%20pro-democracy%20politicians%20from%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=China%20bars%20Hong%20Kong%20pro-democracy%20politicians%20from%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fchina-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report&media=>
China bars Hong Kong pro-democracy politicians from office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/07/china-bars-hong-kong-pro-democracy-politicians-from-office-video-report>
China’s state media applauded the move on Tuesday. The Communist party’s 
official mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, vowed that “no mercy” would be shown 
to an intolerable and unrepentant collection of pro-independence “elements” who 
posed a direct threat to Chinese sovereignty.

Hong Kong’s South China Morning Post echoed those views, describing the 
intervention as a “strong tool to stamp out pro-independence forces”.

“Beijing is determined to keep separatists out of public office,” the 
pro-establishment newspaper said 
<http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/2043838/necessary-intervention-keep-separatists-out-public-office>
.

Pro-democracy activists have reacted to the intervention with astonishment and 
dismay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7970050b388002f8d832bf2e2276cfc379b397e%2F0_320_4798_2879%2F4798.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20'meddling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20%27meddling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd7970050b388002f8d832bf2e2276cfc379b397e%2F0_320_4798_2879%2F4798.jpg>
 Baggio Leung (left) and Yau Wai-ching during a protest march. Photograph: 
Isaac Lawrence/AFP/Getty Images 
In a statement released on Monday night two of Hong Kong’s leading 
pro-democracy voices, Nathan Law and Eddie Chu, said Beijing’s ruling was not 
simply an attack on two pro-independence politicians but rather an attempt to 
“put the political reins” on the whole of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement.

“All participants in the democratic movement must stand in solidarity, for no 
one is safe alone, in the face of such a dictatorship which sees any effort to 
strive for democracy as a secessionist threat to its rule,” they said.

Members of Hong Kong’s legal community are also aghast, with many viewing 
Beijing’s actions as a severe blow to the former colony’s judiciary.

This is the beginning of the end of Hong Kong | Claudia Mo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
Pro-democracy groups took out prominent advertisements in local newspapers 
<https://www.hongkongfp.com/2016/11/08/world-city-no-hong-kong-professionals-censure-beijings-intervention-local-laws/>
 on Tuesday morning that read: “Beijing destroys the rule of law – Hong Kong is 
a world city no more.”

By the afternoon, hundreds of members of the former colony’s legal community 
and other demonstrators had gathered outside the high court to begin their 
silent march.


“The legal sector has to come out and express our discontent and that we 
oppose this,” said Margaret Ng, a prominent local barrister.

“If the legal sector does not come out and protest then it will mean that we 
have accepted it. We will never accept this – not even for the 100th time.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8202116600f73ae7c3d5d8f33efee22ca98c64d8%2F0_151_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20'meddling'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%3A%20lawyers%20and%20activists%20march%20against%20Beijing%20%27meddling%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F08%2Fhundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8202116600f73ae7c3d5d8f33efee22ca98c64d8%2F0_151_4760_2856%2F4760.jpg>
 Leung (centre, wearing glasses) is restrained by security after attempting to 
read out his oath of office. Photograph: Anthony Wallace/AFP/Getty Images 
Lee Cheuk-yan, a veteran labour and democracy activist, said that having 
deprived Hong Kong’s citizens of genuine democracy in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/31/china-rules-out-open-elections-hong-kong>
, Beijing was now seeking to strip them of the right to criticise the Communist 
party or freely elect their own representatives to the city’s parliament.


On Monday, the British Foreign Office expressed concern about the political 
crisis ina brief and cautiously worded statement 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-hongkong-china-politics-britain-idUKKBN1321I8>
.


Lu Kang, a spokesperson for China’s foreign ministry, responded on Tuesday, 
urging the British government to “be cautious with its words and deeds, to 
refrain from interfering in Hong Kong’s affairs and to offer no support to Hong 
Kong independence forces”.
 