
Feeling down about Donald Trump’s election and hope he will fail? Want to 
curse Nigel Farage for leading the UK to Brexit? A group of sorcerers inHong 
Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> have what you need, and a 
track record they say proves their success.

Known locally as “villain hitters”, the group of mostly elderly women set up 
stall every day under a flyover in the former British colony’s busiest shopping 
district. As Hong Kong residents have become increasingly disillusioned with 
their leaders, more and more have sought out a more ethereal method to vent 
their anger.

As his popularity plummeted 
<https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/popexpress/ce2012/cy/poll/cy_poll_chart.html>
, Hong Kong’s leader, Leung Chun-ying, has been increasingly in the crosshairs 
of the roadside retribution vendors.

“During the hitting, we ask the gods of heaven and earth to punish the 
villains, to make them less dominant,” said Wong Gat-lei, a third-generation 
villain hitter who has been casting spells for more than 20 years.

“People want to weaken others through villain hitting to achieve peace of 
mind,” she said. “But it’s more about achieving peace of mind by releasing your 
anger.”

At roadside stalls with burning incense and an assortment of statues of 
deities, the sorcerers hit a paper effigy with their shoe while cursing the 
villain in question. If there is a specific target, patrons can write a name on 
the paper or bring a photo.


Once it has been beaten to shreds, the sorcerers rub the remains with a slab 
of pork fat and burn it. They then chant for good fortune, and all for just 
HK$50 (£5.25).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f4e41234830e54e6b0ef3724ef4a830cd52e2b6%2F0_66_4777_3119%2F4777.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong's%20'villain%20hitters'%20use%20sorcery%20to%20vent%20political%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%27s%20%27villain%20hitters%27%20use%20sorcery%20to%20vent%20political%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f4e41234830e54e6b0ef3724ef4a830cd52e2b6%2F0_66_4777_3119%2F4777.jpg>
 A villain hitter burns a paper effigy representing evil spirits. Photograph: 
Benjamin Haas for the Guardian 
The ritual originated centuries ago, when farmers in southern China performed 
the ceremony to drive away evil spirits. It has since evolved into a means for 
people from all walks of life to release their anger, but many of the women 
casting spells under the flyover are from rural villages inChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

A stream of people have brought Leung’s photo to be hit, Wong said, but she 
would not take credit for hisdecision not to seek a second term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/hong-kong-leader-leung-chun-ying-to-step-down-next-year>
 in elections next year. Tourists from neighbouring Taiwan have also stopped at 
her shrine, paying to curse their former president Ma Ying-jeou.

Political tension in Hong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> 
exploded two years ago, resulting in nearly three months of street protests, 
road occupations and constant calls for Leung to step downled by what became 
know as the umbrella movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/-sp-hong-kong-umbrella-revolution-pro-democracy-protests>
.

“People felt depressed and powerless in the immediate aftermath of the 
umbrella movement, as even such a large scale mobilisation failed to bring 
about any observable change,” said Mathew Wong, a politics professor at the 
University of Hong Kong. “Leung’s rule was too divisive, and people are 
dissatisfied with him as much as with the system.”

Some villain hitters choose not to get involved in politics, and turn away 
those wanting to curse public figures. “This is about protecting you and giving 
you good luck,” said a woman known as Grandma Leung. “We want to drive the evil 
away from you, not harm others.”

Her refusal has not tamed the desire for otherworldly blood. After being 
inundated with requests, she was forced to hang up a sign that advises 
customers not to bring photographs of famous people to be cursed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa902763fbbabc96daed79c1a059dafc3cedfa8d%2F0_154_5484_3291%2F5484.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong's%20'villain%20hitters'%20use%20sorcery%20to%20vent%20political%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%27s%20%27villain%20hitters%27%20use%20sorcery%20to%20vent%20political%20anger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fhong-kongs-villain-hitters-sorcery-political-leaders-anger%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffa902763fbbabc96daed79c1a059dafc3cedfa8d%2F0_154_5484_3291%2F5484.jpg>
 A villain hitter beats a paper effigy with her shoe. Photograph: Benjamin Haas 
for the Guardian 
For most Hong Kong residents, however, evil lurks much closer to home. A 2014 
survey by a local newspaper said the top targets of black magic were 
colleagues, bosses and mistresses.

Aside from hexing enemies, the women advertise spells 
<http://taoist-sorcery.blogspot.hk/2014/03/learn-how-to-hit-villain.html> to 
cure illness, stop babies from crying, help souls crossover and even contact 
dead ancestors for marital advice.


On a recent afternoon, an estate agent was dispatched by his boss with orders 
to cast five spells, hoping to ensure good fortune and business for the coming 
year.

“I’m here because I’ve been sick recently,” said another patron who refused to 
give his name. “I would say that villain hitting can bring me good luck for the 
new year.”

With the shrines sandwiched between one of the city’s main thoroughfares and a 
bus interchange, there is no shortage of footfall, and many stare as they walk 
by with a look of longing, wondering if a bit of change might fix lift their 
life’s woes.

For the political targets, the villain hitters may have a new wave of 
customers as the race to become Hong Kong’s next leader begins and frustration 
builds.

“In the grand scheme of things there won’t be much change in the system and 
politics in Hong Kong is still dominated by Beijing,” said Wong.

“People simply try to stage a show more than anything else” by targeting 
politicians with villain hitting, he said. “To be sure people need to find 
other ways to deal with their political frustration.”
 