
Hong Kong’s divisive leader has announced he will not seek a second term, amid 
adeepening political crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/hundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling>
 in the former British colony.

Leung Chun-ying cited family reasons for the decision to step down when his 
term ends in July 2017.

“I need to make a responsible choice between my family and society,” Hong 
Kong’s chief executive said at apress conference 
<http://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1301310-20161209.htm>. “If I run, my 
family will suffer intolerable stress due to my electioneering … I must protect 
them.”

Under his leadership, Hong Kong has been rocked by some of the most severe 
challenges in history to China’s authority over the semi-autonomous city, 
including theumbrella movement protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/30/-sp-hong-kong-umbrella-revolution-pro-democracy-protests>
 in 2014, during whichroads were occupied 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/29/hong-kong-citizens-protests-police-withdraw>
 for nearly three months by demonstrators opposed to the method of electing the 
chief executive.

The failure of the protests to win any concessions from Leung and Beijing left 
thecity starkly divided 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/the-guardian-view-on-independence-for-hong-kong-made-in-beijing>
 between pro-establishment and pro-democracy camps, and inspired an 
independence movement calling for it to break away from Beijing.

China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> has expressed fury over the 
movement, which it claims is illegal and will damage Hong Kong’s prosperity.

In recent months, Leung has taken the unprecedented step of filing lawsuits to 
successfully ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/hong-kong-bans-pro-democracy-politicians-after-beijing-rewrites-oath-law>
 two popularly elected pro-independence politicians from taking their seats, 
and isseeking to bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/hong-kong-beijing-sixtus-leung-yau-wai-ching-4-more-mps>
 four other pro-democracy MPs.

Willy Lam, a politics professor at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, said: 
“The big picture hasn’t changed much, because at the end of the day, Beijing 
still calls the shots in Hong Kong, whoever is chief executive. But there’s a 
big sigh of relief becauseHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> people hate him.

“He bent over backwards to please Beijing at the expense of the Hong Kong 
people.”

Leung’s popularity has plummeted in recent years. His approval rating 
<https://www.hkupop.hku.hk/english/popexpress/ce2012/cy/cecomparison/donald_comparsion_chart.html>
 for the past three months has been about 38%, according to the Public Opinion 
Programme at the University of Hong Kong, the second-lowest of any chief 
executive in history.

His resignation has been a key demand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/02/hong-kong-leader-offers-talks-protests>
 of the pro-democracy camp for years, and chants of “Leung Chun-ying, step 
down” permeate nearly every protest in the city. He is often called “the wolf”, 
a play on his last name, which sounds similar in Cantonese.

Leung was elected in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/25/leung-chun-ying-hong-kong> by a 
1,193-member election committee, securing 689 votes to run the city of 7.3 
million people. Early in his term there were large-scale protests against a
“patriotic education” curriculum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/08/hong-kong-backs-down-patriotsim>
, which was strongly supported by Chinese authorities but eventually scrapped.

This is the beginning of the end of Hong Kong | Claudia Mo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
Claudia Mo, a pro-democracy politician 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
, told the Guardian: “There will be euphoria for a while. But things could get 
even worse, as his replacement gets more popular support amid a false feeling 
that Beijing will actually heed the Hong Kong people’s demands.”

Nathan Law, one of the MPs Leung is trying to disqualify, warned that the 
outgoing leader would become more antagonistic towards the pro-democracy camp 
in the coming months and called on people to “remain vigilant” during the 
election for Leung’s replacement in March.

“There will be more offensive moves inside the system targeting legislators,” 
Law said. “It’s a serious warning that we should be aware of his next move, 
instead of just feeling happy.”

In citing family reasons for his departure, Leung tacitly acknowledged his 
fraught relationship with his daughter, Leung Chai-yan, who previously said she
suffered from depression 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1694731/cy-leungs-daughter-chai-yan-lay-her-heart-bare-first-television?page=all>
.

But experts believe that larger political forces caused the sudden 
announcement. Lam said: “He exacerbated divisions in Hong Kong and he’s most 
responsible for the rise of the pro-independence movement.”

Leung was also unpopular with the city’s business community, especially the 
handful of tycoons who own nearly all Hong Kong’s critical infrastructure.

In an effort to appeal to China’s leaders, he often favoured Chinese 
state-owned companies over privately owned businesses when awarding lucrative 
government contracts.

The Chinese government said it “deeply regrets” Leung’s decision not to seek 
another term, according to a statement from the Hong Kong and Macau Affairs 
Office.

“The central government has consistently given recognition and high praise to 
his work,” the office said. “He has made important contributions to 
safeguarding national sovereignty, security, development interests and social 
and political stability in Hong Kong.”

Last month, Leung said the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, approved of his work.

Hong Kong’s financial secretary, John Tsang, and the pro-Beijing MP Regina Ip 
are widely expected to run for chief executive next year.

Ip, the former secretary for security, resigned from that post in 2003 after 
the government’s attempt to introduce anti-sedition legislation prompted 
widespread protests.


But the candidates will still be subject to vetting by China and are likely to 
continue with many of the same political priorities.

Lam said: “It’s a mistake to think this shows Beijing is taking a more 
tolerant stance on Hong Kong politics. The Chinese government just wants a less 
divisive, more palatable figure to push their agenda.”
 