
Stepping off the subway in his army uniform, Victor Yu prepared to face the 
onslaught ahead. Instead of charging into a crowd armed with rifles, he was met 
with smartphones, overwhelmed on a street inHong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> by pictures and selfies rather 
than enemy fire.


Yu is a member of Watershed <https://www.facebook.com/WatershedHK/>, a local 
historical group working to raise awareness of what they feel is Hong Kong’s 
forgotten history. The performance comes at a time when instruction of the 
city’s history is becoming increasingly politicised, with recent government 
attempts to bury details that may be embarrassing for China.

About 20 volunteers dressed in period British military uniforms have been 
gathering on the streets of the city over the past month to mark the 75th 
anniversary of Black Christmas, when in 1941 British forces in Hong Kong 
surrendered to the Japanese, the first ever for a Crown colony.

“Most Hong Kongers don’t know anything about the battle to defend the city, 
they can only remember the Japanese occupation and think we gave up without a 
fight,” said Taurus Yip, 24, co-founder of the group. “All they know is the 
Japanese occupation was harsh and lasted for three years and eight months, that 
line is repeated over and over.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7406898de1817614f52f0a832561e87563926f12%2F0_222_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%2C%20where%20history%20has%20become%20a%20battleground%20for%20Beijing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%2C%20where%20history%20has%20become%20a%20battleground%20for%20Beijing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7406898de1817614f52f0a832561e87563926f12%2F0_222_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
 Victor Yu rides the subway in Hong Kong on December 25, 2016 to an event 
marking 75 years since the British surrendered to the Japanese during World War 
II. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian 
The event was inspired by a similar campaign in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/jul/01/wearehere-battle-somme-tribute-acted-out-across-britain>
 last year, when uniformed actors handed out cards bearing the names of 
soldiers killed during the Battle of the Somme.

But beyond serving merely as a memorial, Hong Kong’s history buffs hope to 
foster a common identity in a city that has traditionally lacked a cohesive 
sense of self.

“Hong Kong people just want to get rich and emigrate because they don’t have a 
sense of citizenship about the place,” Kevin Ng, another organiser of the 
event, said in an interview. “What we’re trying to do is use history as a 
foundation, to show there were hundreds of Hong Kong people willing to die for 
their home, and then we can create a sense of belonging.”

History is increasingly a battleground for that sense of belonging, where the 
Chinese government hopes to instill patriotism while younger people identify 
with a Hong Kong identity that’s separate fromChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>.

A proposed revision in September to the way history is taught, with the 
government saying “too much emphasis has been put on political history and not 
enough on society and culture”, wasmet with resistance 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/education-community/article/2023594/breathing-life-chinese-history-hong-kong-begins>
 from teachers who worry the move is designed to bolster patriotic education.

Introducing “national education” was beaten back in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/sep/08/hong-kong-backs-down-patriotsim>
, but the concept still remains a priority for Beijing.

At a public forum earlier this year on renovating Hong Kong’s history museum 
exhibits to tackle events beyond 1997, a chorus of seemingly organised, mostly 
elderly residents made demands that any expansion would promote a sense of 
belonging to theChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> and the 
Communist party, rather than a local, uniquely Hong Kong identity.

“Local history education is very political,” said Allan Pang, a member of the 
University of Hong Kong history society who has researched school curricula.

“The textbooks and syllabus try to sidestep so-called embarrassing issues like 
June 4th or the 1967 riots,” Pang added, referring to the date of the 1989 
Tiananmen Square massacre, an event that spurred 1.5 million people, more than 
a quarter of the population at the time, to march inHong Kong in the largest 
ever protest 
<http://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/article/1519713/june-4-1989-events-china-still-have-profound-effect-hong-kongs>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F631dec494066d702f154a28a29ab8dc0bad90ae9%2F0_124_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hong%20Kong%2C%20where%20history%20has%20become%20a%20battleground%20for%20Beijing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hong%20Kong%2C%20where%20history%20has%20become%20a%20battleground%20for%20Beijing&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Fhong-kong-history-battleground-beijing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F631dec494066d702f154a28a29ab8dc0bad90ae9%2F0_124_6016_3610%2F6016.jpg>
 Members of historical group Watershed pose in Hong Kong during an event 
marking 75 years since the British surrendered to the Japanese during World War 
II. Photograph: Benjamin Haas for the Guardian 
Last year the Hong Kong police revised the history section of their website to 
remove references to “leftists” and “Communists” 
<http://www.ejinsight.com/20150915-why-are-the-police-tampering-with-1967-riots-history/>
 as agitators and bomb makers during months of deadly rioting in 1967. The 
changes led to an outcry from historians and former police officers and the 
original text was eventually restored.

In another move that alarmed conservationists, Hong Kong’s post office 
unveiled a plan tocover royal cyphers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/hong-kong-to-cover-british-insignia-on-postboxes-to-avoid-confusion>
 found on colonial-era mailboxes to “avoid confusion”. But some saw a more 
sinister subtext as the decision came in the wake of comments made by a former 
Beijing official berated Hong Kong for its “failure at decolonisation”.

Britain handed Hong Kong to China in 1997 under a framework known as “one 
country, two systems” where the former colony was allowed to maintain its 
institutions and freedoms.

But in China’s push to hold sway over history education in Hong Kong can 
backfire. While teachers generally have free reign to interpret 
government-issued guidelines as they see fit, some schools are decidedly 
pro-Beijing.

Nathan Law became a student protest leader and the youngest ever pro-democracy 
lawmaker despite attending a school that echoed the Chinese government line on 
history and politics.

The day after Chinese democracy activist Liu Xiaobo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/liu-xiaobo> won the Nobel Peace Prize in 
2010, the president of Law’s school denounced Liu, saying he “didn’t respect 
China and colluded with hostile foreign forces”.

The Nobel committee made a mistake and the school president warned students 
not to support Liu or his ideas, Law said.

“In my history classes I didn’t learn anything about Hong Kong before 1997,” 
Law recalled.

“In class we never talked about the 4th of June, freedom or human rights, and 
instead put the focus on glorifying Chinese history.”

The school president’s attack on the Nobel laureate spurred Law to do his own 
research, eventually inspiring his democracy activism.

That free flow of information in Hong Kong ensures academic freedom, said Lui 
Tai-lok, a professor at The Education University of Hong Kong, since even if 
students are taught one point of view in the classroom, they are free to read 
other interpretations.

“I can’t see there ever being one single body that ensures there is one 
interpretation, one mode of delivery and one one way of telling students what 
to say,” Lui said.

But he warned against Hong Kong people becoming complacent: “If things go 
wrong we have to blame ourselves for not standing up.”
 