
Beijing’s unprecedented eviction of two pro-independence activists from Hong 
Kong’s parliament has dealt a severe blow to “political extremists”, a 
Communist party-controlled newspaper has claimed as members of the city’s legal 
community prepared to take to the streets in protest.


 One day after Beijing effectively barred Sixtus ‘Baggio’ Leung and Yau 
Wai-ching from taking up their seats in the former colony’s 70-seat legislative 
council,an editorial in the Global Times 
<http://www.globaltimes.cn/content/1016440.shtml> praised their ousting, 
arguing that the appeasement of such voices would plunge the financial hub into 
confusion and ruin.

This is the beginning of the end of Hong Kong | Claudia Mo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
The Communist party’s official mouthpiece, the People’s Daily, said Beijing 
was taking decisive action against an intolerable and unrepentant collection of 
pro-independence “elements” who posed a direct threat to China’s sovereignty 
and national unity.

“The central government will not hesitate to take effective measures to crack 
down on and curb the “Hong Kong independence” [movement],”it said 
<http://rmrbimg2.people.cn/html/items/wap-share-rmrb/#/index/home/3/normal/detail/1913728603423744_cms_1913728603423744/normal>
.

Hong Kong’s South China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Morning Post 
echoed those views, describing the intervention, which came in the form of a 
highly unusual interpretation of the former colony’s mini-constitution, as a 
“strong tool to stamp out pro-independence forces”.


“Beijing is determined to keep separatists out of public office,” the 
pro-establishment newspaper said 
<http://www.scmp.com/comment/insight-opinion/article/2043838/necessary-intervention-keep-separatists-out-public-office>
.

 Pro-democracy activists have reacted to the intervention with astonishment 
and dismay whilethe British government expressed its concern 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-hongkong-china-politics-britain-idUKKBN1321I8?utm_campaign=trueAnthem:+Trending+Content&utm_content=5820830704d301260c9516de&utm_medium=trueAnthem&utm_source=twitter>
 in a brief and cautiously worded statement.

 In a statement released on Monday night two of Hong Kong’s leading 
pro-democracy voices, Nathan Law and Eddie Chu, said Beijing’s ruling was not 
simply an attack on two pro-independence politicians but rather an attempt to 
“put the political reins” on the whole of Hong Kong’s pro-democracy movement.

 “All participants in the democratic movement must stand in solidarity, for no 
one is safe alone, in the face of such a dictatorship which sees any effort to 
strive for democracy as a secessionist threat to its rule,”they said 
<https://m.facebook.com/chuhoidick/photos/a.203826656349933.49033.201155333283732/1165428356856420/?type=3&theater>
.

 Speaking to the Guardian, on Monday, Holden Chow, a leading member of Hong 
Kong’s pro-Beijing community, suggested Beijing’s intervention was indeed 
intended to cow those politicians who dared to promote causes such as 
independence from China.

 Chow said Beijing’s move against Yau and Leung should also serve as a warning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
 to those backing “self-determination” - the idea that Hong Kong’s citizens 
should have a say in how the former colony is governed after 2047 when the 
current ‘one country, two systems’ framework under which it has been ruled 
since handover in 1997 expires.

Chow’s party, the Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress of Hong 
Kong (DAB), hascalled for a review 
<http://news.rthk.hk/rthk/en/component/k2/1295275-20161107.htm> of whether 
another pro-democracy politician, Lau Siu-lai, should also be blocked from 
taking up her seat because of views.

Hong Kong’s latest political crisis has been brewing for months, with the 
emergence of a new generation of activists who came of age during the 2014 
umbrella movement protests and are now pushing for greater autonomy or outright 
independence from mainland China.

 Six such figures claimed seats in the semi-autonomous city’s parliament in 
early September, including 25-year-old Yau and 30-year-old Leung, who have 
publicly backed the idea of a complete split with China.

 The two firebrand millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/festering-pustules-two-pro-democracy-activists-targets-chinas-wrath>
 incurred Beijing’s fury last month when they used a swearing in ceremony as a 
platform tolash out at China’s rulers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/hong-kong-pro-democracy-oath-snub-china>
, unfurling flags that read “Hong Kong is not China” and using language some 
found offensive to refer to China.

 On Monday, Li Fei, the deputy head of China’s most important legislative 
panel, told reporters the pair were “national and ethnic traitors”, adding 
ominously: “All traitors and those who sell out their countries will come to no 
good end.”

 While China’s state-run media has applauded the central government’s clamp 
down, critics have lamented it as a severe blow to Hong Kong’s limited 
political autonomy and independent judiciary.

“This is the beginning of the end of Hong Kong,” Claudia Mo, an outspoken 
pro-democracy legislator,wrote in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
.

Members of Hong Kong’s legal community are set to gather outside its high 
court on Tuesday afternoon before marching through the former colony’s streets 
in silence and dressed in black.

Additional reporting by Christy Yao 
 