
Thousands of people attended a pro-Beijing rally in Hong Kong on Sunday in 
support of China’s decision to in effect bar two pro-independence legislators 
from taking office, asfears grow for the city’s freedoms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
.


Beijing’s ruling last week pre-empted a decision by the Hong Kong courts over 
whether lawmakersBaggio Leung and Yau Wai-ching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/hong-kongs-pro-independence-mps-a-grave-threat-to-security-says-china>
 should be disqualified from parliament after deliberately misreading their 
oaths of office, inserting expletives and draping themselves with “Hong Kong is 
not China” flags.

This is the beginning of the end of Hong Kong | Claudia Mo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/this-is-the-beginning-of-the-end-of-hong-kong-china>
Beijing’s interpretation of the city’s constitution, issued on Monday, said 
any oath taker who did not follow the prescribed wording, “or takes the oath in 
a manner which is not sincere or not solemn”, should be disqualified.

On Sunday rowdy crowds, waving Chinese flags, surrounded the government’s 
headquarters in a show of support for Beijing’s unprecedented decision, 
criticised by pro-democracy activists and legal experts as a massive blow to 
Hong Kong’s judicial independence.

Supporters chanted slogans such as “fight against Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> independence, support the 
interpretation” at the rally, which was attended by pro-Beijing legislators.

“The cancer cells are those who are promoting Hong Kong independence ... we 
will fight them to the end,” lawmaker Michael Tien told the crowd who cheered 
loudly in response.

Hong Kong: lawyers and activists march against Beijing 'meddling'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/hundreds-silently-march-in-hong-kong-in-protest-at-beijing-meddling>
“China will never, ever tolerate the splitting of the nation,” Tien said.

Priscilla Leung, another pro-China legislator who attended the rally, said the 
lawmakers’ behaviour at the swearing-in ceremony “humiliated all of the Chinese 
people”.

Police said 28,500 people attended the rally.

The Hong Kong high court’s decision on whether Leung and Yau should be 
disqualified is still pending.

Hong Kong was handed back to China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> 
by Britain in 1997 under a “one country, two systems” deal which protects its 
freedoms for 50 years, but there are growing concerns those liberties are 
disappearing.
 