
Hong Kong’s human rights situation is at its worst since Britain handed the 
territory to China,Amnesty International 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/amnesty-international> said in a new report, 
after a string of incidents damaged the city’s reputation in the past year.


Rule of law, freedom of speech and trust in government all deteriorated in 
2016, Amnesty said, in a strong rebuke of the former British colony.

 The report highlighted the case of five Hong Kong booksellers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/16/hong-kong-bookseller-lam-wing-kee-speaks-out-about-detention-in-china>
 who disappeared, only to reappear in the custody of Chinese police. The five 
men specialised in titles critical of the ruling Communist party and at least 
one was abducted fromHong Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong>.

An increase in attacks on journalists by police was also evidence of the 
worsening rights situation, the report said.

After the UK handed Hong Kong to China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> in 1997, the city maintained many 
freedoms nonexistent in mainland China, under a framework known as “one 
country, two systems”.

Freedom of speech and an independent, common law judiciary have made Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> a base for many critical of the 
Chinese government.

“The human rights situation is deteriorating to the point where people worry 
about their personal safety,” said Mabel Au, Amnesty’s Hong Kong director. 
“There is a lot of discontent in Hong Kong about many issues, but there is 
increased suppression against those who express their views.”

Hong Kong’s government has stopped responding to the group on some of the most 
critical issues, ignoring requests made on behalf of the abducted booksellers.

“Two years ago we had meetings with the government to discuss our concerns, 
and now there’s nothing,” Au said. “They seem to really not care about civil 
society.”

Hong Kong’s independent judiciary was also under attack, Amnesty said, after 
Beijing interfered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/china-bans-hong-kong-pro-independence-politicians-crisis-grows>
 in a local court case against two pro-independence MPs. The move was seen as 
highly controversial and sparkedabout 13,000 to take to the streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/06/police-and-protesters-clash-in-hong-kong-pro-democracy-march>
 in a protest that ended in clashes with police.

In a separate and extremely rare protest, more than 2,000 members of the legal 
profession marched against Beijing’s meddling in the local legal system.

The Amnesty report also highlighted a deep mistrust of government officials, 
with many Hong Kong people feeling the authorities only cared about political 
advancement and were not working for local residents.

Those fears were largely confirmed in the wake of the disappearance of the 
booksellers, when the Hong Kong government did little publicly to advocate for 
its detained citizens.

The reports also expressed concern over Hong Kong’s top leader, Leung 
Chun-ying, suggesting Hong Kong should withdraw from theUnited Nations 
convention against torture 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/ProfessionalInterest/Pages/CAT.aspx>.
 