
It is staggering that in 2016, the hottest year on record, the chancellor can 
present a budget that has no mention of climate change (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-will-blow-59bn-hole-in-public-finances-admits-hammond>
, 24 November). Indeed, most policies and spending plans are heading in the 
wrong direction. We have more money for new roads and fracking keeps its 
subsidy, but cuts to the local authorities who subsidise bus services. 

The freeze on fuel duty is another backward step and shows that the government 
cares nothing about climate change, air pollution or public health. Last year 
saw a record number of vehicles on our roads, especially in rural areas where 
bus services have been decimated. The government could bring us healthier air 
and less congestion by raising fuel duty and using the money to reverse the 
devastating cuts to buses. We need to give people the choice of travelling by 
public transport, walking and cycling, but that can only happen if we make the 
polluter pay and use the money raised to invest in things that are good for our 
health and our environment.
Jenny Jones
Green party, House of Lords

• As a member of Citizens’ Climate Lobby, I thank Dana Nuccitelli for writing 
about our work (Groups working with Republicans on climate see glimmer of hope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/21/groups-working-with-republicans-on-climate-are-discouraged-but-see-a-glimmer-of-hope>
, theguardian.com, 21 November) and the advantages of (and roadblocks to) a 
carbon tax. A carbon tax is gaining favour with governments and economists 
worldwide. Ironically, if – as it appears – a tax is not in our immediate 
future, other countries could slap one on our exports. Then we might reconsider 
a fee-and-dividend to improve our own economy, environment, and public health 
rather than pay someone else’s tax. In any case progress will come, as it 
already has, from states, local jurisdictions, and the private sector because 
reducing emissions makes economic sense. Washington can at most help, or at 
least stay out of the way.

China has a major role in this drama. It has taken praiseworthy steps to 
reduce its carbon emissions. It is a leading exporter of wind turbines, and its 
technology has made solar energy affordable worldwide. Now it hopes to wrest 
the mantle of climate leadership from America. You want to compete with China, 
Mr Trump? Then compete to save the climate. Denying reality, trashing the 
environment, rushing headlong toward climate catastrophe, and withdrawing from 
the global community won’t make America great.

Our spirits, but not our resolve, may have hit rock bottom on 9 November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-trump-won-us-election>; 
but mine have rebounded. We can lick this. The question is, will it be in time?
Carol Steinhart
Madison, Wisconsin, USA

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 