
The headlines say house prices, based on the Nationwide data, are showing 
their "biggest monthly fall in two years 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/2012/03/29/uk-house-prices-nationwide-idUKLNE82S00420120329>
" (Reuters) and suffering a "stamp duty hangover" 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2122032/House-prices-suffer-annual-fall-months-stamp-duty-hangover-kicks-in.html>
 (Daily Mail). The media-savvy economists are calling the 1% dip in March 
"quite a shock" (Howard Archer 
<http://www.ihs.com/capabilities/experts/howard-archer.aspx>) and predict 
further plunges. Yet the truth is that house prices in Britainrose in March.

In February the price of a typical home was £162,712, but over March it jumped 
to £163,327 – a rise of £615. Where do I get these figures that so contradict 
the Nationwide data? From none other thanNationwide itself 
<http://www.nationwide.co.uk/hpi/>. Welcome to the mysterious world of 
"seasonal adjustment".

It beggars belief to be told that after paying £615 more for an item that 
actually you are paying less, but then that's economics for you.

Nationwide does not deny that house prices jumped in March. Its economists say 
they anticipated the rise, but because it wasn't as big as they thought it 
would be they've put it down as a price fall. I'm not making this up, by the 
way.

It seems that spring and summer always see more activity in the property 
market than autumn and winter. Families prefer to buy now so they can get 
everything in place for the start of the school year in September. So 
transaction activity rises, as do prices.

The house price economists like to strip this out of the data. "If you look at 
the unadjusted figures they will show a rise. But as economists we want to know 
whether this was driven by predictable seasonal elements or not," says 
Nationwide's chief economist Robert Gardner.

We can blame the US Census Bureau <http://www.census.gov/srd/www/x12a/> for 
this. Nationwide's economics department (like most other economists) use its 
X12 system to adjust its data. X12 analyses any series of data to identify 
seasonal elements, then filters them out.

Gardner accepts, though, that house purchasers might not quite see it this 
way. If they are having to stump up a higher deposit or find a bigger mortgage 
this month, they will be understandably puzzled that the economists are saying 
prices are falling.

"Seasonally adjusted prices are more than misleading, they are rubbish," says 
Ray Boulger, mortgage expert atJohn Charcol <http://www.charcol.co.uk/>. "I 
always ignore what Nationwide and Halifax claim is the monthly change in house 
prices and look at the real figures, which in Nationwide's case was a rise of 
0.4% in March.

"The one positive thing I will say about Nationwide is that it is much more up 
front than other index providers in the press release about the fact that the 
figures commented upon are seasonally adjusted."

It's not just house prices that are seasonally adjusted – so are the Bank of 
England's <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/Pages/home.aspx> mortgage lending 
figures, which results in "massive adjustments" in December and January. Only 
theCouncil of Mortgage Lenders <http://www.cml.org.uk/cml/home> doesn't 
gerrymander the figures, Boulger says.

Let's say I've just bought a home in Britain, paying the average £163,327. My 
90% mortgage will be £146,994 compared to £146,440 if I'd bought the month 
before. Perhaps I should pop into a Nationwide branch and demand that £554 is 
wiped off my mortgage for "seasonal adjustment" reasons. But I think they might 
just tell me to bog off.
 