
“It’s always the same story,” says Steve Sims, who runs Houston’s Ghost Bike 
scheme <https://www.facebook.com/groups/HTXGhostBike/> with wife Melissa. “We 
speak to the family who tell us ‘My loved one was struck and killed.’ It’s 
devastating for them, but when someone gets hit on a bike here, nothing gets 
done. It happens over and over. You get involved every time but after a while 
they just kind of blend together.”

We meet at the tattoo parlour the ghost bike group uses as a base. The garage 
out back is packed wall to wall with old bikes which have been donated and 
spray-painted white, ready to be used as memorials to the victims of crashes 
with cars and trucks. It’s eerie to think these bikes will soon mark the site 
of someone’s death – like visiting the scene of a future mass killing.

Houston has no shortage of victims. Around 1,700 cyclists have been hit by 
cars on the streets of America’s fourth biggest city since 2013, with drivers 
failing to stay at the scene in nearly a quarter of cases, according todata 
from the Houston police department 
<http://www.houstonpress.com/news/will-the-houston-bike-plan-end-the-battle-between-bicyclists-and-drivers-8762197>
. Twenty-three cyclists have been killed – seven of them by hit-and-run 
drivers. Many are so-called “invisible cyclists”, people cycling to and from 
poorly paid jobs early in the morning or late at night, many without lights or 
a helmet. If the cyclist involved broke a traffic law such as not yielding the 
right of way, or did not have proper lights, the driver is usually considered 
blameless, oneprosecutor told the Houston Press 
<http://www.houstonpress.com/news/will-the-houston-bike-plan-end-the-battle-between-bicyclists-and-drivers-8762197>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6973cba22200a3c790b80c6f6c1da4ec8fa6625%2F0_317_816_546%2F816.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Houston's%20hit-and-run%20problem%3A%20ghost%20bikes%20honour%20'invisible%20dead'%20cyclists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Houston%27s%20hit-and-run%20problem%3A%20ghost%20bikes%20honour%20%27invisible%20dead%27%20cyclists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6973cba22200a3c790b80c6f6c1da4ec8fa6625%2F0_317_816_546%2F816.jpg>
 The family of Glen Mathews at the placing of his ghost bike in June. 
Photograph: Melissa Sims/Houston Ghost Bike 
Since the first ghost bike was placed in St Louis, Missouri, in 2003, the 
movement has spread to cities around the world, with awebsite giving advice on 
how to set up a ghost bike programme <http://ghostbikes.org/howto>. Schemes are 
often started in response to a spate of local deaths, and tend to come and go, 
but Houston seems to have a particular problem.

An average of six people on bikes are killed every year in the city itself, 
but that rises threefold or more for the wider urban area, according to Steve 
Sims. And while Houston has tripled the size of its Metro light rail, agreed a 
threefold increase in its bike share scheme, and drafted its first newBike Plan 
<http://houstonbikeplan.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Houston-Bike-Plan-Full-Report-Online-June-2016.pdf>
 in more than two decades, it remains a citydominated by cars and large SUVs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/02/america-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles>
.

We want drivers to see the person. We need them to recognise it was a human 
being that was killed
Steve Sims 
Cycling some quieter inner city areas, or the bayou trails, is pleasant enough 
– but try riding outside the loop formed by the I-610 freeway and it soon gets 
more aggressive.Census data shows 
<http://usa.streetsblog.org/2016/09/16/where-car-commuting-is-shrinking-and-where-its-not/>
 the number of people commuting by car in the Houston metro area has increased 
over the past decade, to more than 80%, with three-quarters of those trips made 
by solo drivers without any passengers.

Richard Tomlinson set up the Houston scheme after the hit-and-run killing of 
Chelsea Norman in December 2013. She wascycling home late at night from her job 
in a Whole Foods store 
<http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/transportation/article/A-ride-a-drink-a-city-figuring-out-its-cycling-6667159.php#photo-6089146>
 when she was struck by Margaret Mayer, who was driving back from a bar. Mayer 
didn’t stop; Norman died from her injuries a few days later. In court Mayer 
claimed she believed she had struck a tree, but was eventually convicted of 
failing to stop andsentenced to 15 years 
<http://www.chron.com/news/houston-texas/article/Punishment-phase-begins-in-trial-over-cyclist-s-5950313.php>
.

By the end of 2015 Tomlinson and a band of helpers – all volunteers – had set 
out more than 60 bikes 
<https://www.google.com/maps/d/viewer?mid=1Qx8AGU7oV8JkDJMWkbnDuQYN_sk&ll=29.76673830097086%2C-95.16664532890627&z=10>
.

Keen cyclist Jon Trevelise <https://www.facebook.com/JonTreveliseProgress> was 
killed in nearby Galveston in April 2014. He was cycling in the shoulder of the 
road when he was struck from behind by a car. The 68-year-old driver told 
police she was lost, and was driving in the shoulder while she looked for an 
address. “She looked up and the man on the bike was there,”the police report 
stated 
<http://www.galvnews.com/news/free/article_cac741da-37de-11e4-b437-0017a43b2370.html>
. She was charged with manslaughter.


The following year, David Rosenfeld was cycling to take part in a memorial 
bike ride in honour of Trevelise whenhe too was hit and killed by a car 
<http://www.houstonchronicle.com/news/houston-texas/houston/article/Bicyclist-killed-en-route-to-memorial-ride-6284655.php>
. Two more cyclistswere killed the next month 
<http://www.houstonpress.com/news/three-houston-area-cyclists-killed-in-three-weeks-7521738>
, and that October 56-year-old Bobby Brooks died afterallegedly being hit by a 
school bus 
<http://abc13.com/news/school-bus-driver-arrested-in-death-of-cyclist/353239/>. 
The driver’s attorney said she didn’t realise she had been involved in an 
accident. “She didn’t realise she … hit anything or anyone, which is why she 
continued on her bus route,”he told reporters 
<http://www.chron.com/news/houston-texas/houston/article/School-bus-driver-charged-in-fatal-hit-and-run-5829724.php>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfdce0010d4f5c5c8063aaa6dfee6f10d0cab709%2F0_118_3264_2245%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Houston's%20hit-and-run%20problem%3A%20ghost%20bikes%20honour%20'invisible%20dead'%20cyclists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Houston%27s%20hit-and-run%20problem%3A%20ghost%20bikes%20honour%20%27invisible%20dead%27%20cyclists&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fhouston-hit-run-personalised-ghost-bikes-invisible-dead-cyclists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfdce0010d4f5c5c8063aaa6dfee6f10d0cab709%2F0_118_3264_2245%2F3264.jpg>
 Melissa and Steve Sims of Houston Ghost Bike. Photograph: Nick Van Mead 
Houston’s first ghost bikes were simply chained to a fence or signpost at the 
location of the crash – a haunting reminder to drivers and cyclists.


Then graphic designer Steve Sims got involved. He offered to make something 
more lasting – a permanent plaque and laminated photo in place of the 
photocopied news clipping or picture which would fade after a week or two.

“We want drivers to see the person,” he explains. “We need them to recognise 
it was a human being that was killed, and not the caricature they have of a 
cyclist. The people being hit and killed aren’t generally the people in spandex 
most people think of when they think of cyclists. They are people who are 
riding bikes because that’s how they need to get around – it’s their 
transportation.”

At the same time Melissa hit on idea of contacting the family and friends of 
the victim through Facebook.

“We realised we had to reach out to the families,” she says. “They have enough 
on, though, so I’ll send a message to a friend of the family. I make them aware 
of what we do and ask them to pass on our details, to see if they’re interested 
in a memorial.”

Not everyone is. One family didn’t want a memorial because the victim’s friend 
passed the scene of his death every day and it would be too strong a reminder.

But if the family agrees then the ghost bikes team are guided by what they 
want. Generally Steve will unload the bike and let someone from the family roll 
it over to the spot. Some say prayers, or will ask Steve to do so; others tell 
stories or stand in silence.

America’s road trip: will the US ever kick the car habit?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/nov/02/america-road-trip-us-car-habit-detroit-houston-los-angeles>
“It’s about remembering,” says Steve. “We’re putting a name on the bike, and 
making sure it represents a person. ”

They don’t generally mark the locations where children have been killed on 
bikes – apart from one 13-year-old, an exception made on the request of his 
relatives.Michael Demny 
<http://www.redpub.com/images_articles_2015/view_houston_ghost_bike.php> was 
killed as he cycled near his school in the late 1990s. The car driver fled the 
scene.

“That was the first one we did with the family,” says Steve. “It happened 
years ago and nothing was done. The family reached out to us. It was so fresh 
when they told us the story, they were reliving every detail. The mother – you 
could just see the weight coming off her – to know someone was listening, that 
something’s going to be there – that their relative is going to be remembered. 
I feel my role is to allow some of these families closure – to show that 
someone noticed.”

The ghost bike volunteers also hope the sight of increasing numbers of white 
memorials will encourage drivers to pay more attention to the road, or think 
twice before texting while at the wheel.


“If people see them all over town, if they see one after the other, then at 
some point we’re going to hit a critical mass,” adds Steve. “We’re going to put 
out so many that people have got to realise what’s happening.”


Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> to join the discussion, and 
explore our archive here <https://www.theguardian.com/cities>
 