
The early 2012 rebound in the housing market has run out of steam, according 
to Britain's surveyors, who have reported price declines and falling activity 
across the country in April in the latest evidence of a broader economic 
slowdown.

The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors <http://www.rics.org/> said that 
19% more surveyors reported price falls than price rises, while newly agreed 
sales turned negative and the number of properties on the books of surveyors 
rose again. RICS blamed the end of the stamp duty holiday on properties below 
£250,000, adding that "weak economic data has eroded confidence in the market".

Only London defied the downturn, with surveyors in the capital reporting a 
remarkably different picture from the rest of the UK. A total of 86% ofLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> surveyors said prices were the same or 
rising, in contrast to Wales, where 36% reported price falls, and Northern 
Ireland, where 50% said the market was continuing its downward slide.

All the major property indices are now showing steep price falls. Halifax said 
prices tumbled by 2.4% in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/may/04/house-prices-april-halifax>, 
wiping £4,000 off the value of the average property, with the market falling at 
its fastest rate for 20 months.

A decline in the availability of mortgage finance is holding back buyers. 
Andrew Fallows, of Carter Jonas in York, said: "Young families appear to have 
been driven away by the lack of finance and a fear of what is to come." John 
Ozwell, of Hunters in Solihull, Birmingham, said: "Mortgage lenders have become 
more pedantic over lending criteria, putting unnecessary hurdles in front of 
buyers."

But the RICS said that downbeat assessments of the property market were 
overdone. "It is still noteworthy that 63% of respondents reported no change in 
prices, and of the ones that did see a fall in prices, 81% did so in the 0-2% 
range."

The gap between optimism in London and pessimism elsewhere has reached 
extraordinary levels. Brendon Thomas, of Maitlands Acorn, who cover the 
Docklands area of London, said: "Some areas seem to be experiencing a 
mini-boom." Justin Knight, of Bective Leslie Marsh, said: "The market in W14, 
W6 and W12 continues to boom with no signs of a slowdown, with prices 20% ahead 
of the 2007 market high."

But 170 miles north in Doncaster, Mark Hunter, of Grice and Hunter, painted a 
very different picture. "Apart from about one year in every 15, the residential 
market in this area has, since the mid-1970s, rarely been one which could be 
described as buoyant. These are now probably around 'average' conditions."
 