
UK house prices fell by 0.6% in March, figures from the Office for National 
Statistics (ONS) have shown, but first-time buyers founds themselves paying 
2.8% more than in March 2011.

The ONS, which has taken over the DCLG's house price index, said the average 
price of a UK property is now £225,283 – 0.4% lower than in March 2011. Over 
the year, house prices in England and Scotland decreased by 0.3%, while in 
Northern Ireland they dropped by 10.7%. In Wales, prices were up by 0.4% 
year-on-year.

Prices in England over the year were pushed down by a 0.2% drop in London – a 
market which had been outperforming the rest of the country and has not shown 
an annual fall since October 2009 – and a 1.4% drop in the rest of the 
south-east.

The ONS figures also showed that while first-time buyers paid more than in 
March 2011, as the arrival of the end of the stamp duty deadline increased 
demand, those who were selling and moving paid 1.6% less for their new property.

During March 2012 the average price paid for a house by a first-time buyer was 
£170,109, while former owner-occupiers paid an average £257,650.

Figures from the Council of Mortgage Lenders (CML) have shown there was a 
flurry of activity among first-time buyers in March 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/may/16/first-time-buyer-mortgage-lending-stamp-duty>
 as they attempted to complete property purchases before 24 March and beat a 
stamp duty holiday on homes costing between £125,000 and £250,000.

More recent CML figures showed a sharp fall in lending in April 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/may/21/mortgage-lending-crashes-stamp-duty>
, and the CML said the eurozone crisis could further dampen lenders' and 
consumers' appetites for new loans.

Separate figures from HM Revenue & Customs showed a big fall in the number of 
properties changing hands in April 2012 after transactions reached a recent 
peak in March.

An estimated 72,000 homes worth more than £40,000 were sold in April, down 
from 88,000 in March. Transactions remain well down on their 2006 levels when 
between 130,000 and 150,000 homes were sold every month.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said the overall drop 
in prices tied in with his view that house prices would trend gradually 
downwards in 2012.

"Housing market activity is very low compared to long-term norms. And the 
economic fundamentals currently look worrying overall for the housing market 
with unemployment high, earnings growth muted, and the outlook highly uncertain 
and more than a little worrying.

"In addition, relatively tight credit conditions may well make it hard for 
many people to get a mortgage. Furthermore, some mortgage rates have risen 
recently due to lenders' higher borrowing costs in wholesale markets and this 
could well weigh down on housing market activity."
 