
Imagine you went to a restaurant and found they couldn’t provide you with the 
menu, or maybe with any food at all – but you still had to pay for the steak 
tartare you ordered even though you only got a cheese sandwich and waited an 
hour.

Imagine that, as an extra humiliation, you also had to prove you had paid when 
you left, by handing over your receipt to a security guard.

If this dysfunctional restaurant was the only source of local food, then after 
a few months of this it would seriously corrode your self-respect.

Yet that is the position in which the humiliated passengers of Southern Rail 
and Govia Thameslink find themselves. For eight months now – throughstrike days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/13/when-where-why-southern-rail-strike-industrial-action>
 and non-strike days – those companies have failed to provide an adequate train 
service.

It wouldn’t be an excuse that the restaurant’s waiting staff were off sick or 
that the chef was on strike. Yet we would complain to the government about this 
particular eating joint, and they would blame striking waiters – though we 
might also notice that disastrous service had gone on far longer than the 
strike.

There comes a point when reasonable people reach the end of their tether, when 
their lives, businesses, marriages and jobs have been turned inside out by the 
failure of one rail franchise – while the media just concentrate on the 
technical squabble aboutdriver-only trains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/17/robotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers>
, which forms the heart of the dispute between Southern and its workers. So 
I’ve been asking myself: what would Gandhi do if he had been a commuter on 
Southern Rail?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae398b8fd13b2a1a66afba0db434b48ea8f5394%2F5_161_5754_3453%2F5754.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20Southern%20Rail%20passengers%20regain%20their%20self-respect%3F%20By%20going%20on%20strike%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20Southern%20Rail%20passengers%20regain%20their%20self-respect%3F%20By%20going%20on%20strike%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ae398b8fd13b2a1a66afba0db434b48ea8f5394%2F5_161_5754_3453%2F5754.jpg>
 Southern Rail passengers make their feelings known at Victoria station in 
London. Photograph: Guy Bell/REX/Shutterstock 
It struck me that he might have refused to hand over his ticket at the 
resolutely guarded gates at Brighton station, where my train takes me each day. 
This would force the rail managers either into climbing down and opening the 
gates – or confronting the passengers they constantly apologise to.

I also decided that, to kickstart the #passengerstrike 
<https://twitter.com/search?q=%23passengerstrike&src=hash> hashtag, I would 
probably have to do this myself.

I’m not naturally brave. I’m certainly no organiser or conventional protester. 
But I took a deep breath, put on my suit, printed out a letter to passengers 
explaining what I was doing and handed it out on the 16:22 from Blackfriars to 
Brighton last night.

I went through the train asking people if they would join me by the gates 
refusing to show our tickets – and have some cake. One passenger said she 
wouldn’t because she was backing the strikers; two others said they wouldn’t 
because I was clearly a troublemaker (I don’t think they were backing the 
strikers). Otherwise I was surprised at how many people said they would join 
us, including the Brighton MP,Caroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/carolinelucas>. Many more promised to give 
a thumbs-up as they went by.

Either opening the gates or keeping them closed would embarrass Southern’s 
managers, but it took me by surprise quite how quickly we managed it.

The final carriage I went into included a Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> executive. He was overheard 
phoning ahead to staff at the station: “We’ve got a problem,” he said. “Get 
everyone out by the gates!”

So when we arrived, 10 minutes or so later, we were met by a line of security 
guards – Southern’s main recent investment – but the gates had been opened. We 
cheered, claimed victory, and categorised their action as a humiliating 
climbdown by Govia Thameslink.

It was exciting, and I’m very glad we did it. But half an hour later, when we 
had finished our victory party, the gates were closed again.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10bf5f923186d1521890e64d95f1d36c3ed33198%2F0_80_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20Southern%20Rail%20passengers%20regain%20their%20self-respect%3F%20By%20going%20on%20strike%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20Southern%20Rail%20passengers%20regain%20their%20self-respect%3F%20By%20going%20on%20strike%20%7C%20David%20Boyle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouthern-rail-passengers-strike-self-respect%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F10bf5f923186d1521890e64d95f1d36c3ed33198%2F0_80_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘How incompetent does a service provider have to be before the government 
steps in and rescues its poor humiliated users?’ Photograph: Daniel 
Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
If the idea of a passenger strike is to work, it will have to be repeated – 
over and over again – by a whole range of people doing the same: recruiting 
passengers approaching Brighton who agree that, because Southern has manifestly 
failed to provide a proper service for so many months, they won’t show their 
tickets.

This will do two things. It will force managers constantly to decide between 
two unpalatable options: pathetically opening the gates or confronting 
passengers.

Most of all it will put the spotlight back on what matters – Govia 
Thameslink’s failure to run a proper service since May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/southern-rail-failure-crush-unions>
, and the Department for Transport’s dysfunctional contract which gives the 
company just 3% of ticket receipts, so that the only way it can add to its 
profits is to cut platform staff.

It is a way of asking: how incompetent does a service provider have to be 
before the government steps in and rescues its poor humiliated users? Or do we 
have to just accept third-rate services in Theresa May’s Britain?

My advice for anyone trying this themselves: take three friends on the train 
with you for moral support; understand that many people will be desperate to 
get home and won’t be able to stay at the gates; be polite: don’t browbeat the 
security staff – focus on the manager in charge; sing songs, eat cake, but – 
most of all – have fun.

That is the way we can claim back a little self-respect.
 