
Dave Matthews, prison governor of Les Nicolles prison, in Guernsey, welcomed 
news ofa complete ban on smoking in prisons in England and Wales, to be phased 
in from January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/prison-smoking-ban-begins-2016-despite-fears-unrest>
.

He says the move is “well overdue” and dismisses the idea that trouble could 
follow. Matthews points out that since Les Nicolles banned tobacco on New 
Year’s Day 2013 there has been no unrest at the 130-capacity jail. He suggests 
that where it occurs, it merely lights a match on deeper grievances. “Part of 
the reason might be that prisoners spend a long time in their cells, there 
might be very poor staff-prisoner relationships; there might be lots of reason 
why, but it’s always ‘the tobacco ban that’s caused it’. I maintain that as 
long as the nicotine addiction is served, there isn’t a problem. You don’t need 
cigarettes.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391748604e1e231205bcee8b8335ca846134b4e5%2F848_1364_3877_2327%2F3877.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20a%20jail%20in%20Guernsey%20ban%20smoking%20with%20no%20unrest%3F%20%7C%20H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Mulholland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20a%20jail%20in%20Guernsey%20ban%20smoking%20with%20no%20unrest%3F%20%7C%20H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Mulholland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F391748604e1e231205bcee8b8335ca846134b4e5%2F848_1364_3877_2327%2F3877.jpg>
 Les Nicolles prison governor Dave Matthews dismisses the idea that banning 
tobacco in prisons could lead to trouble. Photograph: Chris George for the 
Guardian 
Tobacco is forbidden across the prison site, but quit courses are available, 
and electronic cigarettes are on sale.

Thomas, a Les Nicolles prisoner, says he was “a little sceptical” when the 
prison gave notice of the ban in 2011. But he went on nicotine patches and was 
pleased to find that he wasn’t climbing the walls. “I can see the health 
benefits. I think on the whole it’s been quite a clever move,” he says.

While smoke-free prisons are already common in some parts of the world, such 
as New Zealand, Canada and parts of the US and Australia 
<http://ash.org.uk/files/documents/ASH_740.pdf>, Les Nicolles – the only prison 
on Guernsey, situated 50 kilometres west of France’s Normandy coast – is just 
the second prison in Europe to be smoke-free. The first was in the Isle of Man 
in 2008.

Under government plans, all prisons in Wales will go smoke-free in 
January 2016 and four early-adopter sites in south-west England will follow in 
March, as part of a phased approach towards eventually making all 136 prisons 
in England and Wales smoke-free. The obvious health benefits, both to smoking 
and to non-smoking inmates and staff are clear. Around 80% of inmates in adult 
prisons smoke. In preparation for the ban, the sale of electronic cigarettes in 
prison shops has been rolled out to all prisons.Smoking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/smoking> cessation support is being made 
available in the prisons about to become smoke-free.

Originally from Northumberland, Matthews spent more than two decades working 
in smoke-filled prisons in the north of England. When he arrived at Les 
Nicolles as deputy governor, inmates were allowed to smoke in their cell, with 
the door shut, and outdoors. Tasked with introducing a smokefree policy 
Matthews, a non-smoker, was motivated by “wanting a healthy environment for my 
staff”. An audit conducted in 2011 revealed that 88% of prisoners at the time 
smoked, as did 39% of staff.

The tobacco-free Isle of Man prison opened its doors to Matthews and his 
senior team allowing them to talk to officers and prisoners. What they found 
chimed witha prison inspection in 2011 
<http://www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/prisons/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2014/03/isle-of-man-oct-2011.pdf>
 which uncovered a long list of items prisoners had attempted to turn into 
alternative smoking material including nicotine extracted from patches mixed 
with dried fruit peel and tea. “Some fruit was subsequently banned, but 
prisoners also used lint from tumble driers and even pubic hair,” said the 
inspector’s report. “The thin pages from Gideons Bibles and dictionaries were 
especially sought-after as makeshift cigarette papers and these were held in 
place with toothpaste. With kettle elements and bare electric wires being used 
to render and ignite these homemade cigarettes, there were also concerns for 
fire safety,” it added.

Banning smoking in prison cells? I predict a riot | Eric Allison
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/sep/20/banning-smoking-prisons-riot>
Matthews decided that electronic cigarettes would be made available to avoid 
similar DIY efforts in his jail. Crucially, he lobbiedGuernsey’s home department
 <http://www.gov.gg/homedepartment> to amend its smoking ban legislation so 
that smoking in cells was no longer exempted. A committee involving both staff 
and prisoner representatives met monthly, and a two-way communication with 
prisoners ensued, says Matthews. Leaflets were left at reception for newcomers. 
Trials with e-cigarettes revealed that prisoners were finding other uses for 
the chargers, so a prison-tailored disposable e-cigarette was commissioned from 
China. It has now switched to a supplier in England.

When 1 January 2013 arrived, there were no fireworks, say prisoners who spoke 
to the Guardian. Martin, a non-smoking prisoner at the time, recalls that there 
was a phase of people being “a lot more short tempered. Nothing ever kicked off 
but you could generally tell by people’s attitudes that they were close to the 
edge”. He comments that the air “is a lot cleaner” nowadays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff91ce49593c497832395393aca6ce1f9ecbdc365%2F0_350_4615_2769%2F4615.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20did%20a%20jail%20in%20Guernsey%20ban%20smoking%20with%20no%20unrest%3F%20%7C%20H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Mulholland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20did%20a%20jail%20in%20Guernsey%20ban%20smoking%20with%20no%20unrest%3F%20%7C%20H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne%20Mulholland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2015%2Foct%2F07%2Fguernsey-prison-ban-smoking-unrest%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff91ce49593c497832395393aca6ce1f9ecbdc365%2F0_350_4615_2769%2F4615.jpg>
 The disposable e-cigarettes being used in the Guernsey prison. Photograph: 
Chris George for the Guardian 
Not everyone is happy, however. Craig laments the loss of one of the few 
freedoms inmates had. Yet he has managed to cut out nicotine because the 
e-cigarettes were eating into his wages, and he hopes to continue to be 
nicotine-free on release.Evidence from New Zealand suggests that half of all 
smokers who quit while in a smoke-free facility leave prison intending to 
remain non-smokers <http://ash.org.uk/files/documents/ASH_740.pdf>.

Matthews, who became governor of Les Nicolles in 2012, says staff no longer 
have to suffer the perils of secondhand smoke, and tests on prisoners’ 
lung capacity on entering and leaving prison show the difference the ban makes 
to them, too.

“Prisoners report that they are feeling a lot better, their skin, their taste 
and their sense of smell returns. It’s fantastic. But they’re still on the 
e-cigarettes because they still can’t get rid of the nicotine habit,” he says

Matthews’ prison would no doubt be the envy of many governors in the UK: built 
in 1989, and housing a range of offenders both male and female, immigration 
detainees, children and young people, it has been turned into a fully working 
prison, where inmates grow fruit and vegetables, tend the garden, work around 
the prison or in workshops. Each prisoner has their own cell, and earns an 
average weekly wage of £13.

Matthews says, while there is no one-size-fits all approach to banning 
tobacco, the same can be done anywhere if staff and prisoner engagement and the 
right leadership is in place. “It’s about having transferable skills and using 
them in a new situation. Anybody can do it as long as they’ve got certain 
skills.”

Prisoners say there are ways to get your hands on tobacco, now contraband, 
though it’s not common. Inmates caught smoking tobacco smuggled in by visitors 
and new inmates face disciplinary measures and the loss of privileges. Of 
tobacco finds, Matthews says: “It’s very rare but I’m not naive enough to think 
it doesn’t happen. People will still take the chance just to try and break the 
rules.”
 