
Many autistic people can become overwhelmed by sensory demands, particularly 
when out in public; the complex codes of social interaction that others take 
for granted can also create confusion. Iris Grace, a talented six-year-old 
painter, became an internet sensation for the therapy cat which has become her 
constant companion; but, increasingly, it is new technology that is helping 
autistic people to cope.

Top tips from parents: what we wish you knew about our autistic children
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/15/top-tips-from-parents-what-we-wish-you-knew-about-our-autistic-children>
Robots that help autistic children develop social, communication and play 
skills, virtual reality behaviour modelling, and apps to reduce anxiety levels 
and promote independence are just a few of the exciting new developments – 
known as assistive technology – that are revolutionising the support available 
for autistic adults and children.

One of the most accessible is a simple app called Brain in Hand 
<http://braininhand.co.uk/>, which offers instant access to pre-planned coping 
strategies, anxiety-level monitoring, and a button for an urgent call back from 
a trained National Autistic Society facilitator if needed.


To an autistic person who has become so stressed by too much information that 
they cannot even think clearly about what coping strategies to use, the Brain 
in Hand app offers prompts that were entered by the user earlier during a calm 
state, perhaps supported by a family member. Common solutions have included: 
“listen to my music”; “move away from the noise”; “do my breathing exercises”; 
“look at photos that make me happy”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa6b15e9a889e264589ea0f892e4558a634cbd5c%2F0_82_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20robots%20and%20apps%20are%20joining%20cats%20in%20changing%20the%20lives%20of%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20robots%20and%20apps%20are%20joining%20cats%20in%20changing%20the%20lives%20of%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faa6b15e9a889e264589ea0f892e4558a634cbd5c%2F0_82_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Assistive technology, such as the Brain in Hand app, is revolutionising the 
support available for autistic people. Photograph: PR 
Rosie King, an autistic teenager who has become an inspirational speaker (her 
TED talk <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=jQ95xlZeHo8XX> has been viewed two 
million times), is finding Brain in Hand a vital tool as she prepares to head 
to university and full independence for the first time.

“If I’m in a situation where my mind is racing, off the rails,” King writes, 
“I can’t do anything but panic and scream. My mind is like an enormous wild 
animal that I find very difficult to chain up. But I have to. This is where 
Brain in Hand comes in.”

King first discovered the app at an autism conference, where a fellow autistic 
person recommended it to her. She’s since become an enthusiastic user. “Brain 
in Hand,” she explains, “is pretty much what it says on the tin; a huge list of 
solutions to potential problems that you can encounter in your day to day life. 
This is programmed into your mobile phone (by you; the user). When I am calm, 
thinking practically and clearly in this way is no problem for me, that raging 
beast is sleeping and I can chat to my older, wiser, hotter self (sometimes I 
feel like I am becoming her).

“It’s as though I have that older Rosie in my pocket and I can call her up for 
advice, whether I’m just a little uneasy or having a full-blown panic attack.”

Brain in Hand was conceived and developed by the father of an autistic boy and 
the clinical director of the Autism Diagnostic Research Centre in Southampton, 
and tested by a number of organisations, including The National Autistic 
Society. It may not be as eye-catching as Milo, the humanoid robot whose 
exaggerated facial expressions teach children to read and understand the 
emotions of others, or Leka, the smart toy unveiled at CES 2016 which may 
remind children of Star Wars’ spherical BB-8, but it is already making its mark.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb41cb676a014b08117929f4790b3ab72fa6cd0ab%2F0_31_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20robots%20and%20apps%20are%20joining%20cats%20in%20changing%20the%20lives%20of%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20robots%20and%20apps%20are%20joining%20cats%20in%20changing%20the%20lives%20of%20autistic%20people&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftmi%2F2016%2Fapr%2F15%2Fhow-robots-and-apps-are-joining-cats-in-changing-the-lives-of-autistic-people%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb41cb676a014b08117929f4790b3ab72fa6cd0ab%2F0_31_1500_900%2F1500.jpg>
 Milo the robot uses exaggerated facial expressions to teach autistic people to 
understand the emotions of others. Photograph: PR 
“Technology is transforming lives,” says David Fry, chief executive of Brain 
in Hand. “The inspiring stories we hear make that clear. Time and time again, 
we hear of people who are achieving increased independence – taking public 
transport, coping with the demands of school or college, even starting 
employment for the first time. Support,” he concludes, “will look very 
different in the future.”

Though there will always be a place for cats.

Discover how you can help: meet 10-year-old Alex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/autism-and-the-overload-effect>, 
star of the National Autistic Society’sToo Much Information film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tmi/2016/apr/01/experience-the-world-through-an-autistic-boys-eyes-video>

To find out more about autism, the person, and what to do visit 
autism.org.uk/tmi <http://www.autism.org.uk/tmi>
 