
To celebrate its 225th anniversary, the US Mint and Treasury last week 
unveiled plans to issue a 24-caratcommemorative coin 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-us-canada-38622886> depicting Lady Liberty as 
an African-American woman. With full lips and braided hair tied back in a bun, 
her gold-embossed profile is framed by the words “LIBERTY” above and “In God We 
Trust” below. “As we as a nation continue to evolve,” said Elisa Basnight, the 
Mint’s chief of staff, “so does Liberty’s representation.”

Don’t treat Donald Trump as if he’s a normal president. He’s not | Jonathan 
Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-not-normal-president-congress-theresa-may>
Sadly, the representation is evolving far faster than the nation. The coin is 
worth $100 (£80); in 2010 themedian net wealth 
<https://www.yumpu.com/en/document/view/23434320/lifting-as-we-climb-insight-center-for-community-economic->
 for women of colour was calculated at just $5.Black women now earn 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2016/07/01/racial-gender-wage-gaps-persist-in-u-s-despite-some-progress/>
 65 cents for every $1 made by a white man – thesame gap 
<http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0882775.html> as 20 years ago. So the Treasury 
has produced a coin in these women’s image that most cannot afford – because 
the economy is producing low-wage jobs that leave them with liberty without 
equality.

For the past eight years American liberals have gorged themselves on 
symbolism. A significant section of the population, including thosemost likely 
to support Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/nov/03/obama-african-americans-paradox>
, have felt better about their country even as they have fared worse in it. The 
young, good-looking, intact, scandal-free black family in the White House 
embodied a hopeful future for America and beyond.Photogenic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/gallery/2017/jan/04/barack-obama-presidency-best-pictures>
, with an understated chic, here were people of colour who looked even better 
in black and white. With personal stories of progress without privilege, they 
provided Camelot without the castle: evoking a sense of possibility in a period 
of economic stagnation, social immobility and political uncertainty.

As Obama passes the keys and the codes to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> at the end of this week, so 
many liberals mourn the passing of what has been, remain in a state of 
disbelief for what has happened, and express deep anxiety about what is to 
come. It is a steep cliff – politically, rhetorically and aesthetically – from 
the mocha-complexioned consensual intellectual to the permatanned, 
“pussy-grabbing” vulgarian.

But there is a connection between the “new normal” and the old that must be 
understood if resistance in the Trump era is going to amount to more than 
Twitter memes driven by impotent rage and fuelled by flawed nostalgia. This 
transition is not simply a matter of sequence – one bad president following a 
good one – but consequence: one horrendous agenda made possible by the failure 
of its predecessor.

It is easy for liberals to despise Trump. He is a thin-skinned charlatan, a 
self-proclaimed sexual harasser, a blusterer and a bigot. One need not exhaust 
any moral energy in making the case against his agenda. That is precisely what 
makes it so difficult to understand his appeal. Similarly, it is easy for 
liberals to love Obama. He’s measured, thoughtful, smart and eloquent – and did 
some good things despite strong opposition from Republicans. That is precisely 
what makes it so difficult for liberals to provide aprincipled and plausible 
critique 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/09/obama-drop-blind-devotion> of 
his presidency.

One cannot blame Obama for Trump. It was the Republicans – craven to the mob 
within their base, which they have always courted but ultimately could not 
control – that nominated and, for now, indulges him. And yet it would be 
disingenuous to claim Trump rose from a vacuum that bore no relationship to the 
previous eight years.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobama-was-inadequate-but-america-will-miss-him-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20was%20inadequate.%20But%20America%20will%20miss%20him%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobama-was-inadequate-but-america-will-miss-him-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20was%20inadequate.%20But%20America%20will%20miss%20him%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fobama-was-inadequate-but-america-will-miss-him-video&media=>
Obama was inadequate. But America will miss him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2017/jan/11/obama-was-inadequate-but-america-will-miss-him-video>
Some of that relationship is undeniably tied up in who Obama is: a black man, 
with a lapsed Muslim father from Kenya. That particular constellation of 
identities was like catnip to an increasingly strident wing of the Republican 
party in a time of war, migration and racial tumult. Trump did not invent 
racism. Indeed,race-baiting 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/its-the-racism-stupid/> has been a staple of 
Republican party strategy for more than 50 years. But as he refused to observe 
the electoral etiquette of the Nixon strategy (“You have to face the fact that 
the whole problem is really the blacks,”Richard Nixon told his chief-of-staff, 
HR Haldeman 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1994/05/18/us/haldeman-diary-shows-nixon-was-wary-of-blacks-and-jews.html>
. “The key is to devise a system that recognises that while not appearing to”), 
his campaign descended into a litany of brazen racist taunts.

Racism’s role should not be underplayed, but its impact can arguably be 
overstated. While Trump evidently emboldened existing racists, it’s not obvious 
that he created new ones. He received thesame proportion of the white vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/white-voters-victory-donald-trump-exit-polls>
 as Mitt Romney in 2012 and George W Bush in 2004. It does not follow that 
because Trump’s racism was central to his meaning for liberals, it was 
necessarily central to his appeal for Republicans.

There is a deeper connection, however, between Trump’s rise and what Obama did 
– or rather didn’t do – economically. He entered the White House at a moment of 
economic crisis, withDemocratic majorities in both Houses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/06/us-elections-2008-democrats-congress-house-representatives>
 and bankers on the back foot. Faced with the choice of preserving the 
financial industry as it was or embracing far-reaching reforms that would have 
served the interests of those who voted for him,he chose 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/posteverything/wp/2017/01/12/democrats-cant-win-until-they-recognize-how-bad-obamas-financial-policies-were/?postshare=5001484345169471&tid=ss_tw&utm_term=.350e05014673>
 the former.

Even as we protest about the 'new normal', we should not pretend it is 
replacing something popular or effective

Just a couple of months into his first term he called a meeting of banking 
executives. “The president had us at a moment of real vulnerability,” one of 
them told Ron Suskind inhis book Confidence Men 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/19/books/ron-suskinds-confidence-men-focuses-on-obama-review.html>
. “At that point, he could have ordered us to do just about anything and we 
would have rolled over. But he didn’t – he mostly wanted to help us out, to 
quell the mob.” People lost their homes while bankers kept their bonuses and 
banks kept their profits.

In 2010 Damon Silvers of the independent congressional oversight panel told 
Treasury officials 
<http://dailybail.com/home/video-we-can-either-have-a-rational-resolution-to-the-forecl.html>
: “We can either have a rational resolution to the foreclosure crisis, or we 
can preserve the capital structure of the banks. We can’t do both.” They chose 
the latter. Not surprisingly, this was not popular. Three years into Obama’s 
first term58% of the country 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/152213/majority-americans-gov-help-stop-foreclosures.aspx>
 – including an overwhelming majority of Democrats and independents – wanted 
the government to help stop foreclosures. His Treasury secretary, Timothy 
Geithner, did the opposite, setting up a programme that would“foam the runway” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=g5uMtZgL1As> for the banks.

So when Hillary Clinton stood for Obama’s third term 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/07/06/hillary-clinton-will-be-barack-obama-s-third-term.html>
, the problem wasn’t just a lack of imagination: it was that the first two 
terms had not lived up to their promise.

This time last year, fewer than four in 10 were happy with Obama’s economic 
policies <http://www.pewresearch.org/key-data-points/us-economy/>. When asked 
last week to assessprogress under Obama 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/201683/americans-assess-progress-obama.aspx?g_source=Politics&g_medium=newsfeed&g_campaign=tiles>
 56% of Americans said the country had lost ground or stood still on the 
economy, while 48% said it had lost ground on the gap between the rich and poor 
– against just 14% who said it gained ground. These were the Obama coalition – 
black and young and poor – who did not vote in November, making Trump’s victory 
possible. Those whose hopes are not being met: people more likely to go to the 
polls because they are inspired about a better future than because they fear a 
worse one.

Naturally, Trump’s cabinet of billionaires will do no better and will, in all 
likelihood, do far worse. And even as we protest about the legitimacy of the 
“new normal”, we should not pretend it is replacing something popular or 
effective. The old normalwas not working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/16/how-trump-took-middletown-muncie-election>
. The premature nostalgia for the Obamas in the White House is not a yearning 
for Obama’s policies.

As any recipient of the new coin will tell you, there’s a difference between 
things that look different and make you feel good, and things that make a 
difference and actually do good. Symbols should not be dismissed as 
insubstantial; but nor should they be mistaken for substance.
 