
Marianne Soko considers the data on her computer screen, trying to decide 
which thatched houses and breeze block shops to spray next with insecticide.

11 ways public and private can work together to improve healthcare
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/dec/09/public-and-private-healthcare-development>
Armed with powerful data visualisation tools that map malaria cases, trends 
and resources, Soko, a 30-year-old environmental health officer, is on the 
frontline of the Zambian government’s ambitious campaign to eliminate malaria 
by 2020.

She is tasked with stamping out malaria in the district of Itezhi-Tezhi, a 
region of cattle, maize and fish farming where seasonal floods make the clay 
plains impassable. As the district’s malaria focal point person, she supports 
Zambia’s NationalMalaria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/malaria> 
Elimination Center to deploy limited resources: insecticide-treated bed nets, 
indoor residual spray, rapid malaria tests and drugs.

Soko relies on information from health clinics and community health workers 
who travel up to 25km by foot, bicycle and boat to log monthly reports. Until 
recently, analysing the reports involved multiple slow downloads and it was 
hard to tell whether the data was reliable. Did that health facility really not 
have any malaria cases for a whole month? Or were some health workers unable to 
submit reports because their bicycles were broken, or they lacked a mobile 
phone connection? Even if all the reports came in, Soko didn’t have an 
up-to-date way to sort the mountain of data and relay information back to 
health facilities and communities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cff13d73572e83ddc1827dd821b55db9f964c4%2F632_376_6343_3806%2F6343.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20data%20maps%20are%20transforming%20the%20fight%20against%20malaria%20in%20Zambia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20data%20maps%20are%20transforming%20the%20fight%20against%20malaria%20in%20Zambia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6cff13d73572e83ddc1827dd821b55db9f964c4%2F632_376_6343_3806%2F6343.jpg>
 Ephraim Sikalundu, data collector, and Vincent Munsaka, community health 
worker in Harmony village. Photograph: Gabe Bienczycki/PATH/Gabe Bienczycki 
Thanks to the Visualize No Malaria <http://visualizenomalaria.org/> 
partnership between the Zambian Ministry of Health,Path <http://www.path.org/> 
and data expertsTableau <http://www.tableau.com/>, Soko and her colleagues now 
have access to powerful automated computer analysis and user-friendly 
dashboards. It takes moments to see emerging patterns in the data and the 
disease, and to optimise resource distribution for the 90,000 people in Soko’s 
district.

“It’s an eye-opener,” says Soko. “Data validation, missing reports ... 
everything is at my fingertips. It’s just a click, then you have it all. You 
know where the hotspots are and where the data is missing. You have a true 
picture immediately. The way everything comes together, it’s a miracle.”

Since 2005, Path has supported the Zambian Ministry of Health’s fight against 
the mosquito-borne disease – an effort that has resulted in a 90% decrease in 
malaria in children in parts of Southern Province over the past two years.

19 ways to beat malaria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/sep/16/19-ways-to-beat-malaria>
Along with our colleagues from the Ministry of Health, we’re impatient to rid 
Zambia of a disease that takes anestimated 7,000 lives a year 
<http://www.who.int/malaria/publications/country-profiles/profile_zmb_en.pdf> 
(pdf). But the closer we get, the harder it becomes because the parasite 
causing malaria hides in seemingly healthy people. All it takes is one infected 
person and one bloodthirsty mosquito to transmit the disease to neighbours, who 
then become new hosts of the parasite.

To disrupt this deadly cycle, we realised that we needed to use the ministry’s 
routine data for insights. We needed faster ways to analyse, share and use data 
so that we could track the disease in real time and see where to go next. Our 
pitch to Tableau wasn’t so much about money. It was a request to collaborate: 
How would you like to helpZambia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/zambia> 
eliminate malaria?


The Tableau Foundation’s five-year commitment, valued at more than $1.8m 
(£1.4m), provides software, in-house technical support, extensive training, and 
financial help to empower health professionals such as Soko.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770afbd5b39f6bac0b50344f54567dbb2317a9e3%2F0_248_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20data%20maps%20are%20transforming%20the%20fight%20against%20malaria%20in%20Zambia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20data%20maps%20are%20transforming%20the%20fight%20against%20malaria%20in%20Zambia&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fpowerful-data-visualisation-is-transforming-the-fight-against-malaria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F770afbd5b39f6bac0b50344f54567dbb2317a9e3%2F0_248_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Marie-Reine Rutagwera, malaria surveillance specialist forMACEPA 
<http://sites.path.org/macepa/>, Monde Mathews, environmental health officer 
for Gwembe district, reviewing malaria surveillance data on a laptop. 
Photograph: Gabe Bienczycki/PATH/Gabe Bienczycki 
Our collaboration with Tableau forges a new way for global health initiatives. 
People from many different companies and backgrounds are coming together with 
creativity, a thirst for learning and optimism. Not a week goes by when I don’t 
hear how this opportunity has helped them improve their skills, or discover a 
new idea that our extended team can apply elsewhere.

 A few Tableau experts, called Zen masters, have travelled to Zambia to share 
skills . Many people lend their assistance from Seattle, Silicon Valley, 
Atlanta and beyond, each donating hundreds of hours to automate workflows, 
improve visualisations, integrate mapping technologies and test algorithms that 
can predict which neighbourhood malaria will strike next.

Real time maps could predict and prevent the spread of malaria
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2014/oct/23/real-time-maps-could-predict-and-prevent-the-spread-of-malaria>
It’s a terrific learning experience for us and our public sector partners as 
we improve what we do best: working lean, nimble, and maximising resources so 
we’re focused on strengthening capacity within the Zambian Ministry of Health. 
We use virtual technical assistance – such as webinars to train personnel – and 
we develop, pilot and adapt tools so under-resourced professionals like Soko 
can accomplish a difficult job more easily.

In Itezhi-Tezhi, where the rains that trigger peak malaria season have already 
started, Tableau’s dashboards are giving Soko new confidence about using 
district data. “This year, we’ll be able to strategise,” she says. “When we 
spray, we’ll know where to go first.”

Jeff Bernson is the director of results management, measurement and learning at
PATH <http://www.path.org/>

 