
What makes someone happy? A famous study 
<http://pages.ucsd.edu/~nchristenfeld/Happiness_Readings_files/Class%203%20-%20Brickman%201978.pdf>
 [pdf], conducted almost 40 years ago, found that lottery winners tend not to 
be happier than other people. Once the initial buzz of winning fades, it says, 
people revert to their normal happiness levels. But if hitting the jackpot 
doesn’t put a long-lasting smile on your face, what does?


Teachers’ morale is never far from the headlines, with almost half stating 
they are thinking aboutquitting in the next five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/22/teachers-plan-leave-five-years-survey-workload-england>
. So what could you be doing to be happier?

Don’t worry about being happy 

An interesting study <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/21517168> found that 
the more people strived to be happy, the less happy they were. Instead of 
enjoying whatever they were doing, they were worrying whether they could be 
happier while doing it (and feeling disappointed when they didn’t reach a 
higher level). Teaching involves a lot of looking ahead, but try to embrace the 
present and not obsess about the future.

Connect with people 

Spending time with others and forming meaningful relationships makes people 
happier. This seems to be especially true for young people; a study found that 
they felt happiest when they wereinteracting with their friends 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1023/A:1024409732742#/page-1> (and saddest 
while isolated). Be sure to nurture relationships and connect with the people 
around you – and encourage your students to do the same.

Value your time 

Evidence suggests that people who value their time over their money are happier
 <http://spp.sagepub.com/content/early/2016/01/04/1948550615623842.abstract>. 
Which is not to say that money makes no impact.A famous study by Princeton 
University 
<http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,2019628,00.html> found 
that once people are paid $75,000 a year (about £60,000), increases in pay 
didn’t bring increases in happiness. This is – obviously – considerably higher 
than theaverage teacher salary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jan/03/teacher-pay-70k-performance>.

But the amount you need to earn to feel happy is probably not as clear cut as 
that study suggests. In his recent book on happiness,Derren Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/sep/23/derren-brown-youre-only-sad-if-you-tell-yourself-youre-sad>
 states: “That magic number seems to vary greatly according to what study you 
read and depends on the cost of living wherever the study was carried out … 
while it remains clear that having less than you need is a source of 
unhappiness, having more than you need does not make you happier.” This is 
because that increase in pay often comes with an increase in working hours, 
whichcan leave people unhappier than before 
<http://www.sciencealert.com/a-pay-rise-makes-us-happier-but-not-if-we-have-to-work-longer-hours-study-finds>
.

Be kind to others 

One study 
<http://sonjalyubomirsky.com/wp-content/themes/sonjalyubomirsky/papers/LSS2005.pdf>
 [pdf] took a different approach to happiness. Instead of focusing on doing 
things that they thought would make them happier, participants were instructed 
to perform five kind acts per week for six weeks. These acts were found to 
increase happiness by providingnovelty 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00224540903365554>; reminding 
people that they were aforce for good 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10902-005-3650-z#/page-1>; eliciting 
positive feedback 
<https://lirias.kuleuven.be/bitstream/123456789/486836/1/33.pdf> [pdf]; and 
promoting positive relationships. Try it in the staffroom or your department 
and look at the positive returns.

Invest in experiences, not possessions 

The problem with prioritising material items is that things change quickly. 
Yesterday’s desirable becomes today’s essential which becomes tomorrow’s 
antique. By prioritising experiences, you create memories that you can carry 
with you indefinitely. It’s a fascinating area of research – you can read more 
studies on ithere 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17439760.2015.1117128>, here 
<http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/17439760.2014.898316> and here 
<http://psp.sagepub.com/content/early/2015/07/18/0146167215594591.abstract>. 
When you’re looking at what to splash out on, consider interesting trips and 
holidays rather than the latest gadgets.

Embrace your bad moods 

Accepting your bad moods may help to minimise the impact they have on you. A 
recent article 
<http://digest.bps.org.uk/2015/11/embrace-your-bad-moods-and-they-may-not.html> 
from the British Psychological Study reported that negative feelings can be 
used in a positive way, by “recognising that anger can sometimes be empowering 
and that sadness can be poignant and can bring us closer to one another.”

This doesn’t mean that stoking your work stress or wallowing in grumpiness is 
the answer, just that we shouldn’t expect to be happy all the time. Negative 
feelings happen, so we should try to learn from them.

Get outside 

A report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/25/three-quarters-of-uk-children-spend-less-time-outdoors-than-prison-inmates-survey>
 released earlier this year found that most UK children spend less time outside 
each day than prisoners. The value of nature can’t be underestimated. Those who 
spend more time outside and feel more connected to naturereport experiencing 
more positive moods 
<https://www.researchgate.net/profile/John_Zelenski/publication/265454280_The_relationship_between_nature_connectedness_and_happiness_A_meta-analysis/links/540f0c8d0cf2df04e75a16f0.pdf>
 (such as joy, interest and alertness) and life satisfaction. It is easy to 
stay inside all day when you’ve got a lot of work to get through, but try and 
make a conscious effort to steal some time outside whenever possible. You will 
feel better for it.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 