
Matthew d’Ancona <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/matthew-dancona>: Grim 
forecasts against bleak Brexit backdrop

Two forces bore down implacably upon Philip Hammond’s first autumn statement: 
the legacy of George Osborne and the prospect of Brexit. There will be no end 
to the austerity that defined the last chancellor’s tenure, no doctrinal 
rejection of fiscal conservatism. Having ditched their pledge to restore the 
public finances to surplus by 2020, the Tories have simply shifted the target 
date to 2025.

Yet the grim forecasts presented to Hammond by the Office for Budget 
Responsibility amount to a bleak backdrop for the EU negotiations:growth down 
by 2.4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
; borrowing up by £122bn (according to the Resolution Foundation’s instant 
sums); and national debt climbing to 90.2% of GDP in 2017-18. Small wonder that 
the chancellor has awarded himself “fiscal headroom” to cope with the 
unknowable pressures that will attend and follow Britain’s departure from the 
EU. His head is already grazing the ceiling.

Autumn Statement 2016: Hammond unveils £122bn Brexit black hole - live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-2016-philip-hammond-brexit-growth-deficit-housing-jams-universal-credit-minimum-wage-live>
There were a handful of measures aimed foursquare at those “just about managing
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/20/just-about-managing-families-to-be-2500-a-year-worse-off-by-2020-study>
” – the so-called Jams: the increase in the National Living Wage, the continued 
freezing of fuel duty, a renewed commitment to raise the personal tax allowance 
to £12,500, the promise of more affordable housing, the amendment of the 
universal credit taper. But Hammond’s passion is productivity, which he 
believes holds the key to economic prosperity, equitably spread, in the decades 
ahead.

Whether he will have the fiscal scope to realise this supply-side vision 
depends in large measure upon the transformative impact of Brexit. But one 
thing the chancellor does not have to worry about – at least for now – is 
Labour. John McDonnell’s response was no more than a litany of aggressive 
soundbites (“six failed years”, “no answers”, “no vision”). It underscored the 
core reality at the heart of contemporary politics: that the government faces 
supremely testing times, and that the government will continue to be 
Conservative.

Martin Kettle <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/martinkettle>: It’s 
complicated – and it’s bad news

Philip Hammond is absolutely right to abolish the autumn statement. It has 
always been a superfluous event in the parliamentary calendar. And it has 
always been much more of a political event than an economic one, unlike the 
budget, which is both. In 2013 I set outthe history and the detailed reasons 
for getting rid of it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/05/autumn-statement-political-economic-george-osborne>
. Now it’s going. Good riddance.

Paradoxically, however, today was just about the one day when something like a 
budgetary statement was in order from the chancellor. That’s because of one 
thing alone: Brexit. Hammond’s statement was a chance to make a first big 
assessment of the impact of Brexit on the UK economy. The verdict is, without 
question, bleak. Growth is down, borrowing has to rise, and the dream of a 
surplus has been deferred to “as soon as practicable”, ie never.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammond-i-will-abolish-autumn-statement-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Hammond%3A%20I%20will%20abolish%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammond-i-will-abolish-autumn-statement-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Hammond%3A%20I%20will%20abolish%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammond-i-will-abolish-autumn-statement-video&media=>
Philip Hammond: I will abolish autumn statement – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-i-will-abolish-autumn-statement-video>
Hammond’s other big problem is that the tax take is falling. All those 
references in his speech to sustaining the tax base are Treasury code for the 
fact that Britain has continued to become a low wage, tax avoiding and 
increasingly unequal economy since 2010, in which there’s not enough public 
money to pay for public spending. That demands either more taxes or less 
spending, or both. Hammond has allowed himself to be boxed in on both options. 
But he gave a very important signal that pensions – and, less importantly in 
budgetary terms, the aid budget – will be cut after 2020, and the pension 
triple lock will be broken.

But this was an autumn statement all about Britain’s uncertain future after 
the dreadful decision to leave the EU. Hammond doesn’t know where this will end 
up, and nor does anyone else. He is sailing in the dark. The immediately 
apparent price tag is perhaps £122bn, but that’s just for starters. At one 
stage in his speech, Hammond made the light-hearted remark that what he was 
saying was “complicated, but it’s good news”. In terms of Brexit, the situation 
is the exact reverse: it’s complicated, but it’s bad news.

Gaby Hinsliff <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/gabyhinsliff>: Nothing for 
those barely managing

Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has never 
been about the showbiz. If chancellors traditionally aim for the reassuring 
qualities of an old-fashioned bank manager, his manner is more management 
consultant brought in to shut their old-fashioned branches down and move 
everything to a call centre.

But boring, he is not. He’s already proved too exciting by half for many Tory 
Brexiters, infuriated by his refusal to pretend that life outside Europe will 
be the breeze they claimed. (You could feel them tensing even as he told the 
Commons that Brexit had changed the course of history; these days they take 
every downbeat economic forecast as a personal insult bordering on treason). If 
his speech glossed tactfully over the worst of it, the bald figures don’t lie – 
and they were enough to make you long for good old boredom, for the days when 
nothing much happened in politics.

Philip Hammond admits Brexit vote means £122bn extra borrowing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
Borrowing up, growth down, public spending shrunken and a “Brexit black hole” 
of £122bn. That’s a lot of things, but boring ain’t one of them. Hammond 
dutifully did his bit for the “just about managing” average earnersTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> promised to help – softening 
Osborne’s cuts to universal credit, freezing fuel duty, raising the minimum 
wage and hammering middle-class workplace perks to help fund it – but there was 
nothing for those barely managing at all thanks to a threadbare social care 
system and creaking NHS. Austerity may have been ditched, with the increasingly 
mythical goal of a budget surplus booted into the distant future, but the pain 
associated with it may simply be moving elsewhere.

In response, John McDonnell started confidently enough; his line that the 
so-called Jams are just an electoral demographic to vote-grubbing Tories but 
are Labour’s “friends, our neighbours, the people we represent” had real sting. 
But before long, MPs’ attention was wandering. These may once have been 
Labour’s people, but it remains unclear what Labour can offer them now besides 
an anguished critique.

Aditya Chakrabortty <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adityachakrabortty>: 
2017 will be particularly painful

Two big things have been revealed this afternoon that will shape all of our 
lives for years to come. The first is the cost of Brexit. The second is how 
economically different Theresa May will be from David Cameron and George 
Osborne. The short take is that Brexit Britain is going to be a poorer, more 
heavily indebted country than even the experts believed even a few weeks ago. 
Yet faced with that horrible prospect May and Philip Hammond will carry on with 
nearly all of the spending cuts planned by Osborne.

Austerity was originally meant to be over within a single parliament of five 
years. It will now last for up to 15 years. It will certainly carry on into a 
third parliament. I will come on to figures in a second, but the big political 
question I have to ask after watching Hammond’s speech is how long he will 
stick it out as austerity chancellor. Either the austerity will go, or he will.

Some of the numbers you’ll know: a Brexit black hole of £122bn. That will not 
be because of Whitehall profligacy but because our national income will simply 
not be growing as fast as predicted before 23 June. Taxes will drop. However 
you voted in that referendum, Brexit constitutes the second major economic 
shock that Britain has suffered within a decade. It will not be as dramatic as 
the banking crash of 2008 – but then look at how that played out economically 
and politically and imagine what the consequences of this slowdown are likely 
to be.

One thing is clear: 2017 will be particularly painful. Growth sharply down, 
employment and wage increases tailing off, the price of food and fuel shooting 
up. Put all that next to the fractious politics: the arguments over Brexit (led 
by none other than Nigel Farage, for heaven’s sake) and the abuse already being 
heaped on ethnic minorities, people with disabilities, anyone judged to be 
“different”.

The puzzle here is how Hammond and May have chosen to respond. Because what 
they’ve given us is Continuity Osborne. All right, so the fiscal rules have 
been dropped. No surprise there, since Osborne had already ditched or missed 
all three of the fiscal rules he set himself in 2015. But Hammond’s 
replacements do head in the direction. He will aim to balance the books, even 
if by some unspecified date. As we saw today, any giveaways will be tiny. And 
the vast majority of the cuts will carry on just as Osborne intended.

Even before Osborne got the boot, it was clear that austerity had not worked – 
delivering a low wage, low-productivity workforce and an economy almost starved 
of investment, debt levels remaining high and a recovery reliant on house 
prices. Yet Hammond is sticking to it. Is that what the17 million people who 
voted for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 really wanted? Is that what May promised with her repeated pitch of “I get 
it”? And why will it work this time against an economic backdrop even more 
uncertain than the one Osborne inherited? My bet is, it won’t.

Polly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>: The 
chancellor is a fantasist or a faker on spending

Project Fear was project truth. There it is, in that £122bn black hole 
suddenly opened beneath our feet, with grim news in the autumn statement of 
slower growth, higher inflation, weaker tax take and soaring borrowing. That’s 
what Brexit really means, before it’s even begun.

The chancellor’s tombstone aspect is well suited to warning the country of the 
path we have set out on. This is the day history books will mark Britain’s 
self-inflicted downward trajectory, as theOffice for Budget Responsibility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/office-for-budget-responsibility> says 
the referendum decision is causing 2.4% lower growth.

But within that wretched prognosis, within the fiscal straitjacket the 
government has chosen, politics continues as usual. Never forget the multitude 
of tax-and-spend choices a government can make, whatever the circumstances. The 
choices of the last six years are unchanged, the brunt borne by the bottom 
half, while the top half – more likely to consist of Tory voters – is protected.

Expect to hear less about the Jams from Theresa May, who promised: “When it 
comes to tax, we’ll prioritise not the wealthy but you.” Who? The £4.5bn income 
tax thresholds go almost entirely to higher earners. Cuts in universal credit 
have been only slightly eased. The size of the state continues to shrink.

Despite his sombre demeanour, the chancellor is either a fantasist or a faker 
on spending. No more for the NHS or social care? He will get a rude awakening 
as both services implode for lack of beds and staff as units and homes close. 
Ill-timed new NHS re-disorganisations around the country will see outbreaks of 
protest, not least from Tory MPs. Imagine what some of Hammond’s £12bn cut in 
corporation tax might have done to ease the pressure.

The great political question is whether this financial squeeze and eruptions 
within health and social care remind people of the bigred bus lie of £350m a 
week for the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
? There may be a wave of indignation against the Brexiters, who lied about what 
the impact might be.

Key points of the autumn statement – at a glance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/key-points-autumn-statement-at-a-glance> 