
“Imagine being unable to talk to your family, or even to tell the waiter you 
want coffee. That’s the daily frustration faced by 367,000 people in the UK 
living with aphasia,” says Professor Jane Marshall, director of the MSc in 
advanced practice in health and social care (Speech Language and Communication) 
at City, University of London

Our ability to speak is so integral to our everyday lives that when it is 
taken away it can make normal tasks increasingly difficult. One of the 
conditions which can cause this loss of speech is known as aphasia, and is the 
focus of an impressive stream of work in the division of Speech and Language 
Communication Science (LCS) in the school of health sciences and centre for 
Human Computer Interaction Design (HCID) in the School of Mathematics, Computer 
Science & Engineering at City.

Commonly occurring following a stroke, aphasia is a condition that affects the 
brain and leads to problems using language correctly. Often affecting older 
people, aphasia can result in difficulty remembering words to losing the 
ability to speak, read or write.

One of the projects at City that is working to help people is Eva Park, a 
multi-user virtual world designed in collaboration between LCS, HCID and five 
people with the condition. Funded by the Stroke Association and a finalist in 
theTech4Good <http://www.tech4goodawards.com/> Awards, which celebrates 
innovation in technology that makes the world a better place, for an hour a day 
over five weeks this year the project has provided a space where people with 
the condition can receive supported conversation from support workers – most of 
which were speech and language therapists – in a variety of different locations 
enabling them to practice social conversation and gain confidence.

Examples included everyday things that many of us take for granted but which 
many with aphasia struggle such as ordering a food at a restaurant or a coffee 
in café, to calling the police in an emergency.

The project has been a great success for the 20 people involved, with one 
participant – called John – even ordering a cup of tea in a restaurant for the 
first time since his stroke following his last day in Eva Park. Others have 
also praised it, saying that the experience was fantastic and helped improve 
not only their speech but their confidence including when going to places such 
as the bank. Others also said that “I just really enjoy it. I wish my daughter 
would come and see.”

Another project has also focused on delivering therapy remotely via commonly 
accessible programmes such as Skype and FaceTime, enabling therapy to be 
delivered to those who cannot receive treatment in their local area.

Speech therapy improves the ability to speak and produce words, but many 
people with aphasia receive insufficient treatment because health services are 
overstretched. This is a major problem since aphasia can lead to unemployment, 
depression and social isolation. Also, many patients can’t easily attend 
appointments because of physical disabilities or distance, and there aren’t 
enough therapists to visit everyone at home.

Involving 21 participants with aphasia following stroke, the remote therapy 
project team conducted a feasibility trial comparing face-to-face and remotely 
delivered word finding therapy. The participants found the technology easy to 
use, and the study found that using such applications achieved the same 
outcomes as traditional therapy.

“The study shows that speech therapy need not be restricted to face-to-face 
meetings. Video chat apps such as Skype can enable effective therapy to be 
delivered remotely, and so help people regain the ability to speak, which is so 
fundamental to our lives,” says Dr Celia Woolf, director of the City Aphasia 
Research Clinic. “This finding could democratise the delivery of therapy, and 
make treatment available to individuals who were previously excluded from help.”

Other initiatives such as the Communicate project are also focusing on 
different strands and aim to deliver technology-enhanced therapies. This 
includes using text-to-speech software and e-readers to help participants 
resume reading activities, including reading websites, correspondence and 
novels. In addition to this a community computer course run by staff and 
students called Split (Speech and Language Information Technology) also helped 
people who have developed aphasia following a stroke to improve their IT skills 
and gain access to much of the technology society takes for granted.

Led by Dr Madeline Cruice, Tess Lancashire and Sukhpreet Aujla, during the 
Split course 18 people from the local community with aphasia worked one-on-one 
with City speech and language therapy students for up to two hours a week on 
how to engage with technology. People learned basic skills on computers such as 
using Word, writing emails, browsing the web, watching videos on YouTube, 
exploring Facebook and also talking to relatives on Skype. The team also ran 
drop-in sessions over the 10-week course to trouble-shoot and provide more 
learning time.

“The project was a fantastic success as it enabled us to get to know a lot of 
people with aphasia in the local community, while also highlighting the 
importance of a good quality of life and the services that universities can 
provide to the local community,” says Dr Madeline Cruice, senior lecturer in 
language and communication science at City. “Many of the participants had never 
used computers or mobile technology before, and as IT is now such an important 
part of everyday life it was great to be able to provide a platform for 
learning at City University London that could benefit the community and people 
with aphasia.”

Gareth Jones, one of the people with aphasia who took part in Split, found the 
project really useful. “As the project is run by people with aphasia for people 
with aphasia, we avoided a lot of explanation and they already know where 
you’re coming from as they’ve been there themselves,” he said.

As a result, technology can clearly play a large role in the future of 
therapy, democratising it and enabling it to reach far more people, and 
researchers from across City are making significant strides towards developing 
tools for the hundreds of thousands of those with aphasia in the UK.

“The potential of technology for delivering therapy to people who have aphasia 
is huge,” said Stephanie Wilson, a reader in human-computer interaction at 
City. “The increase in the use of applications in recent years can enable far 
more people to have access to therapy than was previously possible. As a 
result, our multidisciplinary approach could help improve outcomes for those 
affected by aphasia following a stroke.”


 * City, University of London delivers a Postgraduate Diploma and MSc in 
Speech and Language Therapy 
<http://www.city.ac.uk/courses/postgraduate/speech-and-language-therapy#course-detail=0>
.  