
Brits piled on the debt in the run-up to Christmas, official data showed this 
week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>
, and some of us will inevitably be left nursing a pretty nasty financial 
hangover.

The total amount owed on the nation’s credit cards rose to a record £66.7bn in 
November 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/documents/mc/2016/nov/moneyandcredit.pdf>
, the Bank of England said, helped along by Black Friday on 25 November and 
Cyber Monday on 28 November.

Meanwhile, the charity National Debtline this week revealed it is expecting 
its busiest January “in years” 
<http://www.moneyadvicetrust.org/media/news/Pages/Budgeting-call-as-households-fear-difficult-January-ahead.aspx>
 as households recover from Christmas (over)spending, with its research 
suggesting that 2.5 million people are likely to look for help or advice.

If you are in financial difficulty then seek free advice from somewhere such 
as National Debtline (see below) as early as possible, but if your situation 
isn’t so dire there may be another remedy for your Christmas debt hangover.

Sign up for a 0% balance transfer deal

Many people with existing credit and store card debt could save hundreds by 
switching these balances to a provider offering a better rate.

The good news for consumers is that something of a credit card war has broken 
out, and you can now get balance transfer deals offering 0% interest for 42 
months or more. However, some people may feel uneasy about the fact that card 
companies are offering cash sweeteners in a bid to encourage people to sign up, 
presumably in the knowledge that a proportion will end up breaching the terms 
and conditions of the offer – for example, they will be late with a monthly 
payment or exceed their credit limit and as a result will be saddled with 
paying the standard 18%-20% interest rate instead.

Barclaycard, Sainsbury’s and nuba (an MBNA brand) have all recently launched 
deals offering 0% interest for 42 months, but MBNA itself has gone one better 
by launching one that lasts for 43 months.

The main benefit of a 0% deal is that all of your monthly repayment goes 
towards clearing the outstanding balance, and therefore the debt can be cleared 
much more quickly – but you do need to be disciplined. Also be aware that there 
will often be a balance transfer fee to pay, which is typically 3%-3.5% of the 
amount of debt being moved over. For example, the 43-month MBNA card carries a 
3.29% fee, so someone transferring a £1,000 balance would pay a one-time charge 
of just under £33.

MBNA and Barclaycard are hoping to sweeten the deal by offering £20 cashback 
when a customer transfers £1,000-plus or £500-plus respectively, while nuba is 
offering a £20 Amazon gift card.

Andrew Hagger at financial website MoneyComms.co.uk <http://moneycomms.co.uk/> 
says that if someone switched £5,000 to the MBNA card, their only cost would be 
£144 (ie, 3.29% of £5,000, which is £164, minus the £20 cashback), provided 
they clear the balance within the 43-month period. If instead of moving the 
debt they kept it on their current credit card, which we will assume has a 
typical interest rate of 18.9%, and paid it off in equal instalments over the 
same 43-month term, they would pay £1,760 in interest. So, by switching cards 
that individual has achieved a net saving of £1,615.

“The fact that card companies still seem to be able to make these 0% deals 
work is no doubt due in part to the number of people who ‘fall off the wagon’ 
by missing a payment or exceeding their limit, and suddenly find themselves 
paying interest at 18.9% APR or more,” says Hagger. On top of that, not 
everyone who applies will be offered the advertised deal. Some will be offered 
less favourable terms because, for example, their credit rating will be judged 
to be less than perfect.

Get the best overdraft deal




If you are someone who regularly uses an overdraft, make sure you are getting 
a good deal. If you’re not, think about switching to another account/provider.

Related: UK credit binge approaching levels not seen since 2008 crash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/uk-credit-cards-borrowing-debt-economic-crash-fears>

Authorised overdraft costs vary hugely between banks – some impose daily fees, 
some impose monthly charges, some charge interest on the amount owed, and some 
use a combination of these methods.

Let’s say you have an authorised overdraft of £2,500 that you are fully 
utilising. If you are a standard Barclays bank account holder, you will 
typically be paying a hefty £93 a month (made up of 31 lots of £3-a-day fees 
for an overdraft in excess of £2,000). Someone with the Halifax would typically 
be paying £62 a month (made up of 31 lots of £2 daily fees for an overdraft of 
between £2,000 and £2,999). A NatWest Select account holder, meanwhile, would 
be paying £44.81 a month (a £6 monthly fee and £38.81 interest).

However, many Nationwide customers are paying a lot less over 31 days to 
borrow £2,500 via an authorised overdraft. In the case of a FlexDirect customer 
it would be £15.50 a month (the account has an arranged overdraft usage fee of 
50p a day), while for a FlexAccount holder it would be £37.02 a month (this is 
interest charged at 18.9% EAR).

Some banks offer special deals to encourage you to switch – for example, HSBC 
is offering switchers a six-month interest and fee-free overdraft.

But what about switching your current account if you are overdrawn? Payment 
body Bacs, which runs theCurrent Account Switch Service 
<https://www.currentaccountswitch.co.uk/Pages/Home.aspx>, says you can. 
However, it adds that you will need to agree any overdraft facilities you 
require with your new bank or building society.

Consider consolidating your debts

If you are juggling various costly debts such as store card and credit card 
borrowing, you may be able to save money by consolidating them into one cheaper 
personal loan. This isn’t an answer for everyone, but for some people it will 
reduce the amount they have to pay each month.

Personal loan rates have fallen below 3% for the first time – just after 
Christmas, Sainsbury’s Bank launched a rate of 2.9% APR for loans of between 
£7,500 and £19,999. However, those with a Nectar card will benefit from a rate 
of 2.8% if their term is less than three years. And on Thursday, M&S Bank 
launched its lowest-ever loan rate of 3% APR on loans between £7,500 and 
£15,000 with periods of between 12 and 84 months.

Related: Debt charities urge struggling consumers to seek advice early 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/03/debt-charities-struggling-consumers-advice-early-citizens-advice-debtline>

Financial website Moneyfacts.co.uk <https://moneyfacts.co.uk/> says using a 
personal loan for debt consolidation can potentially save large sums. For 
example, if you had £10,000 on credit cards at 18.9% APR, and made a minimum 
payment of 1% plus interest or £180 (whichever is higher) each month, you would 
be charged £7,727 in interest and retain the debt for almost eight years. If 
you opt for one of the lowest loan rates instead, for example 2.9% APR fixed 
for five years with Sainsbury’s Bank, you would only pay £744 in interest, it 
says.

Hagger, meanwhile, says a credit card balance transfer deal will be cheaper 
than a personal loan, but you need to be financially disciplined to make all 
your monthly repayments on time and ensure the balance is cleared within the 
promotional period.

“A personal loan may cost a bit extra, but it is more structured with set 
monthly repayments being debited and is definitely repaid in full by maturity, 
so may suit some people better if they require more certainty.”

Help is at hand

If you are struggling with debt there are many places offering free advice:

• StepChange Debt Charity <http://Stepchange.org>,  0800 138 1111

• Citizens Advice <http://citizensadvice.org.uk>

• National Debtline <http://Nationaldebtline.org>, 0808 808 4000

• PayPlan <http://payplan.com> (a service financed by the credit industry), 
0800 280 2816
 