
Having decided you would like to move into the voluntary sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2017/jan/04/top-tips-third-sector-charity-job>
, done all you can to prepare, and identified a vacancy that appeals to you, 
it’s time to put together an application.

“Why do you want this job?” can be the most difficult question on any job 
application form.Charities <https://www.theguardian.com/society/charities> in 
particular will be used to receiving a multitude of applications boasting very 
similar answers, so it’s important to consider this fully before committing. 
Can you incorporate your reasons for wanting to move from the private or public 
sector – or to commit to a charity straight out of university – into a 
compelling narrative?

Top tips to get a third sector job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2017/jan/04/top-tips-third-sector-charity-job>
Where possible, anchor your response in specific examples rather than abstract 
do-goodery. Develop a statement of your values into an explanation of why you 
share an affinity with this particular charity and its aims. Perhaps you could 
reference an article, statistic or story to help you stand out from the crowd. 
If possible, back this up with one or two brief examples of how you have put 
these values into practice.

While values are important, charities are going to need evidence of more than 
just an alignment of ethos. Recruiters are ultimately seeking a candidate who 
will help the charity to fulfil its mission by excelling at the job. So make 
sure you state clearly what you, personally, can offer.

Stick like glue to the job spec

Usually recruiters will provide a person specification detailing the qualities 
and skills they are looking for. The idea is that candidates should refer to 
this when filling in the application form or – perhaps less commonly –putting 
together a CV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/15/write-a-successful-cv-dream-charity-job>
 and covering letter.

How to write a successful CV for your dream charity job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2015/sep/15/write-a-successful-cv-dream-charity-job>
Resist any temptation to go off piste with skills you think are more 
impressive than the ones listed as necessary by the employer. Most charity 
recruiters score applications strictly according to the strength of evidence 
that the person specification has been met. The usual place to detail this on 
an application form is in the section dealing with skills and experience. It is 
often a good idea to set out bullet points providing clear evidence of each and 
every quality listed in the job spec.

Exploit your existing skills

Charities may not exist to make a profit, but many of their day-to-day 
operations differ little from those in the private sector. Demonstrating 
professionalism is crucial and you should prioritise that, while showing how 
the skills you have gained so far can be applied to the needs of your chosen 
charity.

If you have a background in sales, chances are you can demonstrate the 
interpersonal skills and experience required for fundraising. If you have been 
a manager, you should be able to co-ordinate a team of volunteers. Charities 
have finance, IT and HR departments – or single-person teams in the case of 
smaller entities – like any other organisation.

If the job you are applying for represents a shift into an entirely new sphere 
of work, it can help to study similar job postings online before filling in the 
form. Other job ads and news of new charity appointments – which usually 
outline a new job holder’s previous experience – might help you identify ways 
in which you meet the essential or desirable criteria. At the same time, be 
aware of techniques you can use tosell yourself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/careers-blog/job-career-how-to-sell-yourself>
 even when the relevance of your skillset is less obvious.

Stay hopeful

Remember, you may already have volunteering experience that you haven’t 
considered putting on a CV or application form before. Have you helped out at a 
school fete, church raffle or local event? Even seemingly insignificant 
experiences can demonstrate relevant skills, as well as illustrating your 
energy and longstanding interest in voluntary work.

But whatever else you do, stay positive. Allow for a few rejections if this is 
a whole new arena for you. If you start to feel you are not getting anywhere, 
take a breath, maybe search out additional advice or consider morepreparatory 
steps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector-network/2014/mar/01/best-bits-moving-career-charity>
 you could take before embarking on another application. Persistence will pay 
off in the end.

If you already work in the voluntary sector and have more suggestions for 
those looking for a job in the sector, leave them in the comment thread below.

Talk to us on Twitter via @ <https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>Gdnvoluntary  
<https://twitter.com/gdnvoluntary>and join our community 
<https://register.theguardian.com/voluntary-sector/> for your free Guardian 
Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to 
you on the first Thursday of the month.
 