
Some time ago – for reasons that will become apparent I am not allowed to say 
when, exactly – the American writerAyelet Waldman  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/apr/19/ayelet-waldman-motherhood-an-olympic-sport>
scored some LSD. She did this, not on a street corner or via the dark web, but 
middle-class style, through an acquaintance of an acquaintance, for which 
reason the drug arrived at her home in Berkeley, California, in a 
stamp-encrusted brown paper package whose sender (an elderly professor, she 
believed) identified himself only as Lewis Carroll, a “fellow resident” of her 
town. Mr Carroll had, however, troubled to write her a brief note. “Our lives 
may be no more than dewdrops on a summer morning,” it said. “But surely, it is 
better that we sparkle while we are here.” The bottle he enclosed contained 50 
drops of “vintage quality” LSD, of which he advised her to take two at a time. 
Waldman was delighted. Not to put too fine a point on it, she believed this 
drug might save her life.

‘I was in a dangerous place, doing everything to ruin my own life’

For as long as she can remember, Waldman has been held hostage by her moods. 
When she is up, she is up; when she is down, she is down. These highs and lows 
she has managed over the years with the help of therapy and a number of drugs, 
with which she has had varying degrees of success. At the time of the parcel’s 
arrival, though, she had entered a new and much more scary phase.

“I was so profoundly depressed,” she says. “It wasn’t the kind of depression 
where you fall into bed. I’ve been through that before, and while it’s grim, 
it’s manageable. This was more of a mixed state, a kind of activated 
depression, and that’s a dangerous place to be. I was doing everything I could 
to ruin my own life. I was afraid that if I stayed on that track, I would force 
my husband to leave me, and that I would probably attempt suicide – and being a 
very capable person, I don’t think a failed attempt was on the cards.”

It was while she was in this state of mind that she stumbled on The 
Psychedelic Explorer’s Guide <http://www.psychedelicexplorersguide.com/>, by 
the psychologist and writer James Fadiman, who since 2010 has been collecting 
reports from individuals who have experimented with regular microdosing of LSD 
and psilocybin, a naturally occurring chemical found in a variety of mushrooms. 
Fadiman’s book is certainly not the result of a scientific research project; 
there has never been an officially sanctioned study of microdosing.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa409fadc803de7148fdbb3fdb5192a5e95b6edc2%2F0_266_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa409fadc803de7148fdbb3fdb5192a5e95b6edc2%2F0_266_4256_2555%2F4256.jpg>
 Here comes happiness: Ayelet Waldman at home. Photograph: Barry J Holmes for 
the Observer 
But the people whose accounts it gathered together spoke repeatedly of 
experiencing, thanks to LSD, increased focus and better mood. They reported 
rarely losing their tempers, and becoming more fun to be with. None, moreover, 
had suffered any side effects. To put it simply, they went to bed feeling they 
had enjoyed that most elusive of things: a really good day. As Waldman read on, 
she grew envious. How she needed to have one of those! Was this her glimmer of 
hope? She thought it might be.

‘Within a couple of doses the computer of my brain restarted’

Waldman contacted Fadiman, and received a memo entitled “To a Potential 
Self-Study Psychedelic Researcher”. The protocol was simple. In order to 
participate in his international self-study group on the effects of 
sub-perceptual doses of LSD, she should take a microdose of the drug every 
third day. The suggested dose was a minuscule 10 micrograms, one 10th or less 
of what a person would have to take in order to experience an altered state of 
consciousness (ie to trip).

Meanwhile, she should lead life as normal, pausing only to record her moods, 
productivity and physical symptoms. Did this sound – to be blunt – 
preposterous? It did. Waldman is a middle-aged mother of four who, in addition 
to writing novels, lectures on the criminal justice system (she is a 
Harvard-educated former lawyer). As someone who is law-abiding and swotty, 
nothing in the world irritates her more than hippies, slackers, free spirits. 
Even people who won’t stay on the right hand side of escalators drive her nuts.
Ken Kesey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/aug/06/lsd-ken-kesey-pranksters-film> 
she is not. But she was suffering. She had nothing to lose. Why shouldn’t she 
try it, just for a month?

Having found a supplier, then, she did indeed begin taking the drug, an 
experience she has now recorded in her own bookA Really Good Day: How 
Microdosing Made a Mega Difference in My Mood, My Marriage, and My Life 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/545767/a-really-good-day-by-ayelet-waldman/9780451494092/>
. Its publication is certain to cause controversy. In fact, the madness has 
already begun. When we speak via Skype, a month or so before it arrives in 
bookshops, she tells me that only a few days earlier an excitable reporter got 
in touch to inform her that his editor had given him permission to “drop acid 
with Ayelet Waldman”. (Her response to his question about when they might 
schedule this journalistic endeavour was: “Like, never.”)
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a574800398e51f5298b8cfbd23f0db1a62187e8%2F0_90_1997_1197%2F1997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a574800398e51f5298b8cfbd23f0db1a62187e8%2F0_90_1997_1197%2F1997.jpg>
 Loved up: Waldman and husband Michael Chabon. Photograph: Albert L 
Ortega/WireImage 
Attitudes to drugs in America are – irrespective of those states that have 
legalised cannabis – far from liberal. “Trump has appointed to the Department 
of Justice a war-on-drugs advocate [the Alabama senator,Jeff Sessions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/jeff-sessions-terrifying-prospect-black-americans>
] who is so retrograde in his thinking, he believes the US suffers from an 
under-incarceration problem,” she says. It’s for this reason that she won’t 
reveal when her experiment ended: there is a three-year statute of limitations 
on drugs charges. “Do I think a white, middle-class lady will be high on his 
list of targets? No. But in this crazy new world we live in, you can’t be too 
careful.”

Its reception will also doubtless be muddied by the fact that she is its 
author. In America, Waldman is well known as an acclaimed writer in her own 
right and as the wife of the Pulitzer Prize-winning novelistMichael Chabon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/michael-chabon>, to whom she has been 
married since 1993. When she writes about herself, moreover – and this is 
something she does a great deal inA Really Good Day – people have a tendency to 
respond with unnerving fury.

'My husband encouraged me to embark on LSD experiment because he was 
desperate, too'

Most famously, this was the case in 2005, when the New York Times published 
her essayMotherlove 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2005/03/27/fashion/truly-madly-guiltily.html>, in which 
she declared that she loved her husband more than her children (“If a good 
mother is one who loves her child more than anyone else in the world, I am not 
a good mother. I am in fact a bad mother.”) In the days that followed, ABC’s 
daytime showThe View hosted an unaccountably vitriolic debate about Waldman, 
her neighbours could be heard tearing her to shreds in Starbucks, and her inbox 
filled with emails from strangers threatening to report her to social services, 
the better that her children might be taken away.

Waldman is clever and funny and open-hearted. But as she readily admits, even 
her more sympathetic readers may sometimes have cause to wonder, in the case of
A Really Good Day, which aspects of her behaviour – her compulsion to tell the 
world things that others might prefer to keep private among them – are simply 
the result of her personality, and which can be attributed to her illness. “Itis
 hard to distinguish between them,” she says, almost wonderingly.

Still, she is probably better placed, now, to cope with any onslaught. Waldman 
is no longer using LSD – her experiment really did last for only a month – but 
its effects have, in some ways, been lasting. “I miss its anti-depressant 
quality, and I miss the way it made me focus. It was like Ritalin [a drug 
commonly prescribed in the US to children with ADHD] without the side effects, 
which is frankly incredible. But that month got me out of a dark place. Within 
the first couple of doses, it was like the computer of my brain had been 
restarted. I was still moody. I had some really good days, but there were also 
crappy days, and days when it was just the normal shit. Somehow, though, the 
bad days were not hellish days, and so I had the capacity to work on issues I 
just couldn’t before. Sure, I was hoping for joy. What I got instead was enough 
distance from the pain I was in to work on the things that were causing it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc53f5cf5123b64b3963093f617c82e3163446ece%2F0_144_1964_1178%2F1964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20dropping%20acid%20saved%20my%20life&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fhow-dropping-acid-saved-my-life-ayelet-waldman-books-depression%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc53f5cf5123b64b3963093f617c82e3163446ece%2F0_144_1964_1178%2F1964.jpg>
 Expand your mind: 1960s LSD advocate Dr Timothy Leary, who advised us to ‘turn 
on, tune in, drop out’. Photograph: AP 
That work continues. “I’m still not on an even keel. I’m still struggling with 
my moods. But I’m committed to that. I’m doing a new kind of therapy that is 
working quite well, even if not quite so well as it might be if I was still 
microdosing.” If someone sends her a mean tweet in the coming weeks, she is 
unlikely to respond as venomously as she might once have done, or even at all.

Given its benign effect on her, why didn’t she just find herself a new 
supplier, and continue taking it? There were, she says, two reasons. The first 
was her complete inability to purchase illegal drugs: towards the end of her 
book, she describes how, having made contact by text with a dealer, she panics, 
having convinced herself that “Lucy” is a police informant. The second was her 
determination to write a book about her experience: for that to be safe, she 
had to no longer be using.

“If I could have overcome those things, there is no doubt in my mind that I 
would have carried on. Of course, it might not have kept working; I’ve been on 
medication before that seemed to be working, and then wasn’t. But if it was to 
be made legal, I’d be the first in the queue, and I periodically remind myself 
that, if I get desperate again, I do have the option.”

Her book is well-researched and, in the matter of LSD itself, careful and 
no-nonsense. The drug, a variation on the ergotamine molecule (ergot is the 
fungus responsible for the disease known in the Middle Ages as St Anthony’s 
Fire) which was first synthesised in Basel in 1938 byDr Albert Hofmann 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2008/apr/30/drugs.chemistry>, has, she 
argues, an undeservedly bad reputation. The scare stories it trails – of young 
men and women whose LSD hallucinations lead them to jump off high buildings – 
have little basis in reality. Rather, they are largely the result of 
conservative America’s response to the 1960s counterculture, toTimothy Leary 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Timothy_Leary>’s suggestion that people “turn 
on, tune in, drop out”. Twenty million people have used it in the US, and 
millions more around the world, with no ill effects at all.

It’s complicated, but when it comes to the drug’s possible use in the 
treatment of mental illness, what you need to know is that LSD stimulates the 
5-HT2A serotonin receptor, which in turn leads to the stimulation both of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), something a pharmacologist described 
to her as “like Miracle-Gro for the brain… It stimulates growth, connections, 
and activity”, and of glutamate, the neurotransmitter most responsible for 
brain functions, such as cognition, learning and memory. (Hence its supposed 
new-found popularity in Silicon Valley, though Waldman thinks that, in reality, 
there are more magazine articles about tech dudes using LSD than there are, 
well, tech dudes using LSD: “If there were some mass secret movement, it would 
have been a lot easier for to get hold of my drugs.”)

She believes that during her experiment her neuroplasticity was enhanced, and 
that this didn’t only enable her to work for hours at a time, to achieve a real 
sense of “flow” at her desk, but that it also made her happier and less 
impulsive. What little research has been done backs her up – a study at 
Imperial College London showed that even a single dose of LSD “produced robust 
psychological effects” – though scientists still don’t fully understand the 
relationship between what happens in the brain, and the psyche.

Why isn’t more research carried out? The simple truth is that LSD still 
carries with it a lot of leftover political baggage. During the writing of her 
book, the few researchers sanctioned by the FDA (Food & Drug Administration) 
who are out there were reluctant to allow Waldman to quote them, fearing that 
to associate themselves with a “personal experiment” would tarnish their 
hard-won credibility.

So far, so good. However, when her book is on more personal territory, as it 
frequently is, Waldman is vastly less cautious, and for the reader – 
especially, perhaps, the British reader – this can be, well, excruciating. “I 
know!” she says, when I tell her this. “Can you imagine what it would be like 
for me if I lived in London?” Chabon, a feminist with whom she shares the 
childcare, has the power of veto over everything she writes. But because he’s a 
writer, too, this seems not to be something he often invokes. InA Really Good 
Day, nothing is out of bounds, from their agonising couples therapy (“My 
husband’s eyes filled… I collapsed in his arms, crying so hard I soaked his 
shirt”), to their sex life (“‘I know you love me,’ I said, as we made love”), 
to their periodic use of MDMA, aka ecstasy, as a way of “opening up” their 
lines of connection. “What we did was talk,” she writes, of the first time they 
tried it, in a hotel room they’d booked specifically for the purpose. “For six 
hours, we talked about our feelings for each other, why we love each other, how 
we loved each other.”

Waldman reveals that her moods can be “triggered” by everything from her 
writerly insecurities, to the dog, to the sound of her husband eating nuts (she 
suffers frommisophonia <http://www.misophonia-uk.org/>, or selective sound 
sensitivity syndrome): “I handed him a handful of almonds, and walked out of 
the kitchen… I heard a crunch, the smack of lips; I felt a wave of anger.” She 
is also fed up that her husband earns more than her, and that she has to share 
his writing studio, which has an uncomfortable couch: “Though he’s welcomed me 
in, I feel like a girlfriend who’s been given a drawer in the bachelor pad 
bathroom.” Poor Michael Chabon. The reader begins to feel he is some kind of 
saint.

“Well, he is somewhat saintly,” Waldman says. “He makes my friends crazy. He 
gives great gifts. He has impeccable taste in clothes and jewellery. He is a 
know-it-all, but then, hedoes sort of know everything. He’s misanthropic, in 
that we [the family] are all he has space for; he doesn’t have any close 
friends, which I think he would benefit from. I was about to say that he’s far 
better than I deserve, but that’s the pathology speaking, because I am a very 
good wife for him.”

Isn’t he ever mean to her? “Yeah, sure he is.” He encouraged her to embark on 
LSD experiment because he was desperate, too.

Before we hang up, I have to ask: does she ever worry her extraordinarily 
intense relationship with Chabon – on Twitter she has been known to post 
pictures of her husband, along with a line informing her 15,800 followers just 
how much she loves him – might be another symptom of her illness? For the first 
time in our conversation, she is hesitant. The gale of her voice drops to a 
light breeze.

“Yeah, I have thought about this. I have said to him: ‘If I were to get 
healthy, would I still love you, and would you still love me?’ There is a way 
that I’ve confused needing with loving. I don’t want to sound like a Hallmark 
card, but love is [supposed to be] unselfish, and in my most internal, whirling 
dark places, I think I need him so badly because he takes care of me, protects 
me, makes me feel safe. One of the things that saved our marriage in that 
[dark] period was when I brutally tried to disentangle those things.”

The upshot is that she thinks, now, perhaps it’s OK to need him. “After the 
LSD, when I was having this intense new therapy, I took a drive one night in 
northern California, where the countryside is very beautiful. I had this 
thought: maybe I don’t love him after all. It was terrifying, and I was crying. 
But then the phone rang, and it was him.” How did she feel then? “His voice 
filled me like a glass of water.”

‘People have been curious, even excited’: an extract from ‘A Really Good Day’

A few days ago, I began tentatively to tell people about this experiment. To 
my surprise, I encountered few negative reactions. Every once in a while a 
listener might arch an eyebrow or smile uncomfortably, as if trying to figure 
out whether her discomfort meant that she wasn’t hip enough, or whether I 
really was nuts. But those have been in the decided minority. Most people have 
been curious, even excited.

Those with histories of mood disorders were intrigued to hear that my spirits 
have lifted, that though I sometimes feel the familiar clutch of anxiety in my 
chest, I am generally able to use mindfulness techniques to make it dissolve. 
When I told them that I have not gained weight and that my libido has not 
withered away, they got really excited. The side effects of SSRIs are so 
ubiquitous and unpleasant that the idea of a medication protocol with fewer of 
them is thrilling.

Friends who incline to the spiritual were disappointed when they heard that 
I’ve experienced no connection to the divine, but reassured when I mention the 
pleasure I’ve taken in the natural world, the tree outside my window, the smell 
of the jasmine beside the city sidewalks. Risk takers and hedonists were 
disappointed that I was unable to provide details of hallucinations. No 
kaleidoscopic colours, they asked wistfully, no feeling that the floor was 
shifting beneath your feet? I live in California. The last thing I want to feel 
is the floor shifting beneath my feet. They urged me to try a ‘real’ dose. It 
would change my life, they said, as though my problem is that my life has been 
too devoid of weirdness. Besides, my life is changing.

Tonight, however, was a different story. These two writer friends are about 20 
years older than my husband and me, which puts them firmly in the boomer 
generation. They were in their 20s in the 1960s. They’ve travelled the world, 
rejected a life of secure conformity in favour of the risks and rewards of art. 
What better people to confide in? I thought.

‘Well,’ I said, ‘I’ve been writing, but not working on a novel. I’ve been 
writing about microdosing with LSD.’

What does that mean, the woman of the pair asked? Are you writing some kind of 
nonfiction article on people who use LSD?

I took a breath and then explained.

Her face froze. If she had been wearing pearls, she would have clutched them. 
She looked horrified, even disgusted, as if I’d told her that I’d taken up 
murdering baby seals. Her husband’s reaction was only slightly less disturbing. 
He smiled uncomfortably and changed the subject. I immediately agreed, yes, the 
antipasto was delicious, and, no, I didn’t want any more.

Their reaction launched a series of cascading anxieties. Will I be condemned 
for doing this? Will people reject me as a nutcase, a crank, a deluded acid 
freak? Will I lose whatever credibility I have in the world? Will parents not 
let their children come over to our house any more, under the misapprehension 
that I keep drugs in my home?

As soon as dinner was over, I tried the technique for dissipating anxiety that 
my cognitive behavioural therapist recommends. I took a few deep breaths, 
exhaling for half again as long as I inhaled. My chest and throat unclenched. 
The anxiety ebbed. I was calm again. I was OK.

Also, I had some perspective. This couple were young in the 1960s, when 
Timothy Leary was spreading the gospel of psychedelic recklessness. For all I 
know, they had complicated histories with the drug that influenced how they 
responded to me. In all likelihood, their discomfort had far more to do with 
them than with me.

A Really Good Day: How Microdosing Made a Mega Difference in My Mood, My 
Marriage, and My Life by Ayelet Waldman is published by Corsair at £13.99. To 
order a copy, go tobookshop.theguardian.com <https://bookshop.theguardian.com>
 