
Last year, a network of health scientists from around the world set out to 
create the most comprehensive portrait of world obesity ever produced. The 
researchers compiled results from 1,698 studies on adult obesity, covering 186 
countries, 19.2 million participants, and spanning 40 years. And they condensed 
it all into asingle study 
<http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736%2816%2930054-X/fulltext>
, published earlier this year in the Lancet medical journal.

And here are the full results, presented in one eye-opening graphic. 


The colour of each country represents its adult obesity rate in the year 
shown. Hover over a country to see what its obesity rate was in 1975 and what 
it is today.


Since 1975, obesity rates have risen in every country in the world, without 
exception. That includes countries like the United States and the UK, where 
food is cheap and abundant, and countries like Somalia and Angola, where 
malnutrition remains an epidemic.

Outbreaks like Zika are distracting us from permanent medical emergencies | 
Gary Finnegan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/dec/28/outbreaks-like-zika-distract-us-from-other-medical-emergencies>
At the low end, North Korea’s obesity rates are up about 1% (from 1.6% in 1975 
to 2.8% today). Japan is also near the bottom with a 2% increase since 1975 
(from 1.1% to 3.3%). The largest changes occurred in smaller Pacific island 
countries. Samoa, Tonga, and Tuvalu all saw their obesity rates increase by 
more than 20%, a doubling of what they were in 1975.

Perhaps the country that stands out most of all is China. In 1975, only 0.5% 
of Chinese adults were obese. Today, China’s obesity rate is about 8%, a 
16-fold increase in the most populous country in the world.

Globally, the average adult today is three times as likely to be obese 
compared to the average adult in 1975.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fusing-data-visualisations-to-help-explain-the-global-obesity-explosion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76135ae9572b9530c56fb674d6d2be8e70241657%2F0_0_4165_4341%2F4165.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%20world%20got%20fat%3A%20a%20visualisation%20of%20global%20obesity%20over%2040%20years%20%7C%20Max%20Galka&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fusing-data-visualisations-to-help-explain-the-global-obesity-explosion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%20world%20got%20fat%3A%20a%20visualisation%20of%20global%20obesity%20over%2040%20years%20%7C%20Max%20Galka&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Fusing-data-visualisations-to-help-explain-the-global-obesity-explosion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F76135ae9572b9530c56fb674d6d2be8e70241657%2F0_0_4165_4341%2F4165.jpg>
 Trends in the number of obese and severely obese people by region. A person is 
obese if they have a body mass index (BMI) of 30 kg/m2 or higher, or is 
severely obese if they have a BMI of 35 kg/m2 or higher. Photograph: The Lancet 
Publishing Group/Trends in adult body-mass index in 200 countries from 1975 to 
2014 


Few other problems exhibit such a clear trend, over such a long time frame, 
across the entire world. In fact, Icreated this map 
<http://metrocosm.com/map-world-obesity/> based on research and maps from NCD 
Risk Factor Collaboration <http://www.ncdrisc.org/map-mean-bmi.html> because I 
think the magnitude of the global obesity epidemic is difficult to communicate 
with statistics alone.

However, the map also illustrates another point about a completely different 
topic, one that is even bigger and further reaching than global obesity – the 
problem of information overload.

The digital universe is growing exceptionally fast. Half of the information 
available online today was created in justthe last two years 
<https://www.emc.com/leadership/digital-universe/2014iview/executive-summary.htm>
. But for that information to be useful to anyone outside of subject matter 
experts, it must overcome a host of challenges.

First, the information must be practically accessible. This obesity study 
represents the work of thousands of researchers over perhaps millions of hours. 
Data visualisation, reduces it all into an intuitive, easily-digestible graphic.

At the same time, data visualisation gives us a frame of reference for 
understanding what would otherwise be cold, abstract numbers. When you read 
statistics about obesity, either as written language or as tables of numbers in 
a spreadsheet, you realise obesity is a problem. But when you watch the story 
unfold visually, you can feel the depth and magnitude of the problem because 
you are witnessing it firsthand.

Finally, for the information to be useful, it must be discoverable from among 
an ever-growing sea of digital noise.Data visualisations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/data-visualisation> are not only 
informative, they can also be fun and beautiful, something that people will 
want to share with their friends.

As the digital universe continues to grow, making sense of all that 
information presents an increasingly difficult challenge. Fortunately, it may 
have an easy solution: communicate it visually.
 