
Paris


Paris bans cars in many historic central districts at weekends, imposes 
odd-even bans on vehicles, makes public transport free during major pollution 
events and encourages car- and bike-sharing programmes. A long section of the 
Right Bank of the river Seine is now car-free and and a monthly ban on cars has 
come into force along the Champs-Elysées.

Delhi

Reports that pollution levels in Delhi matched those in Beijing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/may/08/india-admits-delhi-matches-beijing-air-polllution-world-health-organisation-cities>
 spurred the city to ban all new large diesel cars and SUVs with engines of 
more than 2,000CC and to phase out tens of thousands of diesel taxis. The city 
has experimented withalternately banning cars with odd and even number plates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/delhi-car-ban-licence-pollution-smog>
 and is now encouraging Uber-style minibuses on demand. Other cities 
considering diesel bans are Dublin and Brussels.

The Netherlands

Politicians want to ban the sale of all petrol and diesel cars from 2025 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/18/netherlands-parliament-electric-car-petrol-diesel-ban-by-2025>
, allowing only electric or hydrogen vehicles. The proposed new law would allow 
anyone who already owns a petrol or diesel car to continue using it. Most 
cities encourage bicycle use.

Freiburg

Freiburg in Germany has 500km of bike routes, tramways, and a cheap and 
efficient public transport system. One suburb, Vauban, forbids people to park 
near their homes and makes car-owners pay €18,000 for a space on the edge of 
town. In return for living without a car, people are offered cheaper housing, 
free public transport, and plentiful bicycle spaces.

Copenhagen

Copenhagen prioritises bikes over cars and now has more cycles than people. 
The city calculates that one mile on a bike is worth $0.42 [27p] to society, 
while one mile in a car is a 15p ($0.20) loss. Large parts of the Danish 
capital have been closed to vehicles for decades and the city plans to become 
carbon neutral by 2025.

 Oslo

Oslo plans to halve its climate emissions by 2020 and proposes a large no-car 
zone, the building of 40 miles of new bike lanes, steep congestion charges, a 
rush-hour fee for motorists, and the removal of many parking spaces.

Helsinki

The Finnish capital plans to drastically reduce the number of cars on its 
streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
 by investing heavily in better public transport, imposing higher parking fees, 
encouraging bikes and walking and converting inner city ring roads into 
residential and walking areas. The idea is to make the city’s public transport 
so good that no one will want a car by 2050.

Zurich


Zurich has capped the number of parking spaces in the city, only allows a 
certain number of cars into the city at any one time, and is building more 
car-free areas, plazas, tram lines and pedestrianised streets. The result has 
been a dramatic reduction in traffic jams, and less pollution.

Curitiba

The southern Brazilian city of 2 million people has one of the biggest and 
lowest cost bus systems in the world. Nearly 70% of the city goes to work by 
public transport andthe result is pollution-free air and traffic-free streets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/06/story-of-cities-37-mayor-jaime-lerner-curitiba-brazil-green-capital-global-icon>
.

Bangalore

The Indian city is converting its 6,000 buses to compressed natural gas and 
discouraging the car. So far, says the city, it has reduced traffic pollution 
by about 20% in a few years and one in four people who used to travel by car 
now use public transport.
 