
Jeremy Hunt has proposed a ban on sexting for under 18s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/29/jeremy-hunt-proposes-ban-on-sexting-for-under-18s>
. As any reasonable person might have predicted, this has been met witha great 
deal of criticism <https://www.girlonthenet.com/2016/12/02/teenage-sexting/>. 
Most of the arguments appear to be based on thetechnical practicalities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/jeremy-hunt-cant-use-tech-ban-sexting-stop-cyberbullying-under-18s>
, given how Hunt never truly explained how tech companies are supposed to 
filter specific types of messages on countless platforms and devices based on 
date of birth. However, an even bigger hurdle would be the sex drive of 
teenagers themselves.

One time when I was in school, we’d heard that someone had abandoned a 
pornographic magazine in a nearby field (for any teenagers reading this, this 
wasa common phenomenon 
<http://www.newsbiscuit.com/2010/09/24/nation-mourns-death-of-last-depositor-of-porn-mags-in-hedges/>
 in the era when porn had to be printed). So, obviously, we set off to find it. 
Took a few hours but it was eventually spotted in a ditch. It ended with us 
just staring at it for a while, focussed on cheaply-printed images of naked 
breasts, spattered with mud, rainwater and animal effluent (I hope nobody 
developed any weird fetishes as a result of this,but you never know 
<http://escholarship.org/uc/item/1wc177zt>).

About 10 young guys, spending hours climbing hills and trudging through bogs, 
all for the mere possibility of seeing images of exposed female flesh. These 
are the sort of lengths teenagers will go to for even the slightest sexual 
stimulation, so the idea of some remote authority figure saying “stop that” 
making them reconsider their actions is ludicrous in the extreme.

This isn’t meant to ignore the issue. Teenage sexting is obviously prevalent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/10/sexting-becoming-the-norm-for-teens-warn-child-protection-experts>
, and we have no real idea how this affect long-term psychosexual development; 
we’ve never had a generation of humans who had such easy access to sexual 
material at such a young age before. And some studies suggest that the 
adolescent brain, which is still forming, ismore prone to addictive behaviour 
<http://www.medscape.com/viewarticle/573211_4> as areas like the prefrontal 
cortex, responsible for critical thinking and impulse control, aren’t “fully 
formed” yet <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1196/annals.1440.010/full>. 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc63e8885ea7159ec70a21044f8988735843c661%2F0_138_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%20teenagers%20sexting%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%20teenagers%20sexting%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc63e8885ea7159ec70a21044f8988735843c661%2F0_138_2912_1748%2F2912.jpg>
 You’d think someone with a name and reputation like Jeremy Hunt would avoid 
mentioning sexting in public altogether. Photograph: Mark 
Thomas/REX/Shutterstock 
But studies like this, and the general attitude that they inform (and that 
informs them in turn) do come in for criticism. Our society often has a 
questionable, unfair view of adolescents, regarding them with suspicion, as 
unable to think for themselves,minimising their achievements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2012/aug/22/gcse-results-exams-easier-impact>
 and so on. They’re often treated more like unpredictable pets than, you know, 
people. Studies focussing on the “immaturity” of the adolescent brainregularly 
back up this stance and inform policy, despite the fact that there’s relatively 
little evidence directly linking brain developments and observed behaviours 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2892678/>.

This could be seen as inconsistent. If your argument is that adolescent brains 
aren’t fully developed so they shouldn’t be trusted with anything potentially 
harmful, then technically ourbrains don’t fully “mature” until our mid-20s 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-24173194>. Logically then, every important 
decision and possibly harmful action (smoking, drinking, driving etc.) should 
be restricted to those over 25. Unless I’ve missed a major announcement, this 
hasn’t happened.

Another argument is that this lack of impulse control in adolescents isn’t a 
flaw, it evolved for a reason.Risk taking behaviour rises markedly during 
adolescence, and falls again into mature adulthood 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0273229707000536>. While 
this obviously has dangerous implications, it can alsolead to positive things 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012/01/03/teenagers-brains_n_1182252.html> like 
meeting more people, establishing relationships (asking someone out is always a 
big risk), achieving new experiences and knowledge, and many other things that 
make you a better person and improve your long term prospects.

And then there’s the adolescent sex drive. Teenagers are going through an 
intense and confusing hormonal onslaught as it is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2005/mar/03/1>. Testosterone and oestrogen 
induce the physical sexual changes experienced by men and women respectively, 
butthese also increase our sex drive in the brain 
<http://neurosciencefundamentals.unsw.wikispaces.net/Sex+and+the+Brain.+What+parts+are+involved%3F>
.

Sex is an extremely powerful motivator 
<http://www.appsychology.com/Book/Motivation/sexual_motivation.htm> at the best 
of times, but people often overlook how complex it is. You’ve got the basic, 
animal “urges” that lead to sex drives, but also the more sophisticated 
aspects. There’s the intimacy aspect (sex is a big part of relationships,
something else our brains seek out 
<http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/03/24/the-brain-on-love/?_r=0>), the 
social aspect (men who have a lot of sex are praised for their virility and 
prowess, women…not so much 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/leora-tanenbaum/the-truth-about-slut-shaming_b_7054162.html>
), and countless other influences. All of these would be even more potent for a 
developing, adolescent brain. Despite this, most researchfocuses purely on the 
timing of onset of adolescent sexuality 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3761219/>, which isn’t especially 
helpful.

So, technical challenges aside, the idea of a ban on sexting is still 
ridiculous. You’ve got millions of individuals with an increased sex drive, 
reduced self-control, a fondness for risk and an established aversion to 
authority figures. Even if youcould work out a way to ban sexts among teenagers 
(one clueless politician versus an angry generation that have been immersed in 
technology since birth? Could happen, I guess) that wouldn’t solve the problem 
at all, would almost certainly just result in more teenagers being punished for 
questionable reasons.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01196e81ecee25d17ca3a9264b3ba6939438d388%2F8_1305_3375_2025%2F3375.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20stop%20teenagers%20sexting%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20stop%20teenagers%20sexting%20%7C%20Dean%20Burnett&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fbrain-flapping%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fhow-to-stop-teenagers-sexting%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F01196e81ecee25d17ca3a9264b3ba6939438d388%2F8_1305_3375_2025%2F3375.jpg>
 Smartphones. For work, for play, foreplay. Photograph: Rick Gomez/Getty 
Images/Blend Images 
As sex-blogger Girl On The Net <https://www.girlonthenet.com/> so eloquently 
puts it:

Short of locking them in boxes with no wifi connection, there is no technical 
“solution” that will prevent kids from sexting any more than you could have 
prevented a younger version of me from getting touched up behind the bike sheds 
at school. What’s more I’d argue that “stopping kids from sexting” is a 
misguided goal in the first place. We shouldn’t be treating sex like it’s a 
monster that’s trying to eat our young people: it’s a very common part of life, 
and blanket bans are a poor alternative to proper sex education and guidance.

There’s definitely a discussion to be had about teenagers engaging in 
potentially harmful, destructive sexual behaviours, but dealing with this would 
be a lot easier if policies around sexual issues were consistent and logical, 
and that’s far from the case. The UK age ofconsent is 16 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-24976929>, but the texting plans would apply 
to anyone under 18? So you can have sex with your partner but can’t mention it 
on your phones afterwards? Sexsuffuses practically every aspect of our media 
<https://www.thebalance.com/does-sex-really-sell-38550>, bare flesh is common 
in everyday advertising 
<http://www.stylist.co.uk/life/top-10-most-risque-adverts>, but teenage girls 
get kicked out of school forwearing too-short skirts 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/lord-grey-school-girls-sent-home-short-skirts_uk_5710aab9e4b0636a3f6c7a1e>
. Is it any wonder teenagers are confused about sex and attempts to educate 
them arehit-and-miss 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2015/mar/24/sex-education-uk-teenagers-pregnancy-sexually-transmitted-infections>
?

Logically, the best way to get teenagers to be more diligent about sex would 
be if those in authority started treating them like actual people with thoughts 
and drives and needs of their own, rather than horny dogs humping your trouser 
leg needing a tap on the nose to “learn their place”. Here’s hoping that might 
happen at some point.

Dean Burnett isn’t a sex guru but he’s seen it on the telly. His book The 
Idiot Brain 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=sr_1_1_twi_pap_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1461961162&sr=1-1>
, is available now in the UK 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/>
, USA 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/idiot-brain-dean-burnett/1122688091?ean=9780393253788#productInfoTabs>
, Canada <http://www.harpercollins.ca/9781443450065/the-idiot-brain> and many 
other countries.
 