
The pill was the first drug to be created and prescribed for healthy people. 
Oral contraceptivesbecame available in 1961 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/the-h-word/2015/dec/04/54-years-of-the-pill-on-the-nhs-and-how-birmingham-women-got-it-first>
 and within a decade were so ubiquitous as to gain the pet name of “the pill”. 
Fast-forward to the present: 100 million women will take a form of the pill 
today, right after brushing their teeth or before they go to bed. In fact, 80% 
of women will use oral contraceptives at some point during their lives. Many 
women now start taking the pill during their teens and continue taking it, 
every day, for several decades. The pill has become such a normalised, 
commonplace part of women’s daily routine that it’s easy to forget that the 
pill is actually a powerful medication. But all of us, at some point, will want 
to know: “How does the pill work?”

The pill is made up of a synthetic estrogen and synthetic progesterone (known 
as progestin). These synthetic hormones are not the same as the hormones 
produced by the female body. The pill actually stops the production of those 
endogenous hormones via the brain. It suppresses the creation and fluctuation 
of hormones that make up the menstrual cycle and replaces that cycle with an 
artificial, flat stream of synthetic hormones. The body stops producing its own 
hormones and the pill acts as hormone replacement.

Could an algorithm replace the pill?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/07/natural-cycles-fertility-app-algorithm-replace-pill-contraception>
This process switches off the ovaries, preventing ovulation (the release of 
the egg from the ovary). The pill also prevents the production of fertile 
cervical fluid (essential for sperm to reach the egg). Plus, the lining of the 
uterus does not grow thicker (this uterine lining is what would usually, in an 
unmedicated cycle, become your period). This is the three-fold action by which 
the pill prevents pregnancy. Although women are only able to get pregnant onsix 
days per menstrual cycle <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC27529/>, 
the pill is taken every day to ensure infertility.

The usual language used for describing how the pill works is too often a mix 
of half-truths, platitudes, and a simple fudging of the facts. Understandinghow 
the female body works 
<http://www.socwomen.org/wp-content/uploads/2010/05/fact_4-2011-menstruation.pdf>
 when not on the pill can help us understand how the pill works. However, the 
female body and reproductive health have long been after-thoughts in science, 
as in our society. As a result, the pill has become both a product and a 
proponent of a sexist set-up,creating a gap in knowledge 
<https://www.usa.daysy.me/blog/body-literacy-101-an-introduction/> that gets 
filled with a host of medical myths.

For example, you may have heard that the pill “regulates” periods. The pill 
doesn’t manage the menstrual cycle, it replaces it, and thereforethe pill does 
not “regulate” the menstrual cycle 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?time_continue=91&v=W_fJvM5S670>. When women take 
the pill, they do not experience a cycle or periods. When they take a break 
from the pill once a month or take the placebo/sugar pills and bleed, this is 
not menstruation. The bleed experienced on the pill is a “withdrawal bleed” 
(your body is withdrawing from the synthetic hormones) and very different from 
a physiological period.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_fJvM5S670&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_fJvM5S670>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DW_fJvM5S670&media=>
Why birth control can never regulate periods 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W_fJvM5S670> 
Early pill researchers decided to create the break week (or the few days of 
placebo pills) to allow women to experience a bleed each month. At the time, it 
was considered a good sales tactic to design the pill packs this way; they 
thought women would be concerned by not bleeding month-in-month-out and, as 
such, would be reluctant to take the pill. Today you’ll often hear that there 
is no medical reason to have “periods” on the pill. What is meant is that 
there’s no medical reason to have “withdrawal bleeds” on the pill, and that’s 
precisely becausethe bleeds on the pill are not real periods 
<http://www.hormonesmatter.com/pill-bleeds-periods/>. Withdrawal bleeds are an 
inessential design feature of the pill, but actual menstruation is different. 
There are many good medical reasons to have a period – in fact, the American 
Committee of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) recommends women view their 
periods as “the fifth vital sign 
<http://contemporaryobgyn.modernmedicine.com/contemporary-obgyn/news/acog-menstrual-cycle-vital-sign>
”of health 
<http://cycledork.com/2016/09/02/know-your-flow-what-your-period-says-about-your-hormones/>
.

Part of the mythology that surrounds the pill is the idea that menstruation is 
unnatural. This developed fromthe “paleofantasy” of one doctor 
<http://www.maximhy.com/blog/2015/06/29/birth-controls-effect-on-menstruation/>
. He assumed that, because paleolithic women did not experience many periods in 
a lifetime (presuming they were pregnant often, breastfeeding, and then, of 
course, dying very young) in comparison to modern-day women, it is therefore 
more “natural” for women today to not have a menstrual cycle. It is more 
natural, he reasons, for them to be on hormonal birth control. So, the theory 
is that the pill takes women back to our presumed “natural” state of constant 
pregnancy and breastfeeding (no ovulation, no periods).

The pill is linked to depression – and doctors can no longer ignore it | Holly 
Grigg-Spall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/pill-linked-depression-doctors-hormonal-contraceptives>
But it’s just a theory, without evidence, as we cannot know what occurred 
pre-science, or pre-society for that matter. Anyway, the pill does not actually 
mimic pregnancy; what happens to the body on the pill is more like a chemically 
induced menopause. The pregnancy hormones are estradiol, estriol and 
progesterone, which give many benefits. The pill contains ethinylestradiol and 
a synthetic progestin (like levonorgestrel or drospirenone, for example, as 
there are many kinds), whichdo not give the same benefits 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/17052903>, and actually have many of the 
opposite effects.

Rather than questioning if a biological function is “natural”, it makes more 
sense to investigate whether it is important for good health. It’s interesting 
to note that there are few functions of the male body we consider obsolete, 
unnecessary, or unnatural. I’ve yet to hear a doctor make the argument that men 
might actually ejaculate too much, and as such should avoid ejaculation 
(preferably with ejaculation-preventive drugs), unless it’s for the purpose of 
conceiving a child.

The connection between the menstrual cycle and women’s health 
<http://www.damemagazine.com/2013/07/09/5-facts-about-menstrual-suppression> is 
not theory, but scientific fact. The menstrual cycle and ovulation, 
specifically female biology, allows women to get pregnant and give birth, but 
that’s not its only reason for being. Menstruation and ovulation aretwo 
connected parts of the same biological system 
<http://www.scarleteen.com/article/bodies/get_with_the_flow_all_about_fam>. 
That we ask “do women need periods?” rather than “do women need to ovulate?” 
reveals that theorising around the necessity of menstruation is always wrapped 
up in the culture of period shaming and taboo.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvagina-dispatches-stopping-periods-episode-two-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20two%3A%20stopping%20periods%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvagina-dispatches-stopping-periods-episode-two-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20two%3A%20stopping%20periods%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fvagina-dispatches-stopping-periods-episode-two-video&media=>
Vagina Dispatches: Stopping Periods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/12/vagina-dispatches-stopping-periods-episode-two-video>
Long-term, ovulation is connected to good bone, heart, and breast health 
<http://www.cemcor.ubc.ca/resources/preventive-powers-ovulation-and-progesterone>
. Short term, ovulation is connected to energy levels, libido, mood, 
creativity, partner choice, and more than 150 other essential biological 
functions, from memory to sense of smell to nutrient absorption. While we 
usually ask, “What are the side-effects of taking the pill?”, we could ask: 
“What are the benefits of having a menstrual cycle?” Ovulation and the hormones 
produced via ovulation, their levels and fluctuations, are intricately 
connected to the workings ofthe immune, metabolic, and endocrine system 
<http://www.larabriden.com/ode-to-ovulation/>.

This information can help build our understanding of why the pill has so many 
adverse effects, with just a sampling of recent research revealing that it 
altersthe structure of the brain <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27109356>,
triggers Crohn’s disease 
<http://gut.bmj.com/content/early/2012/05/22/gutjnl-2012-302362.abstract>, and 
increasesthe risk of depression 
<http://jamanetwork.com/journals/jamapsychiatry/article-abstract/2552796>.

When will my periods start? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Rose George
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/06/when-will-my-periods-start-google>
The pill has to disrupt the endocrine system in order to stop the production 
of endogenous hormones. The hypothalamus, the pituitary gland – the brain’s 
control centre for hormones – is what the pill overrides to prevent pregnancy. 
When we hear the term“endocrine disruptor” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endocrine_disruptor> it’s normally in relation 
to other environmental toxins. In the last year nail polish, fire-retardant 
sofas, receipts, pesticides and household cleaners have all made the headlines 
for having endocrine disruptive properties and, therefore, carcinogenic and 
disease-causing consequences. The pill isan endocrine disruptor by design 
<http://www.menstruationresearch.org/2013/03/06/does-it-matter-that-hormonal-contraceptives-are-endocrine-disrupting-chemicals/>
.

During the early days of research for my book on the pill 
<http://www.sweeteningthepill.com/>, I interviewed a GP. I asked him why women 
are so rarely told how the pill works at the time that this discussion would be 
most relevant: in the doctor’s office before getting the prescription. I often 
think of his response, which was: “‘Why wouldn’t you be satisfied with just 
knowing it stops you producing eggs so you don’t get pregnant?” I knew why I 
wasn’t satisfied, because that wasn’t all that the pill did for me – it also 
caused debilitating physical and psychological side-effects. It hadn’t occurred 
to this GP that some women experience side-effects on the pill and want to know 
why and how this happens; or that some want to know more about a medication 
they’re putting in their (healthy) body every day; or that some think any 
behaviour expected of only women, and never men, is always worthy of our 
attention.
 