
What will be the Brexit bill?

Britain’s exit from the European Union will be like many divorces: there will 
be a bitter argument about money.According to the Financial Times 
<https://www.ft.com/content/3c1eb988-9081-11e6-a72e-b428cb934b78>, Britain will 
have to pay €20bn (£18bn) to leave the EU, taking into account the UK’s share 
of the EU’s unpaid bills and pension liabilities. TheGerman magazine 
Wirtschaftswoche 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/05/britain-owes-the-eu-21bn-report-claims-but-is-it-true>
 suggested in August that the Brexit bill could be as high as €25bn.

Government refuses to rule out £18bn Brexit 'divorce bill'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/18bn-brexit-divorce-bill-eu-payment-boris-johnson>
Some officials in Brussels think both these estimates are on the low side, 
although they do not offer alternative figures. The budget is one of the main 
areasMichel Barnier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/27/jean-claude-juncker-puts-michel-barnier-in-charge-brexit-talks>
, the European commission’s chief Brexit negotiator, is focusing on, in 
addition to trade and the single market. But his team have yet to produce their 
own estimate of how much Britain should pay.


How long will it take to find out?

Negotiations on the budget will not begin until Theresa May invokes article 
50, the EU exit clause. Theprime minister has promised to notify the EU of 
Britain’s intention to leave by the end of March 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/theresa-may-to-propose-great-repeal-bill-to-unwind-eu-laws>
. Her announcement will start the clock on two years of negotiations. As money 
is so fundamental, it is likely the final bill will not be settled until the 
end.

What are the issues?

The article 50 talks will be about unwinding EU membership: the EU will press 
Britain to pay its share of unpaid bills and liabilities; the UK is expected to 
seek a share of EU assets.

The EU’s unpaid bills totalled €218bn in 2015. These are IOUs that have paid 
for motorways, bridges and other economic development projects in poorer 
regions of Europe. Unpaid bills have mounted up over the last 15 years, as the 
EU has gone on a spending spree, following the enlargement to central and 
easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Another problem will be agreeing the UK’s share of the EU’s €59bn pension 
liability, which guarantees income for 1,730 retired British officials. EU 
sources say the UK will be on the hook for its share of all pension 
liabilities, not only those of British officials.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbrexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df12f1e4c8594aa708791ffeb92b8e5137cb9bb%2F0_167_3894_2337%2F3894.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20much%20will%20Brexit%20cost%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbrexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20much%20will%20Brexit%20cost%20Britain%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fbrexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6df12f1e4c8594aa708791ffeb92b8e5137cb9bb%2F0_167_3894_2337%2F3894.jpg>
 The headquarters of the European commission in Brussels. Photograph: Getty 
Images 
Will the UK be paying into the EU budget after leaving?

In theory the UK could be required to pay into the EU budget until 2022 or 
2023, because of the time lag between authorising payments and paying the bill.

But sorting out the divorce is only part of the Brexit negotiations. Britain 
will have to pay into the EU budget if it wants good access to the single 
market.

Reimer Böge, a German Christian Democrat MEP who used to chair the European 
parliament’s budgets committee, said countries wishing to participate in the 
single market would need to pay into the common pot. Without such payments, 
British students and British universities would be barred from EU programmes 
and funding.

“Germany, the Netherlands, Sweden and other net payers can never accept that 
they pay the bill for the internal market and Great Britain has access to the 
market without paying anything,” he told the Guardian. “There will be an 
ongoing bill, year by year, to be a member of the internal market.”

He thought it was “a bit premature” to be talking about numbers, because “the 
story is very complicated”.

Although the final bill is not known, one thing is clear: EU leaders will want 
to show there is a price for leaving the EU, while the UK will try its hardest 
to minimise it. With such large sums at stake, there is plenty of negotiating 
to do.
 