
Samuel Gibbs’ piece about the internet of things (How I turned my home into a 
sci-fi dream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/23/alexa-lights-how-i-turned-my-home-into-a-sci-fi-dream>
, theguardian.com, 24 December) omits an important warning: Alexa and Siri must 
never be left alone in the same room. The Bluetooth/Wi-Fi version of scratching 
each other’s eyes out is not pretty, but only Siri has that blood-curdling 
scream.
Tony Waters
Eugene, Oregon, USA 

• Can I ask you to review the use of “to sleep with” when you mean to have sex 
with (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/26/daryll-rowe-man-faces-deliberate-hiv-infections-charges>
, 27 December). It is 2016 and I think your readers can deal with an accurate 
description rather than this 1950s euphemism for sexual activity.
Caroline Pinder
Todmorden, West Yorkshire

• The rich pay £23m for the privilege of rubbing snow into their skins (Perks 
snowball as luxury flat market cools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/snow-cabins-jungle-showers-latest-perks-luxury-london-flat>
, 29 December). Homeless people do it for nothing. Wake up, world. Feel ashamed.
Laura Cunningham
London

• Neither Jem Whiteley (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/27/gender-balanced-in-comedy-is-so-1950s>
, 28 December) nor Judith Flanders (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/28/no-time-for-homes-under-the-hammer>
, 29 December) makes an original point. The Monster Raving Loony Party, many 
years ago, posed the question: “How come there’s only one Monopolies 
Commission?” At the same time in its election manifesto it indicated that the 
way to reduce classroom sizes was to push the desks closer together.
Gordon Atkinson
Shoreham-by-Sea, West Sussex

• Maybe, having explained (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/28/no-time-for-homes-under-the-hammer>
, 29 December) the singularity of “thesaurus”, Judith Flanders could tell us 
why, stepping off the boat at Ostend, you can’t book a quick tour of just the 
one Flander?
Chris Sladen
Woodstock, Oxfordshire 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 