
At the start of this third millennium, sex seems to be all around us – within 
easy reach, on our screens, constantly talked about in the media. What used to 
be concealed, shameful and forbidden only a century ago is today regarded as 
evidence of progress in the freedom of thought. Artists use sex to push the 
limits of creativity:Paul McCarthy’s “butt plug” sculpture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/20/paul-mccarthy-butt-plug-sculpture-paris-rightwing-backlash>
, for example, was installed at the Place Vendôme in Paris in 2014, even though 
it provoked outrage among residents.

Graphic sex: intimate cartoon history of sex translated into English
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/sep/27/graphic-sex-intimate-cartoon-history-of-sex-translated-into-english-the-story-of-sex>
The sexual metaphor is ever-present. Paradoxically, however, sex is rarely 
explained and almost never taught. Do you know how our sexual organs changed 
when we evolved from animal to human? When did the first couple show up? Where 
does our sense of modesty come from? Or eroticism? Or love, that most momentous 
of human concerns? What about our earliest customs? Which ancient civilisation 
championed equality between men and women? And why was masturbation frowned 
upon?

Sex <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> is one of those realities 
that for a long time we neither wanted to see nor hear about. The sexual 
liberation of the 1970s – which was, in my opinion, the biggest social 
revolution in the history of humanity – signalled the transition from a 
traditional male-dominated society to one in which sex with all its nuances 
could finally be examined openly and understood. But as sex has dared to 
uncover itself, to live, to speak, we face the challenge of expressing what for 
so long has been kept under wraps. How are we to communicate what so recently 
caused so much shock and outrage?

In the west, the union of two individuals is in complete flux, with a drop in 
those getting married (in France57% of births 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/21/france-population-europe-fertility-rate>
 now happenoutside marriage 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Marriage_and_birth_statistics_-_new_ways_of_living_together_in_the_EU#Births>
); same-sex marriage; and the option of “slices of life”, relationships with 
different partners in the course of a lifetime. But however free our customs 
may be, censorship persists when it comes to the communication of sex, the 
words, the particular way of defining sexuality and the idea of sensuality. 
Literature and fiction have always attempted to push the boundaries of this 
censorship: in the 18th century we had Pierre Choderlos de Laclos’s Dangerous 
Liaisons; and in the 21st, EL James’s Fifty Shades of Grey. But mostly our 
discussions fall somewhere between sincerity and provocation as we attempt to 
understand intimacy and the fullest expression of sexual pleasure.

No history book will delve too deeply into the sexual realm, yet it’s clear 
that history is a timeline of instructions and condemnations about sexuality. 
Each culture, each religion, each era has defined its own normality.

But without learning the history of love and intimacy, how can we understand 
the extraordinary evolution in customs that has led us from an existence 
ordered by family and society, and reinforced by religion, to the freedoms we 
know today? In his collection of aphorisms, Monogamy, the psychoanalystAdam 
Phillips 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1998/10/02/opinion/how-much-does-monogamy-tell-us.html?_r=0>
 says that “most people would not live as a couple if they had never heard of 
it”. In this, he is reflecting the artificial nature of our customs and the 
need for a way to express our thoughts on sex, intimacy and being with other 
people.

Put down the porn and explore real sex with erotica | Mariella Frostrup
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/porn-sex-erotica-erotic-writing>
We know today that human sexuality is not innate: it is learned and 
constructed through the images that society offers us. Even among our cousins, 
the primates, who live in a natural habitat, sexuality is learned through 
experience – young monkeys witness the courting and frolicking of the adults. 
The need for a model is evident: a young chimpanzee isolated from its peers is 
incapable of mating when it reaches adulthood.

Yet there is a fundamental difference: we invented modesty. Humans always make 
love away from the group. This is one of the great problems with sexuality: on 
the one hand it requires education; on the other, culture and religion collude 
to suppress sexual education.

The physician Thomas Beddoes 
<https://www.general-anaesthesia.com/images/thomas-beddoes.html> was probably 
the first person to teach a course in sex education, complete with public 
demonstrations on the differences between men and women, inthe early 19th 
century <https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Hygeia.html?id=xkUgAQAAIAAJ>. 
But in the following two centuries, sex education failed to gain ground. 
Opposition was widespread and aggressive, on the part of the church as well as 
among teachers.

Sex education classes were subsequently written into law, 
<https://www.guttmacher.org/about/journals/psrh/1998/07/school-based-sexuality-education-issues-and-challenges>
 but, in reality, rarely delivered. Sex education is today well establishedin 
Quebec 
<http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/quebec-to-introduce-sex-ed-pilot-project-with-no-exemptions-1.3209189>
 and the Scandinavian countries, where primary school-age children are educated 
about gender differences and roles, as well as sexual orientation. In the 
Netherlands, where acomplete programme of sex education 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/updates/spring-fever/> is delivered from primary 
school, the rates ofteenage pregnancies and abortions 
<http://www.dutchdailynews.com/dutch-teen-pregnancy-rate-among-lowest-in-the-world/>
 are among the lowest in the world.

Pornography makes us ask ourselves: am I sexy enough, am I the best lover?

But other western countries such as France and the UK provide little more than 
a perfunctory discourse on contraception and safeguarding against STDs. In 
France,a 2001 law 
<http://womensenews.org/2015/03/french-official-says-sex-education-falling-short/>
 stipulates three classes of sex education a year in middle and secondary 
school. However, as teachers have no training in this very particular field, it 
is often organisations such as those devoted to family planning that ensure 
these classes go ahead. In most cases, they rarely take place at all, and when 
they do they are limited to the three Ps: “prevention, pill, protection”, in 
other words, information on fertility and STDs. In this educational void the 
internet and porn offer themselves as models.

This is quite evidently the worst possible model, and the reason why a more 
reliable source of knowledge is indispensable, from primary school through to 
the last year of secondary. Theaverage age at which children 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/2010/11/23/one-in-three-children-watch-internet-porn_n_7393532.html>
 are first exposed to pornography is 11. Such an artificial vision of sex has 
altered our most intimate behaviour and has become the frame of reference not 
just for our teenagers but for us all. It makes us ask ourselves: am I sexy 
enough, am I the best lover?

I’ve come of age in the porn generation. Here are some of the problems we face 
| Ellie Olcott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/22/porn-generation-problems-hardcore-pornography-teenage-boys>
Nothing could be more damaging than these images devoid of explanation. We 
can’t stop young people from encountering porn, but a formal, educational 
approach would allow our society to explain its context and prevent 
misunderstandings that could otherwise compromise a fragile or still developing 
personality.

A genuine sex education should take the bio-psychological, emotional and 
social aspects of sexuality into account, should allow children to understand 
differences between the sexes, interpersonal relationships, the importance of 
developing critical thinking, an open mind and respect for the other. We must 
banish negative terms (sin, adultery, prostitution, Aids and STDs) in favour of 
positive schooling that allows children to understand desire, pleasure and 
excitement; the importance of sensitivity in love; the importance of 
masturbation, even. We must understand that everything can be taught, even the 
practicalities of how people live together, and we should start in primary 
school with discussions not only of genital differences but about the 
variations between boys and girls, the significance of love and of respect that 
may help with later relationships, notions of gender equality and domestic 
violence.

Only by speaking frankly, lightheartedly and wide-rangingly about sex, love 
and intimacy can we provide an education that enables adolescents, both boys 
and girls, to begin their lives with a better understanding of human 
relationships.
 