
In his 2015 and, as it turned out, final autumn statement, then chancellor 
George Osborne announced thegovernment’s intention 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/517678/SO_and_AHP_prospectus_13_04_16.pdf>
 [pdf] to expand shared ownership considerably, by building 135,000 shared 
ownership homes by 2020.

Those numbers were ambitious. Since only 41,000 shared ownership homes were 
built in 2010-15, it represented more than a threefold increase.

Shared ownership allows people to buy a share of between 25% and 75% of a home 
from a landlord, usually the council or a housing association, and rent the 
remaining share at a reduced rent. There are slightly different terms for 
shared ownership in England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.

In January, the government rebranded grant-funded shared ownership assistance 
as help to buy shared ownership.

Since April 2016, households in England earning under £90,000 a year in London 
and £80,000 in the rest of the country have been eligible to apply for shared 
ownership properties.

Shared ownership homes leave buyers frustrated and out of pocket
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2015/jul/03/shared-ownership-buyers-frustrated-charges>
A report 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/documents/shared-ownership-ugly-sister-or-cinderella-final/20161013-shared-ownership-ugly-sister-or-cinderella-final.pdf>
 [pdf] by the Council of Mortgage Lenders in October examined the current 
numbers and demographics of shared ownership tenant-owners. It revealed that:

 * About 200,000 UK households live in shared ownership homes. 

 * Shared ownership forms about 0.4% of English housing stock, 1.3% of all 
mortgages held and 0.7% of the total value of mortgages held. 
 * The number of sales varies considerably across the UK, with the highest in 
London.

 * A third of all shared ownership sales are resales, rather than sales of new 
shared ownership properties.

 * In financial terms, about £4bn is lent in the form of mortgages to 
householders buying homes under shared ownership. Almost 75% of purchasers use 
mortgage finance. Of these, 96% of purchasers have at least one person in 
full-time work, 36% are dual-income households and 90% are first-time buyers.

 * The average incomes of first-time buyer shared owners in 2015-16 were 
£45,000 in London, and £24,000-£34,000 in the rest of the country.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 