
One Friday afternoon in late summer of 2014, I walked into a church that I had 
never entered, even though it is just around the corner from my home of 17 
years, in Clapham, southLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>. I 
approached a man I had met just once and asked if I could shadow him with my 
camera for the next year.

Tending the flock: a year in the life of London priest – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/mar/02/photographer-jim-grover-london-priest-in-pictures>
Quite some ask. He was about to go on holiday and, not unreasonably, said he 
would like some time to think about it. The Rev Kit Gunasekera returned from 
holiday with a yes, which has resulted, for me, in two outcomes.

First, it produced my first photo-essay Of Things Not Seen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2016/mar/02/photographer-jim-grover-london-priest-in-pictures>
, which has just been exhibited in the Oxo Gallery, on London’s South Bank, and 
attracted thousands of visitors. The work tells the story of a year of Kit’s 
ministry here in Clapham. That so many have seen for themselves the wonderful 
thing that ministry is, and the profound difference ministry andthe church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/anglicanism> can make in a local community, 
has been hugely rewarding for me. One of my objectives for this whole venture 
was to show what is, for most, “unseen” – beyond those things we typically 
associate with clergy, such as Sunday services, weddings and funerals.

Second, the project has reconnected me with my faith – a completely 
unexpected, unintended, and wonderful consequence of undertaking this project. 
I hadn’t chosen Kit because he was part of the church; I chose him as someone 
who I thought would make an interesting subject for a photo-essay.

Coming into this project I was a “Christmas Day churchgoer” (like many other 
Church of Englandattendees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/17/church-of-england-attendance-decline-30-years-general-assembly>
), at the church where I was married in central London. I went to school with a 
strong Anglican ethos, was confirmed, and was an occasional churchgoer during 
some parts of my life. But church, and my faith, took a backseat as I brought 
up a family and pursued my international business career, which took me all 
around the world.

Of course, an inevitable consequence of my project was spending many hours 
with Kit over 14 months, both out and about in his Clapham parish as he touched 
and enhanced the lives of those that he ministered to, and in our many 
conversations over mugs of coffee in Kit’s vicarage.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe494c1ade67039fd57a0cb08e04f8801c1317e27%2F0_101_2949_1769%2F2949.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20how%20my%20camera%20helped%20me%20re-focus%20on%20my%20faith%20%7C%20Jim%20Grover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20how%20my%20camera%20helped%20me%20re-focus%20on%20my%20faith%20%7C%20Jim%20Grover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe494c1ade67039fd57a0cb08e04f8801c1317e27%2F0_101_2949_1769%2F2949.jpg>
 A pastoral visit. Photograph: Jim Grover 
I got to know Kit and how he thought about his own faith, his relationship 
with God, his beliefs and his ministry. I was inspired by the strength of his 
faith, his trust in God, his resolve and determination (which you certainly 
need as a minister), and his compassion and love, which he so freely shared 
with others. I was also inspired by his honesty and authenticity: while 
documenting Kit’s ministry, one of my best friends lost his wife in a tragic 
accident. I asked Kit to explain how I might reconcile this with there being a 
loving God. He was honest enough to say that some things could not be.

In parallel, I got to know Kit’s parishioners who worship at St James, as well 
as the group of people who support Kit – all full of faith, kindness, 
generosity of spirit, care and consideration for each other (and a knowledge of 
the Bible that puts me to shame). I saw and experienced first-hand the positive 
differences that the church can make in a local community, and the value of 
community that the church can offer to those who seek it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9873d72ae8103b170abd6d4fa6d4d12d85a13a6f%2F0_1_2434_1460%2F2434.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20how%20my%20camera%20helped%20me%20re-focus%20on%20my%20faith%20%7C%20Jim%20Grover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=A%20moment%20that%20changed%20me%3A%20how%20my%20camera%20helped%20me%20re-focus%20on%20my%20faith%20%7C%20Jim%20Grover&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F21%2Fmoment-that-changed-me-faith-anglican-london-photgraphy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9873d72ae8103b170abd6d4fa6d4d12d85a13a6f%2F0_1_2434_1460%2F2434.jpg>
 ‘I saw and experienced first-hand the positive differences that the church can 
make in a local community.’ Photograph: Jim Grover 
I found myself being steadily drawn back to God and my faith, with a growing 
recognition that I wanted this to be part of my life again. I now attend St 
James every Sunday, when I remind myself to be considerate, loving and helpful 
to others; to be kind; to be generous. And I find this weekly reminder a very 
helpful “pause” in my busy life. I have also experienced, first-hand, the value 
and power of prayer.

I’ve enjoyed immersing myself in supporting Kit’s church, seeking to bring my 
business experience to bear to the parochial church council and its finance and 
buildings committees. We are currently wrestling with the usual realities of a 
roof that needs a major overhaul, and a need for funding.

So what was intended to be simply a piece of documentary photography has 
resulted in so much more for me. The reality is that my life has changed: 18 
months ago I would never have expected my Sundays, for example, to be what they 
now are, and I am just so happy with where my life and my faith are now. It 
seems that God does indeed work in mysterious ways.
 