
The amount of tax owed by many buy-to-let landlords will double or even triple 
as a result of changes being phased in from April, it was claimed this week. 
Some landlords enjoying four-figure net annual profits could end up nursing 
losses – and if interest rates rise this will make the situation even tighter.

It was in July 2015 that George Osborne mounted a surprise raid on mortgage 
tax breaks. He announced a cut in tax relief on mortgage interest payments for 
buy-to-let landlords, with the changes phased in gradually between April 2017 
and April 2020.

So what’s happening?
 At the moment, landlords can deduct mortgage interest and other 
finance-related costs from their rental income before calculating their tax 
liability. But this interest relief is being slashed from 100% to zero.

What will happen instead is that the income tax on someone’s property profits 
and any other income sources will be totted up, and then they will be granted a 
“tax credit” worth 20% of the mortgage interest cost to offset against income 
tax, whatever rate of tax they pay.

Some experts have claimed this tax change, which might sound arcane and is 
made extra-complicated because it is being phased in, will have a devastating 
impact on many landlords’ finances. It only affects individuals who own rental 
properties in their own names.

How many people does it affect?
It’s difficult to come up with a comprehensive figure because every landlord’s 
circumstances will be different.

The Treasury says HM Revenue & Customs has estimated that “only one in five 
landlords will pay more tax as a result of this measure”. However, 
organisations representing landlords have rubbished this claim.

What is a fact is that by inflating people’s taxable profits, the change will 
inevitably push some people into a higher tax bracket, without them earning a 
single penny in extra income.
The National Landlords Association says its research has shown that 44% of 
current basic rate tax-paying landlords say the changes will push them into a 
higher tax bracket.

There could be unpleasant knock-on implications for some people. For example, 
it might mean that some landlords with children will be dragged into the “high 
income child benefit charge” regime, where child benefit is clawed back via the 
tax system if a parent has an income of more than £50,000.

Give me an example of how it will work
The table below shows how the tax change might work in practice. It tracks 
what could happen between now and April 2020 when the new rules will be fully 
in place. The table has been put together by Anna Sofat, who runs financial 
services boutique Addidi Wealth, and it is based on a higher-rate taxpayer who 
buys a £350,000 property with a £280,000 mortgage that has an interest rate of 
3.5%. This example assumes a rental yield of 4%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fbuy-to-let-profit-could-become-loss-property-rental-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d8a3038c917188788a089783ce390526d1c5096%2F8_13_632_689%2F632.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20a%20healthy%20buy-to-let%20profit%20could%20soon%20become%20a%20painful%20loss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fbuy-to-let-profit-could-become-loss-property-rental-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20a%20healthy%20buy-to-let%20profit%20could%20soon%20become%20a%20painful%20loss&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fbuy-to-let-profit-could-become-loss-property-rental-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3d8a3038c917188788a089783ce390526d1c5096%2F8_13_632_689%2F632.jpg>
For the sake of simplicity, our Mr/Ms Example’s net rental income (£12,600 a 
year) and the mortgage interest they have to pay each year (£9,800) have been 
kept the same throughout.

As the table shows, landlords can currently offset all mortgage interest 
payments against rental income, but this is gradually being reduced – ie, to 
75% in 2017-18, 50% in 2018-19 and so on. As can be seen, that change whacks up 
the taxable profit massively: from £2,800 now to £12,600 in 2020-21. The 20% 
tax credit which is then applied cuts a bit off the bill, but not enough to 
stop it from shooting up from £1,120 in the current tax year to £3,080 in 
2020-21.

That in turn means Mr/Ms Example’s net profit after tax takes a big tumble, 
falling from a current £1,680 a year to a £280 loss in 2020-21.

However, this is arguably too upbeat in that it doesn’t factor in the upfront 
costs of acquiring the property, including the new higher stamp duty on 
buy-to-lets. Addidi Wealth says it is reasonable to deduct £975 a year from the 
annual net profit to reflect these costs, and once you do that the losses get a 
lot worse a lot more quickly.

If the mortgage is on a variable rate, a rise in interest rates would further 
eat into profits. If we assume the mortgage interest rate gradually rises from 
3.5% to 4.5%, that would also result in a thumping loss, as shown in the table.
“This example provides insight into a previously profitable venture that 
becomes loss-making, that will need to be bailed out down the line, either by 
higher rental yields or large property price rises, neither of which are 
certain,” says Sofat of her table.

HMRC has put together its own worked examples. They include “John”, who has a 
self-employment income of £35,000 a year, plus rental income from property of 
£18,000 a year. His mortgage interest is £8,000 per year. HMRC says John’s 
2016-17 income tax bill is £6,400, and his total income for tax purposes is 
£43,000, which means he is just below – by £1 – the 40% higher-rate tax 
bracket. But in 2020-21 it all looks very different, despite the fact that the 
amount of income John is getting hasn’t changed a jot.


HMRC says that because there is a zero deduction for his £8,000 mortgage 
interest, his total income for tax purposes in 2020-21 leaps to £51,000. The 
20% tax credit is then applied, but John will still end up with a 2020-21 
income tax bill of £8,000 – ie, £1,600 higher than in 2016-17. Also, John is 
now a higher-rate taxpayer, and if he or his partner is claiming child benefit, 
he will be hit by the high income child benefit charge because his total income 
is now more than £50,000.

The new rules that will make it harder to borrow


Tough affordability rules for buy-to-let mortgages that take effect on 1 
January mean the figures will no longer stack up for many wannabe landlords,
writes Rupert Jones.


The new tests will in some cases massively reduce the amounts landlords can 
borrow. For example, someone who would currently qualify for a £190,000 
buy-to-let mortgage could find themselves limited to £150,000 under the new 
regime. Many of those who find themselves in this situation would probably have 
to abandon their plans because they wouldn’t be able to find the extra cash for 
a much bigger deposit, or whack up the rent by enough to bridge the gap.

The clampdown on affordability, which is separate to the tax increases on 
buy-to-let properties, is designed to ensure that borrowers could cope in the 
event of a chunky rise in interest rates. The Bank of England has previously 
expressed concern about the landlord mortgages sector, saying that buy-to-let 
borrowers “may be more vulnerable than owner-occupiers to an unexpected rise in 
interest rates or a fall in income”. Its big fear is that if there were a mass 
sale of buy-to-let properties, this could undermine financial stability.
buy to let market share 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T11:46:56/embed.html>
As a result, governor Mark Carney toughened up the “stress test” that 
buy-to-let mortgage applicants must undergo. From 1 January, lenders will have 
to check that an applicant could still afford their mortgage if interest rates 
shot up to 5.5%. However, this particular stress test will not apply if the 
customer is taking out a mortgage fixed for five or more years, so perhaps we 
will see a bigger take-up of such deals.

While this requirement does not formally take effect until next month, many 
lenders have already introduced tougher criteria. Buy-to-let lenders have 
traditionally required applicants to prove that the rent they receive is equal 
to at least 125% of the mortgage repayments, but in addition to bringing in the 
higher ­interest rate stress test early, many lenders have also started 
insisting that the rent must cover 145% of the mortgage payments.

The tightening in lending criteria will mean that landlords require higher 
rent to support the borrowing

For example, on 23 November Santander changed its rules so that the 5.5% 
stress test rate applied, and the rental cover figure was upped from 125% to 
145%. It was followed this week by Virgin Money, which also moved to 5.5% and 
145%. Nationwide’s buy-to-let division, the Mortgage Works, switched from 125% 
to 145% rental cover back in May, and is raising its stress test rate, 
currently either 4.99% or 5.49%, to 5.5% on 19 December. Meanwhile, Leeds 
building society said it will move from 125% to 140% rental cover, plus the 
5.5%, on 1 January.

Some lenders, including the Mortgage Works, have also used this as an 
opportunity to reduce their maximum loan to value – in its case from 80% to 
75%. In other words, it is now demanding a minimum 25% deposit in addition to 
all the other requirements.

So how will the changes affect landlords? It’s best illustrated with an 
example (courtesy of brokers London & Country). Let’s take the example of a 
property generating £1,000 in rent a month. At present, using a 5% interest 
rate figure and a 125% rental cover figure, a landlord could borrow £192,000. 
But once you increase those figures to 5.5% and 145% respectively, the amount 
the landlord could borrow tumbles to £150,470.

Another way of looking at it is that, still using that first set of figures, a 
landlord wanting to borrow £150,000 would need to receive rent of £781 per 
month. But when you change to 5.5% and 145%, the monthly rent required shoots 
up to £997.

“The tightening in lending criteria, to ensure there is no slip in lending 
standards, will mean that landlords require a higher rent to support the 
borrowing,” says David Hollingworth of L&C. “This should give them better 
ability to deal with changes in costs, and the stress test is designed to 
account for interest rates rising in the future. However, there’s a sense that 
the pressure hitting landlords from different angles, and all at once, will put 
upward pressure on rents.”

The Bank of England has said that in order to avoid existing borrowers being 
adversely affected when remortgaging, the new rules won’t apply to buy-to-let 
remortgages where there is no additional borrowing beyond the amount 
outstanding under the existing contract.


Change of tactics to avoid paying more tax


Landlords are creating limited companies in a bid to avoid higher taxes on 
their rental incomes when new rules on mortgage interest come in in April,
writes Hilary Osborne.


Research from lender Kent Reliance found that 100,000 limited company loans 
were taken out in the first nine months of the year, more than double the 
figure for 2015. Meanwhile the Residential Landlords Association said 40% of 
its members had considered changing their status, but that 80% of those had 
decided it was not the best thing to do.

Michael Wright, director at property tax specialist RITA4Rent, said his firm 
had seen a large number of landlords asking for advice on whether to hold their 
properties in a limited company rather than in their own name.


Holding a property in a company means a different set of tax rules. Instead of 
paying income tax on the rent, the money goes into the company which is then 
liable for corporation tax. The rate is currently 20%, but by 2020 that will 
drop to 17%. For a 40% taxpayer, or someone on the highest rate of 45%, this 
could mean a big saving, although a company does not receive a personal 
allowance before tax kicks in. Mortgage interest and finance costs are 
considered allowable expenses inside a company, so landlords can then offset 
them against their rental income.
buy to let 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-06T12:39:34/embed.html>
Lenders have cottoned on to the trend and are increasingly willing to offer 
mortgages on this basis. Ray Boulger of broker Charcol says: “A year ago you 
would have had relatively little choice of lender and you would’ve had to pay 
more. Now, several lenders are charging the same rate. Some charge a higher 
fee, but if that’s £500 it is not much compared with the savings you will make.”

Setting up the company is inexpensive, with online services charging less than 
£100 to do the basic work. But while the process is straightforward, deciding 
whether it is the right thing to do is not. First, says Wright, landlords need 
to consider whether it is worth transferring any existing properties. “A 
company is a separate legal entity, so if you want to move a property into one 
you have to sell it to it – this may attract the new higher rate of stamp duty 
and, depending on how much the property has increased in value, could trigger a 
capital gains tax bill.” For landlords who have seen big growth in the value of 
their properties, this expense could offset the benefits of the move.

Some landlords will opt to only use a company for any new properties they buy, 
but if they want to take an income they may find themselves liable for tax on 
dividends. Wright adds a cautionary note to landlords who do go down this 
route. “We can’t rule out the government launching an attack on landlords 
holding properties in a company – they may one day say, ‘Why are two homes on 
the same street both being rented out and taxed differently?’” he says.

Stuart Law of Asssetz Property <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> 
adds: “On paper incorporation looks like a great idea. However, when it comes 
to the practicalities we’re not sure landlords will do it. The cost of 
transferring properties means that for many it is simply not worthwhile. For 
new purchases though, it can be worthwhile.”


Kent Reliance says there will be other measures landlords could take to 
mitigate the impact of the tax changes:

• A third of landlords said they planned to increase rents in the next six 
months, by an average of 5.4% (or £571 a year). This will mean paying more tax 
too, and landlords may find that the market will not bear any more increases.


• Transferring ownership would allow landlords to avoid tipping their incomes 
into the 40% tax bracket. But if the property is mortgaged it could result in a 
stamp duty bill, which is based on the share of the mortgage that is 
transferred. There could also be a CGT bill.

 