
Will Donald Trump destroy America?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/will-trump-destroy-america> 
The shock may have started to subside, but the despair is just beginning. For 
non-Americans, the aftermath of the US election feels like being in mourning, 
but perhaps in that detached way we feel when a beloved musician or actor dies 
(and goodness knows we’ve had enough of that this wretched year) – it was not 
our election;Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is 
not our president. And yet it does affect us, not just in whatever economic 
impact is to come, or because the president-elect couldn’t care less about 
climate change. The seeding of fear and hate, the misogyny that has been 
condoned, the attacks on our most vulnerable: this affects us all. It is time, 
therefore, to get to work – even from over here. You could retreat to a bunker, 
but fighting back will probably make you feel better, as long-time activists 
confirm.

“I’ve learned that when society and politics disappoints, I can’t spend too 
long grieving about the dying of the light,” argues the 93-year-old social 
justice activistHarry Leslie Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/the-crown-portrayal-of-history-insult-to-my-generations-struggles>
. “The only way I feel injustice can be defeated is by staring evil or 
indifference in the face and shouting: ‘You won’t have me, I’ll come back 
tomorrow and have another go at you.’ Nobody can live as long as I have and not 
have faced much disappointment and loss. So when I encounter things like the 
madness of Brexit or the election of Donald Trump, I mourn for a short while 
and get back on my bike and figure out how I can lay seeds in the imagination 
of people for them to harvest a better world.” In many ways, he says, “activism 
allows me to give purpose to the suffering I endured along with my parents and 
my siblings. Fighting for social justice allows me to connect with younger 
people, people who are vulnerable, and people who are hurting, and that allows 
me, at 93, to feel I am still part of the human race.”

Volunteering and activism can bring personal benefits. There are four areas the
Institute for Volunteering Research <http://www.ivr.org.uk/> looks at, says its 
research manager Jurgen Grotz: human, economic, social and cultural capital. 
“In human capital, the ones we describe are personal development, such as 
growth in confidence and self-esteem. Young people [might experience] 
leadership roles. It can also result in transferable skills – public speaking, 
how to work in a team. If we look at social capital, especially if people 
become more engaged and active, we look for new networks and friendships, which 
sometimes leads to greater involvement in the local community.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d376c7c1c865eeca87cb0e554e90133a82e53fb%2F0_2587_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d376c7c1c865eeca87cb0e554e90133a82e53fb%2F0_2587_3840_2304%2F3840.jpg>
 ‘As long as there is breath in my body, I will always stand for social 
justice, because one day we will get it right’ … campaigner Harry Smith, 93. 
Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Under the cultural capital category, “we’d be looking for a better 
understanding of identity, and an increased expression of values, a greater 
appreciation of other cultures and interests. With economic capital, depending 
on the activity, it can be linked to better employability.”

Older volunteers are more likely to see health effects. “Some studies have 
suggested that especially older people who volunteer live longer than those who 
don’t, but the question is do they do so because of things like getting out of 
the house and having more physical activity? But certainly wellbeing – the sort 
of outcomes like self-esteem – are reasonably well-documented.”

“Being part of a movement for social change is an idealistic, altruistic act,” 
says activistPeter Tatchell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2016/feb/19/peter-tatchell-attacks-from-the-left-are-incredibly-painful-nus>
, who has been campaigning for 50 years. “You do get an emotional uplift to 
participate in a campaign that changes your life, and the lives of others, for 
the better. But it can be very frustrating and dispiriting when change takes a 
long time to happen. You need to be psychologically ready for the long haul.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&media=>
Protests against Donald Trump continue across US – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/11/protests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
There will be aggressive opponents, and pedantic critics. “That can get very 
demoralising unless you steel yourself to be ready for those brickbats,” 
Tatchell says. What’s kept me going for the last 50 years has been a vision of 
what society could be, and a series of successes along the way. I’ve always 
taken the long view. When you’re up against great historical inequalities, 
they’re very unlikely to be remedied overnight. We need to be prepared to think 
in terms of months, years and in extreme cases, decades. Working together with 
others in a campaign is mutually reassuring and empowering – knowing you’re not 
alone will give you the strength to carry on despite delays and setbacks.”

What has kept Smith going is firm belief. “I am six-and-a-half years short of 
100 years old, so I don’t know how long I’ve got, but as long as there is 
breath in my body and memory in my head, I will always stand for social 
justice, because one day we will get it right. And even I am not there to see, 
it will still be worth it.”

Ruth Bader Ginsburg told the truth about Donald Trump – just as she should | 
Matt Laslo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/ruth-bader-ginsburg-donald-trump>
So what can we do? You may not be able to join or donate to the Democrats, but 
there are other practical steps you can take. Some are extreme – you could 
consider boycotting the US. Some are not so extreme – you could certainly 
boycott Trump’s businesses, such as his golf courses in Scotland and Ireland, 
without experiencing any sacrifice.

You could turn your attention to the US supreme court and send vitamin 
supplements and encouraging words to insist the ageing liberal judgesRuth Bader 
Ginsburg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/ruth-bader-ginsburg-donald-trump>
 (83) and Stephen Breyer (78), and the moderate RepublicanAnthony Kennedy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/04/supreme-court-justice-anthony-kennedy-conservative-liberal-legacy>
 (80), carry on. There is already one open slot, and allowing Trump the 
opportunity to appoint (rightwing) replacements could have terrifying 
consequences. Here are some marginally better ideas:

Donate to Planned Parenthood
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e825eb1115876f909ea1e3e8fdd9acc935e001f%2F0_0_3000_2120%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e825eb1115876f909ea1e3e8fdd9acc935e001f%2F0_0_3000_2120%2F3000.jpg>
 Photograph: Mark Wilson/Getty Images 
How Mike Pence wrote the Republican Planned Parenthood attack playbook
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/19/mike-pence-republicans-defund-planned-parenthood-abortion>
Grabbing ’em by the pussy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 is only the start of Trump’s assault on women’s bodies. Repealing the
Affordable Healthcare Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/10/astrazeneca-us-healthcare-trump-pascal-soriot-affordable-care-act>
, which Trump wants to do, will end free contraception. He has said women who 
have abortions should receive “some form of punishment”, and is against 
late-term abortions (which are usually performed when the woman’s life is in 
danger). He has said he will appoint anti-abortion judges to the supreme court. 
Mike Pence, who will be vice-president, is fiercely anti-abortion, and has said 
he would like the Roe v Wade ruling, which legalised abortion, to be “sent to 
the ash heap of history”.

Congressional Republicans have repeatedly tried to strip Planned Parenthood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/planned-parenthood>, the family-planning 
and education organisation, which also provides terminations, of $500m of 
federal funds – which accounts for nearly half its revenue. With a Trump 
government, they are seriously under threat. If you can afford it, donate to 
PP, to the National Abortion Federation, or to any number of local 
organisations that help women access abortion services – the National Network 
of Abortion Fundshas a list <https://abortionfunds.org/need-abortion> online.

Join the American Civil Liberties Union

The ACLU <https://www.aclu.org/> describes Trump as “a one-man constitutional 
crisis”. It was founded in 1920 to defend rights supposedly guaranteed in theUS 
constitution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/us-constitution-and-civil-liberties>. Trump’s 
proposals, says the group, violate several amendments, and if he attempts to 
see them through, it promises to unleash the “full firepower of the ACLU at 
every step”. Non-US residents can become members and donate.

Support campaign groups

There are a huge number of organisations stepping up their work to protest 
Trump’s presidency and protect vulnerable people. The websitesJezebel 
<http://jezebel.com/a-list-of-pro-women-pro-immigrant-pro-earth-anti-big-1788752078>
 andThe Cut 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2016/11/how-to-donate-to-planned-parenthood-and-other-charities.html>
 have good lists, but you could consider donating to theNational Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People <http://www.naacp.org/>, the Council on 
American-Islamic Relations <https://www.cair.com/>, progressive Jewish group 
Bend the Arc <http://www.jewishaction.us/> and The Trevor Project 
<http://www.thetrevorproject.org/>, which supports young LGBTQ people. Of 
course, there’s a limit to what people outside the US can do for these 
organisations. You can’t go on protests or host events, but you can join in 
virtually – share their information, news and events. Again, if it’s possible, 
what really helps is cash.

Join a protest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7987012407a813b7fed73df3ad35a8880d3efcd%2F0_497_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20to%20survive%20and%20resist%20in%20the%20Trump%20era%3A%20practical%20things%20you%20can%20do%20now&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-to-survive-and-resist-in-the-trump-era-practical-things-you-can-do-now%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7987012407a813b7fed73df3ad35a8880d3efcd%2F0_497_7360_4415%2F7360.jpg>
 Photograph: Andy K/Pacific/Barcroft 
Protests have been held in cities in the US, including Chicago, Minneapolis, 
Baltimore and New York, but also outside the US. There will be a rally in 
Berlin on Saturday , and on Wednesday, a protest was held outside the US 
embassy in London by the organisationStand Up to Racism 
<http://www.standuptoracism.org.uk/>. There will be more. Look out for events, 
especially to mark Trump’s first state visit to the UK, whenever that is. Or 
create your own.

In this new world, now is the time to support fearless, independent journalism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/2016/nov/09/with-trump-victorious-time-to-support-fearless-independent-journalism>
Pay for news

In February, Trump, singling out the New York Times and Washington Post, said 
that if he won he would declare war on the press: “We’re going to open up libel 
laws, and we’re going to have people sue you like you’ve never got sued 
before.” As with other Trump threats, he will come to realise that a president 
can’t do everything he wants (it would be a supreme court decision – another 
reason to be worried about ageing justices). Still, if you believe a robust 
press is going to be vital in the years ahead, it has to be paid for. 
Otherwise, one day, all we’ll end up with is the Trump Times, the Peter Thiel 
Gazette and fake “news” reports on Facebook.

Fight climate change

Trump does not believe humans are responsible for climate change and has 
promised to “cancel” the Paris agreement on climate change and Obama’sClean 
Power Plan 
<https://www.epa.gov/cleanpowerplan/clean-power-plan-existing-power-plants>. He 
has also said he will withdraw all funding from the UN Framework Convention on 
Climate Change. The US is the second-biggest emissions producer after China, 
and if it withdraws from the landmark agreement to reduce emissions, it could 
derail the whole thing. Why should the 192 other countries stick to their 
promises if the US doesn’t? Well, not to be dramatic, but because the future of 
life on Earth is at stake. It might seem futile to forgo that car journey or do 
a bit more recycling when it is predicted that a two-term Trump presidency 
would actually increase US carbon emissions by 16%, but we all need to do our 
bit – and more.

Start at home

If Brexit wasn’t enough of a wake-up call that the left is in serious trouble, 
maybe the US election will be. Now is the time to get involved in politics – 
join a political party, participate in meetings, recruit supporters. Insist 
progressive parties work together and do something to connect with people who 
believe them to be the preserve of out-of-touch, liberal elites. Donate to and 
volunteer with organisations such asRefugee Action 
<http://www.refugee-action.org.uk/?gclid=CKWIgqqHodACFde6Gwodq58CsA>, Calais 
Action <https://www.facebook.com/calaisaction>, and Women for Refugee Women 
<http://www.refugeewomen.co.uk/>. Become a foster carer for unaccompanied 
minors. Stand up to rape culture. Support groups such asHope Not Hate 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/>. True, not everyone who voted for Brexit or 
Trump is a rabid misogynist racist, but these wins allow rabid misogynist 
racists to believe people are behind them. It doesn’t have to be like that.
 