
Local councils have generally responded practically and effectively to the 
financial squeeze since 2010. They have managed matters internally and not 
engaged in a great deal of reaching out to the public. Even if the government 
lifts the cap on council tax rises in an effort to address the crisis in social 
care,as has been reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/12/council-tax-hike-being-considered-to-cover-social-care-costs>
, the pressures on other, non-statutory services are likely to intensify. As a 
consequence of this new financial reality, different council strategies are now 
coming to the fore. But how to discuss cuts with citizens?

Many local government services are at a pinch point. Libraries, for instance, 
took a £25m hit to their budgets in the year to March 2016, and many other 
council services are facingbig cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/08/uk-library-budgets-fall-by-25m-in-a-year>
. The National Audit Office in its2014 report 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Financial-sustainability-of-local-authorities-20141.pdf>
 was complimentary about the way in which local government has adapted. Savings 
have been made through reducing employee levels, selling assets, and making 
other cost-reductions, rather than engaging in fundamental service 
restructuring.

In the late 1990s and early 2000s, some councils held a referendum on raising 
council tax

But as further spending cuts come forward, the NAO expressed a fear that over 
half of those authorities responsible for education and social care spending 
“are not well-placed to deliver their medium-term financial strategies”.

The next phase of managing cuts is likely to be more challenging, and may 
require dialogue with the public rather than behind-the-scenes fixing. Here are 
four options that councils might consider:

1. Vary council tax bands

The first option is to ask citizens to pick up the tab through paying more in 
council tax – by holding a referendum if necessary and depending on whether the 
government raises the current limit of 4%. Liverpool’s mayor is interested in 
this option and isproposing a referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/10/liverpool-plans-citizens-poll-on-proposed-10-council-tax-rise>
 for a 10% increase in council tax. A small number of councils tried this 
tactic in the late 1990s and early 2000s: Milton Keynes, Croydon (twice) and 
Bristol.

How did things work out? A report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/8308/145545.pdf>
 about how to undertake council tax consultation written at the time – and of 
which I was a co-author – identifies some positives: citizens were engaged by 
the referendums with turnouts equal to or higher than in local elections.

The lowest tax option was not always preferred, and the consultations 
generally had the effect of engaging sections of the public in a debate about 
public services. The biggest downside was the cost involved in running a 
referendum. Moreover, the political outcomes can be messy. If a consensus 
emerges for an increase it can help to build support for saving services, but 
if the result shows a divided locality, it can make decision-making even harder.

2. Use interactive budget tech

The second option is a product of the availability of new technology. Councils 
aretrialling a budget simulator tool 
<http://www.local.gov.uk/research-youchoose-tool> which offers a different form 
of consultation. The tool is interactive, people using it are forced to make 
tough choices, and they have a sense of the actual cash sums involved and the 
challenges facing local politicians and council officers. But participants can 
be channelled into an obvious “right” answer; the key decisions having already 
been made so citizens are merely endorsing them. And sitting at a screen 
ticking boxes is not mobilising or empowering. Why would the public want to 
join in this depressing exercise?

Council tax hike being considered to cover social care costs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/12/council-tax-hike-being-considered-to-cover-social-care-costs>
3. Empower citizens

The third option is to find ways of bringing the resources and capacities of 
citizens into both the decision-making and implementation of service delivery; 
“co-production”,to use the jargon. This requires a council to be comfortable 
with giving up more control. But where it is willing to do so, it can be 
possible to construct a more deliberative, two-way dialogue with local people 
and organisations.

The ESRC research project Jam and Justice, based in Greater Manchester, is 
exploring how this can be done 
<http://www.urbantransformations.ox.ac.uk/project/jam-and-justice-co-producing-urban-governance-for-social-innovation/>
. Its pilot projects bring citizens and service providers together at both the 
neighbourhood and city-regional levels. For instance, by pooling their 
resources of local groups, health and social workers have shown they can help 
isolated older people in Stockport more effectively. Citizen organisations in 
other areas too are engaging in discussions about how to match more inclusive 
economic growth with more inclusive governance.

4. Declare war on austerity

Here the engagement with citizens moves away from co-production and towards 
protest. Maybe Jeremy Corbyn-supporting activists in Labour areas will get into 
leadership positions and start to challenge (1980s-style) the need to balance 
budgets, and raise ideological objections to working with private or 
non-governmental providers? It is unclear, however, if Corbyn’s supporters have 
the sustained commitment or capacity for such action.
 