
Our consultation is nearly finished when my patient leans forward, and says, 
“So, doctor, in all this time, no one has explained this. Exactly how will I 
die?” He is in his 80s, with a head of snowy hair and a face lined with 
experience. He has declined a second round ofchemotherapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/03/how-to-get-through-chemotherapy-decca-aitkenhead-cancer-treatment>
 and elected to havepalliative care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/13/palliative-care-social-work>
. Still, an academic at heart, he is curious about the human body and likes 
good explanations.

We need better palliative care, not assisted dying | Zara Aziz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/09/better-palliative-care-not-assisted-dying>
“What have you heard?” I ask. “Oh, the usual scary stories,” he responds 
lightly; but the anxiety on his face is unmistakable and I feel suddenly 
protective of him.

“Would you like to discuss this today?” I ask gently, wondering if he might 
want his wife there.

“As you can see I’m dying to know,” he says, pleased at his own joke.

If you are a cancer patient, or care for someone with the illness, this is 
something you might have thought about. “How do people die from cancer?” is one 
of the most common questions asked of Google. Yet, it’s surprisingly rare for 
patients to ask it of theironcologist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/feb/23/familyandrelationships.healthandwellbeing1>
. As someone who has lost many patients and taken part in numerous 
conversations about death and dying, I will do my best to explain this, but 
first a little context might help.

Some people are clearly afraid of what might be revealed if they ask the 
question. Others want to know but are dissuaded by their loved ones. “When you 
mention dying, you stop fighting,” one woman admonished her husband. The case 
of a young patient is seared in my mind. Days before her death, she pleaded 
with me to tell the truth because she was slowly becoming confused and her 
religious family had kept her in the dark. “I’m afraid you’re dying,” I began, 
as I held her hand. But just then, her husband marched in and having heard the 
exchange, was furious that I’d extinguish her hope at a critical time. As she 
apologised with her eyes, he shouted at me and sent me out of the room, then 
forcibly took her home.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvUBoHrBAsWQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvUBoHrBAsWQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvUBoHrBAsWQ&media=>
 Metastasis: essential facts about cancer 
It’s no wonder that there is reluctance on the part of patients and doctors to 
discuss prognosis but there is evidence that truthful, sensitive communication 
and where needed, a discussion about mortality, enables patients to take charge 
of their healthcare decisions, plan their affairs and steer away from 
unnecessarily aggressive therapies. Contrary to popular fears, patients attest 
that awareness of dying does not lead to greater sadness, anxiety or 
depression. It also does not hasten death. There is evidence that in the 
aftermath of death, bereaved family members report less anxiety and depression 
if they were included in conversations about dying. By and large, honesty does 
seem the best policy.

Studies worryingly show that a majority of patients are unaware of a terminal 
prognosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/the-news-isnt-good-doctors-patients-and-the-confronting-conversation-about-terminal-cancer>
, either because they have not been told or because they have misunderstood the 
information. Somewhat disappointingly, oncologists who communicate honestly 
about a poor prognosis may be less well liked by their patient. But when we 
gloss over prognosis, it’s understandably even more difficult to tread close to 
the issue of just how one might die.

Thanks to advances in medicine, many cancer patients don’t die and the figures 
keep improving. Two thirds of patients diagnosed with cancer in the rich world 
todaywill survive five years 
<http://www.healio.com/hematology-oncology/breast-cancer/news/online/%7B68c032a9-a6a3-459e-8034-3088827269e6%7D/two-thirds-of-patients-with-invasive-cancer-likely-to-survive-5-years>
 and those who reach the five-year mark will improve their odds for the next 
five, and so on. But cancer is really many different diseases that behave in 
very different ways. Some cancers, such ascolon cancer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/breast-cancer>, when detected early, are 
curable. Early breast cancer is highly curable but can recur decades later. 
Metastatic prostate cancer, kidney cancer and melanoma, which until recently 
had dismal treatment options, are now being tackled with increasingly promising 
therapies that are yielding unprecedented survival times.

But the sobering truth is that advanced cancer is incurable and although 
modern treatments can control symptoms and prolong survival, they cannot 
prolong life indefinitely. This is why I think it’s important for anyone who 
wants to know, how cancer patients actually die.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fhow-do-people-die-from-cancer-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac3f2daf54c53d300026664afab216aef101b31%2F0_53_3721_2232%2F3721.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20people%20die%20from%20cancer%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Ranjana%20Srivastava&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fhow-do-people-die-from-cancer-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20people%20die%20from%20cancer%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Ranjana%20Srivastava&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F17%2Fhow-do-people-die-from-cancer-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcac3f2daf54c53d300026664afab216aef101b31%2F0_53_3721_2232%2F3721.jpg>
 ‘Cancer cells release a plethora of chemicals that inhibit appetite and affect 
the digestion and absorption of food’ Photograph: Phanie / Alamy/Alamy 
“Failure to thrive” is a broad term for a number of developments in end-stage 
cancer that basically lead to someone slowing down in a stepwise deterioration 
until death.Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> is caused by an 
uninhibited growth of previously normal cells that expertly evade the body’s 
usual defences to spread, or metastasise, to other parts. When cancer affects a 
vital organ, its function is impaired and the impairment can result in death. 
The liver and kidneys eliminate toxins and maintain normal physiology – they’re 
normally organs of great reserve so when they fail, death is imminent.

Cancer cells release a plethora of chemicals that inhibit appetite and affect 
the digestion and absorption of food, leading to progressive weight loss and 
hence, profound weakness. Dehydration is not uncommon, due to distaste for 
fluids or an inability to swallow. The lack of nutrition, hydration and 
activity causes rapid loss of muscle mass and weakness. Metastases to the lung 
are common and can cause distressing shortness of breath – it’s important to 
understand that the lungs (or other organs) don’t stop working altogether, but 
performing under great stress exhausts them. It’s like constantly pushing 
uphill against a heavy weight.

Cancer patients can also die from uncontrolled infection that overwhelms the 
body’s usual resources. Having cancer impairs immunity and recent chemotherapy 
compounds the problem by suppressing the bone marrow. The bone marrow can be 
considered the factory where blood cells are produced – its function may be 
impaired by chemotherapy or infiltration by cancer cells.Death can occur due to 
a severe infection. Pre-existing liver impairment or kidney failure due to 
dehydration can make antibiotic choice difficult, too.

I am dying and I want everyone to talk about it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/may/12/i-am-dying-want-talk-family-carer-doctors-death>
You may notice that patients with cancer involving their brain look 
particularly unwell. Most cancers in the brain come from elsewhere, such as the 
breast, lung and kidney. Brain metastases exert their influence in a few ways – 
by causing seizures, paralysis, bleeding or behavioural disturbance. Patients 
affected by brain metastases can become fatigued and uninterested and rapidly 
grow frail. Swelling in the brain can lead to progressive loss of consciousness 
and death.

In some cancers, such as that of the prostate, breast and lung, bone 
metastases or biochemical changes can give rise to dangerously high levels of 
calcium, which causes reduced consciousness andrenal failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/07/waiting-list-effects-kidney-failure>
, leading to death.

Uncontrolled bleeding, cardiac arrest or respiratory failure due to a large 
blood clot happen – but contrary to popular belief, sudden and catastrophic 
death in cancer is rare. And of course, even patients with advanced cancer can 
succumb to a heart attack or stroke, common non-cancer causes of mortality in 
the general community.

You may have heard of the so-called “double effect” of giving strong 
medications such as morphine for cancer pain, fearing that the escalation of 
the drug levels hastens death. But experts say thatopioids 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/09/opioid-addiction-appalachia-tennessee>
 are vital to relieving suffering and that they typically don’t shorten an 
already limited life.

It’s important to appreciate that death can happen in a few ways, so I wanted 
to touch on the important topic of what healthcare professionals can do to ease 
the process of dying.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lhGpfWb0eM&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lhGpfWb0eM>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D6lhGpfWb0eM&media=>
 Palliative care at home 
In places where good palliative care is embedded, its value cannot be 
overestimated. Palliative care teams provide expert assistance with the 
management of physical symptoms and psychological distress. They can address 
thorny questions, counsel anxious family members, and help patients record a 
legacy, in written or digital form. They normalise grief and help bring 
perspective at a challenging time.

People who are new to palliative care are commonly apprehensive that they will 
miss out on effective cancer management but there is very good evidence that 
palliative care improves psychological wellbeing, quality of life, and in some 
cases, life expectancy. Palliative care is a relative newcomer to medicine, so 
you may find yourself living in an area where a formal service doesn’t exist, 
but there may be local doctors and allied health workers trained in aspects of 
providing it, so do be sure to ask around.

It’s your life and your death: you are entitled to an honest opinion, ongoing 
conversation, and compassionate care

Finally, a word about how to ask your oncologist about prognosis and in turn, 
how you will die. What you should know is that in many places, training in this 
delicate area of communication is woefully inadequate and your doctor may feel 
uncomfortable discussing the subject. But this should not prevent any doctor 
from trying – or at least referring you to someone who can help.

Accurate prognostication is difficult, but you should expect an estimation in 
terms of weeks, months, or years. When it comes to asking the most difficult 
questions, don’t expect the oncologist to read between the lines. It’s your 
life and your death: you are entitled to an honest opinion, ongoing 
conversation and compassionate care which, by the way, can come from any number 
of people including nurses, social workers, family doctors, chaplains and, of 
course, those who are close to you.

Over 2,000 years ago, the Greek philosopher Epicurus observed that the art of 
living well and the art of dying well were one. More recently, Oliver Sacks
reminded us 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/02/19/opinion/oliver-sacks-on-learning-he-has-terminal-cancer.html?_r=0>
 of this tenet as he was dying from metastatic melanoma. If die we must, it’s 
worth reminding ourselves of the part we can play in ensuring a death that is 
peaceful.
 