
In the nascent field of orgasm research, much of the data relies on subjects 
self-reporting, and in men, there’s some pretty clear physiological feedback in 
the form of ejaculation.

But how do women know for sure if they are climaxing? What if the sensation 
they have associated with climax is actually one of the the early foothills of 
arousal? And how does a woman know if she has had an orgasm?


Neuroscientist Dr Nicole Prause set out to answer these questions by studying 
orgasms in her private laboratory. Through better understanding of what happens 
in the body and the brain during arousal and orgasm, she hopes to develop 
devices that can increase sex drive without the need for drugs.

Understanding orgasm begins with a butt plug. Prause uses the 
pressure-sensitive anal gauge to detect the contractions typically associated 
with orgasm in both men and women. Combined with EEG, which measures brain 
activity, this allows for a more accurate picture of a woman’s arousal and 
orgasm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1010be784b3c0ab49be290c8f795e79cf5dbd9e%2F0_138_3764_2260%2F3764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20women%20really%20know%20if%20they%20are%20having%20an%20orgasm%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20women%20really%20know%20if%20they%20are%20having%20an%20orgasm%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1010be784b3c0ab49be290c8f795e79cf5dbd9e%2F0_138_3764_2260%2F3764.jpg>
 Dr Nicole Prause has founded Liberos to study brain stimulation and desire. 
Photograph: Olivia Solon 
When Prause began studying women 
<http://www.span-lab.com/Assets/pdf/PrauseOrgasm2012.pdf> in this way she 
noticed something surprising. “Many of the women who reported having an orgasm 
were not having any of the physical signs – the contractions – of an orgasm.”

It’s not clear why that is, but it is clear that we don’t know an awful lot 
about orgasms and sexuality. “We don’t think they are faking,” she said. “My 
sense is that some women don’t know what an orgasm is. There are lots of 
pleasure peaks that happen during intercourse. If you haven’t had contractions 
you may not know there’s something different.”

Research could lead ​to a device put on before intercourse to increase 
responsiveness to sexual stimuli

Prause, an ultramarathon runner and keen motorcyclist in her free time, 
started her career at the Kinsey Institute in Indiana, where she was awarded a 
doctorate in 2007. Studying the sexual effects of a menopause drug, she first 
became aware of the prejudice against the scientific study of sexuality in the 
US.

When her high-profile research examining porn “addiction” 
<http://www.socioaffectiveneuroscipsychol.net/index.php/snp/article/view/20770/28995>
 found the condition didn’t fit the same neurological patterns as nicotine, 
cocaine or gambling, it was an unpopular conclusion among people who believe 
they do have a porn addiction.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55b3193df120a8b5420545eb95b77a1432b5e7c3%2F0_158_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20do%20women%20really%20know%20if%20they%20are%20having%20an%20orgasm%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20do%20women%20really%20know%20if%20they%20are%20having%20an%20orgasm%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Ffemale-orgasm-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55b3193df120a8b5420545eb95b77a1432b5e7c3%2F0_158_4752_2851%2F4752.jpg>
 The evolution of design of the anal pressure gauge used in Nicole Prause’s lab 
to detect orgasmic contractions. Photograph: Olivia Solon 
“People started posting stories online that I had falsified my data and I 
received all kinds of sexist attacks,” she said. Soon anonymous emails of 
complaint were turning up at the office of the president of UCLA, where she 
worked from 2012 to 2014, demanding that Prause be fired.

Does orgasm benefit mental health?

Prause pushed on with her research, but repeatedly came up against challenges 
when seeking approval for studies involving orgasms. “I tried to do a study of 
orgasms while at UCLA to pilot a depression intervention. UCLA rejected it 
after a seven-month review,” she said. The ethics board told her that to 
proceed, she would need to remove the orgasm component – rendering the study 
pointless.

Undeterred, Prause left to set up her sexual biotech company Liberos, 
<http://liberoscenter.com> in Hollywood, Los Angeles, in 2015. The company has 
been working on a number of studies, including one exploring the benefits and 
effectiveness of “orgasmic meditation 
<http://nymag.com/thecut/2013/09/i-went-to-an-orgasmic-meditation-class.html>”, 
working with specialist companyOneTaste <http://onetaste.us/>.

Part of the “slow sex” movement, the practice involves a woman having her 
clitoris stimulated by a partner – often a stranger – for 15 minutes. “This 
orgasm state is different,” claims OneTaste’s website. “It is goalless, 
intuitive, and dynamic. It flows all over the place with no set direction. It 
may include climax, or it may not. In Orgasm 2.0, we learn to listen to what 
our body wants instead of what we think we ‘should’ want.”

Prause wants to determine whether arousal has any wider benefits for mental 
health. “The folks that practice this claim it helps with stress and improves 
your ability to deal with emotional situations even though as a scientist it 
seems pretty explicitly sexual to me,” she said.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Vagina%20Dispatches%20episode%20three%3A%20the%20orgasm%20gap%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fvagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video&media=>
Vagina Dispatches episode three: the orgasm gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/video/2016/oct/28/vagina-dispatches-episode-three-the-orgasm-gap-video>
Prause is examining orgasmic meditators in the laboratory, measuring finger 
movements of the partner, as well as brainwave activity, galvanic skin response 
and vaginal contractions of the recipient. Before and after measuring bodily 
changes, researchers run through questions to determine physical and mental 
states. Prause wants to determine whether achieving a level of arousal requires 
effort or a release in control. She then wants to observe how Orgasmic 
Meditation affects performance in cognitive tasks, how it changes reactivity to 
emotional images and how it compares with regular meditation.

Brain stimulation is ‘theoretically possible’ 

Another research project is focused on brain stimulation, which Prause 
believes could provide an alternative to drugs such as Addyi, the “female 
Viagra”. The drug had to be taken every day, couldn’t be mixed with alcohol and 
its side-effects can include sudden drops in blood pressure, fainting and 
sleepiness. “Many women would rather have a glass of wine than take a drug 
that’s not very effective every day,” said Prause.

The field of brain stimulation is in its infancy, though preliminary studies 
have shown thattranscranial direct current stimulation (tDCS) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2015/may/06/warning-transcranial-direct-current-stimulation-bad-for-iq>
, which uses direct electrical currents tostimulate specific parts of the brain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/mar/16/electrical-brain-stimulation-could-boost-benefits-of-stroke-rehabilitation>
, can help with depression, anxiety and chronic pain but can also cause burns 
on the skin. Transcranial magnetic stimulation, which uses a magnet to activate 
the brain, has been used totreat depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/head-quarters/2015/may/18/non-pharmaceutical-treatments-for-depression-magstim-tms>
,psychosis and anxiety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/aug/18/cap-that-treats-depression-check-the-science-before-getting-excited>
, but can also cause seizures, mania and hearing loss.

Prause is studying whether these technologies can treat sexual desire 
problems. In one study, men and women receive two types of magnetic stimulation 
to the reward center of their brains. After each session, participants are 
asked to complete tasks to see how their responsiveness to monetary and sexual 
rewards (porn) has changed.

With DCS, Prause wants to stimulate people’s brains using direct currents and 
then fire up tiny cellphone vibrators that have been glued to the participants’ 
genitals. This provides sexual stimulation in a way that eliminates the 
subjectivity of preferences people have for pornography.

“We already have a basic functioning model,” said Prause. “The barrier is 
getting a device that a human can reliably apply themselves without harming 
their own skin.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWR2VdbwYNs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWR2VdbwYNs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DjWR2VdbwYNs&media=>
 Liberos’s proposed direct current stimulation (DCS) device, configured to 
stimulate the brain areas associated with reward. 
There is plenty of skepticism around the science of brain stimulation, a 
technology which has already spawned several devices including the headsetThync 
<http://www.thync.com/>, which promises users an energy boost, and Foc.us 
<http://foc.us/>, which claims to help with endurance.

Neurologist Steven Novella 
<https://medicine.yale.edu/neurology/people/steven_novella-1.profile> from the 
Yale School of Medicine uses brain stimulation devices in clinical trials to 
treat migraines, but he says there’s not enough clinical evidence to support 
these emerging consumer devices. “There’s potential for physical harm if you 
don’t know what you’re doing,” he said. “From a theoretical point of view these 
things are possible, but in terms of clinical claims they are way ahead of the 
curve here. It’s simultaneously really exciting science but also premature 
pseudoscience.”

Biomedical engineer Marom Bikson 
<http://bme.ccny.cuny.edu/people/faculty/mbikson>, who uses tDCS to treat 
depression at the City College of New York, agrees. “There’s a lot of snake 
oil.”

Sexual problems can be emotional and societal

Prause, also a licensed psychologist, is keen to avoid overselling brain 
stimulation. “The risk is that it will seem like an easy, quick fix,” she said. 
For some, it will be, but for others it will be a way to test whether brain 
stimulation can work – which Prause sees as a more balanced approach than using 
medication. “To me, it is much better to help provide it for people likely to 
benefit from it than to try to create fake problems to sell it to everyone.”

Sexual problems can be triggered by societal pressures that no device can fix. 
“There’s discomfort and anxiety and awkwardness and shame and lack of 
knowledge,” said psychologist Leonore Tiefer, who specializes in sexuality. 
Brain stimulation is just one of many physical interventions companies are 
trying to develop to make money, she says. “There’s a million drugs under 
development. Not just oral drugs but patches and creams and nasal sprays, but 
it’s not a medical problem,” she said.

Thinking about low sex drive as a medical condition requires defining what’s 
normal and what’s unhealthy. “Sex does not lend itself to that kind of line 
drawing. There is just too much variability both culturally and in terms of 
age, personality and individual differences. What’s normal for me is not normal 
for you, your mother or your grandmother.”

And Prause says that no device is going to solve a “Bob problem” – when a 
woman in a heterosexual couple isn’t getting aroused because her partner’s 
technique isn’t any good. “No pills or brain stimulation are going to fix 
that,” she said.
 