
By 2050, drug-resistant infections are expected to cause 10 million deaths 
annually – becoming a bigger killer than cancer is today. By 2050, 
antimicrobial resistance is also expected to cost the world $100tn and could 
push more than 28 million people into extreme poverty.

Misuse of antibiotics in food animals is a major driver of resistance. Farm 
animals consume about two-thirds of the world’s antibiotics, with much of this 
added to feed or water to make animals grow faster or to counter unsanitary 
conditions in factory farming facilities. Between 2010 and 2030, it is 
predicted that antibiotic use in food animal production will increase by 
two-thirds.

In World Antibiotics Awareness Week 
<http://www.who.int/campaigns/world-antibiotic-awareness-week/en/>, we are 
calling on KFC, Subway and McDonald’s to end the routine use of all antibiotics 
included on the World Health Organisation’slist of medically important 
antimicrobials 
<http://www.who.int/foodsafety/areas_work/antimicrobial-resistance/cia/en/>, in 
all of their livestock supply chains. This means prohibiting suppliers from 
using these antibiotics for growth promotion or disease prevention and only 
using them when there has been a diagnosis of illness.

Sore throats to be tested by pharmacists instead of GPs under NHS move
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/sore-throat-test-pharmacists-instead-of-gps-under-nhs-move>
We welcome the progress that has been made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/20/burger-king-kfc-mcdonalds-antibiotic-free-meat>
 by Subway and McDonald’s in North America and urge KFC to follow suit. But 
action in one region will not be enough. Consumers worldwide are becoming 
increasingly aware of the negative health impact of misuse of antibiotics in 
livestock farming. Drug-resistant infections do not respect national 
boundaries. We urge KFC, Subway and McDonald’s to make global commitments and 
develop timetables for action with targets.
Amanda Long Director general, Consumers International, Jean Halloran Director 
of food policy initiatives, Consumer Reports,Catherine Howarth Chief executive, 
ShareAction,Angus Wong Lead digital campaign strategist, SumOfUs, Steve Roach 
Food safety programme director, Food Animal Concerns Trust,Emma Rose Campaigns, 
lobbying and communications specialist, The Alliance to Save Our Antibiotics,
Rosie WardleProgramme director, Jeremy Coller Foundation, Alan Briefel 
Executive director, FAIRR (Farm Animal Investment Risk & Return),Josh Zinner 
Chief executive officer, Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility,Laura 
Rogers Deputy director, Antibiotic Resistance Action Center at the Milken 
Institute School of Public Health, The George Washington University,Anna Zorzet 
Head of ReAct Europe,Leslie Samuelrich President, Green Century Capital 
Management,Steve Blackledge Public health programme director, US Public 
Interest Research Group

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 