
The company behind the HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2> rail project 
has been accused of using Orwellian propaganda tactics after it awarded a 
£280,000 contract to promote the high-speed rail project to children at primary 
schools on the proposed route.

HS2 Ltd has contracted 
<https://www.contractsfinder.service.gov.uk/Notice/32b0f329-6318-4732-8d8c-0ad617cd5d49>
 London-based Hopscotch Consulting to develop an education programme aimed at 
young children.

Primary schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/primary-schools> near 
the route have received an email from Hopscotch inviting them to “come aboard 
Zoom Rail, HS2’s Primary School Engagement Programme”.

Materials for teachers from HS2 Ltd’s existing education programme, seen by 
the Guardian, include an exercise that encourages pupils to assess four 
possible routes for the “Zoom Rail project”.

“With no perfect answer, students must weigh the competing advantages and 
disadvantages, balancing community, environmental and economic factors to make 
the best choice,” the task description for teachers reads.


“One of the four options – Route D – is the preferred route. This is not the 
only acceptable ‘right answer’. However, students who have closely understood 
the opportunities and constraints faced by Zoom Rail as it tries to strike the 
best balance are more likely to opt for the preferred route.”

In one activity aimed at younger children, pupils are urged to create their 
own “powertrain” by cutting out a template of a locomotive and making it move 
with balloons.


Delayed HS2 second-phase route unveiled
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/15/delayed-hs2-second-phase-route-plan-unveiled>
 Whether individual schools choose to use the education materials provided, 
and how teachers use them, is entirely up to the school . But anti-HS2 
campaigners have accused HS2 Ltd of trying to brainwash the children who will 
be most affected by the proposed route for the high-speed line.

“Just when we thought HS2 Ltd couldn’t sink any lower, we find they are 
spending quarter of a million on targeting primary schoolchildren along the 
route of HS2 for brainwashing,” said Joe Rukin, campaign manager at Stop HS2.

“The concept of state-sponsored propaganda, which is tailored so children in 
communities impacted by HS2 must come to the conclusion HS2 is a brilliant 
idea, is truly Orwellian.”

Jonathan Pile, a spokesman for Yorkshire against HS2, whose family home in 
Crofton, Wakefield, is 265 metres from the proposed high-speed train line, said 
that many teachers in the region were furious that the company had decided to 
target schools.

“If this wasn’t so sinister and unacceptable it would be funny, but to the 
hundreds of families facing enforced relocation by HS2, and the thousands being 
financially blighted and facing years of noise and construction pollution, it 
is anything but a joke,” he said.

A spokesperson for HS2 said the goal of the education programme was to 
“provide Britain with a legacy of skills and experience that will benefit the 
whole industry.

“We are committed to ensuring that young people receive access to learning and 
skills opportunities which will enable them to play a role in the construction, 
development and ongoing operation of HS2 and other transport and infrastructure 
projects.

“We’re 17 years away from introducing high-speed rail between the Midlands and 
the north of England, so it’s right that we plan ahead and help young people to 
develop the skills and knowledge they need to take advantage of the 
opportunities available. Research shows that early awareness of the value of 
Stem (science, technology, engineering and maths) subjects can remove gender 
barriers and help to reduce skills shortages in areas as diverse as the 
environment and engineering.”



Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F28%2Fhs2-winners-losers-video&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F1%2F28%2F1359384484181%2FStill-from-the-HS2-route--005.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=HS2%3A%20who%20are%20the%20winners%20and%20losers%3F%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F28%2Fhs2-winners-losers-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=HS2%3A%20who%20are%20the%20winners%20and%20losers%3F%20%E2%80%94%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2Fvideo%2F2013%2Fjan%2F28%2Fhs2-winners-losers-video&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2013%2F1%2F28%2F1359384484181%2FStill-from-the-HS2-route--005.jpg>
HS2: who are the winners and losers? — video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/video/2013/jan/28/hs2-winners-losers-video>  