
The first evidence has emerged that the era of record-low fixed-rate mortgages 
may be coming to an end after HSBC withdrew its “cheapest-ever” deal and 
increased rates on other products.


HSBC had been offering a mortgage that allowed customers to lock in for two 
years at a rate of 0.99%, but this deal has been pulled with immediate effect. 
The bank’s new mortgage offers are coming in at up to 0.5% higher.

Fix your mortgage rate now if you’re worried about Trump and Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/mortgage-rates-fixed-deals-brexit-trump>
The move follows warnings from mortgage brokers that a number of factors, 
including Donald Trump’s US election win,were set to push up the cost of new 
fixed-rate home loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/mortgage-rates-fixed-deals-brexit-trump>
.


David Hollingworth at broker London & Country Mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages> said: “The bottom of the market 
may have been hit. This [announcement] and the broader changes from HSBC, which 
has been very aggressively priced in the fixed-rate market, could spell the end 
of the sub-1% fixed rate, but also signals a potential turning point for fixed 
mortgage rates.”

HSBC’s 0.99% deal was launched in June this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/21/hsbc-fixed-rate-mortgage-below-1-per-cent-interest-rate>
 and was the cheapest on the market, as well as the lowest ever recorded by 
financial information firm Moneyfacts.


The deal emerged at a time when competition among lenders had been hotting up, 
reflecting the fact that the cost of borrowing for banks and building societies 
had fallen to new lows.


A HSBC spokesman said: “When the cost of funding comes down we are always 
quick to pass on the benefit to customers, and we have been able to do that for 
almost six months with our 0.99% rate mortgage. The cost of funding has gone up 
over the last month or so and we have had to reflect that in our recent pricing 
review.

 “We regularly review our rates, and while they still provide good value for 
those looking to move on to or up the housing ladder, should the cost of 
funding come back down you can be sure we will reflect that with some great 
deals.”

Last month, the Council of Mortgage Lenders said home loan affordability had 
reached a “historic low” 
<https://www.cml.org.uk/news/press-releases/september-house-purchase-lending-up-11-compared-to-a-year-ago/>
 for both first-time buyers and home movers. It added that in September, 
first-time buyers spent an average of just 17.8% of their monthly household 
income on mortgage repayments – partly reflecting August’s interest rate cut 
from 0.5% to 0.25%. Meanwhile, according to Moneyfacts, the average five-year 
fix fell below 3% for the first time on record.


But more recently swap rates – what the banks pay to borrow from one other, 
which play a large part in determining the pricing of fixed-rate mortgages – 
have increased sharply, a trend which accelerated in the days following Trump’s 
win.


Economists believe the president-elect’s promises of tax cuts and a $550bn 
boost to infrastructure spending will force the Federal Reserve, the US central 
bank, toraise interest rates more rapidly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/bonds-trump-prompts-inflation-tax-cuts-interest-rates>
 than had been expected. In recent weeks, UK mortgage brokers have warned that 
this was translating into upwards pressure on fixed-rate mortgage pricing.


HSBC has now announced it is “increasing the rates of all fixed-rate products 
by between 0.1%-0.5%”, and is removing the 0.99% “special rate”. Its two-year 
fixed-rates now start at 1.29%. However, no changes are being made to variable 
rates.


Interest rate cut: what now for savers and borrowers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/13/interest-rate-cut-savings-rates-mortgages-borrowers>
Hollingworth said: “The 0.99% fixed-rate has been something of a poster boy 
for the record low rates that borrowers have been enjoying. Borrowers that have 
held off hoping that rates could fall further may not want to delay much more … 
Higher swap rates could result in rates drifting up, though the good news is 
that the competition in the market continues to offer some sharp rates.”


Challenger bank Atom has just launched in the mortgage market, its two-year 
fixed-rates reportedly starting at 1.19%.

 