
A human rights abuses complaint against WWF 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wwf>, the world’s largest conservation 
organisation, is to be examined by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation 
(OECD) in an unprecedented step.


Anti-poaching government “eco-guards” in the Cameroon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cameroon> rainforests, part-funded and 
logistically supported by WWF, are alleged to have destroyed camps and property 
belonging to the hunter-gatherer Baka people. The guards are accused of using 
physical force and threats of violence against the Baka people over a number of 
years.

Survival International, which campaigns for indigenous peoples’ rights, last 
year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/03/wwf-accused-of-facilitating-human-rights-abuses-of-tribal-people-in-cameroon>
 submitted a228-page formal complaint 
<http://assets.survivalinternational.org/documents/1527/survival-internation-v-wwf-oecd-specific-instance.pdf>
 to the OECD in Switzerland, where WWF International is based, alleging that 
the Baka have also been denied access to their ancestral lands after the 
Cameroon government established protected areas “with the vital support of WWF”.

Under OECD guidelines, the complaint and dispute between Survival International
 <http://www.survivalinternational.org/>and WWF will now be mediated by a Swiss 
government official. It is the first time the conduct of an international 
charity has been scrutinised under the OECD’s guidelines for multinational 
enterprises, which usually define responsible conduct for commercial companies.

The tribes paying the brutal price of conservation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/aug/28/exiles-human-cost-of-conservation-indigenous-peoples-eco-tourism>
Survival has documented Baka allegations 
<http://www.survivalinternational.org/news/11538> of abuse. One Baka man last 
year told the charity: “[The anti-poaching eco-guards] beat the children as 
well as an elderly woman with machetes. My daughter is still unwell. They made 
her crouch down and they beat her everywhere – on her back, on her bottom, 
everywhere, with a machete.”

In a statement, WWF said it has worked strenuously to obtain improved rights 
for the Baka community but recognised that there was “clearly more work to be 
done”.

“WWF takes any and all allegations of human rights violations extremely 
seriously,” it said in a statement. “We have worked over the years to verify 
any alleged abuses, and we have taken all appropriate measures to address 
allegations brought to our attention, including communicating these to the 
appropriate authorities.”

WWF said its Cameroon branch had helped create the first Baka-managed 
community forest in south-east Cameroon and lobbied the government to improve 
the investigation and resolution of alleged abuse. WWF has also provided human 
rights training for government eco-guards and “facilitated” the employment of 
Baka people as ecoguards.

Frederick Kwame Kumah, director of WWF’s Africa regional office, told the 
Guardian: “Protecting the rights of local communities has been, and continues 
to be, a priority in all of WWF’s work. This is true inAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, around the world and in Cameroon 
where we have worked during challenging times to develop ways of collaborating 
with indigenous peoples through direct engagement with the Baka people and 
other local communities.

“Lasting solutions must not be decided for the Baka people, they must be 
forged with the Baka people, other local communities and the Cameroon 
government.”

Stephen Corry, director of Survival, said: “The OECD admitting our complaint 
is a giant step for vulnerable peoples. They can already use OECD guidelines to 
try and stop corporations riding roughshod over them, but this is the first 
time ever it’s agreed that the rules also apply to industrial-scale NGOs like 
WWF.”

The UN’s special rapporteur for the rights of indigenous peoples last year 
praised WWF-Cameroon 
<http://unsr.vtaulicorpuz.org/site/index.php/documents/annual-reports/149-report-ga-2016>
 for its work to get Cameroon’s government to improve the process of seeking 
consent from indigenous people for conservation measures. But Michael Hurran, 
Africa campaigner for Survival, said the charity hoped the mediation process 
would persuade WWF to “properly consult” in Cameroon.

“The aim of the complaint is to finally get WWF to speak to every Baka 
community, which is completely in line with its own principles,” said Hurran. 
“They visit Baka communities and have meetings but they’ve never properly 
consulted them about these protected areas on their land and the anti-poaching 
squads.”


WWF has voluntarily agreed to the mediation process in Switzerland although it 
said it disagreed with turning the OECD guidelines designed for commercial 
companies “into a mechanism for resolving issues between two non-profit 
organisations”.
 