
In an era of increasing dissatisfaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/millennial-voters-2016-election-apathy>
 with and disengagement from governments, political parties, and much of the 
rest of the democratic establishment, it’s more important than ever that you 
show up and vote.

Suffrage is not a right afforded to everyone. Rather, voting is a privilege in 
the United States – and a hard-earned privilege at that.

What is the voter turnout in your state? An election quiz
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/oct/11/voter-turnout-presidential-election-states-2012-2016>
At the beginning of the republic, only those white men with land were allowed 
a hand in electing our leaders and lawmakers. Later,under President Andrew 
Jackson 
<http://millercenter.org/president/biography/jackson-the-american-franchise>, 
that decision-making power was extended to most white men. After a lengthy 
civil war – shedding a staggering amount of blood and treasure – successive 
amendments to the US constitution granting broader voting rights followed. 
Women, at this time, were entirely disregarded – until the19th amendment 
<http://www.history.com/topics/womens-history/19th-amendment> passed in 1920.


Although some people of color were allowed to vote, many still faced 
disenfranchisement prior to theVoting Rights Act 
<https://www.justice.gov/crt/history-federal-voting-rights-laws> of 1965. With 
the recentgutting of that act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2013/jun/25/supreme-court-voting-rights-act-live>
 by the supreme court, the systematic disenfranchisement of people of color is 
alive and well today.

Progress on suffrage has always tended to be incremental. And, far from being 
a closed chapter in our history, the fight to keep things moving forward 
continues to this day.

For every thousand people living in the US, seven are incarcerated. That 
population consists disproportionately of black and brown people, whether 
accused and convicted of crimes or held by immigration authorities.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20does%20the%20US%20electoral%20college%20work%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F31%2Fhow-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video&media=>
How does the US electoral college work? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/31/how-does-electoral-college-work-us-election-video>
Even when the incarcerated leave prison, they often return to our communities 
without the ability to vote. That means the people most affected by our 
political institutions and processes today often have absolutely no say in how 
they are run. This group includes me. In Maryland, my state of residence, for 
instance, I will not be able vote until the year 2045.

Disenfranchisement and legal exclusion – whether by race, gender, class, 
immigration status, or otherwise – from our democratic institutions is one of 
the most significant failures of American society today.

One of the most contentious general elections in modern US history is in front 
of us. Next Tuesday, if, instead of making your way to the booth, you decide to 
go shopping, out for lunch or dinner, stay at home, play a video game, or 
whatever, just remember that many of us cannot vote but would dearly like to. 
While universal suffrage remains an ideal yet to be attained, if you’re lucky 
enough to be able to vote, don’t let that privilege go to waste.
 