
Lying in a hospital bed, staring at my bleeding bowel on the screen above my 
head, was a defining moment in my social work career. It marked the end of it. 
After just two short years I was done. Burnt out. Exhausted. Finished.

At 33, I had developed high blood pressure, chronic stomach problems and had 
not slept properly in months. Now, one year on, I can talk about it. I can see 
old colleagues without having palpitations. I have survived something that 
nearly took me down.

Although I’m free of the formidable paperwork and endless visits, I remain 
haunted by the children on my caseload. I still dream about them and wonder how 
they are getting on – did they ever return home or were they adopted? Are they 
receiving the care I so much wanted them to have? I will never know.

I was so overwhelmed by work as a social worker, I was physically sick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog/2016/mar/23/overwhelmed-new-social-worker-child-protection-workload>
Social work was a career change for me; why I chose it I’m not entirely sure. 
Perhaps all the awful stories I heard over the years of children suffering 
violence and sexual abuse triggered my interest, or perhaps after thecase of 
Peter Connolly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2014/oct/27/baby-p-untold-story>
 I was naive enough to believe I could do a better job.

I started out in a long-term child protection team in a London borough, keen 
to take on tougher cases and asking for a challenge. I regretted it almost 
immediately. Alcoholism, drug addiction and psychosis became my daily reality. 
But I managed. I was interested in people’s lives, their stories.

Like thousands of other social workers, in my first year I had a succession of 
different managers and a complete lack of supervision. An amazing head of 
service offered guidance; a family support worker kept my spirits up with 
office gossip and cups of tea.

Alcoholism, drug addiction and psychosis became my daily reality.

Then I moved to the front line. As a duty worker I saw families first and 
initially found it exhilarating. But within weeks I was fed up – tired of 
meeting violent offenders, staring into the beaming face of a child beaten by 
his father, listening to hours of anguish.

My team were amazing: always laughing, always supportive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/jul/22/social-work-stress-support-peers>
. My manager was frantic but tried her best. Then, at the end of a long 
Tuesday, I was sent to do a welfare check where I was met with mental health 
problems, neglect and aggression. It was a typical social work story. The 
police were called, my colleague prevented me from being assaulted, children 
were removed. Weeks of verbal abuse from the mother followed: I was told I 
would die, my family would die, my unborn children would die in my womb, that I 
was the devil.

In the following week I did 17 hours of overtime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/careers/2016/feb/25/short-working-life-social-worker-flexibility>
. I wrote pages and pages of court statements. I stopped sleeping and lived on 
coffee and crisps. By this stage the physical symptoms of stress had started. 
My stomach was a mess and I cried continually. I had nightmares and chest 
pains. I was in such a state I made a doctor’s appointment, not realising 
stress could manifest itself in such a visceral way. My GP told me I needed to 
resign. After months of anti-depressants, I finally handed in my notice.

No one batted an eyelid. My team had witnessed my deterioration from a 
confident, caring social worker into a sleep-deprived, anxious wreck. As much 
as they tried to support me, it was too late. I was just another in a long line 
of social workers who had cracked under the pressure.

It was a long and painful journey deciding that social work wasn’t for me. Had 
I obeyed the voice in my head arguing that I ought to stay on, I know I would 
have ended up on long-term sick leave.

But while my confidence was shattered by the bleak, unrelenting world of child 
protection, I gained invaluable tools for survival. Once you have experienced 
the stress of social work, very little can faze you. My health is now back to 
normal and my anxiety is under control.

Social workers must look after themselves and recognise their limits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2013/apr/23/child-protection-social-worker-burnout>
I have sworn I’ll never go back. But I feel considerable regret and sadness 
that I could not do what thousands of committed andresilient social workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/05/how-can-social-workers-build-resilience-and-avoid-burnout-live-qa>
 do, day in and day out. Was I not good enough? Why couldn’t I separate work 
from my own life?

For those who continue to deal with child protection cases, relentless 
bureaucracy and the sheer panic those entail on a daily basis, I have nothing 
but respect. I envy their resilience. But my embarrassment and shame at leaving 
has passed. I want my experiences to serve as a warning for those who try to 
fight the constant pressure and nerves.

Although it’s doubtful I’ll ever practise again, my de-registration forms 
remain unsigned. And those children, the hapless victims of circumstance, will 
stay with me forever.

I might not have lasted as a social worker but I’m not sorry I tried.

The Social Life Blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/social-life-blog> is written 
by people who work in or use social care services. If you’d like to write an 
article for the series, emailsocialcare@theguardian.com 
<mailto:socialcare@theguardian.com> with your ideas.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 