
John Berger <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/john-berger> had the most 
amazing eyes. I do not mean that in the abstract, though it is true; his way of 
seeing the world has become part of the way we understand visual culture. I am 
thinking simply of those great baby blues. He was never not looking. He was a 
painter and he took up photography at one point but gave it up because once you 
have taken a picture “you stop looking at what you’ve shot. I was more 
interested in looking. I think I gave my camera away.”

When I heard he’d died at the great age of 90, of course I thought of his 
eyes, of what it was like to have them focused on you – he did that to 
everyone, it was absolutely compelling. To be human for him meant always 
seeing, listening, exchanging.

He wrote to me out of the blue when I was a film critic. It was the most 
brilliant letter of warmth and encouragement that had me floating with joy. He 
wrote many such letters to many people. It is what he did, that old-fashioned 
thing: engagement.

He wrote to me about the nature of criticism. Like many, I was interested in 
criticism as a result of his work, because of the idea that criticism could be 
radical, that it was a conversation not an evaluation. Yes, that remains 
idealistic as we live in a world where criticism is debased to stars, to a 
TripAdvisor mentality that requires no thought or knowledge whatsoever, the 
precursor to the sneering at experts mentality.

But in 1972 Berger had shown what could be achieved. His TV series and book, 
Ways of Seeing, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2012/sep/07/ways-seeing-berger-tv-programme-british>
 remain revelatory. He blew up everything we thought we “knew” about art and 
its reproduction. He said: “The relation between what we see and what we know 
is never settled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/02/a-life-in-quotes-john-berger>”, 
freeing up a space for us to wonder about meaning. This is quite beautiful to 
me still, this wondering.

A letter from Berger was an invitation to be somehow involved in one of his 
myriad projects – a film, a novel, an idea – so I did meet him, but more often 
we talked on the phone. Not about geopolitics, though of course he was one of 
the first people to grasp that migration, “forced or chosen, across national 
frontiers or from village to metropolis”, was “the quintessential experience of 
our time”. Instead, he might call to ask how best to describe dreadlocks 
(dreads or locks?), or about my children, or what colour I was painting the 
kitchen. This amuses me now, this chatting about the details, but he always 
wanted the details. The everyday was not trivial to him.

That may be why I simply do not recognise him in some of the snippy obits in 
which he has been reduced to the stereotype of the dour Marxist. He was the 
complete opposite. I guess the challenge he presented still stands. Nor is he 
reducible to a methodology of decoding. This is to miss all his stories, poems 
and thinking that were so grounded in the material. One does not have to like 
all his work or agree with his various political stances (many could not stomach
his stance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/jan/11/salman-rushdie-satanic-verses> on
Rushdie <https://www.theguardian.com/books/salmanrushdie>) to see his 
significance is huge.

In any situation where political power was in play, his very instinct was to 
side with the powerless. He was undeniably a romantic. But everything went back 
to experience in the end.

Episode two of Ways of Seeing remains seared on my mind. Remarkable 
television, so far from how the 70s is now often envisioned. Here, Berger talks 
about the difference between being naked and nude, explaining who owns the gaze 
– men. Men act and women appear. He talks of how women always survey 
themselves, even in moments of grief. Then, halfway through the programme, he 
says that he has shown images of women but not heard their voices so hands over 
the discussion to a group of women, while he listens and smokes.

Here then are the beginnings of understanding how visual culture – art, TV, 
film, advertising – depicts women for the presumed male spectator/owner’s 
pleasure. Feminists took this much further and still use these insights. No 
wonderKenneth Clark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/may/16/kenneth-clark-arrogant-snob-saviour-art>
,Auberon Waugh 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=jdbU0r44egcC&pg=PA52&lpg=PA52&dq=Auberon+Waugh+john+berger&source=bl&ots=jUD959jQvn&sig=_qw45cjX3rshQursrrKanFFt2_s&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwicopGx5qjRAhUCOsAKHQI3AzgQ6AEIIDAB#v=onepage&q=Auberon%20Waugh%20john%20berger&f=false>
,Stephen Spender 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/culture/2015/06/i-think-dead-are-us-john-berger-88>
 et al – the old elite – did not like Berger. This was an oppositional reading 
of “their” culture.

Berger’s way of seeing, I came to understand, was a way of being. Here was a 
public intellectual who never divvied up the world into “politics” and 
“culture”, a learned man who shied away from academia but could talk to anyone. 
He knew observation has consequences. He knew that not from theory but because 
he rode a motorbike.

As he trained his eyes and his ears on whoever he was with, this intense 
listening meant he was a wonderful storyteller of searing moral clarity. He 
always seemed to know, implicitly, that protest and anger derive from hope. His 
work embodies the hope involved in our everyday human exchanges, whatever the 
circumstances. His very being radiated it.

“Hope,” he once said, “is a contraband passed from hand to hand and story to 
story.” What contraband. What treasure. I am for ever grateful for it.
 