
I was raised in a single-parent family. My mother – having decided that I was 
extraordinarily bright (as they do) – took me out of comprehensive education at 
the age of eight and sent me to a private school, so that I could fulfil my 
full academic potential and prepare for the exams ahead.

A lost baby taught me how little academia really meant to me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/01/a-lost-baby-taught-me-how-little-academia-really-meant-to-me>
She was so determined for me to succeed that she worked night shifts in a care 
home to pay for my fees, while also working on her own degree. I was a latchkey 
kid, settling down to work diligently after school each night in preparation 
for the dreaded test that would prove my mother right or wrong, largely in her 
absence.

I do not remember sitting my 11-plus. Perhaps I was ill, or tired out from the 
hard work, or my confidence was low after two years of being an isolated 
single-parent child in a private school. Perhaps I was simply not as bright as 
the other children. But I did not make the cut.

Today I have a first-class degree, a master’s and a PhD, and I am working in 
one of the UK’s leading research-intensive universities.

My mother’s ingenuity in the face of adversity meant that I ended up being 
sponsored to go to a private school, rather than a grammar. But I wonder how 
many other children from my area might have gained a university degree, had 
they not been turned away from academic pursuits when they did not make the 
grammar school cut.

For the first time in 18 years, I don't feel welcome in Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/21/for-the-first-time-in-18-years-i-dont-feel-welcome-in-britain>
Of course, the present admissions system is far from just. In many cases, a 
postcode lottery determines the quality of school that children attend: the 
larger the mortgage you can afford, the better your child’s local school. 
Ultimately though, this problem is about resource allocation.

Opening up new grammar schools will cast inequality in stone. When good local 
schools become grammars, financially astute parents invest in private tutoring 
to ensure their child’s access to a state-funded education rivalling that 
provided by the private sector. Their calculation is: invest in your children 
early while it is cheap and you can reap the savings later.

If grammar schools turbo-charge social mobility for the few, they clearly fail 
many more. Not all families can afford to pay for tutoring. And if your child 
doesn’t make they cut, they will probably end up attending an underfunded 
comprehensive and believing that they will never be clever enough to get into a 
university.

I reported plagiarism in a PhD, but my university ignored it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/08/i-reported-plagiarism-in-a-phd-but-my-university-ignored-it>
The proposed expansion of grammars is not about social mobility, of course. It 
is at the vanguard of a three-pronged attack on the education system, flanked 
by chronic underfunding of the further education sector on the one side, and a 
Teaching Excellence Framework on the other that will allow only the 
best-performing universities to raise their fees.

Seen holistically, this package of education reforms signals a shift back to a 
two-tier education system from the age of 11. It is designed to re-establish a 
“natural order” to the structure of British society, an idea we thought was 
laid to rest, but has clearly been slumbering in the hearts of right-wing 
politicians for 20 years.

So much for one-nation Britain.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 