
I’m a Wiradjuri/Gumbaynggirr woman, my mum is from Bowraville/Macksville and 
dad is from Peak Hill. I was born in Queanbeyan, spent most of my childhood in 
Peak Hill and then moved to Scotts Head. I have had the best of both worlds 
with love and support always surrounding me. That’s so important because the 
world we now live in as Aboriginal people can be so challenging.

One of the first instances that stood out to me was when my sister was born. I 
was 12 and I instantly fell in love with her. I used to walk her absolutely 
everywhere in her pram. I would hardly ever let my mother dress her, she was my 
little doll. And of course being in my small town of Scotts Head everybody knew 
me. I had been asked by a fair few people if she was mine. I just laughed it 
off back then and did not know what that actually meant. Then I got a little 
older and realised what they were insinuating. What a strange thing to assume, 
I was 12 years old. This was one of my earliest realisations, then I grew up 
and knew more.

Indigenous Australians know we're the oldest living culture – it's in our 
Dreamtime | Larissa Behrendt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/indigenous-australians-know-were-the-oldest-living-culture-its-in-our-dreamtime>
When thinking of my children’s future, I think of hope and wonder, then of 
course, I am thoroughly disappointed.

How can I trust that their future will be something they can look forward to, 
that it might bring prosperity? That it may give them hope for their children? 
A house within reach and a brilliant job?

I can’t really. I have trust issues with the future for them and, for that 
matter, for me as well.

Just recently we’ve had to apply for houses to rent and realising that mine 
and my partner’s Aboriginality was going to hinder the perception of our 
cleanliness and ability to pay rent on time in others’ minds, we decided on a 
few things. One of those was that my partner would put down he works for SBS 
rather than NITV, due to it looking more appealing for a landlord. Yet I know 
if it were a white person applying, they would proudly put NITV because they 
would want to flaunt it.

That scares me for my children. I never want them to have to suppress a thing 
about them. I want my sons and daughter to thrive on the knowledge they’re 
handed down and for their identity as Aboriginal to be their proudest feature.

Unfortunately, I can’t see within the next decade or so their Aboriginality 
being seen by the wider Australian community how we want it to be seen, how 
they need it to be seen, just as their mum and dad have wanted.

I know they will have to deal with the realities of racism. Personal and 
systemic, they will have to deal with it either way and that scares me. It is 
our job to protect them but that is something we know we cannot shield them 
from. The best we can do is prepare them for it, but as a parent that feels 
woefully inadequate.

When you hold your children for that first time you feel such love, such 
respect and such hope for them that it hurts so much, you cry. You’ve made it 
through the pregnancy and the labour to come to the realisation that this 
person, this tiny little human, will one day grow up to be someone with their 
own thoughts, their own wishes, their own passions and their own dreams.

They may one day grow up to be in the same position as you, looking down and 
kissing their own children on the head and knowing they have their whole life 
ahead of them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fi-have-trust-issues-with-the-future-i-fear-the-racism-my-children-will-have-to-face%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e53ef2e4899ff426037d5580cad734483c7f58a%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%20have%20trust%20issues%20with%20the%20future.%20I%20fear%20the%20racism%20my%20children%20will%20have%20to%20face%20%7C%20Jade%20Towney%20for%20IndigenousX&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fi-have-trust-issues-with-the-future-i-fear-the-racism-my-children-will-have-to-face%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%20have%20trust%20issues%20with%20the%20future.%20I%20fear%20the%20racism%20my%20children%20will%20have%20to%20face%20%7C%20Jade%20Towney%20for%20IndigenousX&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F04%2Fi-have-trust-issues-with-the-future-i-fear-the-racism-my-children-will-have-to-face%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e53ef2e4899ff426037d5580cad734483c7f58a%2F0_0_960_960%2F960.jpg>
 My children have been to their first of many corroborees recently, and will 
dance in it next year. Photograph: IndigenousX 
I wish I could take all the bad things away from them. Not all the bad things, 
I guess. Some bad things are a part of life. The heartache of a lost love, 
grieving for lost friends and families. These “bad things” are natural and are 
experiences that we all must go through if we are to truly live. Racism, 
however, is not a natural part of life. Or at least, it shouldn’t be.

This is a question from me to you: how do we shield our children from racism? 
How do we teach them how to deal with it?

Do we tell them now, so they are prepared for it when they get old enough to 
see it? Or do we wait until they are confronted with it and then burst their 
bubble of how they view the world, rip away the ideas of fairness and equality 
that we have tried to instil in them? It is a such a painful conversation to 
have with your partner.

We are raising them to know their culture, to be proud of it, to cherish it, 
but the society they live in does not feel the same way about it.We are a part 
of the oldest living culture on Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/indigenous-australians-know-were-the-oldest-living-culture-its-in-our-dreamtime>
; Aboriginal knowledges, philosophies, and stories contain wisdom, strength, 
and perspectives that the world should marvel at, and many places around the 
world do, but sadly, Australia is not one of those places. How do we prepare 
our children for the shock of knowing that their culture and identity is 
commonly ridiculed and dismissed, and not just by random rednecks in the pubs 
or online, but by politicians whose racism helps them get elected, by 
journalists whose racism helps them keep their jobs?

I am living proof of the stolen generation. Trust me, the trauma is real | 
Elaine Crombie for @IndigenousX
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/09/i-am-living-proof-of-the-stolen-generation-trust-me-the-trauma-is-real>
My answer would be along the lines of: to empower. Where people belittle, 
where people try to shut them down, it’s my responsibility to make them feel 
empowered, to feel that their Aboriginality is a powerful, beautiful thing. 
That it makes them who they are – that making it who you are is a positive.

 Having to even write that makes me feel off but with such negative opinions 
about us depicted in the mainstream, what else can we do but to prove to our 
children and teach them what a wonderful people we are?

Luckily for my children, they get to experience the best aspects of our 
culture and identity. They have big extended families who love them and support 
them. They have been to their first of many corroborees recently, and will 
dance in it next year. They get to hear political and cultural conversations 
from some amazingly talented and insightful Aboriginal thinkers and doers.

All I can do is hope that it will be enough to give them the inner strength 
and perspective to deal with the racism I fear they may encounter; racism even 
stronger than the generation before them had to face.
 