
How they frown. How they fulminate. How they threaten. For decades, presidents 
and prime ministers, policymakers and pundits have told voters there is only 
one direction of travel: free trade. Now comes Brexit and Donald Trump – and 
the horrible suspicion that the public won’t buy it any more. This is how an 
elite project falls apart. And the elites don’t know what to do, apart from 
keep insisting the public listen.

The transatlantic trade deal TTIP may be dead, but something even worse is 
coming | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/transatlantic-trade-partnership-ttip-canada-eu>
In Washington last month, you could barely move for wagging fingers as the 
heads of the IMF, the World Bank and the World Trade Organisationwarned that 
free trade was in mortal danger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/international-monetary-fund-world-economic-outlook-globalisation-free-trade>
. In Ottawa last week, Canadian prime ministerJustin Trudeau 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/eu-rejection-canada-trade-pact-send-wrong-message-150527090.html>
 surveyed the hundreds of thousands of Europeans demonstrating against the 
continent’s treaty with his country and said: “If … Europe is unable to sign a 
progressive trade agreement with a country like Canada, well, then with whom 
will Europe think that it can do business in the years to come?”

Their outriders in the press have dropped the pretence of liberal politesse 
for red-cheeked self-righteousness. The hairy-palmed hordes arecoming for our 
internationalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/liberal-internationalists-populists-globalisation>
! As if internationalism were little more than business-class flights and the 
freedom to structure derivatives across several time zones. The Economist slaps 
an image of anti-globalisation demonstrators on its cover with the headline: “
Why they’re wrong 
<https://image.issuu.com/161002070406-64bef4336bdc2cc1ad4576efec597e0b/jpg/page_1.jpg>
”. Note that use of “they”, with its shadow of the drawbridge being hastily 
pulled up. Coming soon, perhaps: “Why can’t we get the 99% we deserve?”

I heartily agree that Nigel Farage and Trump are grotesques. But the 
free-traders peddle their own untruths. They have insisted that black is white, 
even as the voters beg to differ. In their seminar rooms, their TV studios and 
their Geneva offices, they have perpetrated the ideological sleight of hand 
that equates internationalism with free trade, and globalisation with 
untrammelled corporate power. The result has been misery for workers from 
Bolton to Baltimore to Bangladesh. But it has also left the six-figure 
technocrats who supervise our economic system pushing a zombie idea. Because 
that is what free trade has become: an idea leached of life and meaning but 
stumbling on for want of any replacement. We have a globalisation for bankers, 
but not for children fleeing the bombs of Syria. Security for investors but not 
for workers.

To see how debased the notion of free trade has become, look at the deal 
between Canada and the EU that is currently being voted through Europe’s 
parliaments. It’s called theComprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/06/transatlantic-trade-partnership-ttip-canada-eu>
 (Ceta), and the fact that you can see it at all is largely down to leaks of 
the documents, which forced the European commission to publish,. That is after 
the negotiations were conducted for five years in secret, with even the
directives kept hidden 
<http://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2015/12/15-eu-canada-trade-negotiating-mandate-made-public/>
 from the hundreds of millions of citizens affected.

This is no minor technical work. Provided it is passed in time, Ceta will 
apply to Britain too – and parts of it will affect Britons’ lives even after 
we’ve “taken back control”. It has been billed as “a backdoor for TTIP”, the 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership, whichcollapsed this summer 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/business/2016/08/28/eus-ttip-trade-deal-with-the-us-has-collapsed-says-germany/>
 amid public opposition both in Europe and the US. Like TTIP, Ceta includes the
investor-state dispute settlement system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/10/obscure-legal-system-lets-corportations-sue-states-ttip-icsid>
 – which hands big business the power to sue governments, including for profits 
they haven’t made yet. A US multinational with an office in Canada (nearly all 
of them) will be able to sue Britons for bringing in laws that lose them money. 
This was the mechanism tobacco giantPhilip Morris used to sue Australia’s 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/dec/18/australia-wins-international-legal-battle-with-philip-morris-over-plain-packaging>
 for bringing in plain packaging. On that occasion, Big Tobacco was 
unsuccessful – but it took four years of expensive legal battle.

Free trade used to be about tackling protectionism; now it’s about protecting 
big business – against the public. If populists take a complex situation, offer 
a simple answer and warn any dissenters of gruesome consequences, then the 
free-traders are guilty of populism too. With Ceta orTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip>, it goes like this: if this deal 
goes through, then economies will grow, jobs will appear, and a rising tide 
will lift all boats, from super-yacht to rubber dinghy. That is pretty much 
what mainstream politicians of Europe – both left and right – and their 
officials are saying about the deal with Canada.

In economic history, never mind that the biggest winners – whether the US in 
the early 1900s or China now – are those who break the free trade rules. Never 
mind that the actual forecasts for Ceta show the gains will be relatively 
meagre. Never mind that the studies cited don’t bother to look at who wins and 
loses, and by how much.

An auto engineer can up sticks and turn into a software engineer. If there 
aren’t any jobs, they can work for Deliveroo

Most of all, ignore their shared assumption that after any deal the affected 
economies undergo a short, sharp shock before bouncing back. Anyone who has 
lived through the past eight years has heard that one before. After the 
financial crisis, the Bank of England and Treasury both kept forecasting a 
return to normal – and they kept getting it wrong. Eight years on, that 
bounceback hasn’t materialised.British workers are still not paid as much 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/datasets/averageweeklyearningsearn01>
 after inflation as they were when Lehman Brothers collapsed.

That assumption’s lack of substance is called a “dirty little secret” by two 
independent economists, Pierre Kohler and Servaas Storm, in arecent paper 
<http://www.ase.tufts.edu/gdae/Pubs/wp/16-03CETA.pdf> scrutinising the likely 
effects of Ceta. As they say, it presumes that laid-off workers “will rapidly 
find new jobs” – whatever the industry, however far away the employer. A car 
engineer can up sticks and turn into a software engineer. And if there aren’t 
any actual jobs, they can deliver takeaways for Deliveroo.

The assumptions are both laughably far-fetched and, in the cost citizens are 
expected to bear, disgusting. No wonder the EU would rather there was as little 
public discussion as possible.

Using a model employed by the UN, Kohler and Storm found that the benefits of 
Ceta become microscopic next to the costs. For at least the first seven years 
after the agreement is brought in, unemployment will rise, wages will fall and 
economies will see their growth rates decline. Governments will lose revenue, 
and so increase austerity.

The burden will fall hardest on the poorest, the lowest-skilled, older people 
and those with disabilities. A senior lecturer at Delft University of 
Technology, Storm summed up for me the consequences: “The weaker your position 
in an economy, the more strongly you’ll feel the fall-out.” These aren’t people 
and regions who are left behind: they’ve been chucked off the train by their 
own governments. This is the settlement free-traders, left and right, are 
fighting to impose on voters. Is it any wonder the voters keep plumping for 
alternatives – no matter how reprehensible, how ruinous?

• You can catch up on the discussion we had on this article and others on our 
Your Opinions thread, which 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/your-opinions-the-perils-of-globalisation-and-the-future-of-the-tory-left>
is now closed.
 