
I signed up for a PhD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> that should have 
marked the start of an amazing career – it was a fully-funded position as part 
of an exciting project that I was enthusiastic to work on. In fact, this 
decision has done anything but help my career.


Related: I've left my PhD behind, but I'm being put under pressure to publish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/07/ive-left-my-phd-behind-but-im-being-put-under-pressure-to-publish>

I had been in the UK higher education system for five years at that point, 
having undertaken both my undergraduate and master’s degrees at UK 
universities. I was lured in by the prospects this PhD offered: international 
work experience within an exciting research team and the opportunity to develop 
valuable skills in my field, using cutting-edge techniques. To top it all off, 
I would get a monthly salary, tuition fees waived, and expenses for 
conferences, laboratory work and travel would all be covered.

Foolishly, I did very little research on my supervisors, thinking that nothing 
could go wrong with a project funded by a well-known organisation in one of 
UK’s leading universities. I was very wrong.

On my arrival, I discovered that my supervisor did not have much knowledge in 
my area – having not worked directly on it before – and I was the first PhD 
student they had ever had.

None of the equipment I was supposedly going to learn to use (as mentioned in 
the original advertisement) was in place. I was left to work with outdated 
methods that weren’t beneficial to the project or my development. When I raised 
these issues, I was told that these methods were more financially sustainable 
and that the university could not invest in the equipment at the moment.


To make matters worse, international collaboration was never made possible. In 
fact, it was actively discouraged on several occasions.

Related: My dirty little secret: I've been writing erotic novels to fund my PhD
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/02/my-dirty-little-secret-ive-been-writing-erotic-novels-to-fund-my-phd>

I tried numerous times to address these issues with my supervisors, since I 
was getting worried about the prospects for my PhD. They didn’t seem 
interested. After more than a year of this situation, I told them that I was 
extremely unhappy with the project and that things needed to change.

They denied my concerns. The equipment was not necessary for my research, they 
said, and the statements and opportunities mentioned in the original proposal 
were not written in stone. I was referred to the departmental tutor for 
“advice”, but was instead told to decide whether I wanted to stay or quit. I 
was offered no support in trying to resolve any of the issues that I had raised.

I contacted my funding body about the situation. I hoped that this would spark 
some interest in trying to find a solution so I would be able to continue; it 
said there was not much it could do. It seemed that the organisation had given 
its money to a project that couldn’t have worked in the way it was intended.

I had no choice but to quit. My issues were not recognised as valid by the 
department, my supervisors or the university – I later found out that my 
withdrawal had been put down to “personal and health issues”, which made me 
feel even worse.


Related: Academics Anonymous: top 10 secret blogs of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/dec/23/academics-anonymous-top-10-secret-blogs-of-2016>

This experience has taught me a lot about how universities operate – I have 
learned these lessons the hard way. The best advice I can offer to anyone 
considering a PhD is to do a lot of research before starting. Get to know your 
supervisor’s area of expertise, the university and the department. Visit the 
university to get an idea of the facilities that are available. Ask as many 
questions as you can before you start. Know your rights. Don’t trust that you 
will be given what you are promised. Be wary about signing up to something that 
seems too good to be true.


The damage this has inflicted on my career and my ambition is immense. It made 
me lose my motivation and passion for a subject that I loved. I just hope that 
sharing my experience means more will be done in the future to check projects 
before they are funded so that cases like mine cannot happen again.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 