
Widespread concerns that the NHS will face the “toughest winter ever” are not 
exaggerated or unfounded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/nhs-hospitals-facing-toughest-winter-yet-say-health-experts>
 – just look at the terrible newstoday from Worcestershire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
. We really should be worried for ourselves and our relatives. As a junior 
doctor and a researcher looking after cancer patients in the NHS, I am 
terrified by the prospect of what the next few months will bring. But we must 
not forget this is entirely preventable.

Three patients die at Worcestershire hospital amid NHS winter crisis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
Our current crisis is down to the almost clockwork-like series of reshuffling, 
rebranding and top-down disorganisation of the services by government. It’s led 
to an inexorable decline in the quality of care.

I have also become aware of an insidious “takeover” by the private sector. It 
is both literal – in the provision of services – and ideological, with an 
overwhelming prevalence of business-speak being absorbed into our collective 
psyche. But the British public (and even many staff) remain largely unaware 
that this is happening.

Where the consultant physician or surgeon was once general, they now 
increasingly play second fiddle to chief executives and clinical business unit 
managers. Junior doctors such as myself (many of whom have spent 10-15 years 
practising medicine and have completed PhDs) must also fall in line to comply 
with business models and corporate strategy put forward by those with no 
clinical training or experience with patients.

With bad policies accumulating over the years, we are now seeing the crisis 
come to a climax

It is this type of decision-making (based on little evidence) and seemingly 
unaccountable policymaking that means patient care is suffering. Blame cannot 
be laid at the feet of a population of demanding and ageing patients, nor the “
health tourists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2013/oct/22/health-tourists-costing-nhs-2bn>
” who are too often scapegoated.

The epitome of such changes is known as the “sustainability and transformation 
plans”. These will bring about some of the biggest shifts in how NHS frontline 
service are funded and run in recent history, and yet, worryingly, most of my 
own colleagues have not even heard of them.Even fewer feel able to influence 
them 
<https://www.bma.org.uk/news/media-centre/press-releases/2016/november/half-of-london-doctors-havent-heard-of-stps-survey-finds>
.

Sustainability and transformation plans will see almost a third of regions 
having an A&E closed or downgraded, and nearly half will see numbers of 
inpatient bed reductions 
<https://www.hsj.co.uk/sectors/commissioning/exclusive-survey-reveals-stps-service-change-priorities/7012728.article?blocktitle=News&contentID=15303>
. This is all part of the overarching five-year plan to drive through £22bn in 
efficiency savings in the NHS. <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35857815>But 
with overwhelming cuts in social services and community care and with GPs under 
immense pressure, people are forced to go to A&E because they quite simply do 
not have any other options.

I have been on the phone with patients with cancer who need to come into 
hospital with life-threatening conditions such as sepsis, and I have been 
forced to tell them, “We have no beds here you need to go to another local 
A&E.” Responses such as, “Please doctor don’t make me go there – last time 
there were people backed up down the corridors,” break my heart.

'It was manic': patients describe meltdown at Worcestershire hospital
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/it-was-manic-patients-describe-meltdown-at-worcestershire-hospital>
According to the Kings Fund, our NHS leaders are choosing to spend less 
year-on-year on healthcare (as a proportion of GDP) than at anyother time in 
NHS history 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/blog/2015/10/nhs-spending-squeezed-never> and yet 
we are the fifth richest economy in the world. Simultaneously private sector 
involvement increases and astronomical interest rates from private finance 
initiatives must be paid, with hospitals such as St Bartholomew’s in London 
having to pay up to £2m per week in interest alone 
<https://rosslydall.wordpress.com/2014/09/26/charing-cross-sell-off-vital-to-avoid-disastrous-pfi-deal-insists-hospital-chairman/>
. No wonder nearly all hospitals are now in dire straits 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-35608992>.

This is all the result of intentional policies being made at the top with 
minimal consultation of those on the frontline. With such policies accumulating 
over the years we are now seeing the crisis come to a climax.The UK has fewer 
beds per person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/16/britain-fewer-hospital-beds-european-oecd>
 andfewer doctors per person than most countries in Europe 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Healthcare_personnel_statistics_-_physicians>
. Fewer ambulances are now able to reach the highest-category emergencies, 
which means people having asthma attacks, heart attacks and traffic accidents 
are being left towait longer in situations where minutes really matter 
<http://www.qualitywatch.org.uk/indicator/ambulance-response-times>. 

The sustainability and transformation plans for my local area in south-west 
London show that they plan to cut 44% of inpatient bed stays over the next four 
years 
<https://www.sutton.gov.uk/info/200333/adult_health_and_social_care/1586/sw_london_sustainability_and_transformation_plan_stp>
. This is dangerous. It is likely that St Helier hospital in Sutton, which 
takes many emergencies in the area, will close and patients will then not only 
have access to critically reduced services, they will then have to travel 
longer to hospital, having waited longer for the ambulance to get to them.

This will be the straw that broke the camel’s back. I cannot stand by while 
patients’ lives are put at unnecessary risk this winter. And neither should you.

• Health Campaigns Together and the People’s Assembly are organising a 
national demonstrationin support of the NHS on 4 March 2017 
<http://www.healthcampaignstogether.com/>. I would urge everyone who cares 
about their families and their own future to get out on to the street and start 
demanding that better decisions are made on all our behalf.
 