
“What was your dad like when you came out?” When people discover I’m both gay 
and the son of an Anglican vicar, the Reverend Ian Godfrey, their response is 
often a predictable variation of this question.

The assumption is, of course, that a devout, spiritual servant of God will at 
the very least have a few reservations about homosexuality. They’re picturing 
criticism, rejection, maybe even abandonment.

Bishop of Grantham first C of E bishop to declare he is in gay relationship
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/nicholas-chamberlain-bishop-of-grantham-c-of-e-gay-relationship>
I empathise with the insinuation. The church’s attitude towards the gay 
community has never exactly been harmonious, and the institution undoubtedly 
still has something of a homophobia problem.

The division between the two communities resurfaced at the beginning of the 
month, when the bishop of Granthamrevealed he was in a same-sex relationship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/nicholas-chamberlain-bishop-of-grantham-c-of-e-gay-relationship>
. In response, more than a dozen clergy – also in same-sex marriages –signed an 
open letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/conservative-anglicans-appointment-of-gay-bishop-a-major-error>
 urging bishops to show greater inclusivity to the gay community, an act that 
enraged the more conservative elements of the Anglican church.

Both camps are entrenched to such an extent that some vicars expect the issue 
will result in the split of the Church of England. All things considered, I can 
forgive people for wondering if my experience growing up the gay son of a 
preacher man was hellish, so to speak.

I was in my second year of university when I came out to my parents. I did so 
first to my mum over the phone. Though a little shocked, she offered all the 
unconditional support I could have hoped for. But as the conversation ebbed 
towards telling the rest of the family – my dad, older brother and younger 
sister – I copped out, asking her to do it for me.

When I think back to how he was with my coming out, I’m left with a cascade of 
immense gratitude and lingering guilt

Coming out to your dad is a moment that defines so many gay men – an 
idiosyncratic flashbulb memory they can recall with ease, the coming-out tale 
they default to when asked the inevitable question. Mine was such a moment – if 
only for the complete dearth of drama that followed. It’s a vague haze, 
compared with the countless other conversations I’ve had with friends and 
family members.

He phoned the morning after I’d talked to my mum, opening the conversation 
with praise for my courage. Aside from this remark, though, I barely remember 
the conversation. We certainly didn’t discuss the revelation in any depth – 
because of its irrelevance, not awkwardness. It was a nonevent. Nothing had, or 
would, change.

Last June, six years on from coming out to him, I drove up to his vicarage in 
Goostrey, an old farming village my parents moved to in 2011. My dad had just 
come out of hospital after a very near miss: his heart had arrested three 
times, stopping altogether twice. He was arriving home that night, so the plan 
was to surprise him on a weekend that fortuitously coincided with Father’s Day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgay-son-preacher-man-religion-homosexuality-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a24fffae1d6846b711a2db4b31200a31fdae20d%2F0_38_1077_646%2F1077.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99m%20the%20gay%20son%20of%20a%20preacher%20man.%20When%20I%20came%20out%20to%20Dad%2C%20he%20was%20perfect%20%7C%20Chris%20Godfrey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgay-son-preacher-man-religion-homosexuality-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99m%20the%20gay%20son%20of%20a%20preacher%20man.%20When%20I%20came%20out%20to%20Dad%2C%20he%20was%20perfect%20%7C%20Chris%20Godfrey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fgay-son-preacher-man-religion-homosexuality-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4a24fffae1d6846b711a2db4b31200a31fdae20d%2F0_38_1077_646%2F1077.jpg>
 The late Reverend Ian Godfrey. Photograph: Chris Godfrey 
My boyfriend sat in the passenger seat; it would be the first time my dad 
would meet him – or any of the guys I’ve dated. When we walked through the door 
and into the kitchen, my dad – in his affable way – welcomed him into the house 
with all the warmth and fervour he would a parishioner.

It was the last time I would be with him in the family home. My dad passed 
away last month. At the age of 59, he died peacefully, unexpectedly and far too 
early after contracting MRSA following a short illness. He wasburied a few weeks
 
<http://blogsfromthebongs.blogspot.co.uk/2016/08/ian-godfrey-vicar-of-faith-and-courage.html>
 later at the cemetery of one of the churches he presided over – St Peter’s in 
Swettenham.

Since my dad passed it’s fair to say I’ve thought about him and our 
relationship a lot. Having spent 26 pretty awesome years with him it would be 
impossible not to. The immediate, debilitating grief has, for the most part, 
subsided; now when I think back to how he was with my coming out, I’m left with 
a cascade of immense gratitude and lingering guilt. Gratitude for the 
unconditional support he showed me when I did; guilt for never actually 
thanking him for it.

Fourteen gay Anglican priests urge bishops to take lead on inclusion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/03/conservative-anglicans-appointment-of-gay-bishop-a-major-error>
There were four months between that first spell in hospital and his eventual 
passing. I’m thankful that during the time in between he got to finally see me 
standing before him, a proud gay man with his boyfriend, the product of his 
invaluable upbringing. And that if I had tried to thank him for his unwavering 
support when I came out, his response would have been to bat away any gratitude 
with an “I’m your father, it’s what I’m here for” sort of remark. It was that 
simple to him: instinctive, resolute, unconditional.

It would be crass of me to use this space to attack the homophobic elements 
within the Church of England – and I’m not quite sure what my dad would make of 
me using his death to attack his former employer – but I will say this: his 
faith taught him to love people unconditionally, so that’s what he did. No 
matter how complex the conflict between religion and homosexuality is made to 
be, by all parties, it really is possible to just wholeheartedly welcome, 
embrace and champion both. He did, and he made it look so easy.

Likewise, that question people ask me when they find out my dad was a vicar, 
“What was he like when you came out?” It’s one of the easiest I’ve ever had the 
pleasure of answering. He was perfect.
 