
Two years ago, my life took an unexpected turn: I became a single parent. 
Until that point, my career had followed a fantastically upward trajectory. I 
was more than a decade out of my PhD and was leading my own research group. 
Children had always featured in my life plan, alongside (I’d hoped) a 
flourishing career. Divorce had not. But just a few weeks after finally getting 
a permanent academic position, I discovered that my partner, with whom I had 
two children, had been having an affair. A long affair. A marriage-ending 
affair. Just as I thought I was coming out on top after years of juggling a 
young family with a fledgling career, I suddenly found myself in a newly 
disadvantaged position.

Related: I landed my dream PhD – and it turned into a nightmare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2017/jan/06/i-landed-my-dream-phd-and-it-turned-into-a-nightmare>

My career and my mental health have only just made it through the upheaval. 
I’ve relied on a combination of part-time working, compressed hours, a 
sympathetic reduction in responsibilities when required, home-working and 
generous support from several colleagues – in particular my talented and stoic 
technician and my childminder – to scrape through to a place where I have a 
functioning and even productive home and work life.


In hindsight I probably should have asked for more specific support from the 
outset. But what did I need? I was so blindsided that I had no idea. In 
reality, I have not worked any less in the past two years. I have travelled 
more and taken on more responsibilities, but my productivity, particularly in 
regard to the number of papers and grant applications I have written, has been 
worse. I often missed deadlines. My reviews were always late and lectures and 
talks prepared with a minimum of time. I have been scooped quite badly twice, 
as unfinished papers sat on my desk waiting to be finished and submitted.

This was not just a result of less time but a reaction to stress. My memory 
and focus can be poor now and my multi-tasking is not what it was. It takes me 
much longer to complete creative tasks.

I have begun to feel as though my research career (and perhaps parenthood) is 
an endurance sport

The worst is over, but things are still hard. I have two children who live 
with me five-and-a-half days a week. I have to get them to school, clean and 
with lunches, and keep their world of home, friends and family (including my 
ex-partner) as whole and as intact as possible. I am also responsible for a 
research group of six people. My heart races with anxiety over children and 
students, deadlines, and budgets, both for my lab and my household.

Like many in the UK, my lab, my career and the careers of my staff teeter 
continually on the edge of financial viability. I no longer have the support 
(financial and otherwise) of a partner and I often lie awake at night worrying 
that I’ll face ruin if a paper is scooped or a grant rejected. Can I work hard 
enough to stay employed and pay my mortgage? What if I am just not competitive 
enough and lose my position?

In another job I might have had friends or family to lean on but, like many 
academics, my wider support network is an international one. I am not from the 
UK. Many of my closest friends are the scientists I studied with and they’re 
across the world. Whatsapp is great but it can’t give you a hug on another 
lonely, anxious Friday night.

So this is my life now: work in the lab, support my staff, teach my students, 
write papers, sit on committees, lecture, mark, examine, organise conferences, 
go to conferences, review grants and papers, mentor, examine two or three PhD 
theses a year, give talks, push my work in public and do a lot of paperwork. 
Then I pick up my kids from childcare, get dinner ready, supervise homework, 
read a bedtime story, do the dishes and housework and get organised for the 
next day. Then I sit down to finish off the work I interrupted to get home to 
the kids.

Related: I was assaulted while researching, but was too scared to speak out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/dec/09/i-was-assaulted-while-researching-but-was-too-scared-to-speak-out>

I’ve done this for two years and I have begun to feel as though my research 
career (and perhaps parenthood) is an endurance sport. I have to keep going. 
But I can’t imagine going on like this forever without consequences for my 
mental or physical health. Would I consider another job? Perhaps, although I 
think that ship has sailed for me (unless I am made redundant). With a home to 
pay for and children to support, I am limited in my freedom to explore 
re-training or other employment opportunities.


So why don’t I give myself a break? The upside of being a single parent is 
supposed to be that you have built-in child-free time, when your children are 
with the other parent. But I find time without them empty and depressing. I try 
to fit in some things from a normal life, swimming and running to take the edge 
off the constant surges of adrenaline. Those hours are also my window of 
opportunity for dating – but who wants to go on a date with a career-obsessed 
single-parent scientist at 10pm on a Sunday? They might be out there, but I 
don’t have the time to find them.


Single parents in academia are a sign of progressive times. We’re still 
uncommon but no longer rare. The tide is turning and universities are beginning 
to understand how to enable us to work and fulfil our potential. But if all the 
single parents out there are feeling as stressed as me, we’re going to have 
problems.


Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 