
The right to make decisions about our bodies, provided we don’t harm others, 
is sacred. That right was today upheld by a High Court judge in approving a 
14-year-old Londongirl’s dying wish to have her body frozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/teenage-girls-wish-for-preservation-after-death-agreed-to-by-court>
. She did so in the hope one day of coming back to life. This hope clearly gave 
comfort to a dying person.

Cryonics <https://www.theguardian.com/science/cryonics> is, to many of us, 
absurd. But the right to employ it is not. Wanting to be buried in a fridge 
rather than in a grave is hardly a big deal. Rising from the dead is one of the 
oldest human cravings. It is central tenet of Christian faith, whether 
resurrection is to take place in heaven, hell, a churchyard or the second 
coming.. Science fiction writers imagine bodies being suspended in time to 
enable space travel.

14-year-old girl who died of cancer wins right to be cryogenically frozen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/teenage-girls-wish-for-preservation-after-death-agreed-to-by-court>
The science of low-temperature physics is in its infancy. Cryonicists believe 
blood can be drained, stored and replaced withantifreeze-like chemicals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2008/feb/14/research.cryonics> to 
prevent crystallisation and the rest of the body preserved intact. Stem cells 
can be isolated and stabilised. Body parts can be replicated. As a field of 
research, some of this may yield advances in the understanding of cells and 
body chemistry. Some may indeed help in preserving simple body parts. But the 
idea that the infinity of brain cells could be locked down and then 
resuscitated as a human beingremains fanciful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/18/cryogenics-does-it-offer-humanity-a-chance-to-return-from-the-dead>
. If we wish to live for ever, we must have children.

The world is full of wacky science. In America, the home of hope, over 100 
bodies are believed to lie in iced storage, in what their former owners believe 
is suspended animation. Good luck to them, and to the scientists whocharged 
them £65,000 each 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/oct/11/cryonics-booms-in-us>.

None of this matters at law. Today’s case is about something different, the 
rights of individuals and families. The girl, a minor, and her mother wanted 
cryonics. Her father, who is separated from her mother, did not. He changed his 
mind on condition he could see his daughter on her death.Her mother and her 
refused 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/11/18/cancer-girl-14-is-cryogenically-frozen-after-telling-judge-she-w/>
. What right does a teenage girl’s father have?

The answer, in this case, was none. The decision was about the rights of all 
of us, including in this case a mother and her child, to “own” our bodies. The 
wider implications extend to the right to die and be helped to die, as to 
abortion, drug use, cancer cures, alternative medicine and, more 
controversially, our custodianship of our children. A young girl’s wish to pay 
for the freezing and storage of her body may be eccentric. That is no reason 
for refusing it.
 