
Wherever you go in the world, you can pretty much guarantee that a good 
proportion of the people around you will be too busy checking their phones to 
look up and appreciate their surroundings.

I'm not LMAO at ridiculous emails from my students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/05/im-not-lmao-at-ridiculous-emails-from-my-students>
We are in the midst of a selfie epidemic. We document every moment of our 
lives – the places we visit, the people we meet, the things we achieve. And now 
this culture has infiltrated the world of academia.

Before I go any further, let me explain: I am speaking from the perspective of 
a young PhD student, not some cranky old professor harking back to the Good Old 
Days.

Using social media to impress people that you know – as well as those that you 
have never met – has now become a professional concern for many academics. I 
see more and more of them live tweeting and hashtagging their way through 
events.

When did it become acceptable to use your phone throughout a lecture, let 
alone an entire conference? No matter how good you think you are at 
multitasking, you will not be truly focusing your attention on the speaker, who 
has no doubt spent hours preparing for this moment.

Some advocates argue that social media provides a form of dissemination – a 
way to share the conference with those who are unable to attend. For some 
tweeters, I am sure that is the case. But it appears that the majority perform 
this ritual as proof of their dedication to the profession, as if posting a 
picture marks them out as more enthusiastic than their peers.

Dear student, I just don't have time to mark your essay properly
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/20/dear-student-i-just-dont-have-time-to-mark-your-essay-properly>
I suspect that this trend stems from the work of careers advice gurus. “You 
must remember, potential employers could be Googling your name right now, 
keeping an eye on your social media timelines,” they advise. “Try to Tweet 
regularly to ensure that people know that you love your work and are truly 
dedicated to the world of science.”

Perhaps I’m naive, but I need to believe that employability is not directly 
correlated to how many likes you get on your Instagram posts. I appear to be in 
the minority, however.

At my university, there are some who utter the words “make sure you tweet a 
picture” on what feels like a daily basis. These are not social media 
representatives or marketing executives, but scientific staff. I know many 
academics who are unwilling to engage in any form of conversation in person, 
yet will happily broadcast their opinions and conversations to the entire 
online world.

Our obsession with metrics turns academics into data drones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/nov/27/our-obsession-with-metrics-turns-academics-into-data-drones>
Then there are the staff who go further than just tweeting about lectures and 
conferences. In the wake of the EU referendum, I have seen many using social 
media to voice very strong opinions, often criticising the general public en 
masse. Given that taxpayer money forms a substantial portion of our research 
funding, this kind of outburst risks alienating the very people we are trying 
to engage with.

It has got to the point where those of us who wish to keep our social media 
accounts private, or for personal use only, face being frowned upon for somehow 
being less enthusiastic about what we do.

But surely the dedication I show in the lab, and the subsequent data I 
collect, should speak for itself. I do not – and should not – have to parade 
myself online to please my employer or to stake my claim as a good researcher. 
Can’t we save the showing off for where it’s really needed, in the dreaded 
grant applications?

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 