
Wherever you go in the world, people are too busy checking their phones to 
really appreciate their surroundings. It’s so disappointing. Focusing on their 
breathtakingly impressive technological devices that allow access to endless 
information and constant communication with hundreds of friends, rather than 
looking up and acknowledging the unparalleled beauty of a decaying bus stop? Or 
a nondescript café wall? Or a public toilet? People are so shallow!

I'm a serious academic, not a professional Instagrammer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/05/im-a-serious-academic-not-a-professional-instagrammer>
We are in the midst of a selfie epidemic. The World Health Organisation 
<http://www.who.int/en/> is stockpiling selfie vaccines as we speak, which are 
weakened pictures of yourself injected into the bloodstream to allow your 
immune systems to fight them off. Probably. I don’t know.

People document every moment of their lives, and now this culture has 
infiltrated academia. Who’d have thought that academia would behave similarly 
to the human society of which it is a part? It boggles the mind.
Pete Etchells (@PeteEtchells) 
I R serious academic https://t.co/4kXwke5pe0 <https://t.co/4kXwke5pe0> 
pic.twitter.com/NlvkXUgpqh <https://t.co/NlvkXUgpqh>
 <https://twitter.com/PeteEtchells/status/761487470705999872> August 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/PeteEtchells/status/761487470705999872> 
Before I go further, let me explain; I am not a cranky old professor, or a 
student, criticising the use of online communication by scientists, in an 
online article, with no apparent sense of irony. I’m a jobbing lecturer/tutor 
whose attempts to produce publishable research were thwarted by circumstance 
and bad luck, so I had scarce hope of a decent job in the current “publish or 
perish <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Publish_or_perish>” climate that pervades 
academia far more insidiously and damagingly than an enthusiasm for Instagram. 
EmbracingTwitter <https://twitter.com/garwboy> and the online world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping> essentially saved my bacon 
and allowed me to provide for my family.

But that’s just me. I’m probably the only person to miss out on a lucrative 
science career due to bad luck, it’snot like the field is oversubscribed and 
competition fierce or anything 
<http://www.the-scientist.com/?articles.view/articleNo/44874/title/Opinion--The-Postdoc-Crisis/>
. Everyone knows becoming a successful scientist is just a matter ofworking 
round the clock all day every day, communicating with as few people as possible 
and having no life outside the lab 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2014/may/02/five-alternative-things-successful-phd-students-would-never-do>
, so what’s the point of social media?

Using social media to impress people with your research and other projects has 
now become a professional concern for many academics. Previously, they’d have 
to impress people by standing next to complicated posters in conferences and 
hoping an interested person wandered into their eye-line.Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> has clearly made this 
meticulously efficient method less productive, for reasons that definitely 
exist.
Dainty Ballerina (@DaintyBallerina) 
As a #seriousacademic <https://twitter.com/hashtag/seriousacademic?src=hash> 
I'm wasting time on Twitter sharing a woodcut of a woman relieving herself in 
the street.pic.twitter.com/2f1DKrUsH9 <https://t.co/2f1DKrUsH9>
 <https://twitter.com/DaintyBallerina/status/761524104965021696> August 5, 2016
 <https://twitter.com/DaintyBallerina/status/761524104965021696> 
When did it become acceptable to use your phone throughout a lecture or 
presentation? Sure, you may bespreading the presenter’s work far and wide 
<http://www.nature.com/spoton/tag/social-media-case-study/>, increasing their 
potential audience by orders of magnitude, but that just meansnormal people 
might see it. Who wants that? Plus, you can’t possibly be smart enough to both 
follow the presentation and tweet at the same time. If you were, you’d be an 
academic or something.

Sadly, it appears (to me) that most of the people who share their work online 
do so purely as proof of their dedication to the profession, to mark them out 
as more enthusiastic than their peers. This is very sad. Before social 
networks, academia was essentially a communist utopia, where nobody ever 
self-aggrandised or showed any hint of ego. This is genuinely true, ask anyone 
who agrees with me.

I suspect that this trend stems from careers advice gurus. “Tweet every 19 
seconds or future employers will think you’re busy embezzling funds or 
injecting heroin in the stationary cupboard” they say. Probably. I wouldn’t 
know, I never had a careers advisor. My school didn’t have the funding. We just 
had a CD-ROM which asked you questions about what you were interested in and 
then gave you a suggested job to go for based on these. I’m fairly sure it was 
random. It once even suggested I try being a “careers advisor”, which seemed 
like some cruel joke in context.
Louise Creechan (@LouiseCreechan) 
My behaviour at conference bars. #SeriousAcademic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SeriousAcademic?src=hash> 
pic.twitter.com/O8pK6ZSlT9 <https://t.co/O8pK6ZSlT9>
 <https://twitter.com/LouiseCreechan/status/761512904713797633> August 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/LouiseCreechan/status/761512904713797633> 
Perhaps I’m naïve, but I need to believe that employability is not directly 
correlated to how many likes you get on social media. But no, I’ve lost count 
of the number of times I’ve been beaten to a job by someone who had more 
Twitter followers than me, or a better mastery of Instagram filters. 
Admittedly, I sometimes struggle to count to one, but the point still stands.

I’ve even encountered some scientific staff who encourage social media use. I 
know many who don’t talk too well to people in person but are happy to 
communicate online. It’s as ifscience attracts socially awkward types 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/its-a-fact-scientists-more-likely-to-be-socially-inept/152421.article>
 who aren’t outwardly confident in person but can usethe safer and more ordered 
environments of social media and technology 
<http://blogs.scientificamerican.com/anthropology-in-practice/what-does-it-mean-to-be-an-introvert-online/>
 to communicate more freely and enthusiastically, and thus get greater 
enjoyment out of life? What a totally ridiculous notion!

Some scientists even go further and express opinions about important issues 
like theEU referendum <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 
They talk about thingsthat are nothing to do with their work! Engaging with the 
public, who might not agree with them. This risks alienating the taxpayers who 
fund our work. Much better to maintain an illusion that we’re all totally 
passive drones with no views of our own.

I realise I am using the fact that our work is funded by taxes to argue that 
we should show utter deference to those outside our field, despite earlier 
condemning anyone who tries to share our work with the very people who pay for 
it. No, YOU’RE inconsistent!
Becca Harrison (@BeccaEHarrison) 
I'm such a #seriousacademic 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/seriousacademic?src=hash> I even have my own 
parking spacepic.twitter.com/xdeXNrLsf5 <https://t.co/xdeXNrLsf5>
 <https://twitter.com/BeccaEHarrison/status/761512078670725120> August 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/BeccaEHarrison/status/761512078670725120> 
This social media craze in science has gone too far. Surely the dedication I 
show in the lab should be enough to get me promotions and respect? It’snot like 
I’m a woman or anything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2015/jun/02/terrible-advice-sexism-science-magazine>
. Why can’t I just do my job and rely on everyone else recognising my 
brilliance and rewarding me in a manner that I feel I deserve?

What’s the point of academia if it doesn’t conform to my own specific 
preferences?

Dean Burnett emphasises his lack of seriousness as a scientist in his debut 
book The Idiot Brain 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Idiot-Brain-Neuroscientist-Explains-Really/dp/1783350814/ref=sr_1_1_twi_pap_2?s=books&ie=UTF8&qid=1461961162&sr=1-1>
, available now in the UK 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/370462/s/idiot-brain/>
, USA 
<http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/idiot-brain-dean-burnett/1122688091?ean=9780393253788#productInfoTabs>
and Canada <http://www.harpercollins.ca/9781443450065/the-idiot-brain>.
 