
The release of the professor watchlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/professor-watchlist-website-academic>
, purporting to expose professors who discriminate against conservative 
students, is anything but that. I should know: I’m on it.

As one of a handful of religion professors in the US who study, write and 
teach about conservative Christianity and politics, I am all too aware of the 
real meaning of the list, and of its purpose. Promoted byTurning Point USA 
<http://www.tpusa.com/chapters/>, the list is not simply designed to expose 
professors who discriminate; it is designed to silence and smear. And it helps 
feed information and screeds to similar sites likethe College Fix 
<http://www.thecollegefix.com/> and Campus Reform 
<https://www.campusreform.org/>, which states that they are “a watchdog to the 
nation’s higher education system” to “expose bias and abuse on the nations 
college campuses”.

Professor Watchlist website elicits both fear and ridicule in US universities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/professor-watchlist-website-academic>
Charles Kirk 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2015/03/the-21-year-old-becoming-a-major-player-in-conservative-politics/451110/>
, a young leader in conservative politics, who is the publisher of the list and 
co founder of Turning Point USA,stated 
<http://time.com/4588165/professor-watchlist-silence-conservative/> that he 
hopes that the professor watchlist will change campus culture by highlighting 
previously reported incidences and statements. It very well might. Turning 
Point USA has chapters on over 300 college campuses across the United States, 
and even more on high school campuses.

For a group claiming to be a watchdog to higher education, the organization is 
training students from high school in how to not engage their education 
critically, but to combat anything or anyone that does not promote or teach 
with a conservative viewpoint. It is an all-out bid to control not only 
academic freedom in the university setting, but to create a hostile climate for 
free speech and academic freedom.

Rightwing organizations like Turning Point USA or Leadership Institute 
<http://www.leadershipinstitute.org/> spend considerable amounts of money and 
time to train students with conservative values how to “fight back”. Their 
efforts on campuses not only promote conservative values but also feed the 
large right-wing media complex – sites like Town Hall and Breitbart. Many of 
the articles that are published by College Reform end up being reported by 
other outlets within hours, and in some cases, picked up by Fox News. 
Professors targeted remain blissfully unaware until their inbox fills with hate 
mail, and the administration has to field calls from media outlets and 
disgruntled conservatives.

Many professors and university officials do not know that these organizations, 
populated by their own students, exist. They are left flatfooted when lists 
like the Professor Watchlist appear, because these organizations are not only 
about promoting the idea that university education ishostile 
<https://www.aaup.org/article/rethinking-plight-conservatives-higher-education#.WEF1t7wrIy4>
 to conservatism, but also to get the maximum amount of exposure for their 
beliefs.

For tenured professors like myself, the Professor Watchlist is an annoyance 
that takes away from research, teaching and time with students. For professors 
on the tenure track, or lecturers who are trying to keep a contract job, being 
named on the professor watchlist could mean diminishedopportunities 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/28/us/professor-watchlist-is-seen-as-threat-to-academic-freedom.html?_r=0>
 for their careers if colleges and universities do not understand the purpose 
and nature of these groups.

These types of attempts to influence campus culture and teaching are 
disturbing. It creates an environment where the very idea and understanding of 
academic freedom and first amendment rights are called into question – not only 
by students, but also by well-funded outsiders with agendas.

It also creates an environment of distrust. Students are being trained not 
only to report on professors, but on student events as well. At the University 
of Pennsylvania, acampus event <http://www.thecollegefix.com/post/29898/> the 
day after the presidential election in a dorm to provide a “breathing space” 
was reported on by a student who mocked the presence of coloring books, cats 
and dogs.

This type of “reporting” is Orwellian. Yet there are students in our midst on 
campuses who feel that that they need to report on, rather than engage with, 
other perspectives.

The irony of all of this is that while I am on the Professor Watchlist, I am 
probably one of the few professors in America who encourages the students who 
take my Religious Right in America course to attend conferences likeCPAC 
<http://cpac.conservative.org/> and Values Voters Summit 
<http://www.valuesvotersummit.org/>. No one censors my class when I ask 
students to watch clips of Ronald Reagan, Phyllis Schalfly or William F 
Buckley. I can teach a course like Religious Right in America at the University 
of Pennsylvania because of the institution’s commitment to academic freedom and 
discourse.

So when groups like Turning Point USA say that I should be watched because I 
am advancing a radical agenda in the lecture hall, maybe I should. I’m teaching 
about their organizations, and how conservatives think. Radical indeed.
 