
Could national populism have reached its high-water mark in western politics. 
Perhaps globally? It may be too early to say, but some signs point to a 
pushback against rampant xenophobia, bigotry and the ruinous fascination with 
strongmen. The indications are fragile, but without doubt they are there.

Take the US, Germany and France. Donald Trump has had a more successful bid 
for the presidency than anyone could have imagined a year ago, but his campaign 
now seems on the wane, damaged by Republican defections and his ramblings on 
women. The political death of Angela Merkel has been pronounced many times 
since the 2015 refugee crisis but the chancellor, arguably Europe’s most 
forceful voice on inclusiveness, simply has no obvious challenger ahead of 
Germany’s 2017 election. As France heads towards primaries next month, it’s a 
centrist figure,Alain Juppé 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/alain-juppe-france-prophet-happiness-presidential-wows-rally-crowd>
 (not Nicolas Sarkozy, who has embraced far-right themes) who leads the polls. 
This makes it more likely that Marine Le Pen will be soundly beaten in the 
second round of next year’s presidential election (which she is all but 
guaranteed to reach).

It might be that populists have over-reached, or that memories of a dark past 
have come to the fore

Such signals have global significance. The US remains the single most powerful 
democracy in the world. AHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> victory in November would 
mean an entirely different global environment to the one that would emerge if 
the US were to end up with a presidency of the type imagined in the 2004 Philip 
Roth novel, The Plot Against America, in which the pilot Charles Lindbergh 
defeats Roosevelt in the 1940 election.

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> and France might form an 
unbalanced couple, but they stand at the heart of European politics: what 
happens in their elections will largely define what can be salvaged of the EU 
project – arguably much more than Brexit negotiations will do. Britain’s 
current political travails are a seen as a side show in Europe at the moment.

Elsewhere on the continent, there are yet more signs of pushback. In central 
Europe, often described as a hotbed of parochialism and intolerance, illiberal 
politicians aren’t entirely having their way. This month Poland’s nationalist, 
ultraconservative government had tobacktrack on plans to curtail abortion rights
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/05/poland-signals-u-turn-total-abortion-ban-protests-video-report>
 after thousands of women protested on the streets. And Hungary’s authoritarian 
prime minister,Viktor Orbán 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/hungary-future-europe-far-right-viktor-orban>
, suffered a serious setback when his referendum on EU migrant quotas failed 
because of low voter turnout.The electorate snubbed him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/02/hungarian-vote-on-refugees-will-not-take-place-suggest-first-poll-results>
.

This may be dubbed the era of post-truth politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/boris-johnson-donald-trump-post-truth-politician>
 and cynical autocrats, but new forms of resistance to bigotry are also 
emerging. It may be that national populists have overreached (Trump’s racist 
and misogynist antics); or that memories of a dark past and the need to avert 
political catastrophe have come to the fore (Germans wanting to counter the 
far-right Alternative for Germany, French citizens worried about Le Pen). It 
may be that groups are rekindling the spirit of democratic mobilisation (Polish 
women and the anti-Jarosław Kaczyński grassroots, who are such keen 
demonstrators). It may be that voter apathy also sends a message about policies 
that stigmatise outsiders (Hungary).

'The question was stupid': Hungarians on the refugee referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/04/the-question-was-stupid-hungarians-on-the-refugee-referendum>
Does this sound too optimistic? Precisely because there haven’t been many 
reasons for optimism recently, it’s important not to ignore what is potentially 
promising. Likewise, it’s important to see how the connections between 
international affairs and domestic politics may not all play out in the 
populists’ favour. Authoritarianism has thrown its weight around in recent 
years, but right now it’s going through a bad patch.

Take Russia. Whatever allowances some in the west might have sought to make 
for Putin in the past, the Syrian tragedy has made this much more difficult. To 
claim that Russia’s air assault on Aleppo’s population is no different from 
western interventions against Isis not only flies in the face of documented 
facts, it smacks of intellectual and moral disorientation.

Geopolitics feeds into politics. Which means there is cautious hope to be 
drawn from the fact that Putin’s Russia currently finds itself more isolated 
than it ever has been (only Venezuela’s autocratic regime voted alongside 
Russia in the UN recently). Russia has been an active backer of populists in
Europe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and in the US. Putin 
sympathisers now find themselves having to keep awkwardly silent over the 
scandal unfolding in Syria, or having to repeat a propaganda line that many 
citizens may find hard to swallow.

This is not to say that national populists or their authoritarian backers are 
about to be defeated or disempowered. The fuel that powers the far right has 
yet to be exhausted. But from Clinton’s lead to the surprising strength of 
Europe’s political centre-ground, and with the novelty of Russia being 
discredited on many fronts, the picture is not just doom and gloom for the 
democratically minded. If this is an interconnected world, then the pushback 
against national populism may be stronger than we think.
 