
I finished my PhD two years ago, have a full-time job outside academia, and 
have even moved to a new country – but my PhD supervisor is still contacting me 
and pressurising me to publish my results. I fulfilled the requirements for my
PhD <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/phd> and have moved 
on to new interests and new challenges. Despite the many ways my life has 
changed since I graduated, I am left wondering when my doctorate will really 
end.


Pressure on PhD graduates to publish their results once they have finished can 
put challenging demands on their time, when they might no longer be tied to 
their research or the institution in the way they were while enrolled in the 
PhD programme.


It's hard being a carer and a PhD student. My university couldn't care less
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/30/its-hard-being-a-carer-and-a-phd-student-my-university-couldnt-care-less>
Graduates may be studying different topics, working outside academia, or 
job-hunting. They could also be juggling multiple personal and family 
responsibilities that they placed on hold during the PhD. When you are actively 
enrolled on a PhD programme, you have to take account of institutional and 
research council guidelines and expectations. The responsibilities of a 
post-PhD student are much less clear.

Post-PhD pressure

My own PhD supervisor has tried a number of methods over the past two years to 
convince me to revisit my doctorate and write papers for publication. At first 
I was optimistic, due to their assurances that writing papers could be 
completed quickly, based on the weighty document I had already produced. I 
began drafting two papers for publication in my spare time, and worked on them 
for a few months. Early on, I received input from my supervisor and I used the 
feedback to revise the work and send a new version to them.

However, my emails about it began to receive no response – term time had 
begun. I wasn’t particularly interested in pursuing the papers personally or 
professionally, so I was happy to let the communication slide. I had already 
spent many months using all my lunch breaks, evenings and weekends to complete 
my thesis and I didn’t relish a return to that lifestyle.

Academic staff: we graduate teaching assistants need you to fight for us
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/28/academic-staff-we-graduate-teaching-assistants-need-you-to-fight-for-us>
Six months later, I received a long email detailing the unsalvageable damage I 
would do to my career unless I produced publications from my PhD. The email was 
pure manipulation and easily grounds for a formal complaint to the institution. 
My supervisor instructed me to complete a full draft of a paper within two 
weeks.

I explained that didn’t want to be manipulated into further work, but there 
was no response. Then, a year later, my supervisor contacted me asking for an 
update on the papers. Having nothing further to say, I’ve now stopped replying 
to these requests. All I really want is for the doctorate to be over.

While I’m aware that a number of funding councils anticipate publication of a 
student’s work, and there is rightly a growing consensus that publicly funded 
research should be available to all, I don’t think that the expectations of the 
funding councils are always appropriately interpreted by PhD supervisors. 
Graduates have a range of opportunities ahead of them, and an academic career 
is not always the sole, or even the most desirable, outcome of the time 
invested in earning the doctorate.

Guidelines required

Supervisors probably face increasing pressure to present the tangible outcomes 
of their supervision, especially given Ref targets – but if publications are 
seen as a critical part of the PhD, then should they not be contained within 
the time period that it takes one to earn it? When new students set off to earn 
an undergraduate degree, there isn’t an expectation that years later they might 
be contacted to write up work they did during their studies. Why should it be 
any more acceptable for PhD students to be contacted after their doctorate for 
this purpose?


Arguably, PhD graduates who have embarked on a post-doctorate track might be 
more inclined to produce publications . But in these cases, the graduates 
themselves are likely to be proactive. The problem arises when a graduate is no 
longer involved in the same work, and has to all intents and purposes fulfilled 
their obligation to obtain the award.

Universities must do more to protect PhD students working in dangerous 
countries
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/13/universities-must-do-more-to-protect-phd-students-working-in-dangerous-countries>
 For those who are ready to move on after they have achieved their doctorate, 
clearer guidance might be needed from funding councils and institutions about 
expectations following the completion of a PhD.

Guidance could set out as to whether students have an obligation to their 
supervisors, the institution or their funding body to publish their research 
following completion of the doctorate. Institutions might also offer 
supervisors advice on how to approach previous PhD students about publishing 
their work.


Reaching a consensus between the competing priorities of graduates, 
supervisors, the Ref, funding councils and the QAA might not be a simple task, 
but we need to be clear: when does the PhD actually end?

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 