
The world can cope with 7 or even 10 billion people. But only if we stop 
eating meat. Livestock farming is the most potent means by which we amplify our 
presence on the planet. It is the amount of land an animal-based diet needs 
that makes it so destructive.

An analysis by the farmer and scholar Simon Fairlie  
<http://www.thelandmagazine.org.uk/articles/can-britain-feed-itself>suggests 
that Britain could easily feed itself within its own borders. But while a diet 
containing a moderate amount of meat, dairy and eggs would require the use of 
11m hectares of land (4m of which would be arable), a vegan diet would demand a 
total of just 3m. Not only do humans need no pasture, but we use grains and 
pulses more efficiently when we eat them ourselves, rather than feed them to 
cows and chickens.

This would enable 15m hectares of the land now used for farming in Britain to 
be set aside for nature. Alternatively, on a vegan planet, Britain could feed 
200 million people. Extending this thought experiment to the rest of the world, 
it’s not hard to see how gently we could tread if we stopped keeping animals. 
Rainforests, savannahs, wetlands, magnificent wildlife can live alongside us, 
but not alongside our current diet.

We believe we can solve the ethical problems by switching to free-range meat 
and eggs. Nothing is further from the truth

Because we have failed to understand this in terms of space, we believe we can 
solve the ethical problems caused by eating animals by switching from indoor 
production to free-range meat and eggs. Nothing could be further from the 
truth. Free-range farming is kinder to livestockbut crueller to the rest of the 
living world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/festive-christmas-meal-long-haul-flight-meats-damaging-planet>
.

When people criticise farming, they usually preface it with the word 
intensive. But extensive farming, almost by definition, does greater harm to 
the planet: more land is needed to rear the same amount of food. Keeping cattle 
or sheep on ranches, whether in the Amazon, the US, Australia or the hills of 
Britain, is even more of a planet-busting indulgence than beef feed-lots and 
hog cities, cruel and hideous as these are.

How much is Britain prepared to pay to protect its wildlife? | Patrick Barkham
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/how-much-britain-pay-protect-wildlife-stone-curlew-farmers-eu-funding-threat>
Over several years, as I became more aware of these inconvenient truths, I 
gradually dropped farmed meat from my diet. But I still consumed milk and eggs. 
I knew the dire environmental impacts of the crops(such as maize and soya 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/sum.12068/abstract>) that dairy 
cows and chickens are fed. I knew about the waste, the climate change, theair 
pollution <http://e.com/nature/journal/v525/n7569/full/nature15371.html>. But 
greed got the better of me. Cheese, yoghurt, butter, eggs – I loved them all.

Then something happened that broke down the wall of denial. Last September I 
arranged to spend a day beside the River Culm in Devon, renowned for its 
wildlife and beauty. However, the stretch I intended to explore had been 
reduced to a stinking ditch, almost lifeless except for some sewage fungus. I 
traced the pollution back to a dairy farm. A local man told me the disaster had 
been developing for months. But his efforts to persuade the Environment Agency 
(the government regulator) to take action had been fruitless.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fvegan-corrupt-food-system-meat-dairy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde9a6644d99d22e25273b408e098445688f269b%2F0_310_4322_2594%2F4322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=I%E2%80%99ve%20converted%20to%20veganism%20to%20reduce%20my%20impact%20on%20the%20living%20world%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fvegan-corrupt-food-system-meat-dairy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=I%E2%80%99ve%20converted%20to%20veganism%20to%20reduce%20my%20impact%20on%20the%20living%20world%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fvegan-corrupt-food-system-meat-dairy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdde9a6644d99d22e25273b408e098445688f269b%2F0_310_4322_2594%2F4322.jpg>
 Farms and pastureland carve their way into tropical forestland in the 
Brazilian state of Rondônia, one of the Amazon’s most deforested regions. 
Photograph: Planet 
I published the photos I had taken in the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/think-dairy-farming-is-benign-our-rivers-tell-a-different-story>
, and they caused a stir. Yet the Environment Agency still refused to take 
action. Its excuses were so preposterous that I realised this was more than 
simple incompetence.After publishing another article about this farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2015/nov/12/toothless-environment-agency-is-allowing-the-living-world-to-be-wrecked-with-impunity>
, I was contacted separately by two staff members at the agency. They told me 
they had been instructed to disregard all incidents of this kind. The cause, 
they believed, was political pressure from the government.

That did it. Why, I reasoned, should I support an industry the government 
refuses to regulate? Since then, I have cut almost all animal products from my 
diet. I’m not religious about it. If I’m at a friend’s house I might revert to 
vegetarianism. If I’m away from home, I will take a drop of milk in my tea. 
About once a fortnight I have an egg for my breakfast, perhaps once a month a 
fish I catch, or a herring or some anchovies (if you eat fish, take them from 
the bottom of the food chain). Perhaps three or four times a year, on special 
occasions, I will eat farmed meat: partly out of greed, partly because I don’t 
want to be even more of a spectre at the feast than I am already. This slight 
adaptation, I feel, also reduces the chances of a relapse.

I still eat roadkill  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/27/why-i-ate-a-roadkill-squirrel>
when I can find it, and animals killed as agricultural pests whose bodies might 
otherwise be dumped. At the moment, while pigeons, deer, rabbits and squirrels 
are so abundant in this country and are being killed for purposes other than 
meat production, eating the carcasses seems to be without ecological 
consequence. Perhaps you could call me a pestitarian.

Even so, such meals are rare. My rough calculation suggests that 97% of my 
diet now consists of plants. I eat plenty of pulses, seeds and nuts and heaps 
of vegetables. That almost allows me to join the 500,000 people in Britain who 
are full vegans 
<https://www.vegansociety.com/whats-new/news/find-out-how-many-vegans-are-great-britain>
 – but not quite. Of course, these choices also have impacts, but they are 
generally far lower than those of meat, dairy and eggs. Paradoxically, if you 
want to eat less soya, eat soya directly: eating animal products tends to mean 
consuming far more of this crop, albeit indirectly. Almost all the soya grown 
where rainforests once stood is used to feed animals. Replacing meat with soya 
reduces the clearance of natural vegetation, per kilogram of protein, by 96%.

Meet the parents raising vegan babies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/19/parents-raising-vegan-babies>
After almost a year on this diet, I have dropped from 12 stone to 11. I feel 
better than I’ve done for years, and my craving for fat has all but 
disappeared. Cheese is no more appealing to me now than a lump of lard. My 
asthma has almost gone. There are a number of possible explanations, but I 
wouldn’t be surprised if it had something to do with cutting out milk. I have 
to think harder about what I cook, but that is no bad thing.

Meat eating is strongly associated with conventional images of masculinity 
<http://www.press.uchicago.edu/pressReleases/2012/May/JCR_1205_MeatMen.html>, 
and some people appear to feel threatened by those who give up animal products. 
An Italian politician this week proposed jailing parents who impose a vegan 
diet on their children 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/europe/italy-vegan-law-parents-force-diet-children-face-jail-a7180206.html>
, in case it leaves them malnourished. Curiously, she failed to recommend the 
same sanction for rearing them on chips and sausages.

By chance, at a festival this summer, I again met the man from Devon who had 
tried to persuade the Environment Agency to take action on the River Culm. He 
told me that nothing has changed. When there’s a choice between protecting the 
living world and appeasing powerful lobby groups, most governments will take 
the second option. But we can withdraw our consent from this corruption. If you 
exercise that choice, I doubt you will regret it.
 