
Last week I disclosed to human resources that I have dyslexia. I am both 
relieved and terrified.

I have been dyslexic all my life. At school I was in remedial classes and got 
extra time in exams. Microsoft taught me to spell in adulthood, and I somehow 
ended up becoming a prolific academic researcher, a teacher and professor. Yet 
in 23 years, this is the first time that I have told an HR department about it.

Cheer up, my academic colleagues! We're so lucky to do this job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/08/cheer-up-my-academic-colleagues-were-so-lucky-to-do-this-job>
I’m afraid because universities have treated dyslexia as a disability since 
the introduction of Disability Discrimination Act 1995 and the Equality Act 
2010. It’s not their fault – they have to – but I worry about the assumptions 
that will be made about my ability.

HR has advised me to contact my line manager to discuss “adjustments to my 
role”. This is what is known as adeficit approach 
<http://www.achieveability.org.uk/files/1270740075/dfes-framework-for-understanding-dyslexia.pdf>
 – I have to discuss what I cannot do, which will inevitably shape what my line 
manager thinks I can do.

Dyslexia is personal and hard to explain. Imagine learning a Romance language 
in which you cannot use the definite article (il, le, la, l’ in Italian, for 
example) with any accuracy, but you can use the subjunctive – which is a source 
of fascination and wonder. Multiply this by all the possibilities in life and 
you have the idea. I can usually anticipate disaster before it occurs, but some 
things remain hidden and impossible.

 It is often the small, routine tasks that lead me into situations beyond 
comprehension. Imagine that you are a dyslexic professor (who has not informed 
HR). An email arrives regarding module specifications ZX181, ZX182, ZX287, 
ZX381, ZX478 regarding GLO1 in ZX181; LO2 in ZX282; LO5 in ZX381 and ZX281, 
GLO3 in ZX178 and the wrong referencing convention in the reading list.

You tackle the referencing first. So far, so good.You find LO2 and get to to 
work. Then you realise it is in ZX281 rather than ZX182 and you’ve edited the 
wrong one. There goes an hour.

A voice in your head is shouting “idiot” but you don’t believe in giving up in 
the face of adversity, so this goes on for another hour. The stress is causing 
the text to move and float around. You can no longer understand the words in 
the original email.

What to do? Ask a colleague ? No, they will think you are dumping work on 
them. Or they may do it, but it doesn’t seem fair. But there is nowhere to go – 
how do you explain that words are jumping all over the page?

Academics Anonymous: why I'm leaving academia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/may/01/academic-anonymous-leaving-academia>
Feeling isolated

Situations like this can leave dyslexic academics feeling isolated. The very 
idea of adjustments feels somewhat anti-collegial because someone else is going 
to have to do my work for me.

It’s worth remembering that it was only a few decades ago that dyslexia was 
seen as an excuse for laziness or stupidity. Although there is greater 
understanding now, I wonder how many academics have actually read about it – 
for those who want to, I would recommend the brilliant Dyslexia at College. It 
made me cry with joy and sorrow and allowed me to recognise: this is how it is.

If dyslexics think so differently to other academics, their work is 
intrinsically original. We’re not just seeing the wood rather than the trees, 
we are seeing the spaces between the trees and occupying those spaces, which 
are invisible to others.

But there are still those working in higher education who do not recognise the 
presence of dyslexics – I’ve heard jokes about it from the most unlikely 
colleagues. A friend once said: “You’ve done very well, considering.” It was 
meant in the kindest possible way, but I still remember those words, 20 years 
on.

I discovered I could write in my late 20s and I loved it. The new ability was 
addictive. So I wrote and wrote and wrote; it made me happy, but it was hard. 
Rewriting my first book as a second edition, 13 years later, I felt the 
difficulty etched in every sentence. But seeing my books – material objects 
full of my words – was proof that the prejudice against dyslexia was unfounded.


Academics are being hoodwinked into writing books nobody can buy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/04/academics-are-being-hoodwinked-into-writing-books-nobody-can-buy>
Why now?

So why have I gone to HR now? In the past 18 months, quite by chance, I have 
met four dyslexics at my university. For the first time ever, I discussed the 
issues with fellow professionals, including whether to talk to HR. I also 
realised that my stress level had reached a point that was not productive. I 
discovered that aDyslexic Academic Network 
<https://www.facebook.com/Dyslexic-academic-network-586652408150171/> is being 
launched next month – and I am told there may be as many as 1,500 dyslexics in 
UK universities.

In the meantime, I remain terrified and relieved, happy and unhappy, and 
uncertain as ever about combining the word “professor” with “dyslexic” to 
describe who I really am. Dyslexic academics – like me – have to accept that 
being dyslexic and an academic is not strange or weird. But as long as we only 
get to adjust for the negatives of dyslexia, there will only be negatives. I 
hope I am wrong about this. Maybe it will be alright in the end.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
, and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk
 