
Surely no season calls for the nation to unite and put its ugly squabbles 
behind itself more than this one.Sajid Javid has the answer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/sajid-javid-british-values-oath-casey-review-social-integration>
: he doesn’t want a “government-approved, one-size-fits-all identity”, which is 
fortunate, since the spirit recoils at the identity the government would 
approve. But he does want to establish some “building blocks of society”, which 
will involve, in the first place, requiring the holders of public office to 
swear some oaths of allegiance to British values. “Tolerating the views of 
others, even if you disagree with them” is the one that would cause the 
immediate problem for the prime minister, who finds many views, even her own of 
six months ago, utterly intolerable.

She would also struggle with Javid’s proposed oath of “respect for the law, 
even if you think the law is an ass”. Isn’t Theresa May explicitly at war with 
the law in styling herself for a hypothetical snap election, according to 
leaks, as the “people versus the judges 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2374751/theresa-may-plans-to-call-snap-general-election-early-next-year-to-crush-supreme-court-judges-and-safeguard-brexit/>
” candidate?

And the oath of “believing in freedom of speech, freedom of religion, freedom 
from abuse …” would arguably entail, from the prime minister, her cabinet, her 
party and her Ukip fellow travellers, a rather more rigorous rejection of 
Islamophobia, so that Muslim women in shopping centres didn’t have to be 
dragged along the ground by their hijabs in a newly emboldened climate of 
“saying the unsayable”. Finally Javid has in mind allegiance to “a belief in 
equality, democracy and the democratic process”, that quintessentially British 
principle to which almost the entire world at least claims to subscribe.

Sajid Javid proposes 'British values oath' in wake of Casey review of social 
integration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/sajid-javid-british-values-oath-casey-review-social-integration>
This is in many ways a Classic Oath, oath-making in the proud British 
tradition where you dress up as loyalty and patriotism what is in reality an 
attack on a particular group or religion: in this instance, the oaths are 
intended to weed out of public life theMuslims of Louise Casey’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/social-integration-louise-casey-uk-report-condemns-failings>
, who aren’t properly British because they fail to castigate Isis strongly 
enough.

Henry VIII set the gold standard with the original Oath of Supremacy in 1534 
<http://www.historylearningsite.co.uk/tudor-england/royal-supremacy/>, which 
savaged Catholics without ever mentioning them and doubtless – in its segue from
“forraine” to “prelate” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oath_of_Supremacy&action=edit&section=1>
 – managed to inflame hatred among proud Englishmen for other men who were 
themselves also English. Even in a kingdom with very little migration, it was 
possible to generate a politics of xenophobia just by ascribing to some natives 
the characteristics of a foreigner. Henry VIII was, of course, the very 
distillation of Englishness, an unskippable chapter in the nation’s history.

But there’s a reason we always reach for Winston Churchill rather than Henry 
when we want to describe our proudest moments in history. And that reason is 
that Henry VIII was a dick. There’s Britishness and there’s Britishness, all of 
it authentic, much of it contradictory, not all of it edifying. Oath-making is 
British all right; it’s just not the best of British.

No oath for public office-holders can ever be effective, since anyone who 
participates in public life does so for what they believe to be in the 
community’s best interests, and will bend their understanding of words like 
“equality” and “democracy” to fit. There may – indeed, there must be a few 
outliers – people of premeditated evil who assume office for personal gain or 
other nefarious purpose. But those people would have no problem swearing an 
oath disingenuously, since they intended from the outset to swindle or bring 
down the institution anyway.

However, as Captain Black articulated frankly in Catch-22’s Glorious Loyalty 
Oath Crusade <http://www.sparknotes.com/lit/catch22/section3.rhtml>: “The 
important thing is to keep them pledging … It doesn’t matter whether they mean 
it or not. That’s why they make little kids pledge allegiance even before they 
know what ‘pledge’ and ‘allegiance’ means.” A loyal person proves their loyalty 
by not minding how often they’re asked to pledge it. Only the disloyal take 
offence, thereby proving how much we need the oath. So the muscles of power are 
flexed and flexed again, and public opinion which would once have had the 
courage to say “ew, this is too much” is silenced.

This idea flows into the stagnant pool of Tory gesture politics – one part 
state-aggrandising, one part telling the people, but only the particular, 
mean-minded, fearful, querulous people of your own devising, that you’re on 
their side. I can already feel it piling into the garbage segment of my 
political memory, so that one day in the future, Javid’s oaths will have become 
I, the undersigned, do hereby promise to defendJohn Major’s cones 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/7772818.stm> around Theresa May’s 
racist vans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/31/go-home-vans-11-leave-britain>
, protect them from the vandalism of ridicule, because that is the British way; 
to tolerate views you disagree with, including this stupid oath.

Sorry, Louise Casey, but Muslim women are held back by discrimination | Aina 
Khan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/louise-casey-discrimination-muslim-women-bradford>
Yet there is another British way: a proud history of keeping these things 
tacit, of not pledging or flag-waving or thumping tables, of finding patriotism 
in restraint, and being proud to take decency as a default. There is more 
Britishness in self-deprecation than in jingoism, more national identity in 
embarrassment than in brash self-assertion.

George Osborne, whose recent pronouncements have the distorted, faint timbre 
of coming from a great distance, said recently that he regretted having 
concentrated on the economy (part of his West Wing-obsessed political youth, 
and we’ll just have to deal with this bullshit self-fashioning another day) at 
the expense of what he called “identity politics”. He uses the term wrongly; it 
was neither invented nor ever, until now, used to mean “nativism”, but rather, 
the act of building a politics around an identity that defined you, whether by 
gender or race or sexuality.

The distinction is meaningful: when you mobilise as a woman, you don’t require 
everyone around you also to become one. When you mobilise as British, it is on 
the understanding that everyone should laud and exceptionalise the nation as 
you do.

Identity politics is pluralist by definition; the politics of patriotism is 
not. Javid’s attempt to shore up democratic values with a show of power is, 
likewise, a misappropriation, taking the principles of equality as garb for a 
divisive authoritarianism. These conservatives are like reverse Santas, 
constantly coming down our chimneys to steal our stuff.
 