
If you’re looking for clues as to why George Osborne’s help-to-buy scheme  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/mar/20/budget-2013-osborne-offers-homebuyers-help-to-buy>
was not a magic bullet for the housing crisis, look no further than its own 
website. There, in the summer of 2015, appeared the story ofMatthew and Alice 
<https://www.helptobuy.gov.uk/customer-stories/customer-story/teachers-take-first-step-onto-property-ladder-in-south-yorkshire/>
: a young pair of teachers from South Yorkshire whom the help-to-buy scheme 
helped to buy.

“This is a house we’ll be able to grow into,” the case study quotes Matthew as 
saying, presumably as he gazes, dewy-eyed, at a light fitting or something. But 
then he adds: “We were fortunate with the deposit in that I’d inherited some 
money from both sets of grandparents, but help to buy has made it possible to 
buy a home that is more spacious than we thought we’d be able to afford.”

This, remember, was a couple that the government chose to highlight as a case 
study. This was an official statement as to who help to buy was for. And the 
government chose a couple who could have bought anyway, through their 
inheritance.

It’s right that we are now including renters in our housing policies | James 
Cartlidge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/renters-housing-policies-home-ownership-conservatism>
A quick primer on what help to buy actually does is due at this point, as the 
scheme comes in several flavours. One is a 20% government equity loan, for 
those buying new-build houses (this is the one Matthew and Alice used). Another 
is an ISA: for every pound you save, the government will give you an extra 25p, 
up to a maximum of £3,000. This would be great, if you had any money to save, 
but with the level of rents these days, there’s a fair chance you don’t.

These parts of the scheme are still both alive and well; a third is not long 
for this world. Since October 2013, buyers have been able to buy a home – 
existing as well as new-build – with a deposit of just 5%. Only first-time 
buyers qualify, the guarantee is only available on properties up to a certain 
price (£600,000), and no one is allowed to borrow more than 4.5 times their 
income. But nonetheless, these were pretty liberal terms, and selected lenders 
have been willing to offer 95% mortgages to eligible borrowers, safe in the 
knowledge that the government had guaranteed the mortgage.

This scheme’s impending demise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/29/closure-of-help-to-buy-scheme-confirmed-by-philip-hammond>
 hit the headlines after the chancellor, Philip Hammond, confirmed plans to 
close it at the end of the year. But this was always going to be the plan – 
because, unlike the ISA and the equity loan, the mortgage guarantee was never 
really about buyers at all. It was about lenders. In 2013, few financial 
institutions were willing to lend to first-time buyers with 5% deposits. Now, 
in part thanks to the mortgage guarantee, confidence has returned, and the 
number of 95% mortgages on offer has increased by afactor of almost five 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/09/i-was-wrong-about-help-buy-im-still-glad-its-gone-1>
. Seen through that lens, the scheme worked.

But did it actually help anyone to buy? On the surface the answer is clearly 
yes: more than 86,000 households, in fact.

Except … think about the scheme’s wider effects. By making more people able to 
buy, the government was effectively encouraging more money into the housing 
market. If you aren’t simultaneously building a lot more houses, which 
obviously we aren’t, then the main effect of chucking more money into the 
market will be an increase in prices.

Philip Hammond ditches Osborne's help-to-buy homes scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/29/closure-of-help-to-buy-scheme-confirmed-by-philip-hammond>
In other words, while help to buy might have helped a few, its contribution to 
ever-rising house prices will have stymied many others. Apart from anything 
else, that 5% deposit just keeps getting harder to save for.

So if mortgage guarantees weren’t the solution, what is? The help-to-buy 
equity loan may help at the margin: it’s only available on new-build 
properties, so it should encourage housebuilders to build more. But not, so 
far, a lot more. And if we’re ever going to see home ownership return to the 
levels enjoyed by earlier generations, we are going to need a lot more housing, 
to reflect the fact this country now contains a lot more people.

This means reforming the green belt, to reduce land prices and give 
over-crowded cities space to grow. It means getting the state building homes 
again, to acknowledge the fact that the big housebuilders – which have an 
incentive to keep prices high – are never going to plug the gap themselves. 
(Hammond, to his credit, seems to have realised this. Inhis speech today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/philip-hammond-to-set-out-his-stall-for-balanced-budget-at-tory-conference>
, he promised £2bn to spend on new building on public land, as well as £3bn to 
help smaller housebuilders get house building.) It may even require us to start 
knocking things down, and rebuilding them at higher densities.

The David Cameron government didn’t do any of those things. It didn’t make any 
of the hard choices required to solve the housing crisis. It never even 
acknowledged that the main reason ownership kept on falling was because prices 
kept on rising. Instead, it offered a few well-targeted subsidies to keep the 
money flowing and help a few lucky buyers to join the party.

In a report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/born-in-early-80s-then-youre-half-as-wealthy-as-1970s-children-says-ifs>
 out last week, the Institute for Fiscal Studies showed that those born in the 
early 80s (hi!) are on average half as rich as those born 10 years earlier were 
at the same age. The crash, austerity, and the increasingly mythical status of 
pensions all play their part in that. But the biggest element is surely 
housing. Help to buy did not arrest that trend. It may well have made things 
worse.
 