
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> has said he 
would be prepared to join the striking Southern rail workers on a picket line, 
blaming the government for protecting the company despite its poor performance.

A day after Transport for London (TfL) station staff went on strike across 
London’s tube network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london>
, Southern train serviceswere cancelled on Tuesday, as well as on Wednesday and 
Friday, in the latest strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/latest-southern-rail-strike-expected-to-cause-severe-disruption>
 on the commuter rail network. These are the first walkouts of the new year in 
a long-running dispute at Southern over whether drivers should operate train 
doors.

“I think many people trying to commute in from Brighton are utterly fed up with
Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail and the way it 
has behaved,” Corbyn said.

Asked if he would join striking drivers and guards on picket lines, the Labour 
leader told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “Yes I would, because I think 
Southern rail have behaved in a terrible manner and the government seems to be 
more interested in protecting Southern rail despite its appalling service and 
shortage of trains, overcrowding, and continues allowing them to run the 
franchise.

“I would want that franchise brought back into public ownership because we 
provide the rails and the trains and they make the profits.”

Corbyn later told Sky News he was not planning on joining a picket line on 
Tuesday, because of a shadow cabinet meeting and his planned speech on Brexit 
in Peterborough later in the afternoon. “I’m not going to a picket line today, 
but what I’m saying to the government is get together with those who travel on 
the trains, who work on the trains, to get a solution,” he said.

Labour’s mayor of London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, Sadiq Khan, 
condemned the tube strikes on Monday, but the Labour leader said he understood 
the concerns about ticket office closures that had prompted them.

Khan had called the strikes “completely unnecessary” and said he had already 
announced the creation of 600 jobs across the network by the end of the year, 
as a step towards replacing those cut by the former mayor Boris Johnson.

Corbyn said: “I still believe that the lack of ticket offices, certainly at 
the major interchanges, is a problem. What should have happened is the 
continuation of the negotiations and another offer made by TfL, and now we’ve 
had a one-day strike and the union has shown its determination to pursue this.

“I would hope there will now be agreement on this, because it’s not a strike 
about wages, it’s a strike about some jobs, though TfL say the number is 
minimal, it’s about services to the public and I hope there will be a new offer 
made by TfL and I urge them to resume negotiations as soon as possible.”

About 2,500 British Airways crew are also set to strike on Tuesday and 
Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/british-airways-cabin-crew-to-go-on-strike-next-week-in-pay-dispute>
, although the airline said only a small number of flights from Heathrow would 
be affected.
 