
Leading Brexit campaigner Iain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith> has distanced himself 
from a pledge by the official leave campaign to spend £350m “sent to the EU 
every week” on theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, saying he had 
never made the claim.

During the referendum campaign, Vote Leave issued posters reading: “Let’s give 
our NHS the £350m the EU takes every week.” The campaign’s battlebus, outside 
which the former work and pensions secretary was frequently photographed, 
featured the slogan: “We send the EU £350 million a week – let’s fund our NHS 
instead.”

Why Vote Leave's £350m weekly EU cost claim is wrong
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
But asked about the statement on Sunday morning, Duncan Smith said he had 
never made the claim during the campaign.

Speaking to the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show, he said: “I never said that during the 
course of the election. The £350m was an extrapolation of the £19.1bn – that’s 
the total amount of money we gave across to theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>. What we actually said was a significant 
amount of it would go to the NHS. It’s essentially down to the government, but 
I believe that is what was pledged and that’s what should happen. There was 
talk about it going to the NHS, but there are other bits and pieces like 
agriculture, which is part of the process. That is the divide up. It was never 
the total.”

He denied that his comments constituted a broken promise, saying: “The lion’s 
share of that money, the government is now able to spend. So people can say 
that there is more money available now for the NHS – categorically more, which 
is what’s required and that’s the key point.”

The repeated claim by the leave campaign that the UK could save £350m a week 
by leaving the EU wascriticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/27/uk-statistics-chief-vote-leave-350m-figure-misleading>
 in the run-up to the referendum, with the independent Institute for Fiscal 
Studies describing the figure as “clearly absurd” and estimating that Britain’s 
net contributions were closer to £175m a week.

Sir Andrew Dilnot, the chair of the UK Statistics Authority, twice reprimanded 
the campaign for using the figure, while Conservative MPDr Sarah Wollaston 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/dr-sarah-wollaston-defects-vote-leave-remain-campaign>
 said the claim that all of the money saved would go towards the health service 
meant she no longer felt comfortable being part of the Vote Leave campaign.

Speaking hours after the result of Thursday’s referendum was announced, the 
Ukip leader, Nigel Farage, said he could not promise money spent on the EU 
would instead go to the NHS. “I would never have made that claim, and it was 
one of the mistakes that the leave campaign made,” he said. “You must 
understand, I was ostracised by the official leave campaign and I did – as I 
always do – my own thing.”

A week before the referendum, pollsters working for Britain Stronger in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> admitted that they were getting 
extremely worried about Vote Leave’s suggestion that £350m sent to the EU could 
be diverted to British priorities such as the NHS. Guardian focus groups in 
Brighton and Knowsley suggested many voters saw the message and believed it.

One woman in Merseyside told the group: “Just think, we could get £20bn back a 
year and make the country great again.”
 