
Ian McCaskill, who has died aged 78, was one of the best recognised faces on 
theBBC <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> for 20 years in his role as a 
weather forecaster. His diffident delivery and gentle Scottish accent were much 
admired. He always tried to lighten up his presentation. Seeing that there was 
little entertainment value in the reports themselves, he tried to deliver them 
with descriptive one-liners.

“I think I was good,” he said later. “I cheered up people – and I irritated a 
lot of Englishmen who didn’t like an ethnic Scot delivering the weather.” When 
he started, in 1978, it was still unusual for BBC presenters to have regional 
accents. In 1994 McCaskill was voted Britain’s sexiest weather presenter and 
often received affectionate fan mail.

By the time he retired in 1998, though, he was thoroughly relieved to have 
done with his work pattern – the routine was shifts from either 9pm to 9am or 
5am to 3pm. “I’d paid my debt to society,” he said. “The conditions of service 
for weather forecasters at the BBC are universally crap.” He pointed out that 
as a Met Office employee he was paid civil service rates and not those of a TV 
personality. But he had nonetheless become a celebrity and was among those 
impersonated by Rory Bremner. He was also lampooned with his ownSpitting Image 
puppet <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=43F7qJTmRFs> – considered the ultimate 
flattery in the 1980s.

The forecasts did not always get it right, or even nearly right. In 1987, his 
colleagueMichael Fish <http://www.michael-fish.com/> was ridiculed for saying a 
hurricane was not going to happen <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NnxjZ-aFkjs>
, just a few hours beforeit did <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2mDt1cYkoc4>. 
Later – much later, 18 years in fact – McCaskill confessed to being the guilty 
party who had given Fish the forecast that day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fian-mccaskill-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c62a29f916e323ec0ad56033b832f9a64d9c3a%2F22_60_5673_3405%2F5673.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ian%20McCaskill%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fian-mccaskill-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ian%20McCaskill%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fian-mccaskill-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2c62a29f916e323ec0ad56033b832f9a64d9c3a%2F22_60_5673_3405%2F5673.jpg>
 Ian McCaskill, right, with fellow forecaster Michael Fish in 1991. Photograph: 
David Fisher/Rex/Shutterstock 
Though McCaskill took his leave of the BBC without tears, he continued to pop 
up on TV. In 1999 he appeared in a BBC2 series calledThe Essential Guide to 
Weather <http://genome.ch.bbc.co.uk/f132d58d74b140e0b49291aca1eb6046>, saying 
that he was being paid tuppence ha’penny, but it should give people a laugh. 
But he did not do too badly: he madecommercials 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JEUCZ7RPaL8>, personal appearances and 
after-dinner speeches. He also appeared in pantomimes, though the audience was 
apt to laugh delightedly at him rather than to boo as required.

He was born John Robertson McCaskill, the son of an insurance agent, in 
Glasgow, and attended Queen’s Park school andGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> University, where he studied geology 
and chemistry. He was then small enough to cox for the university rowing club. 
He also joined the dramatic society. His first ambition was to be a doctor but 
his parents could not afford to keep him at university for six years, so he 
decided to opt for a teaching career.

But when he was called up into the RAF, his scientific background led to him 
being put through meteorological college and after two years he found that it 
seemed to have better career prospects than teaching. He worked for the RAF 
from 1959 as a meteorologist, including a spell in Malta, where he met his 
first wife, Lesley Charlesworth, a teacher, with whom he had two daughters, 
Vicky and Kirsty.

As a civilian, he became one of the 2,000 civil servants working in the Met 
Office. When volunteers were sought to present TV weather forecasts, he was 
selected. It meant that he and Lesley had to move from Manchester, where they 
were very comfortable, to London and a more uncertain future.

McCaskill always tried to retain the light touch but latterly felt that 
technology had expelled humour from forecasting and that there was no place for 
Met people in what he called “youth-orientated TV”. Long before retirement from 
the Met Office, he was already casting his thoughts in a new direction by 
taking a degree at the Open University, studying science in the form of geology 
but also computing, electronics, sociology, statistics and mathematics.

In 2002 he joined ITV’s Celebrity Fit Club. Though slight tubbiness – at 5ft 
9in he weighed more than 15 stone – had been part of his television persona, he 
managed to lose two stone to raise money for charity, later proclaiming that he 
no longer felt 64 but about 30.

In 2006, together with Paul Hudson, another weatherman, he wrote a book, 
Frozen in Time 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/Frozen-Time-Worst-Winters-History-x/dp/1905080093>, 
about Britain’s harshest winters.

Lesley died of breast cancer in 1992. Six years later, he married Pat Cromack, 
a family friend. She and his daughters survive him, along with two stepsons, 
Tim and Matthew, and nine grandchildren.

• Ian McCaskill (John Robertson McCaskill), weather forecaster, born 28 July 
1938; died 10 December 2016

• Dennis Barker died last year
 