
The “Dove Campaign for Real Beauty 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=R5Ynz3eje9s>” has spent years telling women 
that we can all be beautiful regardless of our shape, size and colour. Like me, 
you may have been too busy trying to be a modern-woman-who-has-it-all to 
realise this, but luckily for us, the men at Unilever pointed it out. For their
latest campaign <https://twitter.com/Dove/status/788439612200849408> the 
purveyors of patronising soap have paired up with a “behavioural investigator” 
(me neither) to tackle negativity online.

Not the daily harassment and threats that women face online, of course. But 
those negative pals in your life who are always moaning to you on social media. 
And it’s hard to see what there could be to moan about as a woman in 2016 
– everything’s great, right? You see, Dove thinks your attitude stinks as much 
as your armpits.
Dove (@Dove) 
If you know a girl who has been negative online—about herself or others—try 
this fun activity to spread positivity.#SpeakBeautiful 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/SpeakBeautiful?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/cEZZbCz4ye
 <https://t.co/cEZZbCz4ye>
 <https://twitter.com/Dove/status/788439612200849408> October 18, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Dove/status/788439612200849408> 
It would be easy to think of Dove as the male colleague who periodically tells 
you that you could go far if only you looked a little more enthusiastic in 
meetings, but really what woman doesn’t look better when she smiles? So next 
time you notice a friend being negative online why not give her a reason to 
cheer up; it’s not that the news today is bad, it’s the way you’re choosing to 
interpret it. Just tell the negative Nellies in your life to peruse a few of 
the many reasons she has to be cheerful – and then unfriend away.

Wage gap

Never mind that the current gap stands at 9% which is equivalent to more than 
a month’s free work a year,new analysis by Deloitte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/24/gender-pay-gap-wont-close-until-2069-says-deloitte>
 says the wage gap will finallyclose in 2069 
<http://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/press-releases/articles/deloitte-analysis-without-action-gender-pay-gap.html>
, a full 99 years after the Equal Pay Act. This may feel like far away, but if 
you’re a woman in your 20s today you will definitely feel the benefit because 
you’ll still have rent to pay. Mark 2069 in your calendars now as the time when 
you’ll be able to hold your head up high in the knowledge that you now earn as 
much as Dave!

Sexual harassment

New research from the TUC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/aug/10/half-of-women-uk-have-been-sexually-harassed-at-work-tuc-study-everyday-sexism>
 shows that 52% of women and 63% of women aged 18-24 said they have experienced 
sexual harassment at work. Statistics are all about the interpretation; looking 
at it another way, 48% of women haven’t been sexually harassed at work – that’s 
almost one in two women. You go girl!

The US election

Tenth woman accuses Donald Trump of sexual misconduct
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/20/donald-trump-sexual-misconduct-tenth-woman-accuser>
This year’s presidential election has amplified the voices of women. At the 
time of writing, 10 have come forward with allegations of sexual misconduct 
against Donald Trump. The Republican candidate himself was kind enough to share 
a platform withthree women 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/bill-clinton-accusers.html?_r=0> 
who have made accusations of rape and sexual harassment against Bill Clinton. 
Cynics might argue these women are being used as pawns but I genuinely can’t 
remember an American presidential election when we’ve heard from so many women. 
And that’s without even mentioning the likely next incumbent of the Oval 
Office, Hillary Clinton ...

Health fears

A recent study of more than a million women demonstrated what many have 
suspected all along;the contraceptive pill is linked to depression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/pill-linked-depression-doctors-hormonal-contraceptives>
. Thestudy showed 
<http://www.nhs.uk/news/2016/09September/Pages/Women-taking-the-contraceptive-pill-more-likely-to-be-depressed.aspx>
 that women taking the combined pill were 23% more likely to be prescribed 
antidepressants and those taking the progestin-only pill were 34% more likely 
than those not on the pill. While this sounds like a bad news story, it’s 
really just another victory for women’s intuition.

Maternity services

In the UK, our lady prime minister, Theresa May, has endorsed plans to crack 
down on maternity tourism by introducing passport checks in maternity wards. 
This may mean that women in late stages of labour have to hold tight, turn 
around, head home and find their documents, but really it shows that our labour 
wards are popular international destinations like the ones you find in Condé 
Naste Traveller and in-flight magazines!

Superhero stance

Wonder Woman announced as UN ambassador amid staff protest
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
The choice of Wonder Woman as a United Nations ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/oct/21/wonder-woman-un-ambassador-staff-protest>
, has been met with shock and anger. Rather than bother to find a real woman to 
campaign for gender equality, the UN has chosen a comic book character owned by 
DC (who coincidentally will be coming to a cinema screen near you in 2017). 
More predictable choices may have beenMuzoon Almellehan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/16/muzoon-almellehan-newcastle-malala-yousafzai>
, a Syrian teenager who has worked to encourage other girls in refugee camps to 
continue with their education or perhaps modelAlek Wek 
<http://www.unrefugees.org/alek-wek/>, whose work with Unicef and Doctors 
Without Borders has helped to raise awareness about the difficulties faced by 
people in Sudan..

But enough with the negatives, let’s ask another question: apart from an 
improbable waist to bust ratio, what does Wonder Woman have that a real woman 
doesn’t? In choosing a work of fiction, the UN has managed to avoid any 
problems they might have incurred with a real woman with a body and mind. The 
transport, food and accommodation budget for this ambassador will be slim and 
you don’t have to worry about her saying anything off-brand because between 
them, the UN and DC control every word she says. There’s simply none of the 
difficulty or fuss of working with a real-life woman. If anything, this is a 
woman that refuses to be held back by her status as a work of fiction, and how 
many men can you say that about?
 