
On a Sunday afternoon, a relative calls. She is at a party and wonders if I 
can help a friend of a friend.

“Her brother is having cancer treatment and wanted to talk to you.”

“You know I don’t like doing this, especially if there is another oncologist 
involved.”

“I know,” she says contritely. “But she is so shocked and I thought just your 
words might help.”

Suppressing a groan, I ask: “What kind of cancer does he have?”

“It’s some form of blood cancer.”

“He needs a haematologist. I can try to suggest one.”

“Oh, that won’t do,” she says. “He lives in Germany.”

“Germany has really good healthcare! He doesn’t need my advice, especially on 
a disease I don’t even treat.”

“But people like us, we hear the word ‘cancer’ and freak out.”

We could prevent millions of cancer deaths with knowledge we already have | 
David Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
The friend of a friend is a wreck and I can’t bear to turn down her request. 
So although there is very little I will say, I patiently hear her out. Her 
brother indeed has cancer and has met his German oncologist, commenced 
chemotherapy, and seems to be doing OK. He has young children and the family is 
anxious about prognosis. The friend asks me many times if he will die from his 
disease. I tell her as many times as I can that he seems to be in competent 
hands and that the question about prognosis should be directed towards his 
treating doctor.

I long to tell her that he has a highly curable disease but without knowing 
all the details, this wouldn’t be right. I end the call feeling somewhat like a 
politician, having batted away every meaningful question with a platitude but 
my hands feel tied.

“If I have cancer, will I die?”

As an oncologist, it’s both interesting and poignant to know that this is one 
of the most common answers peopleseek from Google 
<https://www.google.co.uk/webhp?sourceid=chrome-instant&ion=1&espv=2&ie=UTF-8#q=If+I+have+cancer%2C+will+I+die%3F>
. Dispensing with the obvious, “Everyone must die”, the answer I hope Google 
would give is: “Tell me more.” Google should ask for not just the type of 
cancer but the colour of your skin, the language you speak, how much you earn, 
what country you live in, the distance to the nearest cancer centre, and 
crucially, if you are married.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fif-i-have-cancer-will-i-die-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483b93779d7b516df116450f49af5c81857f2ba8%2F0_39_728_437%2F728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=If%20I%20have%20cancer%20will%20I%20die%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Ranjana%20Srivastava&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fif-i-have-cancer-will-i-die-google%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=If%20I%20have%20cancer%20will%20I%20die%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Ranjana%20Srivastava&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fif-i-have-cancer-will-i-die-google%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F483b93779d7b516df116450f49af5c81857f2ba8%2F0_39_728_437%2F728.jpg>
 ‘The disparities in cancer outcomes based on the socioeconomic gradient are 
significant and sadly familiar to every oncologist.’ Photograph: Enrique 
Castro-Mendivil/Reuters 
In the developed world, cancer survival rates are increasing. An Australian 
patient diagnosed with cancer today has a67% chance of being alive in five years
 
<https://canceraustralia.gov.au/affected-cancer/what-cancer/cancer-australia-statistics>
. Cancer Research UK states that cancer survival rates in the UKhave doubled 
from 24% to 50% in the past 40 years 
<http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/health-professional/cancer-statistics/survival>
. A recent American Cancer Society report calculates five-year survival for all 
cancers as having risen from49% to 69% 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwicnsO0js7QAhUiIsAKHdjpC7AQFggdMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.cancer.org%2Facs%2Fgroups%2Fcontent%2F%40research%2Fdocuments%2Fdocument%2Facspc-047079.pdf&usg=AFQjCNF0Tao4K8UmkbQwQQgVcf47icCPeQ&sig2=LCVVEN1J9xs1-dq5x5_BRw>
 in the past 40 years.

If you have survived the first five years, the chance of long-term survival is 
increasingly optimistic, more than 90% for all cancers combined. These improved 
outcomes are attributed to early diagnosis and better treatments. Modern 
chemotherapy and radiotherapy regimens are unrecognisable compared to earlier 
decades. The march of immunotherapy continues, with new drugs able to delay 
cancer progression and extend survival in traditionally bleak scenarios 
including melanoma and lung and bladder cancer.

We now know that cancer is actually many different diseases 
<https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/what-is-cancer>, cancer 
cells are extraordinarily smart at outwitting the body’s defences, and a 
reasonable goal ought to be keeping cancer patients better for longer rather 
than expecting to banish cancer altogether. Amid the high survival rates for 
common cancers such as bowel, breast and prostate, detected early, the outcomes 
for brain, pancreas and stomach cancers remain dismal, with most patients 
expected to live for only a few years.

The secret life of an oncologist: witnessing the most painful and intimate 
moments of life | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/secret-life-oncologist-cancer-painful-intimate-life-treatments>
But apart from tumour biology, what else affects survival? Being male, an 
ethnic minority and being non-English speaking confers poorer outcomes as does 
social disadvantage, illiteracy, poverty and living far away from the full 
suite of services that modern treatment demands. Thedisparities in cancer 
outcomes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/25/cancer-survival-rates-worse-for-people-in-poorer-areas-study-finds>
 based on the socioeconomic gradient are significant and sadly familiar to 
every oncologist, who nonetheless spend most of their time prescribing drugs 
because this is what they feel best equipped for.

Interestingly, marriage (but not living with a friend or a child) conveys a 
consistent and substantial impact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/11/marriage-boosts-survival-chances-of-cancer-patients-say-scientists>
 on cancer detection, outcome and survival. Married people seek earlier 
attention for concerning symptoms, are more compliant with treatment, and die 
with greater psychological support. Married men benefit somewhat more than 
women but in the case of five common cancers, the overall impact is greater 
than published results of chemotherapy, leading theJournal of Clinical Oncology 
<http://ascopubs.org/doi/full/10.1200/jco.2013.51.5080> to state baldly: 
“Marriage is as protective as chemotherapy.”

It’s fair to say that if you are a cancer patient lucky enough to live in the 
rich world, you can be increasingly optimistic about your chances all along the 
continuum of cancer care, from diagnosis to terminal care. But what if a person 
living in a poorer country asks the same question? Unfortunately, the answer is 
more likely to be a straightforward: “Yes, you will die.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhave-scientists-found-the-cure-for-cancer-video-explainer&picture=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F16%2F1455643724607%2FKP_1794377_crop_640x360.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Have%20scientists%20found%20the%20cure%20for%20cancer%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhave-scientists-found-the-cure-for-cancer-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Have%20scientists%20found%20the%20cure%20for%20cancer%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F16%2Fhave-scientists-found-the-cure-for-cancer-video-explainer&media=http%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2016%2F2%2F16%2F1455643724607%2FKP_1794377_crop_640x360.jpg>
Have scientists found the cure for cancer? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/feb/16/have-scientists-found-the-cure-for-cancer-video-explainer>
There are 14m new diagnoses and 8m cancer deaths each year. A staggering 70% 
of deaths happen in Africa, Asia and Central and South America 
<https://www.cancer.gov/about-cancer/understanding/statistics>. Poverty, poor 
governance, inadequate infrastructure and scarce specialists all play a role. 
Many countries have pockets of excellence but there is no comprehensive and 
easily accessible programme of cancer education, screening, treatment and 
palliative care.

Globally 20% of cancers are related to tobacco 
<http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs297/en/>, use of which remains 
common, cheap and unregulated. Another 20% are attributed to 
vaccine-preventable infections such as hepatitis B and the human 
papillomavirus. Patients suffer from the twin curse of living in 
cancer-promoting environments and lack of access to help when they need it.

How do people die from cancer? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/how-do-people-die-from-cancer-google>
But even if one took the sanguine view that everyone must die of something, it 
is the abject state of palliative care that should jolt us from complacency. 
While we may be occupied by opioid abuse, access to morphine remains a 
pipedream for most people around the world. Fully90% of the world’s morphine 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/2013/05/10-cent-world-uses-90-cent-morphine-needs-change>
 is used by patients in the US, Canada, Europe and Australia.

Meanwhile, the vast majority of cancer presentations in developing countries 
are with advanced disease, where effective palliative care is not only the most 
practical but also the most compassionate intervention. But oncologists there 
have stories, such as the dying patient with a bleeding, infected and painful 
cancer who has travelled hundreds of kilometres in search of pain relief only 
to be sent home with paracetamol or ibuprofen, or nothing at all. Morphine is 
arguably the cheapest and most effective drug for palliation and is on the World
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Organisation’s list of 
essential medications but due to health illiteracy, stigma, misguided fears and 
misinformed government policy, dying with dignity is no more than an aspiration 
for most patients around the world.

As an oncologist, I am regularly humbled by patients’ disclosure that they 
lost track of everything else I said after the word “cancer”. Treatable or not, 
the very encounter permanently alters the lives of those who suffer and those 
who must watch on. No one, no matter where in the world, is “lucky” to develop 
cancer, but the next time you turn to Google and ask “If I have cancer, will I 
die?”, it may help to know what a loaded question it really is.

 * This article was corrected on 1 December, because, due to an editing error, 
hepatitis C had initially been included with hepatitis B as one of the 
vaccine-preventable causes of infection responsible for 20% of cancers  