
Set aside the mysteries of his position on Brexit, and imagine for a moment 
that Jeremy Corbyn’s sudden intervention onhigh pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/the-guardian-view-on-corbyn-and-pay-close-that-gap>
 and inequality this week had been a bit more effective. Instead of his 
proposalsflipping around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-brexit-high-pay-public-sector>
 like a dropped hosepipe, he might have picked one policy, got his aides to do 
their homework, and then evangelised about it for the foreseeable future.

I’d settle for the idea he seemed to alight on after ditching a crude wage 
cap: that government procurement might somehow be limited to firms who stick to 
a pay ratio of 20:1 and award their executives no more than £350,000 a year – 
which would be somewhat difficult to pull off without tearing up thousands of 
public contracts, but has an undeniable oomph.

He might have loudly trailed that idea on social media, so as to create an 
advance buzz that would have lessened the impression of someone busking it. 
Most obviously, one can just about conceive of the proposal being suggested in 
the company of a handful of businesspeople who live out the kind of model 
Corbyn wants to popularise. Even the sainted John Lewis only caps itspay ratio 
<http://www.hrreview.co.uk/analysis/analysis-reward/is-it-time-for-a-maximum-pay-ratio/52389>
 at 75:1 – but people from a few medium-sized businesses, or maybe successful 
co-operatives, might have stood alongside him and underlined a simple enough 
message: this can be done, and it makes for better business.

Judging by advance Labour whispers, the shoot-from-the-hip approach that so 
misfired was indicative of anattempt to copy 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/revealed-jeremy-corbyn-labour-plan-to-copy-donald-trump-playbook/>
 the approach to politics favoured by Donald Trump, to which there is only one 
response: that whatever the other odorous clouds now following him around, 
Trump is about to take office with theworst disapproval ratings 
<https://twitter.com/RonBrownstein/status/818909580214333440> of any 
president-elect in history. Moreover, his one-man crusade, 95% based on 
personal aggrandisement, has precious little to teach any politician meant to 
be in charge of a convincing project.

Besides, Corbyn could no more approximate Trump-esque barnstorming rhetoric 
than he could fly. If Tuesday was an attempt to do so, out in the electoral 
badlands of Nuneaton, Thurrock etc – and Copeland, where next month’sbyelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/07/labour-nuclear-test-copeland-byelection-cumbria>
 may yet deepen Labour’s problems – both the high-pay stuff and Corbyn’s almost 
indecipherable manoeuvrings on the EU and immigration surely got nowhere near 
what was intended. In fact, they had a familiar quality: since the Gordon Brown 
years, voters have got used to Labour trying to reboot itself at regular 
intervals, essentially because the party can no longer confidently speak to the 
country.

The Guardian view on Corbyn and pay: close that gap | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/the-guardian-view-on-corbyn-and-pay-close-that-gap>
Over a year into the Corbyn era, what do people know of him and where he is 
heading? He and his allies want torenationalise the railways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/16/corbyn-to-launch-transport-campaign-with-rail-pledges>
, and also“renationalise” the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/23/jeremy-corbyn-promise-renationalise-nhs-labour-private-end>
, neither of which is much of a revelation. They have an assortment of vague 
policies formore investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/labour-will-offer-interventionist-government-john-mcdonnell>
 in the economy. Nothing, in fact, has yet cohered into a story about modern 
Britain. Meanwhile, Corbyn and his people sporadically respond to Tory failures 
in a way that evokes the ageless advice ofSun Tzu 
<http://www.davidbrim.com/sun-tzu-lessons-on-strategy/>: “Tactics without 
strategy is the noise before defeat.”

Their muddled take on Brexit has simply highlighted their muddledness across 
the piece. So, in polls, there are no end of fallingLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> figures, and personal approval 
ratings that almost defy belief. When I am out reporting, what strikes me is 
the way that mention of Corbyn and his party tends to be met with a sighing 
indifference, as if his supposedly scary politics are less defining than his 
simple irrelevance.

So what to do? Viewed from a certain angle, he has two key assets: a lifelong 
distance from the mushy mainstream, and increasingly little to lose. If, as his 
aides insist, he wants to push beyond the politics of Brexit by floating big, 
radical ideas, he perhaps should have started not with the supposedly 
“populist” wheeze of a wage cap – but a less mechanistic idea that goes to the 
heart of the insecurity and uncertainty that defines millions of lives: that of 
auniversal basic income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>
, sporadically bigged up byCorbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/jeremy-corbyn-to-launch-review-into-universal-basic-income>
 andJohn McDonnell 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/universal-basic-income-john-mcdonnell-labour-shadow-chancellor-next-general-election-a7219726.html>
 over the last year, worked on by a growing number ofthinkers 
<https://www.thersa.org/action-and-research/rsa-projects/economy-enterprise-manufacturing-folder/basic-income>
, and now being seriously considered by clued-upLabour people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/universal-basic-income-glasgow-welfare-revolution>
 in Scotland.

Given the benefits system is now completely inappropriate for a job market 
that increasingly pulls people in and then rapidly spits them back out again, 
universal basic income could conceivably sit at the heart of a plan to rip the 
whole thing up and start again. An axe could be taken to the parts of the big 
state that have outlived their usefulness: such as the Department for Work and 
Pensions, which could be wholly devolved, handing the hated JobCentre Plus 
network to a mixture of local councils and third-sector organisations. To go 
with the grain of Brexit, moreover, the income could be contingent on British 
citizenship and the taking of decently funded English lessons.

Should we scrap benefits and pay everyone £100 a week?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>
The Mail and Sun, of course, would still go ape – but that, we’re told, is now 
precisely the idea. Besides, from there, Corbyn could link UBI to the defining 
crisis of our time: that ofsocial care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/austerity-over-britain-afford-social-care>
, and our ageing society. It is time someone in politics unflinchingly looked 
ahead and told us the truth: that austerity is to blame for most of the current 
crisis, but even so, in the years to come, caring for our older relatives will 
not be something we will be able to wholly palm off on the state.

Again, in the recent past, Corbyn has raised a good idea – for education and 
training 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/education/schools/news/78136/jeremy-corbyn-outlines-lifelong-national-education-service-plan>
 that can happen at any time in people’s adult lives. To that, he could add 
maternity and paternity leave that could be taken throughout parenthood. Both 
would attempt to cast the stop-start nature of modern work as an opportunity, 
not a threat.

Looking ahead, it is increasingly a given that work will define a declining 
share of most lives. Even now, wage stagnation and insecure jobs are leading to 
falling tax receipts, with grave implications for our ageing, work-light 
future. Meanwhile, tax avoidance byFacebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2015/oct/11/facebook-paid-4327-corporation-tax-despite-35-million-staff-bonuses>
,Google 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/04/google-uk-tax-deal-share-options-scheme>
,Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jun/24/amazons-uk-business-paid-119m-tax-last-year>
,Apple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/30/apple-tax-avoidance-vindication-protest-ttip>
,Uber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/ubers-main-uk-business-paid-only-411000-in-tax-last-year>
 and the rest has regularly bounced into the headlines. These corporations 
trigger no end of social and economic turbulence and mine our data while giving 
far too little back, and they ought to be right at the centre of Labour’s 
attention.

More generally, a lot of what Corbyn ought to do was pointed up by Tuesday’s 
failures. He needs to reach out way beyond his party and find as many allies as 
he can. He should always do his homework. And please, Jeremy: even if you 
pursue the wage cap, ditch theLenin one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/dec/14/jeremy-corbyn-hat-buy-of-the-day>
. It doesn’t suit you, or the future.
 