
Reports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/chelsea-manning-obama-commute-prison-sentence>
 suggest that imprisoned transparency advocate Chelsea Manning is on President 
Obama’s “shortlist” for a possible commutation.

If true, this move would offer a glimmer of hope during a time when it is in 
short supply. If President Obama fails to act now, he is condemning Chelsea to 
a gruesome fate, and his legacy as an advocate for LGBTQ rights will be forever 
tarnished.

Chelsea Manning <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning> is a 
transgender woman who has already served 7 years of a 35 year sentence in an 
all-male military facility. Her crime? Releasing documents that revealed the 
impacts of war on civilians in Iraq and Afghanistan.

Chelsea witnessed atrocities, and bravely did what she felt was right to 
expose them. Her outrageously long sentence, nearly 10 timeslonger 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/news/us-news/army-leaker-chelsea-manning-obama-s-short-list-commutation-n705441>
 than other recent whistleblowers, is shocking enough, but we can add to that 
to the disturbing abuse that Chelsea has faced behind bars.

For 8 months, Chelsea was held 
<https://www.vice.com/en_uk/article/the-torture-of-bradley-manning> in a form 
of solitary confinement which the United Nationsconsiders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
 to be torture.

Since then, Chelsea has been denied 
<https://www.aclu.org/blog/speak-freely/government-chelsea-manning-were-denying-your-treatment-your-own-good>
 some medically recommended treatments for gender dysphoria. And despite the 
Obama administration’s stated support for the rights of transgender prisoners, 
Chelsea has had to undergo a stressful and protracted legal battle with the 
Justice Department just to gain the right to be herself while in prison.

Since her arrest in 2010, the government’s perverse mistreatment 
<http://america.aljazeera.com/opinions/2015/8/the-unending-persecution-of-chelsea-manning.html>
 of Chelsea has made international headlines seemingly every month. She’s been 
threatened with severe punishment and solitary confinement for minor 
“infractions” likehaving 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/12/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-toothpaste-army>
 an expired tube of toothpaste in her cell, and has faced constant scrutiny and 
harassment from prison officials.

Chelsea has twice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/04/chelsea-manning-second-suicide-attempt-attorneys-prison-sentence>
 attempted to end her own life as a direct result of the inhumane conditions of 
her imprisonment and in particular the extreme distress she has experienced due 
to the denial of proper health care. After her first suicide attempt, she was 
cruellypunished 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/23/chelsea-manning-solitary-confinement-suicide-attempt>
 with solitary confinement, which only deepened her despair.

Chelsea has already been incarcerated for longer than any other whistleblower 
in United States history, despite the fact that intelligence officialsagree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/31/bradley-manning-sentencing-hearing-pentagon>
 that her actions – which were clearly intended to be in the public interest – 
never put anyone in danger. She has suffered more than enough.

President Obama has just 8 days to do the right thing and commute Chelsea’s 
sentence to time served. If he chooses to keep her behind bars, he is all but 
signing Chelsea’s death warrant. Chelsea’s attorney at the ACLUsaid 
<https://www.freechelsea.com/chelsea-manning-short-list/> on Wednesday that she 
won’t survive another 5 years in prison, much less another 30.

Donald Trump has repeatedly attacked whistleblowers like Chelsea as 
“traitors,” and members of his incoming cabinet havecalled 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/02/politics/kfile-kt-mcfarland-manning-assange/> 
for her execution. Given the degrading treatment that Chelsea has suffered 
under the Obama administration, I shudder to think about what her life will be 
like during the next four years if she remains in prison.

Through my work as a free speech activist, I have become friends with Chelsea 
and am lucky enough to speak to her on the phone on a regular basis. She is one 
of the most courageous, compassionate, intellectually curious and gentle people 
I’ve ever had the privilege to get to know.

Since her arrest she has dedicated her life to helping others. As a Guardian 
columnist <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/chelsea-e-manning>, trans icon, 
and advocate for human rights, Chelsea has done so much for all of us. Now more 
than ever, we need people like Chelsea Manning in the world.

I know I won’t be able to sleep tonight knowing that President Obama could be 
deciding Chelsea’s fate at any moment. I sincerely hope that he listens to the
overwhelming 
<https://petitions.whitehouse.gov/petition/commute-chelsea-mannings-sentence-time-served-1>
 public outcry and releases Chelsea so that she can start the journey of the 
rest of her life.
 