
The 2016 presidential campaign isn’t turning out to be the Facebook election, 
as some peoplehave dubbed it 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/how-facebook-is-dominating-the-2016-election-1475429365>
. More than anything else, it’s now the Election Dominated By Leaks.

In the final month of the race, the Clinton and Trump campaigns’ main attack 
points now revolve around several major leaks that have put their opposing 
candidate on the defensive. Both campaigns or their supporters have been 
actively encouraging leaks about the other side, while claiming leaks involving 
them are either illegitimate or illegal.

Either way, it’s yet another example of why leaks are very much in the public 
interest when they can expose how presidential candidates act behind closed 
doors – and the motivations of the leakers shouldn’t prevent news organizations 
from reporting on them.

Clinton campaign dubs WikiLeaks 'Russian propaganda' after latest hack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
Donald Trump’s campaign has been rocked by two major leaks in particular: his 
1995 tax return to the New York Times, which showed an almost billion-dollar 
“loss” that could have allowed him to avoid paying taxes for almost two 
decades, and the leak of the now notorious video to the Washington Post, where 
Trump appears to admit to sexual assaulting women.

At the advent of the tax story, Trump’s lawyer immediately threatened legal 
action <http://www.cjr.org/first_person/donald_trump_lawsuit_new_york_times.php>
 against the New York Times. Former Trump campaign manager and CNN’s resident 
Trump sycophant Corey Lewandowskisaid the paper 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/erik-wemple/wp/2016/10/03/cnns-lewandowski-hopes-trump-sues-new-york-times-into-oblivion/?utm_term=.df43714de16f>
 “should be held accountable”, adding: “I hope he sues them into oblivion for 
doing this.”

Yet they couldn’t be happier with the hacked emails from Clinton’s campaign 
manager that were leaked to WikiLeaks and published late last week. Trump cited 
WikiLeaks twice during the debate on Sunday, and declared“I love WikiLeaks” on 
Monday 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/ballot-box/presidential-races/300327-trump-i-love-wikileaks>
. Previously he had (perhaps jokingly, perhaps not?)called on Russia to release 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/07/trump-putin-no-relationship-226282> the 
deleted emails from Clinton’s private server if they had them.

The leak of the video, meanwhile, has sparked rumors that many more tapes of 
Trump saying things far worse exist. In less than two days,a crowdfunding effort
 <https://www.gofundme.com/sunlightfund> has raised over $33,000 for more 
damaging Trump videos. Mark Burnett, the producer of The Apprentice and an 
alleged close friend of Trump, reportedly threatened to sue anyone on his staff 
who leaked more videos (though helater denied 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/life/tv/2016/10/10/mark-burnett-apprentice-cant-release-trump-tapes/91875804/>
 making those remarks).

On the Clinton side, the campaign and its surrogates have spent the past week 
trying to delegitimize the latest WikiLeaks release of campaign manager’s John 
Podesta’s emails, while heavily pushing the Trump taxes and video stories. 
Several people caught up in the leak have slyly insinuated that some could be 
faked by alleged Russian hackers, while providing no proof that they’ve been 
altered. The Clinton campaignhas been calling WikiLeaks 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/12/democrats-say-wikileaks-is-a-russian-front-u-s-intelligence-isn-t-so-sure.html>
 a “Russian front” even though US intelligence officialsdon’t even think that 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/10/12/democrats-say-wikileaks-is-a-russian-front-u-s-intelligence-isn-t-so-sure.html>
 is the case.

Donald Trump apologises for sex boast tape
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-apologises-for-sex-boast-tape>
Leaks exposing Trump’s behind-the-scenes comments and actions, however, are 
not only legitimate in their eyes, but encouraged. Correct the Record, the 
Super Pacthat has openly admitted it thinks 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2015/05/12/how-a-super-pac-plans-to-coordinate-directly-with-hillary-clintons-campaign/>
 it can coordinate with the Clinton campaign in the past, is asking for Trump 
leakson its (insecure) website <http://correctrecord.org/trumpleaks/>. Correct 
the Record CEO David Brockhas also publicly offered to pay 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jessicasimeone/apprentice-legal-fees?bftwnews&utm_term=.xuKzlkllVK#.djmYXlXX56>
 for the legal fees and potential $5m penalty for anyone who leaks the rumored 
Apprentice videos.

Clinton’s communications director, Brian Fallon, spent all day yesterday 
explaining why the information released by WikiLeaks is illegitimate because 
many people believe Russia may have leaked them, then was quick to insinuate
he’d be fine if <https://twitter.com/brianefallon/status/785675657741266944> 
the same thing happened to Trump: “Wouldn’t it be good reading to see internal 
discussions about Trump’s taxes? Yes…”

As Jack Shafer wrote on Tuesday 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/10/wikileaks-emails-hack-clinton-2016-podesta-214348>
, the Clinton camp should stop freaking out about WikiLeaks: “Angels almost 
never leak,” he wrote. “If reporters limited their appetites to only heavenly 
leaks, they’d starve. I say that if the material is strong enough, you hold 
your nose and publish the best and most accurate stories you can from them.”

New York Times reporter David Barstow, one of the journalists who broke the 
Trump taxes story,said much the same thing last week 
<https://twitter.com/mikiebarb/status/783379164409847808>: he doesn’t know who 
leaked the Trump tax return, nor does he know their motivation, but those facts 
shouldn’t stop him from reporting on it – or any other story – where he is 
given newsworthy information by a potentially biased individual.

It should go without saying that allegations that Russian hackers have been 
the source of several of the leaks involving Clinton and Democrats is a 
legitimate story worth pursuing. But concocting Putin-Trump-WikiLeaks collusion 
conspiracy theories and making large leaps in logic without any direct 
evidence, like Clinton-aligned journalistKurt Eichenwald recklessly has 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/10/11/in-the-democratic-echo-chamber-inconvenient-truths-are-recast-as-putin-plots/>
, does a disservice to actual journalism.

Leaks sometimes make the subject of them uncomfortable, and increasingly large 
leaks of private emails raise questions about internet security and privacy. 
But ultimately we should ask ourselves: would we rather reporters not cover 
what politicians are doing behind closed doors?

Disclosure: the author is the director of Freedom of the Press Foundation, 
which accepts donations on behalf ofWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> and other transparency journalism 
outlets to prevent financial censorship.

 