
Woodgrange Road, an unremarkable high street in the east London suburb of 
Forest Gate, has known better times and been known for better things. It was 
once the home to TheUpper Cut 
<http://www.e7-nowandthen.org/2013/07/the-upper-cut-club-part-1-rise.html>, a 
stellar music venue. The Who played there, Stevie Wonder, James Brown, Otis 
Redding, Jimi Hendrix and Nina Simone.

Now the dominant feature along the three-quarters of a mile of Woodgrange Road 
is its betting shops. Along the promenade of tightly packed premises, five vie 
for trade: Betfred, Paddy Power, William Hill, JenningsBet and, on the other 
side of the road, Ladbrokes.

Problem gambling costs UK up to £1.2bn a year, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/13/problem-gambling-gambleaware-ippr>
People flit from one to the next. I have seen them in the middle of the day 
when I’ve been looking for West Indian groceries or a haircut from the African 
barbershop. What I often see are young men – usually minorities, seemingly 
agitated. Not chirpy, cockney types having a cheeky flutter, as depicted in the 
television ads, but grim-faced men on a mission; people hoping to make a little 
more than they lose.

The borough of Newham, which gained from the 2012 Olympics and is benefitting 
from regeneration but still suffershigh levels of deprivation 
<http://www.newhamrecorder.co.uk/news/deprivation_levels_plummet_in_newham_but_elderly_remain_adrift_1_4262936>
, has 84 betting shops. That’s six for every square mile. High Street North, 
East Ham, where as a teenager I began my journalistic apprenticeship on the 
Newham Recorder, has hadup to 18 betting shops 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-22934305>. Set against the dull facades of 
other stores, with their shiny fittings and garish front-window adornments, 
they stand proudly along its mile and a quarter. And there’s the irony, because 
their very proliferation seems indicative of decay – just as holes in a floor 
joist warn of woodworm.

The poorest 55 boroughs in Britain have, in total, more than twice the number 
of betting shops 
<http://democracy.leeds.gov.uk/documents/s124504/fixed%20odds%20betting%20terminals.pdf>
 as the most affluent 115, and municipal leaders in Newham – which includes 
Forest Gate and East Ham – have a clear view of all these betting shops, and 
particularly the fixed-odds betting terminals inside: critics dub them the 
crack cocaine of betting machines. The council says that locally there has been 
a47% increase in the number of betting shops since 2007 
<https://www.newham.gov.uk/Pages/News/Betting-shops-crime.aspx>, after Labour – 
to its shame – had ushered in the liberalising Gambling Act.

Leave to one side for a moment the cost to individuals. Consider the cost to 
the wider community. “Areas with a high concentration of betting shops 
persistently remain within areas with the highest levels of crime in the 
borough,” say officials there.

Municipal leaders have a clear view on fixed-odds terminals. Critics dub them 
the crack cocaine of betting

But look elsewhere. Earlier this year, research by the Responsible Gambling 
Trust <http://about.gambleaware.org/> found that rates of problem gambling were 
higher among people who lived near clusters of betting shops, and particularly 
ethnic minorities and theunemployed 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c70a863c-21c6-11e6-9d4d-c11776a5124d>. These are 
long-standing problems. In 2014Ralph Topping 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jul/04/william-hill-ralph-topping-retires-james-henderson-new-betting-ceo>
, then chief executive of bookmaker William Hill, was quoted in the Racing Post 
saying that even he understood clusters of betting shops can cause harm and 
alienate local communities, and conceding that councils might need enhanced 
powers. Mary Portas, who conducted a 2011 review of town centres for David 
Cameron, saidtoo many bookmakers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2013/nov/13/high-street-grimsey-review-bookies>
 are “blighting” Britain’s high streets.

Against that backdrop, let’s evaluate the contribution to a debate in the 
House of Commons 
<https://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2016-12-13a.682.6&p=11461> this 
week of Philip Davies, the outspoken Conservative MP for Shipley. As part of 
the neighbourhood planning bill, MPs discussed an amendment calling for 
councils considering betting and payday loan shop applications to receive 
statutory guidelines reminding them of their powers to curb them. Davies was 
against that, making honourably clear at the outset his proximity to this 
matter by referring members to theregister of interests 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm/cmregmem/161205/davies_philip.htm>
: free tickets from Ladbrokes to Royal Ascot, the Cheltenham festival, the St 
Leger meeting and the Community Shield at Wembley; free tickets from Coral for 
Cheltenham, races at Sandown Park and the Coral Sprint Trophy at York.

In a spirited, waspish address, he said concerns about betting shops, and 
particularlyfixed-odds betting terminals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/fixed-odds-betting-terminals-fobts>, are 
overblown, ridiculing “the idea that this is a massive social concern for the 
vast majority of our constituents”. There is no proliferation of betting shops, 
he said, in so far as the total number of shops is decreasing.

Think about the jobs, he advised, “including lots of younger people and lots 
of women”. As for punters’ losses on fixed-odds machines of £7 over an average 
10-minute session, that didn’t seem to worry him unduly. Consider that: £7 gone 
in 10 minutes.

'He haemorrhaged money': the bereaved parents taking on the gambling industry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/15/ryan-myers-bereaved-parents-taking-on-the-gambling-industry>
You may think that the House of Commons focusing on this matter shows 
appropriate recognition of concern in many communities. Davies insists it’s 
snobbery. “In this house we have an awful lot of upper-class and middle-class 
people who like to tell working-class people how they should spend their money 
and how they should not spend their money,” he said.

High streets clearly need a radical rethink: more community use, perhaps, or 
lower rents and council tax reform to encourage more one-off businesses. 
Councils could look again at parking; maybe convert more shops to residential 
accommodation. But can the answer really be to fill the void with shops that 
collectively make deprivation worse?

The Commons amendment did not progress. Instead, ministers promised 
non-statutory guidance. Davies faced opposition in the House from members such 
as Oliver Letwin. Fellow Conservative Charles Walker said he would personally 
be happy to impose restrictions. That offer cut no ice with the member for 
Shipley, but then I doubt that 84 betting shops in one deprived area or five 
littered on Woodgrange Road bothers him either. He believes what he believes; 
it is for others to make and win the argument that betting shops are making the 
renewal of communities and their high streets more difficult.
 