
Pity the luckless children of Aleppo <https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo>
. If only the bombs raining down on them, killing their parents, maiming their 
friends, destroying their hospitals – if only those bombs were British or, 
better still, American.

Aleppo hospital bombed again as Assad vows to 'clean' city
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/14/syrian-regime-bombs-hospital-again-assad-vows-clean-aleppo>
Then the streets of London would be jammed with protestors demanding an end to 
their agony. Trafalgar Square would ring loud with speeches from Tariq Ali, Ken 
Loach and Monsignor Bruce Kent. Whitehall would be a sea of placards, insisting 
that war crimes were being committed and that these crimes were Not in Our 
Name. Grosvenor Square would bepacked with noisy protestors 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vB6e3gEpjBA> outside the US embassy, urging 
that Barack Obama be put on trial in The Hague. The protestors would wear 
Theresa May masks and paint their hands red. And they would be doing it all 
because, they’d say, they could not bear to see another child killed in Aleppo.

But that is not the good fortune of the luckless children of that benighted 
city. Their fate is to be terrorised by the wrong kind of bombs, the ones 
dropped by Bashar al-Assad and Vladimir Putin. As such, they do not qualify for 
the activist sympathy of the movement that calls itself the Stop the War 
Coalition. Indeed, it’s deputy chair, Chris Nineham,told the Today programme 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/stop-the-war-syria_uk_57fdd68be4b0a9568544eed4?ir=UK+Politics&utm_hp_ref=uk-politics>
 that his organisation would not be organising or joining any protests outside 
the Russian embassy because that would merely fuel the “hysteria and the 
jingoism” currently being whipped up against Moscow. Stop the War would 
instead, explained Nineham in a moment of refreshing candour, be devoting its 
energies to its prime goal – “opposing the west”.

But if hysteria is the wrong emotional reaction to the ordeal now being 
endured by the people of Aleppo, I wonder what is the right one. What’s the 
right state of mind to contemplate pictures of the dead, the unarmed women and 
men and their kids, entombed in ash?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkerry-on-syria-you-dont-drop-barrel-bombs-on-children-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kerry%20on%20Syria%3A%20'you%20don't%20drop%20barrel%20bombs%20on%20children'%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkerry-on-syria-you-dont-drop-barrel-bombs-on-children-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kerry%20on%20Syria%3A%20%27you%20don%27t%20drop%20barrel%20bombs%20on%20children%27%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F21%2Fkerry-on-syria-you-dont-drop-barrel-bombs-on-children-video&media=>
Kerry on Syria: ‘you don’t drop barrel bombs on children’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/sep/21/kerry-on-syria-you-dont-drop-barrel-bombs-on-children-video>
How should we look at the drone footage 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/15/world/middleeast/aleppo-destruction-drone-video.html?_r=1>
 that surveys what seems to be a ghostly, smashed ruin of a city? How are we to 
respond when we listen to a 12-year-old boy who from 7am every day sorts 
through the rubble, trying to find something to eat andwho says 
<https://twitter.com/SkyNews/status/786924542128037889>, even as the bombs 
explode around him, “We thank God for what we have”?

Despite what Stop the War says, “opposing the west” won’t bring any of that 
horror to an end. For it is Russia that is up to its neck in the blood of 
Aleppo. It is Russia that joins Assad in the bombing of hospitals. It is Russia 
which stands accused – and credibly accused – of bombing an aid convoy. It is
Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and its Syrian ally that is 
fond of the “double-tap” tactic, dropping one bomb and then, after an interval 
which allows time for paramedics to arrive and start treating the injured, 
drops another on the same spot, killing the rescuers.

Still, we mustn’t get hysterical. Perhaps we ought instead to be even-handed, 
as suggested by 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/stop-the-war-coalition-protest-russian-embassy>
 a spokesman for the Labour leader this week, when he expressed his worry that 
all this focus on Russia “diverts attention” from the atrocities committed by 
the other outside powers, such as the US – and that it would be just as 
sensible to protest outside the US embassy as outside Russia’s.

Usefully, the Guardian did a “reality check 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/reality-check/2016/oct/12/reality-check-are-us-led-airstrikes-on-syrians-as-bad-as-russias>
” of the notion that Washington and its allies might be just as culpable for 
the carnage as Moscow, and it reached an unambiguous conclusion: the numbers 
were not comparable. Chris Woods of the Airwars monitoring site put it 
succinctly: “The Russians’ death rate probably outpaces the coalition by a rate 
of eight to one.” Woods also made the important, but often overlooked, point 
that while the US and its allies have killed too many civilians – and one is 
too many – they are at least trying to avoid or limit such casualties. Russia 
is deliberately targeting civilians and civilian infrastructure.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvB6e3gEpjBA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvB6e3gEpjBA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DvB6e3gEpjBA&media=>
None of this means, incidentally, that Boris Johnson was right to summon 
demonstrators to the gates of the Russian mission in London. It’s not for him 
to issue such a call. A government minister engineering a supposedly 
spontaneous rally outside a despised foreign embassy is the sort of stunt you 
might expect from an authoritarian state like Iran or, come to think of it, 
Russia. It should not be the business of a democratic government. Chalk it up 
as yet more proof that Johnson has not yet made the transition from newspaper 
columnist to government minister, a transition which – given the evidence of 
him and his onetime fellow Brexiteer, Michael Gove – may not be such a good 
idea anyway.

More serious was Johnson’s call for “more kinetic options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/13/boris-johnson-military-options-against-syrian-regime-being-considered>
” in Syria, deploying the latest euphemism for military action. Anyone who has 
seen the dead and dying of Aleppo – and felt that urge for somebody, somewhere, 
to do something – will understand that impulse. But now Russia is so fully dug 
in, such a call is reckless. If the US were to enforce a no-fly zone, it could 
soon find itself in a direct military confrontation with Russia, a clash of the 
two cold war superpowers. It risks escalating a bloody civil war into something 
larger and yet more lethal.

So what then? Stop the War says this is a matter “for the Syrian people 
alone”, as if, were the US and the west only to butt out, Assad would 
generously launch a national consultation exercise, hold free and fair 
elections, perhaps with PR and women-only shortlists, and agree to be bound by 
the result. To claim this is for the Syrian people alone is to gaze at a family 
trapped in a burning building, declare that it’s for them to put out the fire – 
and praise yourself for refusing to get involved. Of course they need help.

Ground down by savagery – the agony of Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/12/ground-down-by-savagery-the-agony-of-aleppo>
Nor is it good enough simply to call for “the strongest possible push for 
negotiations and a diplomatic solution”, as Stop the War do. What do they think 
John Kerry and his fellow foreign ministers have been doing round the clock for 
months if not years? Kerry is still engaging with his Russian counterpart, even 
this weekend, but it’s hard to keep going when Russia keeps strangling Aleppo.

No, what’s needed is some pressure on Russia to stop. Not a military 
confrontation, but every other kind of pressure. And here is where Stop the War 
can be useful. They insist they can only influence western nations, that a 
protest outside the Russian embassy wouldn’t make a “blind bit of difference”. 
But how can they be so sure? We know Putin cares about his international 
standing. That’s why he spends millions on his propaganda channel Russia Today. 
He would not want pictures beamed around the world of mass demonstrations 
outside Russian embassies.

Surely it’s worth a try. Those who regard themselves as the peace movement 
should live up to their name. The slaughter of the innocents of Aleppo started 
long ago: it’s time they did their bit to stop the war.
 