
You’ve just accepted your first invitation to peer review a journal article. 
The paper is the culmination of years of the author’s research and its 
publication is an important next step. You want to get it right; give 
constructive feedback, check whether it works for the journal, and generally 
improve the quality of the article. But how can you achieve those objectives 
without the right training and support?

Peer review needs to expand so that more scientists are reviewing papers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/oct/23/peer-review-system-science-research>
We’ve been analysing data emerging from our year-long research project on peer 
review <http://authorservices.taylorandfrancis.com/peer-review-global-view/>. 
First we focused on what academicswould like to see change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/28/why-peer-review-needs-a-good-going-over>
 in the process. Now we’ve examined how new reviewers feel about embarking on 
reviewing, and it seems clear that many would like significantly more guidance 
on how to get it right.

Alongside issues of transparency, much of the criticism of peer review 
revolves around the quality of individual reviews – from the “short and snitty” 
(as one researcher put it in a focus group we held) to those that may be biased 
by the reviewer’s personal views.

The majority of reviewers learn on the job, plunged into assessing their 
peers’ work as a natural progression of their academic career. This will need 
fixing if everyone’s overall experience of the peer review process is to 
improve. Here are some of the key findings from our research on the topic:

New academics want to review but don’t know how to start

Research we conducted 
<http://authorservices.taylorandfrancis.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Peer-review-supplement-motivations-and-support.pdf>
 with more than 6,300 authors of journal articles, peer reviewers and journal 
editors revealed that over two-thirds of researchers who have never peer 
reviewed a paper would like to. Of that group (drawn from the full range of 
subject areas) more than 60% said they would like the option to attend a 
workshop or formal training on peer reviewing. At the same time, over 
two-thirds of journal editors told us that it is difficult to find reviewers.


Guidance is not always available

For those who are already reviewing papers, the most common source of support 
they received was journal editor guidelines. Just under half of respondents – 
45% in science, technology and medicine (STM) and 49% in the humanities and 
social sciences (HSS) – said they had received these. Guidelines issued by the 
publisher came second, with 41% of reviewers receiving them in STM, and 35% in 
HSS.

Peer review: how to get it right – 10 tips
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/sep/27/peer-review-10-tips-research-paper>
Only one in 10 of reviewers had been to a workshop or formal training but 55% 
of sciences researchers and 51% of humanities and social science researchers 
said they would like this opportunity. And that is despite the fact that 
two-thirds of reviewers rated their confidence in reviewing at eight or above 
out of 10.

What can editors do?

Editors are trying to recruit and retain good reviewers. But views were split 
as to the best way to achieve this. Some 46% of editors in STM wanted to offer 
formal training or workshops but 44% said they didn’t want to. In the 
humanities and social sciences, just 38% wanted to offer this option, with 56% 
saying they wouldn’t.

In terms of what help they were offering, they listed (in the following 
order): offering their own guidelines and advice, signposting to publisher 
guidelines, encouraging supervisor involvement, and, for a small number, 
workshops or formal training.

From this research, there seems to be a discrepancy between the support those 
doing the reviewing wish for and what those overseeing the process are prepared 
to offer. However, the lack of enthusiasm for offering workshops or formal 
training has made me wonder whether this may have been more popular had we made 
it explicit in our question that this training could be delivered by someone 
other than journal editors.

Why researchers want to review

Playing a part as a member of the academic community, reciprocating the 
benefit, and enjoying being able to help improve papers were the top three 
motivations for doing a peer review.

Scientists aren't superheroes – failure is a valid result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/08/scientists-arent-superheroes-failure-is-a-valid-result>
We also looked at this data across the age groups, expecting to see some 
differences in this order, particularly for those at the start of their career 
who might have been more motivated to take the job for career reasons. But, no 
matter what the age group, playing a part as a member of the academic community 
scored highest.

Understandably, those aged between 20 and 29 gave the highest score compared 
to other groups in the “enhancing your reputation or furthering your career” 
category. However, this still came fifth out of the eight possible responses 
for those in their twenties. And in terms of whether academics should receive 
payment for doing reviews, those in the youngest age group (20-29) were most in 
favour, while those who were over 60 were the most resistant. Whether this is 
due to the financial pressures for those starting out, or a possible shift in 
attitude towards payment for reviewers, is yet to be seen.

With peer review remaining so central to the research process, despite its 
flaws, understanding the motivations to publish in peer reviewed journals and 
to review another academic’s work is crucial. Addressing what training is 
needed is even more important. There’s a clear desire from the academic 
community to see effective support put in place, so now is the time for action.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 