
The trajectory of the spirit of Brexit has all the characteristics of a 
tantrum – they wanted to leave the EU, and the desire was indivisible from the 
rage that accompanied it. They prevailed, but the anger didn’t abate.Nigel 
Farage’s victory speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/nigel-farage-ugliness-bullet-fired>
 was as splenetic as his war cry. Next they wanted an end to the single market, 
and an end to that well-known liberal conspiracy: the customs union. They 
wanted an end to parliamentary sovereignty, and before long,an end to the rule 
of law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/assault-uk-judges-brexit-press-judiciary-constitution>
. They wanted everybody who tried to reason with or moderate them, from Mark 
Carney to Sir Terence Etherton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/may/26/britain-first-openly-gay-judge-master-of-the-rolls-terence-etherton>
, to just shut up, for reasons that would shame a six-year-old: because they’re 
foreign, or they’re gay.

It’s winner takes all on Brexit island, because the audience demands it | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/winner-takes-all-brexit-island-judiciary>
This was entirely predictable. A tantrum cannot be reasoned with. Meeting its 
demands only makes it worse. It isn’t asking for satisfaction, it is asking for 
a boundary. This is the urgent task of the rest of the nation, whether 
regretful remainer or sane, puzzled leaver: to stop reacting to the outbursts 
and set some meaningful boundaries.

It is no doubt possible, but I have so far found it extremely difficult, to 
engage with what a post-Brexit Britain should look like. Refusing to accept 
that Brexit is happening makes it very difficult, but the vote for Brexit has 
happened. Its particulars could range from the merely destructive to the 
outright disastrous, and depend on many more variables than the qualities and 
decisions of our own politicians (it is paradoxical that we have never been 
more reliant on the kindness of the continent than when we try to assert our 
independence from it).

It is possible, as many have pointed out, that when the full consequences 
start to emerge, we will find parliamentary means to water them down. But 
nobody – not Tony Blair, not Nick Clegg, not John Major, not any of these 
once-vilified figures who periodically pop up as a voice of reason – is going 
to act the saviour here. No technicality will be found to stop Brexit, nobody 
will snap their fingers and wake us up.

It’s not enough to point to looming catastrophes and say what we don’t want; 
it’s not enough to concentrate on what we might lose. We need to consider what 
could be better, in a Brexited Britain. That is dauntingly open-ended until we 
establish whose and which interests we want to press: they needn’t be exclusive.

On workers’ rights, we can tackle problems such as zero-hours contracts and 
Sports Direct-esque hyper-surveillance

Last week the Fabian Women’s Network <https://fabianwomen.org.uk/> launched a 
charter to protect the rights whose loss would have most impact on women. There 
were five clusters: maintaining workplace rights; replacing European Social 
Fund (ESF) money; tackling hate crimes; protecting reproductive autonomy and 
freedom from violence; and pushing for better female representation at the 
highest levels of politics and business.

Initially, I thought it was a mistake to set any limit – even the broad limit 
of one entire gender – when conceiving what “better” would look like, in the 
context of what will amount to a constitutional remodelling. In fact, each 
sectional interest, rather than being a limit, is more like a guy rope holding 
up the whole.

Sticking with a feminist agenda, what could we push for beyond the language of 
“safeguarding” and “protection”? Are there new ways of discussing old issues – 
the role of occupational segregation in pay inequality, for example – that 
would take us beyond simply upholding the law? At a practical level, all 
organisations whose income partly depends on the ESF have to come together and 
build a detailed picture of what they need from the Brexit negotiations, as 
well as a plain, unified argument explaining why they need it. This should be 
fruitful, as the pressure of the coming crisis forces a new articulation of 
shared aims and values.

And what of workers’ rights? If we’re building a new framework for employee 
rights, we can do more than ensure that leaving the EU doesn’t intensify 
inequality. We can tackle head-on the conditions that have made people’s lives 
worse, fromzero-hours contracts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/09/uk-workers-on-zero-hours-contracts-rises-above-800000>
 to Uber-style non-contracts toSports Direct-esque hyper-surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/sports-direct-warehouse-work-conditions>
. We can determine what decency means, in the relationship between employer and 
employee, and find a way to iterate it, rather than sliding into neo-serfdom, 
pausing only for some periodic outrage against Philip Green or Mike Ashley.

Environmental legislation was always one of the strongest arguments in the 
EU’s favour, the exemplification of all that was long-term, constructive and 
democratic in its activity, the place you could go to rebut the quite 
reasonable charge that union was technocratic and overloaded with bureaucracy. 
It was unwieldy, it was slow, but once it made legislation, it stayed made. 
Once it decided thatbeaches should be clean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/09/what-has-the-eu-ever-done-for-my-beach>
, they stayed clean. We categorically do not need to take a vote to leave as a 
mandate to re-toxify everything, especially given that the Brexiters scarcely 
mentioned the environment. The pressing danger is that environmental matters 
simply slide off the agenda, on a slope of anti-science innuendo and deliberate 
avoidance. That is a risk we can only take on by establishing a green agenda 
that is not a bare minimum, but an audacious maximum.

Brexit: lawyers confront Liz Truss over ‘dangerous’ abuse of judges
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/05/lawyers-war-liz-truss-over-abuse-judges-brexit-barristers>
What is extraordinary about the Brexit tantrum is that those having it often 
dismiss national prosperity – usually as a secondary concern, behind 
controlling borders, but occasionally even as an irrelevance, a detail that 
only pessimists and sore losers talk about. It is not an irrelevance, and the 
fears of businesses, the financial sector in particular, are real.

Creating the blueprint for a workable Brexit that serves the national interest 
is more than a chance to unite complementary progressive agendas. It can 
reunite voices that should never have been separated: employers and employees, 
businesses, equality campaigners, greens. It has served the interests of 
far-right conservatives to claim that businesses and workers are implacably 
opposed: the first creating wealth, the second draining it. It was never true – 
profit is a thin motivator, most businesses think of themselves as working for 
the social good – and those extremists’ interests have been indulged long 
enough.

If one positive thing has come out of the past week, indeed, out of the entire 
referendum fiasco, it is clarity: the hard Brexiters can never be satiated, 
they know no restraint. The territory of reason, constructiveness, modernity 
and credibility will take work to describe, but will be easily taken. Those in 
power have left it undefended.
 