
It’s 2026. Ten years have passed since the British voted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/03/eu-referendum-live-cameron-brexit-economic-gove-remain-leave>
 to pull out of the European Union. In London, the Ukip prime minister has 
organised ceremonies to mark the anniversary of the “sovereignty referendum”. 
What does the world look like? How have Britain and Europe fared?

'The Brexit lot are doing a victory lap already': readers on the EU referendum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/03/the-brexit-lot-are-doing-a-victory-lap-already-readers-on-the-eu-referendum>
The EU has unravelled. Most of Europe is now part of China’s One Belt New Silk 
Road, which includes infrastructure projects across Eurasia. But that doesn’t 
mean Europe is stable. It has become a space of geopolitical rivalries. Russia 
has entrenched its influence in many countries and is secretly worried about 
China’s growing clout. Greece has joined Russia’s recently launched Orthodox 
Union, a project described as a “cultural and spiritual civilisation” – as has 
Bulgaria.

French president Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> is preparing to run for 
re-election. She came to power in 2022 on an anti-globalisation and 
anti-immigration platform. She rapidly organised a “Frexit” referendum, which 
put an immediate end to the European project, launched in 1957. Without France, 
there simply could not be a union of any sort. Le Pen had the slogan: “If the 
British can do it, so can we”.

After France’s departure, the remaining members convened a Brussels summit to 
rescind EU treaties and sign a “peace and fraternity agreement”, but no one was 
certain what that meant, or how it would be enforced. On televisionJean-Claude 
Juncker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/26/jean-claude-juncker-boris-johnson-not-speaking-in-line-with-reality-video>
, a former president of the commission, burst into tears.

Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> has long given up on 
playing any leadership role in Europe, as it tried to do on the refugee 
question 10 years earlier, because after Britain left the EU, Germany’s 
increasingly dominant position had made it a target of violent criticism from 
its neighbours. France could not act as a counterbalance because its citizens 
had radically rejected any notion of “more Europe”. Instead, the Germans 
focused on developing new export markets in Asia and the global south, and set 
immigration quotas to address its demographic problem.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20Brexit%20for%20non-Brits%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F31%2Feu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer&media=>
EU referendum: Brexit for non-Brits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/may/31/eu-referendum-brexit-for-non-brits-video-explainer>
In the decade that followed Brexit, the only European states where far-right 
or populist parties did not manage to enter government, or become part of a 
ruling coalition, were Norway (which never was a member of the EU, and retained 
a significant oil-based sovereign fund) and Spain (where memories of the Franco 
years somehow held fast, preventing the rise of extremists). Elsewhere, 
protectionist and anti-globalisation groups, some of them highly xenophobic, 
had registered electoral breakthroughs. Brexit itself had not created these 
groups, but it had helped galvanise them.

After it withdrew from the EU, the UK quickly discovered its “special 
relationship” with the US didn’t really amount to much, for America’s new brand 
of isolationism had largely turned it away from the old world.

The US cast its energies towards the Asia Pacific region, where strategic 
competition with China was rife. This reorientation had started under President 
Obama and was accelerated under his successor Donald Trump. President Trump 
applauded Brexit, as did Vladimir Putin, but no one was ready to help Britain 
redefine its position on the international stage. Putin’s technocratic 
successor continued to capitalise on Europe’s fragmentation and the growth of 
illiberalism within its societies.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2F2026-after-eu-vote-europe-chaos-freedom-empty-slogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb25ce521d1669d3553868ecd945714f55530546%2F0_313_2322_1393%2F2322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Imagine%20Europe%20in%20chaos%2C%20and%20freedom%20just%20an%20empty%20slogan%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2F2026-after-eu-vote-europe-chaos-freedom-empty-slogan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Imagine%20Europe%20in%20chaos%2C%20and%20freedom%20just%20an%20empty%20slogan%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F04%2F2026-after-eu-vote-europe-chaos-freedom-empty-slogan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffb25ce521d1669d3553868ecd945714f55530546%2F0_313_2322_1393%2F2322.jpg>
 Le Pen ‘rapidly organised a ‘Frexit’ referendum, which put an immediate end to 
the European project, launched in 1957. Photograph: Michel Spingler/AP 
All this explained why Britain, in the end, opted for a tighter relationship 
with China. To mark the rapprochement, Heathrow was renamed Xi Jinping Atlantic 
Airport. Chinese money arrived, often through offshore facilities, but that was 
also accompanied by political pressure, including on media organisations. One 
British investigative journalist, looking into Chinese holdings and the funding 
of MPs in Westminster, disappeared. The Chinese military became increasingly 
interested in the Atlantic and saw Britain as a worthwhile platform. Soon, a 
Chinese destroyer was anchored at Devonport, western Europe’s largest naval 
base.

There is no war in Europe but once solid alliances have faltered. Nato has not 
disappeared, but has been hollowed out

A decade after Brexit, the EU is a fading memory. Some schoolbooks describe it 
as a project that failed the test of the 21st century and whose gradual demise 
started after the British turned their backs on “a misconceived, bureaucratic 
entity” that “flooded the country with migrants” and dictated the shape of 
bananas.

There is no war in Europe but once solid alliances have faltered. Nato has not 
disappeared, but has been hollowed out. With the unravelling of the EU and 
America’s loss of interest in the continent, Nato lost its political base.

European states no longer cared as much for US security guarantees: first, 
because they’d lost faith in them (after America made plain it was tired of 
“free-riding pseudo-allies”); and second, because anti-American sentiment had 
grown in parallel with the rise of populist movements. This even happened in 
the Baltic states, which Russia had actively destabilised through corruption, 
scare tactics and the manipulation of minorities. It didn’t even have to invade 
– it just waited for their democracies to wane.

EU referendum: our writers on David Cameron's TV questioning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/02/eu-referendum-our-writers-on-david-camerons-tv-questioning>
Today, 23 June 2026, there are fireworks over the river Thames and soon the 
bell of Big Ben will ring to commemorate the referendum that “restored 
Britain’s freedom”. Yet Britain’s freedom is an empty slogan. It lives on the 
edge of a continent whose stability is not assured, and where European 
nationalistic ghosts have returned.

Larger powers try to intimidate smaller ones, or buy up their loyalty. Russia, 
China and occasionally the US vie for influence, with separate states as pawns. 
After Scotland and Catalonia, separatist tendencies multiplied, at times 
triggering territorial disputes. Walls have been built. Europe now has a 
southern iron curtain, to ward off refugee flows from Africa and the Middle 
East – a region still in the midst of its 30-year war.

Europe has long stopped attempting to be an actor in global affairs – instead 
it is shaken by external forces it has no hope of controlling, and devoured 
by internal rivalries.

You do understand that this is fiction, right?
 