
There has been much debate about the Teaching Excellence Framework since it 
was initially proposed. Some have calledfor an outright rejection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/04/universities-higher-education-research-bill>
, while others have come up with ideas about theprinciples 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/07/seven-rules-the-teaching-excellence-framework-should-follow>
 it should follow. But I am interested in how to design an effective system to 
measure and improve the quality of learning and teaching across the higher 
education system. What would that actually look like?

Will the Teaching Excellence Framework be sexist?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/04/will-the-teaching-excellence-framework-be-sexist>
There are four things that need to be understood: 

 * We need to recognise that any form of measurement is expensive and so, to 
avoid wasting money, it needs to lead to improvements in practice.

 * Crucially, we need to accept that no measure is precise. Metrics are 
sledgehammers rather than lasers and will, at best, offer broad indications of 
quality. Any high-precision instrument that we are offered will be lubricated 
with vast quantities of snake oil.

 * We need to take account of what we know from more than 40 years of research 
into learning and teaching in higher education, but also what we know about how 
institutions respond when they are assessed on performance measures. 
 * We need to recognise that this involves designing an assessment system, 
rather than arguing over individual metrics. 
Ingredients of a fit-for-purpose Tef

 * The criteria will be based on a research-informed view of high-quality 
teaching. We need a clear basis on which to include and exclude each criterion. 
There are a number of potential frameworks that could be used for this, for 
example,the Teaching and Learning Research Programmes 10 principles of teaching 
and learning <http://eprints.ioe.ac.uk/7044/> or the UK Professional Standards 
Framework for Higher Education 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/system/files/downloads/ukpsf_2011_english.pdf>. 

 * The individual metrics informing the assessment system need to be part of a 
collective and coherent system. This involves relating the metrics to the 
overall criteria and showing how they measure something that is identified as a 
necessary element of high quality teaching.

 * The metrics should be measures of the quality of teaching offered, rather 
than the prestige of institutions or the profile of their students. To improve 
their scores, institutions would have to improve their teaching practices.

 * The overall criteria should remain stable but the actual metrics should 
change every year. They should be drawn from a very large public bank of 
potential metrics. This is important so that institutions focus on improving 
the quality of their practices rather than fixing individual metrics.

 * The judgments offered by the Tef should be relatively simple. They should 
be focused on the subject level rather than the institutional level because 
institutions can, clearly, have programmes of variable quality.

Lack of vision

Judged by these criteria, the current Year 2 version of Tef performs OK. In 
particular, benchmarking the metrics by students’ entry characteristics and 
flagging statistically significant differences are improvements on university 
league tables. However, not focusing on the subject level is a major flaw in 
the Year 2 Tef’s ability to offer valid indications of quality (although this 
is pencilled in for Year 4).

The reward for good teaching in universities? We can push learners deeper into 
debt
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/sep/23/the-reward-for-good-teaching-we-can-push-learners-deeper-into-debt>
But the impact of not basing the system on a coherent, research-informed 
vision of teaching quality becomes even more apparent in the discussion of 
future metrics.

Measures that we know 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/system/files/dimensions_of_quality.pdf> do not 
relate to the quality of learning and teaching, such as contact hours or 
“teaching intensity”, are beingpushed by the government 
<http://www.hefce.ac.uk/media/HEFCE,2014/Content/News/2016/HEFCE_Grant_Letter_201617.pdf>
. Measures that we know are crucial, such as the expertise of teachers or the 
ways students are transformed by knowledge, are not even part of the 
conversation.

The issue is that if the Tef is not based on a systematic view of high-quality 
teaching, then there is no basis on which to include or exclude potential 
measures of excellence. As a result, an opportunity to develop the quality of 
teaching across the sector – and give students more valid indicators of the 
quality of different courses – will be lost to ever-changing ministerial 
hunches about what good university teaching looks like.

Paul Ashwin is professor of higher education at Lancaster University and a 
researcher in the ESRC-HEFCE funded Centre for Global Higher Education.

• This article was amended on 27 October to say that the Tef’s benchmarking is 
better than league tables, rather than some league tables.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 