
Australia’s immigration department spent $2.2bn on its offshore detention 
regime without proper authorisation,a scathing report from the government’s own 
independent auditor 
<https://www.anao.gov.au/work/performance-audit/offshore-processing-centres-nauru-and-papua-new-guinea-contract-management>
 has found.

The report 
<https://www.anao.gov.au/work/performance-audit/offshore-processing-centres-nauru-and-papua-new-guinea-contract-management>
, published on Tuesday by the Australian National Audit Office, condemned the 
Department of Immigration and Border Protection for its handling of contracts 
to run offshore detention, saying the detention regimes on Nauru and Manus held 
people in unhealthy and dangerous conditions, were wasteful of public money, 
and damaging to Australia’s reputation.

Human Rights Watch report card gives Australia a fail for offshore detention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2017/jan/13/human-rights-watch-report-card-gives-australia-a-fail-for-offshore-detention>
The auditor found the department failed to get “value for money” in running 
offshore detention: contracts were signed “in great haste to give effect to 
government policy decisions and the department did not have a detailed view of 
what it wanted to purchase”.

In some cases, private contractors tendering for contracts were invited to 
suggest elements they would like written into contracts, and contracts were 
signed before agreement on a price.


In addition the auditor raised safety concerns, finding massive gaps in the 
video recordings taken within the island detention camps.

The Nauru and Manus camps have been riven by allegations of systemic physical 
and sexual abuse of asylum seekers by guards, violent incidents, acts of 
self-harm and suicide attempts. On Manus,one asylum seeker was murdered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/reza-barati> inside the detention 
centre in 2014, while in2015 a staff member was allegedly drugged and gang-raped
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2015/aug/27/exclusive-woman-allegedly-raped-in-manus-detention-centre-accuses-transfield-of-cover-up>
.

All incidents in detention, where they are recorded by CCTV, are required to 
be kept by the department. The department told the auditor it had eight 
terabytes of stored video, but only provided a quarter of that amount.

The auditor found: 

 * video and incident records did not always reconcile. There were records of 
incidents which noted that video existed of an incident, but no corresponding 
video; and 
 * during incidents there were gaps in the recording of incidents. 
The auditor also had access to reports from the department’s chief medical 
officer, who reviewed conditions on bothManus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> and Nauru.

“The chief medical officer’s reviews have drawn attention to work, health and 
safety issues relating to the garrison support and welfare services contracts, 
including: increased risk of infections and disease due to vermin and pests; 
water pooling; extensive mould and inadequate cleaning of wet areas; inadequate 
food hygiene; and overcrowded accommodation. The Department of Immigration and 
Border Protection has often been slow to respond to issues raised by the chief 
medical officer or service providers.”

The auditor highlighted a case where it took 11 months – from January 2016 to 
December 2016, before the department took any action about mould growing in 
tents in theNauru <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nauru> detention centre. 
Mould remains a problem in the camp, the department says.


Overall, the auditor reported that the department’s handling of its offshore 
processing detention network, “has fallen well short of effective contract 
management practice”.

It found that $2.2bn was spent by the department on offshore processing 
without appropriate, or in some cases any, approval. “$1.1bn was approved by 
DIBP officers who did not have the required authorisation; and for the 
remaining $1.1bn there was no departmental record of who authorised the 
payments.”

“In addition, this audit highlighted further weaknesses in the department’s 
management of procurement. Substantial contract variations totalling over $1bn 
were made without a documented assessment of value for money.”

The auditor said the Department of Immigration and Border Protection had 
previously been warned about its profligacy in contracting.In September, the 
audit office condemned the department 
<https://www.anao.gov.au/work/performance-audit/offshore-processing-centres-nauru-and-papua-new-guinea-procurement>
 for allowing detention contracts to blow out by more than $1bn without seeking 
any alternative quotes.

“This audit [in January] has identified a recurrence of these, and other, 
deficiencies, which have resulted in higher than necessary expense for 
taxpayers and significant reputational risks for the Australian government and 
the department.”


In response to the auditor’s report, department deputy secretary Jenet Connell 
wrote that it was important for the auditor “to recognise the complex 
environment in which these contracts were established and continue to operate”.


Manus Island refugee who had breakdown found 'hungry and homeless'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/11/manus-island-refugee-who-had-breakdown-found-hungry-and-homeless>
“The pressure placed on the department to simultaneously manage thousands of 
asylum seekers, negotiate with host governments, engage service providers and 
operate all the logistics for the regional processing centres, while continuing 
to manage the immigration detention network in Australia, was immense.”

Connell said that the department disputed that more than $2bn was spent 
without authorisation. “The vast majority of these payments were fixed monthly 
contractual fees which are dependent on the number of residents in the RPCs. 
The department acknowledges that there is a lack of documentary evidence 
supporting our decisions on approving these payments.”

Connell said the department had begun work to remove mould from tents on Nauru.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text='You%20wish%20you%20could%20save%20them'%3A%20teachers%20describe%20anguish%20of%20children%20held%20on%20Nauru%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=%27You%20wish%20you%20could%20save%20them%27%3A%20teachers%20describe%20anguish%20of%20children%20held%20on%20Nauru%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Faustralia-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F11%2Fyou-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video&media=>
‘You wish you could save them’: teachers describe anguish of children held on 
Nauru 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/video/2016/aug/11/you-wish-you-could-save-them-teachers-describe-anguish-of-children-held-on-nauru-video> 