
Karen Bradley, our newish secretary for culture, media and sport, has an 
infernal December dilemma to solve. No, not the relatively simple business of 
seeing Rupert gobble all Sky TV. She’s over halfway through her 10-week 
consultation on the future of section 40 of the Crime and Courts Act: the 
currently dormant provisions that could land an outraged press with the full, 
crippling costs of libel actions even when they win. Does she stick or does she 
twist?

Activate those provisions and an overwhelming majority of Britain’s newspapers 
– every national from theSun to the Guardian, the Star to the FT – will be up 
in arms. So, perhaps even more worryingly, will be the local papers that serve 
MPs’ constituencies – papers which fear that a furious 40 will drive many of 
them out of business.

And what if she lets the section lie? Then Hacked Off, not to mention a swath 
of vocal opponents on the opposition benches at Westminster, will be after her 
blood. For 40 is the pressure point left by Leveson to drive newspapers to sign 
up with a royal charter-sanctified regulator (Impress) rather than stick with 
the industry’s own construction (Ipso) – never forgetting the in-house codes 
and complaints handling at theGuardian, FT and Standard, papers that fear the 
charter model because, at the end of the day, it leaves politicians in charge 
of press freedom.

Put section 40 to sleep – maybe even in some cryogenic chamber – and the 
chances of the Royal Charter that the previous parliament voted for reaching 
fruition are slim to vanishing. And it will be goodbye too, £3m of taxpayers’ 
money later, to the great and good “recognition panel” that eventually deemed
Impress <https://www.theguardian.com/media/impress> a fit-for-purpose regulator 
whose very existence makes implementing 40 possible. There are more effusions 
of fury along that path.

But, equally, delivering the outcome that Hacked Off wants can’t guarantee 
peace and harmony. The thousands of papers and magazines who’ve chosenIpso 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ipso> won’t scuttle quietly into the Impress 
fold. They’ll raise a rare old ruckus. They’ll fight. There will be messy court 
cases and appeals that may shred the force of 40 along the way – not to mention 
casualties when small papers collapse. It’s a forbidding prospect as human 
rights watchdogs such as Index on Censorship or Reporters Without Borders take 
to the barricades. Who wants to be freedom’s pariah figure in your first 
cabinet job?

Yet Bradley seems doomed to choose one course or the other. Rock or hard place 
territory. Unless, of course, there’s a third way: a road of give, take and 
moving on. Which indeed there is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6655a97764d5fc054fc461d2df9f21d49b74a51f%2F0_62_2838_1702%2F2838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Impress%3F%20Ipso%3F%20Thankfully%2C%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20better%20idea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Impress%3F%20Ipso%3F%20Thankfully%2C%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20better%20idea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6655a97764d5fc054fc461d2df9f21d49b74a51f%2F0_62_2838_1702%2F2838.jpg>
 Karen Bradley: weighing the future of section 40. Photograph: Peter 
Nicholls/Reuters 
Sir Brian Leveson, remember, did not advocate some government-imposed 
statutory regime of press regulation. Just the opposite. Governments may frame 
contentious legislation to make certain practices – say internet snooping for 
journalists’ sources – part of the rule of law. But state-enforced general 
regulation of the press is a different matter. It may please people who don’t 
like the tabloids, who roll their eyes when you say the word “Murdoch”; people 
who, in today’s terms, prefer to live in their own bubbles of civility. But it 
doesn’t have anything to do with freedom.

So, what can Karen and her Mother Theresa reasonably conclude as they examine 
the fruits of this consultation?

That the probabilities of newspaper extinction, especially at local level, 
have changed woefully. That the overall strength of the press is being sapped 
by social media (as one of Bradley’s juniors, Matt Hancock, observed only a few 
days ago). That Leveson, a mere three years past, did not remotely foresee the 
rise of fake digital news in full Trump mode. That unregulated or 
under-regulated online activity is the future anyway. And thus that inflicting 
a full-Monty regulatory regime on the press seems perversely out of time.

The better question, therefore, is: what can be done to deliver the kind of 
broadly consistent solution Leveson wanted? Sir Brian argued that one system 
must cover all, except maybePrivate Eye and a few special cases. In fact, now, 
we’ve got three separate, often hostile, systems. But bringing them much closer 
together ought to be relatively easy.

One code of conduct covers all? Well, Impress has been using the Ipso code 
while it gets its own (very similar) act together. TheFT/Guardian codes have 
similar roots. Ipso has just announced a widespread public consultation on 
possible changes to its own draftings. Things are on the move. There’s no 
reason why – perhaps with a little independent mediation – one basic complaints 
code shouldn’t cover every regulatory base (with separate appendices if 
required). In short, if you have a complaint, a single code steers you through.

And arbitration, the most difficult section 40 sticking-point? That’s soluble, 
too. Ipso is – wisely – mounting arbitration test runs. Impress has its own 
embryo scheme but hasn’t reached that stage yet. TheFT/Guardian third force 
offers external review of complaints at this stage, but doesn’t go further. Yet 
one arbitration plan, covering all again, surely makes sense. More trials 
before adoption? Of course. And with an opt-in rather than blanket membership, 
so that the national press and big magazine companies offer arbitration, but 
local papers can stand aside if they wish: an answer that fits experience in 
any case.

The same commonsense approach could operate wherever you look. Ipso would gain 
further autonomy if it raised its industry-support funds from the press direct, 
to an agreed formula. Manifest independence. Impress has huge long-term 
financing problems until it can break free from Max Mosley’s controversial 
beneficences (dismayingly extended by millions more over years at a twitch of 
Max’s fingers, as though they were puppets on his string). Manifest problems. 
And then there’s the question of independent monitoring of a regulator’s 
performance (though all sides have notably distinguished and clearly 
independent board members who could do the job).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cf239bcbdc159c98704fa4fc224ad935d5860a%2F0_63_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Impress%3F%20Ipso%3F%20Thankfully%2C%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20better%20idea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Impress%3F%20Ipso%3F%20Thankfully%2C%20there%E2%80%99s%20a%20better%20idea&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fimpress-ipso-thankfully-better-idea-karen-bradley-libel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41cf239bcbdc159c98704fa4fc224ad935d5860a%2F0_63_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Sir Brian Leveson: wanted a broadly consistent solution. Photograph: Dan 
Kitwood/Getty Images 
But, you may ask, why should anyone want to broker some compromises when there 
seems absolutely no wish for peacemaking across the trenches of mutual 
hostility? TheDaily Mail is not about to fall in love with Evan Harris of 
Hacked Off (and it’s mutual); the House of Lords is still voting for a Leveson 
2 inquiry into police-press relations (as though Leveson 1 plus the Filkin 
report hadn’t killed any actual relations stone dead); busy national newspaper 
lawyers are predictably challenging the recognition of Impress; and, though 
David Cameron and Oliver Letwin have retreated into the shadows, their royal 
charter notion still snoozes on the statute book.

Last week, moreover, committees in both the Commons and Lords were in full 
countering mode, giving the various regulators a tough time. Memories of phone 
hackings long ago haven’t died. Civil court cases drag on. It doesn’t seem a 
propitious time to try a more peaceable tack.

Yet the reasons to stop snarling and start thinking are equally cogent. 
Journalists aren’t exactly revered by their readers: down to a 24% trust and 
veracity scoreon the latest Ipsos Mori polling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/03/poll-uk-trust-deficit-getting-worse-politicians-teachers-nurses>
. They can dig in with Ipso but they can’t make it a game-changer for public 
opinion. They need one regulator, not three, so that the room for confusion and 
contention fades. They want sensible, coherent reform.

And maybe – just maybe – that will prove easier now Paul Dacre of the Mail has 
retired from his leadership of the editorial code committee. It’s easy to love 
or hate Dacre. That’s how he runs his paper. But, like David English, theMail’s 
chief before him, he’s worked formidably hard to try to unite a fractious 
industry behind self-regulation. The question is whether he’s convinced the 
public along the way. Without him, the question is whether a more measured 
approach might work better in ranting Trumpian times.

Bradley needs to do no more than speak softly and put aside any stick; to 
broker some kind of rational, non-Charter peace deal that serves the public 
(and Leveson) best. Leave trench warfare in the pits. And, while she’s at it, 
set up a working party to do what Sir Brian couldn’t: try to navigate a way 
through the jungles of online fakery that deceive, confuse and corrupt. New 
problems, not old festering ones, for a politician whose breed boasts a 15% 
trust rating.
 