
Oh how resilient myths can be, even in the face of facts. This past week saw 
the publication ofthe third strong refutation 
<http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/pdf/10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00106.1> of the myth 
that global warming had somehow stopped a decade or two ago. You would think 
that with 2014 the hottest year on record and 2015 almost certain to exceed 
that, and2016 to potentially set yet another heat record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/14/2015-and-2016-set-to-break-global-heat-records-says-met-office>
, people would use common sense to conclude that global warming continues. 
You’d also think with ocean heating breaking records (as discussedhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jan/22/oceans-warming-so-fast-they-keep-breaking-scientists-charts>
) and loss of ice around the world, any lingering doubts would be put to rest. 
But alas, for some reason, even more proof is needed.

The first paper, which I covered here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/aug/03/statistics-says-the-long-term-global-warming-trend-continues>
 looked at the actual temperature trends and found no statistically significant 
reduction in the rate of warming.The latest paper 
<http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00106.1>, just published 
in theBulletin of the American Meteorological Society by Stephan Lewandowsky 
<http://www.cogsciwa.com/>, James Risbey, <http://www.marine.csiro.au/~ris009/> 
andNaomi Oreskes <http://histsci.fas.harvard.edu/people/naomi-oreskes>, looks 
at the evolution of the terms “pause” and “hiatus.” The authors find that over 
the past decade or so, there has been a lot of interest in both the scientific 
community (as judged by papers covering the topic) and by the general public 
(as determined by web-search statistics).


In particular, the authors found distinct increases in web searches related to 
the so-called pause just prior to two major climate-change meetings. The 
article then asks two questions. First, has there been a pause? Second, why has 
there been such an intense interest in this so-called event?

The authors show that there is no unique pause in the data. They also discuss 
biases in the measurements themselves which suggested a slowing in warming that 
actually did not occur once the data were de-biased. Finally, they reported on
recent work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jun/04/new-research-suggests-global-warming-is-accelerating>
 that displayed a common error when people compare climate models to 
measurements (climate models report surface air temperatures while observations 
use a mixture of air and sea surface temperatures). With this as a backdrop, 
the authors take a step back and ask some seemingly basic questions.


First, what is meant by a “pause”? According to its commonly defined meaning, 
a “pause” is the interruption or suspension of a process. With this context, 
the global warming “pause” means exactly what the contrarians intend it to 
mean, a halt to global warming, at least for some time. By this definition, the 
so-called pause is seen to be meaningless because warming has continued apace, 
particular by the near linear increase in ocean heat content. The data clearly 
shows no “pause.” However, the authors restricted themselves to surface 
temperatures and asked if the pause appeared there.


The authors looked at temperatures since 1970 which they defined as long-term 
warming. They separately focused on15-year trends which they termed 
“fluctuations” because they represent short term fluctuations of temperatures 
about a long-term trend. They find clear fluctuations in the temperature trend, 
for instance the trend centered around 1999 was larger than the trend centered 
around 2005. By definition there must be certain time periods that are faster 
than the long-term average and certain time periods that are smaller than the 
long-term average. That is the meaning of an average. The real question is, can 
claims of a “pause” be distinguished from these fluctuations?


The authors looked at all possible 15-year trends in global mean surface 
temperatures. They first find that every single 15-year period showed warming 
(all four major datasets). The authors also show that the most recent 15-year 
trend isn’t very different from other 15-year trends throughout the entire 
period. To quote from the paper,

For a ‘pause’ to be distinctive, it must deviate below the longer-term trend 
more than previous periods deviated above the longer-term trend – otherwise, it 
can be considered just a fluctuation like others observed in the past.


While this sounds compelling so far, the authors went even further. They 
subjected the data to a blind expert test. They evaluated people’s forecasting 
judgement because it reveals human perception of a particular set of data. The 
authors asked a group of economists (each with a Masters or PhD degree in 
economics or an allied discipline) to evaluate the trend in global temperatures 
without awareness of the source of the data.


The experts were told that the data referred to agricultural output and were 
asked questions about whether the agricultural output had “stopped”. In fact, 
the authors took exact statements from a climate contrarian, except they 
replaced words associated with global warming with statements associated with 
agricultural productivity.

In this blind test, the experts strongly rejected the agricultural “pause” 
conclusion. In fact, they found mention of a pause “to be misleading and 
ill-informed”. The experts were divided about whether the “pause” statement was 
also fraudulent. What is particularly convincing is that a blind test like 
this, which removes the effects of personal biases or preconceived opinions, is 
the gold standard for many research areas.

The authors continue the paper by reciting how the “pause” gained such 
traction in the general public and such interest among scientists. They also 
found that the intense investigation on the “pause” has, as the put it,


ultimately reaffirmed the overall reliability of climate models for projecting 
temperature trends. However, by accepting the framing of a recent fluctuation 
as a ‘pause’ or ‘hiatus’, that research has, ironically and unwittingly, 
entrenched the notion of a ‘pause’ in the literature as well as in the public’s 
mind.

I asked the lead author, Dr. Stephan Lewandowsky for a summary and he told me, 

We put the idea of a ‘pause’ in global warming to a blind expert test. 
Basically, we presented the global temperature data for the last 100+ years to 
a group of economists, but identified the data as representing ‘world 
agricultural output’ so that political attitudes or preconceived notions would 
not play a role. The economists agree that talk of global warming having 
‘stopped’ was misleading and not supported by the data. This is not surprising 
because if you do the statistical analyses you find that the most recent 
fluctuation in warming rate was no more extreme than previous accelerations. 
Global warming has not ‘paused’ 


The paper <http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/BAMS-D-14-00106.1> is 
available as open-access, I encourage people to read it for themselves.

Another related paper 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-015-1495-y> has just been 
published; the fourth refutation of the “pause” myth, coveredhere 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2015/09/17/new-statistical-studies-dismantle-the-notion-of-a-global-warming-pause/>
 in the Washington Post.
 