
We drop down the side of this woodland on a bright day buffeted by a cold 
wind. First planted in 1811 with scots pine and oak, its fencesnow enclose a 
wide variety of trees <http://www.newforest-national-park.uk/holmsley.html>. We 
turn along the eastern edge to find the lower gate and, on entering, are 
plunged into a claustrophobic tangle of branches, before quickly coming to a 
narrow path close set with brambles on one side and hollies on the other. The 
recent rains have made the soil beneath the fallen leaves a muddy squelch, 
deeply incised with fresh bike tracks.

Getting our eyes in, we begin to see a host of small brown and greyish fungi 
tucked into the patchwork of sodden foliage and decaying leaf-fall. For us, 
most of them are “little brown jobbies”, as they are known to those without 
sufficient skill to identify them. We notice, too, some so much smaller that we 
are drawn into a Lilliputian world.

The secret life of a tiny pond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/20/secret-life-tiny-pond> 
Tiny white fungi are growing on rotting holly leaves. With long stems, red for 
the greater part but becoming paler near to the cap, these are so fragile that 
we sense a puff of wind could blow them away. They are theholly parachute 
<http://www.ispotnature.org/node/381904>, Marasmius hudsonii. There are a lot 
of them here, many on each leaf.

Now looking closely at leaf litter, we soon find galls of two species of wasp, 
both of which are on fallen oak leaves. At first sight one looks like a mass of 
moth eggs, lovely golden brown circles with a hollow in the middle. These are
silk button spangle galls 
<http://www.naturespot.org.uk/species/silk-button-gall-wasp>, and each has a 
minute larva inside, which will develop during winter. Looked at later under 
the microscope, they remind us of a scrumptious doughnut.

The others are quite different, wafer thin, dull brown, flattened circles with 
a central hump, like a badly eroded burial mound laid bare. These arecommon 
spangle galls <https://www.shropshirewildlifetrust.org.uk/species/spangle-gall>
. Adult wasps, a few millimetres long, will emerge from both in the spring to 
lay eggs in the opening buds of the oaks.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 