
Take back control. Those three words now govern our politics. They sum up why 
Britain is leaving Europe, and they make up the yardstick by whichTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will be judged. Yet already, 
in the past few days, their hollowness has been exposed.

Don’t stop at Nissan – we all need comfort letters now | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/nissan-comfort-letter-car-brexit>
This story moves fast – and begins with a threat. Not a subtle moue of 
displeasure from behind an expensive pair of cufflinks, but a bluntly put, 
publicly issued ransom. At the end of September the boss of Nissan, Carlos 
Ghosn, goes to one of the car industry’s biggest annual events, the Paris Motor 
Show, and declares to reporters that Brexit means the UK now has to cut him “a 
deal”. If cars made in Britain are to face tariffs on export to Europe, he 
wants “some kind of compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/30/nissan-hard-brexit-compensation-new-uk-investment-tariffs>
”.

Extraordinary: one of the biggest manufacturers in Britain effectively wants 
danger money to carry on investing here. Even more remarkably,Nissan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> has behind it the full might of 
the Japanese government, which sent 15 pages of demands on behalf of some of 
the country’s biggest businesses – along with the veiled threat to pull out of 
the UK.

Faster than you can say Micra, Ghosn is invited to Downing Street. Within two 
weeks he has aface-to-face with the prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/14/nissan-chief-executive-carlos-ghosn-meets-theresa-may-brexit-talks>
. The UK has just opted to sever four decades of relations with its biggest 
trading partner, the government has no fiscal policy and her own party is in 
turmoil – yet May still clears her diary for the Nissan boss.

Then, a few days back, Ghosn announces Sunderland will not only carry on 
working, butwill now make the new-model Qashqai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-to-make-new-qashqai-and-x-trail-models-in-britain>
. The obvious question is: what did his company get from our government? Yet 
business secretary Greg Clark refuses to divulge any detail of how much or even
what kind of taxpayer support has been offered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/new-nissan-super-plant-hopes-for-tariff-free-eu-access>
 to Nissan – after all, it’s only our money. Instead, he waves off the deal as 
just a slightly prickly chat in the senior common room.

“One can overcomplicate these things,” he airily tells MPs at the end of 
October. A mere month after Ghosn made his initial threat, what apparently
changed his mind <https://www.theyworkforyou.com/debates/?id=2016-10-31b.687.3> 
was the government’s “intention to find common ground and to pursue discussions 
in a rational and civilised way”.

To say this doesn’t add up is beside the point: it’s not meant to. Clark and 
May obviously don’t want a rival carmaker or any other multinational operating 
in Britain to know how far they will go to keep them onshore. But if the 
multimillionaire boss of a £33bn auto giant only wanted a “rational and 
civilised” discussion, , he could try a Melvyn Bragg podcast. The Qashqai has 
been a massive seller for Nissan; the company would not have opted to make the 
next model out of Sunderland merely on the basis of some comforting ministerial 
purrs.

A source 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-britain-eu-nissan-support-idUKKCN12R2FI> 
tells Reuters that “the government gave Nissan a written commitment of extra 
support in the event Brexit reduces its competitiveness”. The carmaker itself 
acknowledges that its executive committee made its decision upon receiving the 
“support and assurances of the UK government”. And the former deputy prime 
minister, Nick Clegg, warns that such deals could cost the taxpayer “colossal 
amounts of money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/nissans-post-brexit-deal-could-lead-to-colossal-bills-for-taxpayers>
”. How much? Were the EU to slap on 10% extra on British-made cars, the tariff 
bill for Nissan UK alone would come to just shy of £300m a year. If May and 
Clark were to try to cover half of that, they would be extending an 
unprecedented level of subsidy to just one company. Now imagine those same 
terms replicated for the other big car exporters: Toyota (which before the 
referendum warned of cutbacks if Britain left the EU), Honda, Jaguar Land Rover 
…
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20hails%20Nissan's%20decision%20to%20build%20new%20car%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20hails%20Nissan%27s%20decision%20to%20build%20new%20car%20in%20UK%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Ftheresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video&media=>
Theresa May hails Nissan’s decision to build new car in UK – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/oct/27/theresa-may-hails-nissans-decision-to-build-new-car-in-uk-video>
What you’ve just seen, then, is a foretaste of the way big business will deal 
with the government in Brexit Britain. First the threat, then the bargain, and 
finally, with unministerial haste, an expensive handshake behind closed doors. 
Each time, the public will be none the wiser, even as their government commits 
them to perhaps costly support for some company or sector, each one claiming 
strategic importance. And don’t think it will stop at cars.

Within 48 hours of the Brexit vote, the National Farmers’ Union was preparing 
for an extraordinary meeting of its council to draw up demands for Downing 
Street. Top of the list was the £2.4bn in subsidies that farmers get each year 
from Brussels. Within weeks, the new chancellor Philip Hammond was promising to 
carry on the handouts until the end of this decade. He made similar offers to 
universities and businesses reliant on EU grants.

Almost inevitably, the British state becomes even more of a milch-cow for big 
businesses

Put these numbers in context. Starting this week, the government will cut the 
benefits it gives to 88,000 families. That is huge turmoil – and it will cut 
just £100m from the welfare bill. Yet at the same time, billions are being 
committed to keep sweet businesses from the pharmaceutical giants to the 
landowners of the south-west.

These are businesses that have already done very well out of taxpayers. 
Consider Nissan UK:Kevin Farnsworth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-farnsworth>, lecturer in social 
policy at the University of York and an expert on government subsidies, 
calculates that over the past two decades it has taken £782m in loans, grants 
and handouts from the British and European public. In upfront cash transfers 
alone that comes to £130m.

Farnsworth has calculated this figure by combing Nissan accounts as well as 
the grant documents from the British government and its various agencies. He 
has compiled adatabase <http://staging.corporate-welfare-watch.org.uk/wp/> for 
other major businesses, to be found at corporate-welfare-watch.org.uk.

Where this takes you is to the dirty secret of the British business model. 
From Margaret Thatcher onwards, successive governments have lured multinational 
investors by promising them access to the single market, a cheap, biddable 
workforce and a bunch of corporate sweeteners. It was the same offer Dublin 
made to the tax avoiders of Silicon Valley and – within its own narrow confines 
– it worked. As Farnsworth points out, Britain has reliably taken in 
proportionately more foreign direct investment than most of its competitors.

The problem is that now the UK can no longer guarantee access to 500 million 
European consumers, it will need to make its workers cheaper and even more 
flexible and offer more handouts.

Surveying this debacle, it strikes me that Lord Acton got it wrong. It’s not 
power that corrupts; it’s powerlessness. What do you bargain with, when three 
decades of deregulation and weakening of local and central government mean you 
have hardly any cards left in your hand? Almost inevitably, the British state 
becomes even more of a milch-cow for big businesses. Forget about foreigners 
coming over here and taking our benefits; now think about multinationals 
cherry-picking our benefits. That trade-off isn’t rhetorical: it’s real. That 
money will come from our social security, our hospitals, our schools. Brexit 
Britain: a soft touch for corporate welfare. Is this what was meant by control?

• Comments will be turned on later this morning
 