
Just over a year after five publishers and booksellers disappeared from Hong 
Kong <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hong-kong> in mysterious circumstances, 
the Chinese territory’s book industry has been shaken to the core.

Bookshops have closed. Publishers have left. Authors have stopped writing. 
Books have been pulped. Printers are refusing political works. Translators have 
grown weary of being associated with certain topics. Readers have stopped 
buying. And the whole industry is wondering if hard-hitting books on Chinese 
politics still have a future in the former British colony.

Hong Kong protesters march over abducted booksellers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/01/hong-kong-protesters-call-for-leader-to-stand-down>
The booksellers involved, formerly known only to a small niche of insiders, 
have now become household names in Hong Kong:Gui Minha 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/gui-minhai-the-strange-disappearance-of-a-publisher-who-riled-chinas-elite>
i, a Swedish citizen, remains jailed in an undisclosed location in China after 
he was kidnapped from his holiday home in Thailand.Lee Bo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/24/hong-kong-book-editor-lee-bo-returns-home-disappear-missing>
, a British national who was lifted off the streets of Hong Kong and taken to 
China against his will has been released and allowed to return, but has 
consistently refused to give a full account of what has happened to him. He 
remains in China. Lui Por and Cheung Chi-ping, two clerks atCauseway Bay Books 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Causeway_Bay_Books>, the bookshop at the centre 
of the case, disappeared while on a visit to Shenzhen. They are also formally 
free, but live across the border where they have refused to entertain calls 
from the press and former associates.

The booksellers were pressured into televised confessions broadcast on 
national TV, in which they admitted to a variety of crimes – from a hit-and-run 
incident to mailing to sending Chinese clients forbidden Hong Kong books 
without a licence. OnlyLam Wing-kee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/06/bookseller-abductions-china-demands-lam-wing-kee-return-from>
 has jumped bail while on a visit to Hong Kong in June to retrieve a computer 
database. He has since spoken out against his ordeal, which included “isolation 
and psychological torture”, threats and being denied access to a lawyer.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa84a5ad461da57964ccff1846d56318aba2aa41f%2F1950_36_1990_1194%2F1990.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Hong%20Kong's%20book%20industry%2C%20'everybody%20is%20scared'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Hong%20Kong%27s%20book%20industry%2C%20%27everybody%20is%20scared%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa84a5ad461da57964ccff1846d56318aba2aa41f%2F1950_36_1990_1194%2F1990.jpg>
 Political sensitivities … President Xi Jinping of China. Photograph: Fred 
Dufour/EPA 
Nobody knows exactly why the authorities in China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> decided to crack down on Causeway Bay 
Books, though it is thought that the final straw is likely to have been a 
salacious work about China’s president Xi Jinping’s relationship with women 
that was about to be published.

Bao Pu, co-founder of New Century Press 
<http://www.nybooks.com/daily/2016/01/22/my-personal-vendetta-interview-hong-kong-publisher-bao-pu/>
 (a publishing house that specialises in highbrow political books), says that 
controls at the border with Hong Kong have been getting stricter in the past 
few years – “and ever more so since the establishment of the Southern Hill 
Project in 2010”. This refers to the code name of a campaign launched by the 
Chinese authorities to counter the influence of the Hong Kong publishing 
industry, which was seen as growing exponentially.

As more Chinese visitors had been allowed to travel to Hong Kong withoutvisas, 
shopping for politically revealing books forbidden in the rest of the country 
had become widespread. Some had been dubbed “democracy tourists” by activists 
who’d see them also taking part, or observing, pro-democracy demonstrations in 
Hong Kong.

Until the Causeway Bay case, these books were easy to buy, allowing Chinese 
citizens to gain a glimpse – not always truthful – of the inner workings of 
their opaque leaders. At the airport, in 24-hour convenience shops and in 
regular bookstores, political books about the Communist party, the People’s 
Liberation Army and individual leaders were readily available next to milk 
powder and traditional medicines, two of the other items particularly 
sought-after by Chinese tourists.

This is no longer the case. Since April, the 16 bookstores at the Hong Kong 
International Airport have been cut down to 10. The biggest five are now 
controlled by Chung Hwa Book Co, a company that was established in Shanghai in 
1912 and is now under Sino UnitedPublishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/publishing>, a mainland-backed conglomerate 
that owns most Hong Kong bookshops – and where the “forbidden” books are mostly 
unavailable.

Critical, gossipy books have also disappeared from the ubiquitous 7-Eleven 
stores and other 24-hour mini-supermarkets. A clerk at a 7-Eleven outlet in 
Hollywood Road, a central street well-known to tourists for its antique shops, 
only says that this was a decision by the management, as the books were “still 
selling”. She declines to give her name, and 7-Eleven, now owned by Dairy Farm, 
a pan-Asian retailer part of the Jardine Matheson Group, has not replied to a 
written request for an interview.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94bddc9b3454f689bfdf29f1e4f8b1767cc937a2%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Hong%20Kong's%20book%20industry%2C%20'everybody%20is%20scared'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Hong%20Kong%27s%20book%20industry%2C%20%27everybody%20is%20scared%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94bddc9b3454f689bfdf29f1e4f8b1767cc937a2%2F0_0_4000_2667%2F4000.jpg>
 Tourism to Hong Kong by mainland Chinese citizens has grown dramatically – 
giving more people access to critical or salacious publications. Photograph: 
Dale de la Rey/AFP/Getty Images 
Independent bookstores, on the other hand, have been deserted by their former 
customers, and some have had to close down.One of them is 1908 Books 
<http://www.rfa.org/english/news/china/china-booksellers-02042016174753.html>, 
a bookstore in the Tsim Sha Tsui district that stocked only political books and 
magazines. It shut its doors earlier this year without any public announcement. 
In November, Page One, a large Singapore-owned bilingual chain that 
occasionally carried political books in Chinese, withdrew from Hong Kong 
entirely.

A handful of independent bookstores do survive, but they all belong to the 
“second-floor bookshops” category: operating from higher floors of commercial 
buildings and harder to find for visitors unfamiliar with Hong Kong. One 
example is People’s Coffee and Books, also located in Causeway Bay, which 
doubles as a cafe. It is still carrying all the troublesome volumes, but owner 
Paul Tang says it is seeing far fewer customers than at this time last year. 
And in an unexpected twist, the Causeway Bay Books outlet – still closed to the 
public – was purchased by a Chinese national.

One aim of the Southern Hill Project is to put pressure on tour guides: “The 
Tourism Bureau ensures that travellers bound for Hong Kong and Taiwan receive 
warnings and are subject to propaganda, and tour guides are given the 
responsibility to remind, discourage and prevent tourists from buying 
publications that are deemed politically harmful to bring back to China,” says 
Bao.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0a831030b2be9ca1f80e6e6db8a4f4bf3088e%2F0_0_5224_3504%2F5224.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Hong%20Kong's%20book%20industry%2C%20'everybody%20is%20scared'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Hong%20Kong%27s%20book%20industry%2C%20%27everybody%20is%20scared%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0b0a831030b2be9ca1f80e6e6db8a4f4bf3088e%2F0_0_5224_3504%2F5224.jpg>
 Deemed harmful … books banned on the Chinese mainland on sale in a Hong Kong 
market last February. Many such titles have now been withdrawn. Photograph: Kin 
Cheung/AP 
The clampdown is not only affecting what bookstores can sell but the books 
that are now available to them, with fewer books being published in the first 
place. “The bookseller incident not only sets new boundaries but also 
reinforces the norm, which is to publish in journals instead of books,” says 
Edmund Cheng, an associate professor at Hong Kong Baptist University.

“The former’s audience is restricted to peers and students but matters a lot 
in academics’ livelihoods and in the ranking of universities. But in this way, 
academic publication’s usage in the public sphere is undermined. So 
authoritarian protocol and market logic work quite well together.”

It has been a slow shift away from freer days, as Cheng underlines: “The 
self-censorship started before the booksellers’ case: afterthe umbrella movement
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/hong-kong-umbrella-movement-first-anniversary-democracy>
 [the pro-democracy protests that began in September 2014], it was no longer 
easy to publish critical books written by academics,” he says. “Titles, in 
particular, can no longer carry certain words, like ‘social movement’. If you 
have those in your title, you are no longer invited to conferences, especially 
on the mainland.”

Timothy O’Leary, head of the school of humanities at Hong Kong University, 
confirms this: “The effect is more likely to be a slow undermining of 
willingness to publish in politically sensitive areas,” he says, as academics 
and writers alike shy away from potential trouble.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c80f68ddb8273d0fb61481140bfb9848e557345%2F0_296_2304_3147%2F2304.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Hong%20Kong's%20book%20industry%2C%20'everybody%20is%20scared'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Hong%20Kong%27s%20book%20industry%2C%20%27everybody%20is%20scared%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fin-hong-kongs-book-industry-everybody-is-scared%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c80f68ddb8273d0fb61481140bfb9848e557345%2F0_296_2304_3147%2F2304.jpg>
 Problems finding translators … author Mei Fong. Photograph: Andrew Lih 
Even translators have become weary. Mei Fong, author of One Child: The Story 
Of China’s Most Radical Experiment, a book about the one-child policy and its 
consequences published in English this year, tried unsuccessfully to have her 
book distributed in Chinese.

“I wanted to reach the audience that has been most touched by the topic I 
analyse,” she says. But “after trying unsuccessfully to have the book published 
in China, I looked for a Hong Kong publisher, which is how books on ‘banned’ 
topics used to reach readers in the mainland. I was told that the problem with 
the book was not so much the sensitivities, but the difficulty in finding a 
distributor. Yet even before that, my translator pulled out,” she says. “So I 
commissioned my own translator, who asked to remain anonymous, but even then I 
could not find a publisher, neither in Hong Kong, because of the consequences 
of the five booksellers’ disappearance, nor in Taiwan, where books about China 
are not very popular.”

She decided to attempt a new approach, allowing the Chinese version of her 
book to be be downloaded for free, with the possibility of contributing a 
voluntary fee to cover costs. It’s not clear how long her experiment can last 
before the mainland censors pull the plug on her website.

“Everybody is scared,” says Renee Chiang, of New Century Press. “The printers 
… are not willing to print political books. And the bookshops are not willing 
to stock political books, because now it is considered dangerous. But since the 
majority of the readers of this kind of work are visitors from the mainland, 
now that the customs officers have increased their surveillance and 
confiscation of political books, they are no longer buying them. So at both 
ends of the chain we have problems.”

Given the climate in Hong Kong, printers do not see their refusal to print as 
a political decision, but purely a business one. AsiaOne, which used to print 
political books without worries, has ceased doing so – but nobody at the 
company agreed to be interviewed. Jason Chan, of printing company Sun-Design, 
says that “truly speaking, the booksellers’ case has a bad influence on the 
publishers and the booksellers still working in Hong Kong. I still believe that 
Hong Kong is a safe place to work, so I haven’t rejected any book’s printing 
yet because of political reasons. Nowadays, the volume of books printed is 
going down, but the impact has been [great] only on specific bookstores and 
publishers,” he says.

Authors, too, are feeling the pinch. Yu Jie, a mainland author of politically 
sensitive books, saw his contract for a new book on Xi with the publishers of 
Open Magazine – a monthly that tries to follow the party’s power struggles – 
rescinded after the chief editor, Jin Zhong, left Hong Kong under pressure from 
his family. The book was eventually published in Taiwan to a much smaller 
audience.

Meanwhile, given the prohibitive costs of keeping unsold stock, some 
publishers have resorted to pulping political books that had no chance of 
getting distributed.

According to the South China Morning Post, Hong Kong’s main English language 
paper, Sophie Choi – Lee Bo’s wife – ordered “45,000 books critical of the 
Communist party destroyed” in the hope of facilitating her husband’s release. 
Other publishers, too, have privately admitted to destroying political books 
that cannot be distributed and sold.

The damage done to the Hong Kong publishing industry is unprecedented. “Since 
1949, Hong Kong had always been the place where books about China could be 
published. Its role was huge, way beyond the size of Hong Kong and its 
readership. This is why to this day scholars from China and from all over the 
world come to Hong Kong: to be able to see sensitive material,” says Bao. “This 
is now disappearing.”
 