
Divided territories usually create their own ugly landmarks. In Nicosia, now 
holder of the unenviable distinction of being the world’s last divided capital, 
the scars of past conflict are brutally evident.

They come in the form of a UN-patrolled buffer zone, a wound that runs east to 
west across the city, and in the dereliction that surrounds it. Roads end at 
barrels and barbed wire; buildings stand bullet-pocked and empty, gun ports, 
sandbags and sentry posts slowly decay.

For 43 years these dismal sights have provided the motif to a conflict frozen 
in time, the most potent symbol of a 112-mile ceasefire line that has kept 
Cyprus’s estranged Christian Orthodox Greek and Muslim Turkish communities 
apart.

But in a dramatic week of international diplomacy, brinkmanship and talks, the 
starting gun has been fired ona process in which all could soon change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/14/cyprus-talks-bring-nicosia-to-a-point-where-we-can-have-hope>
. Across the ethnic divide there is conviction that the gaping wound could 
close. “This time people aren’t afraid to be optimistic,” said Andreas 
Mesarites, a Greek Cypriot brand strategist. “This time it feels different.”

What has long been Cyprus’s plight – the inability of its politicians to 
compromise and concede – changed last week in the elegant, high-ceilinged rooms 
of Geneva’s UN Palais de Nations. There, Nicos Anastasiades, who heads the 
island’s internationally recognised Greek-run south, and Mustafa Akinci, who 
leads its Turkish-run north, narrowed differences to the point where they pored 
over maps, discussed property rights and began tackling the thorny issues of 
territorial realignment and troop presence – small but bold steps to not only 
putCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> back together again, but 
ending a status quo that in many ways is both anomalous and surreal.

Even now, more than four decades after the 1974 Turkish invasion – an 
operation that cemented a division first created by inter-ethnic fighting in 
the early 1960s – the two sides are linked by very little. A common sewage 
system and electricity grid are in place, connecting entities that are only 
metres apart but, with the exception of trade in home-grown goods, practically 
all other official interaction is stymied.

Few know this better than Phidias Pilides and Fikri Toros. As presidents of 
the Greek and Turkish Cypriot chambers of commerce, the two men might, in 
different times, have much to bicker over. Instead, bonded by the desire for an 
end to their island’s division, they are good friends who regularly cross the 
ethnic divide.

“We are both working for the same cause,” says Pilides, seated behind a large 
glass table in his office with a view out towards the Kyrenia range of the 
breakaway republic beyond. “On the issue of Cyprus, I don’t hide any of my 
feelings … we have no secrets.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fin-nicosia-cyprus-spirit-of-reconciliation-is-stirring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c613bbdec42efcdecc6f3e7b00658a9fd60b41%2F0_138_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20Nicosia%2C%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20last%20divided%20capital%2C%20a%20spirit%20of%20reconciliation%20is%20stirring%20across%20the%20fence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fin-nicosia-cyprus-spirit-of-reconciliation-is-stirring%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20Nicosia%2C%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20last%20divided%20capital%2C%20a%20spirit%20of%20reconciliation%20is%20stirring%20across%20the%20fence&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fin-nicosia-cyprus-spirit-of-reconciliation-is-stirring%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c613bbdec42efcdecc6f3e7b00658a9fd60b41%2F0_138_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 A cafe in Nicosia near the separation line between the two communities. 
Like Toros, Pilides believes that Cyprus is on the cusp of historic change. 
“I’d put money on a political solution being agreed in the coming months,” he 
says. “The talks didn’t end in deadlock, they didn’t collapse … there is 
optimism that the reaching of an agreement is still within grasp.”

Any deal will be put to a referendum – another high-risk move whose outcome, 
in an age of referendum surprises, is far from sure. The last time a peace plan 
was put to the popular vote in 2004 it was supported by the Turkish Cypriots 
and roundly rejected by the Greeks. “Back then,” quips Mesarites, “you wouldn’t 
put a bumper sticker on your car if you believed in a solution. You knew your 
windows would be smashed.”

But times have changed. Under the stewardship of Anastasiades and Akinci – who 
ironically both hail from the southern coastal town of Limassol – Cypriots on 
either side say they have arrived at a point of hope. “Finally we have two 
leaders who are truly committed to a solution,” says Toros. “Men who are 
willing to take the courageous steps to get there.”

In many ways, Anastasiades and Akinci already know that their people are ahead 
of them. Years of international isolation have seen growing numbers of Turkish 
Cypriots seek work in the south and, where possible, educate their children 
there too. With the passage of time passions have abated. In ways big and 
small, Cypriots from both sides are intermingling – collaborating on communal 
projects, working together, falling in love.

“For two years I was in a lovely relationship with a Greek Cypriot girl,” says 
a young Turkish Cypriot behind the till at Rustem’s, a bookshop in the north. 
“You can’t stop love. You can’t stop people getting on with their lives. A lot 
of us want a solution. Now it’s up to the politicians to get on and do it.”

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
About two miles south as the crow flies, Corina Constantinou and Elena Ellina, 
Greek Cypriot chemists in their 20s, couldn’t have agreed more. “Of course, 
Cyprus should be united,” said Constantinou, her trendy leather jacket pulled 
up around her neck as she sipped coffee at Starbucks on Friday. “If it wasn’t 
divided, we’d all be so much better off. Maybe on this side it would also stop 
us building so many concrete blocks which would be better for the environment.”

“And,” said Ellina interjecting, “it would be a good way to end the racism 
which is so ugly too.”

But, like so many Cypriots, both know that the future is fraught with risk. 
“It’s not going to be easy,” says Constantinou. “All our lives we’ve heard 
about this problem and all our lives nothing has changed. Still, I live in 
hope, I really do. At some point something has to give.”

What will give and how is anyone’s guess. Resolving what has long been 
regarded as the Rubik’s cube of diplomacy – the west’s longest-running 
diplomatic dispute – is a tortuous business, as arcane as it is complex. 
Conciliation cannot come without concession and concession cannot come without 
pain. To make matters worse, the long hoped for two-state federation not only 
requires compromise but approval from Nato rivals Greece andTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey>.

As former colonial master with military bases on the island, Britain also has 
a say as a guarantor power alongside Ankara and Athens.

That more progress wasn’t made in Geneva last week was blamed squarely on 
Greece’s truculent foreign minister digging in his heels on matters of security 
with Turkey.

“Sadly, in our case, it doesn’t just take two to tango,” one high-level Greek 
Cypriot diplomat confided. “It involves a folk dance which makes every step 
that much more complicated.”

Cyprus reunification talks making slow progress
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/cyprus-reunification-talks-making-slow-progress>
In all the politics it is easy to forget the pain. One in three Greek Cypriots 
was displaced in 1974, when the Turkish army ordered a full-scale invasion in 
response to a rightwing coup aimed at uniting the island withGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece>. Many were forced to flee their 
homes in hours, hastily burying jewellery, gold and other treasures in 
courtyards and back gardens. Refugees (though far less) also went the other 
way, with members of the Turkish Cypriot minority in the south being similarly 
forced north as the army moved in. For most, it never occurred to them that 
such a tumult would be anything other than temporary.

In 2003, when the then Turkish Cypriot regime eased travel restrictions – 
opening up access to the statelet for the first time since declaration of 
independence in 1983 – Greek Cypriots could see what they had lost. And often 
they were shocked. Not by anger or disbelief at seeing so much of the 
territory’s Greek past erased – street names had changed and churches converted 
into mosques – but at the kindness of apologetic Turkish Cypriots, who “wished 
a thousand Virgin Marys” (for many spoke Greek) it had not been this way.

That was the first sign that something had changed.

“For so many years we had painted the face of the devil on the other,” says 
Nikos Athanasiou, a teacher who led civil society efforts to reach out to the 
north. “That’s when that stopped.”

But fear and loathing still haunt Cyprus. Even today, as minefields are 
cleared and communal activities snowball and supporters of reconciliation take 
to the streets, there are those who prefer fracture as a state of mind. In the 
months ahead they will take to the streets, as they have in times past, to 
ensure the status quo.

Only now a new spirit has stirred; a spirit that sees hope in change and 
change in unity. For Anastasiades and Akinci, who belong to the last generation 
with common memories of coexistence, it is a spirit they have to harness before 
it is too late.
 