
When William Hill threw out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/15/william-hill-rejects-888-rank-revised-takeover-approach>
 a cheeky three-way merger proposal from the Rank Group and 888 Holdings a 
couple of months ago, its chairman, Gareth Davis, explained robustly that the 
bookmaker would not be doing a deal based on “risk, debt and hope”.

Quite right, too. Life has become tougher for William Hill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/williamhill> over the past year, and it 
has lost its chief executive on the way, but there was no reason to panic.

But now comes a deal the board wants to look at – a potential “merger of 
equals” with Amaya, the Canadian company whose PokerStars website dominates the 
world of online poker. But, using Davis’s own yardsticks, the appeal looks 
wobbly at best.

On risk, Amaya brings at least two big ones. The more obvious is a $870m 
(£704m) penalty in the US state of Kentucky. Amaya is probably correct in 
thinking it will not end up paying anything like that sum, but one can never be 
sure given US authorities’ past (baffling) attempts to combat online poker.

The other risk is that William Hill ends up with too much exposure to 
unregulated markets, meaning those where gambling is either banned or the rules 
are so unclear that your local operation can legislated out of existence. At 
the moment, William Hill’s exposure to unregulated territories is an admirably 
low 5%. After a merger with Amaya, the ratio would rise to about a quarter of 
the business. Big difference.

On debt, Amaya would bring a bundle. The combined group’s borrowings would be 
about 3.5 times the top-line profits. Historically, William Hill has aimed for 
under two times. If high levels of debt are not your bag, Amaya is a strange 
choice of partner.

The hope element is that cross-selling will do wonders for both companies – 
that Amaya’s poker players will want to bet on sport with William Hill, and 
vice versa. That seems plausible, but the degree is untested.

Add it up and we can agree that Amaya looks a better gamble than the complex 
Rank/888 proposal, where the debt ratios would have been even higher. The 
Canadian company is a fearsome generator of cash and it is digital and 
international – qualities prized by William Hill. All the same, there’s a whiff 
of desperation in the idea that an overdose of online poker, a game that’s 
barely growing these days, is the thing to fire up William Hill.

Note the limp reaction in the share price, up just 3%. In poker terms, Amaya 
is offering a marginal hand. William Hill’s investors may fairly feel the 
self-help cards are stronger.

Clock ticking on RBS inquiry
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc59042ef519029528a08c955eb3f98d72b8b4bf%2F0_0_4092_2456%2F4092.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20poker%20terms%2C%20Amaya%20is%20offering%20William%20Hill%20a%20marginal%20hand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20poker%20terms%2C%20Amaya%20is%20offering%20William%20Hill%20a%20marginal%20hand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc59042ef519029528a08c955eb3f98d72b8b4bf%2F0_0_4092_2456%2F4092.jpg>
 RBS has admitted it did not always meet its own standards when dealing with 
small business customers. Photograph: Hannah Mckay/EPA 
The bad smell around Royal Bank of Scotland’s global restructuring group (GRG) 
refuses to go away. Lawrence Tomlinson, an adviser to then-business secretary 
Sir Vince Cable, was the first to allege that the unit routinely ripped off 
small business customers, forced healthy companies into insolvency and then 
bought their assets for a song. That was back in 2013.

RBS has admitted it “did not always meet our own high standards” when dealing 
with small business customers but it has always vehemently denied (and did so 
again on Monday) the ugly charge of crashing viable businesses for its own 
gain. The bank has also commissioned two inquiries, both of which cleared the 
bank on the central allegations. And yet material keeps coming. Witness 
Buzzfeed and BBC Newsnight’s coverage of documents in which an RBS official 
wrote about a “dash for cash”.

In the end, it is only the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, armed with 
powers of investigation, that can make sense of the tale. Its inquiry was 
launched in January 2014 after Tomlinson’s report and was initially promised by 
the end of 2015. That deadline came and went. This month’s update from the 
regulator said its review has been “complex and lengthy” and that it was 
therefore “important that we do not rush the final stages of this process”.

Well, yes, it’s better to be accurate than to be quick. But the FCA is still 
pushing the limits of acceptability on timing. Andrew Bailey, the 
organisation’s new boss, has hinted that he is aiming for publication by the 
end of this year. Better to make that a firm commitment and work some overtime. 
Delay has not helped small firms that may or may not be due compensation – and 
it’s not doing much for RBS either.

Mitie lessons to learn from ‘prickly peer’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d52643f2087b52852f2bbb0299490d0a15580f%2F26_76_1959_1175%2F1959.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20poker%20terms%2C%20Amaya%20is%20offering%20William%20Hill%20a%20marginal%20hand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20poker%20terms%2C%20Amaya%20is%20offering%20William%20Hill%20a%20marginal%20hand&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fpoker-amaya-william-hill-deal-plans%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3d52643f2087b52852f2bbb0299490d0a15580f%2F26_76_1959_1175%2F1959.jpg>
 Ruby McGregor-Smith is stepping down as Mitie CEO. Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
Mitie Group wants you to know that Ruby McGregor-Smith is leaving of her own 
volition.News of her departure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/10/mitie-outsourcing-chief-executive-ruby-mcgregor-smith-steps-down>
 after 10 years at the helm was presented as an “update on CEO succession 
plans”. Phil Bentley, formerly of Cable & Wireless Communications, has been 
hired after a process that started “late last year” – in other words, before 
the profits warning that sent the outsourcer’s share price to a seven-year low.

Amid the tributes to Lady McGregor-Smith, there wasn’t even room to refer to 
the profits shocker in the official statement. “A challenging time for the 
sector” was the closest Bentley came. His first task, one can deduce, is to 
challenge a corporate hostility to criticism that earned McGregor-Smith the 
wonderful nickname “the prickly peer”.
 