
We will seize the opportunities of our departure from the EU, said Theresa 
May, back in the honeymoon days of her leadership when she still said things “
to forge a new role for the UK in the world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/31/no-staying-in-eu-by-back-door-theresa-may-brexit>
”.

Too much time has been wasted, by me at least, on open-mouthed outrage at the 
ludicrousness of this presentation, with the EU as our boring boyfriend, 
standing in the way of us playing the field. A more accurate analogy would be 
that, previously, we were on the field as part of a team. Now we’ve left the 
team and seek to play on our own, but that will necessitate changing all the 
rules, with no evidence that anyone else playing the sport is remotely 
interested.

It’s time to focus on what this new role will be. The overwhelming likelihood 
is that nobody has a clue, yet that lacuna where a plan should be won’t stay 
empty for ever. Each time May or a member of her government makes a statement 
conveying intent, even on the hoof and only hazily determinable,the position 
hardens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/02/hard-brexit-eu-trade-deal>
. The campaign groupGlobal Justice Now <http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/> has 
been trying to map the new territory: a lot of the information so far looks 
more like a dead end than a waypoint, but it’s all we’ve got to go on.

Hard Brexit ideologues threaten the UK’s economic future | Nick Herbert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/02/hard-brexit-eu-trade-deal>
Item one: whatever the question is, free trade is the answer. The trade 
minister Mark Garnier wants Britain tobecome the “truly global leader in free 
trade” 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Commons/2016-11-03/debates/92CBABB5-1BE7-4719-BC30-66B0BA8A2E2C/InternationalTrade>
. It is unclear what this would look like in practice, unless it means “we want 
to be the country that nurtures its domestic industry and protects wages the 
least”. Free trade is “a glorious joy”,according to Liam Fox 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3813504/Britain-export-exploit-glorious-joy-free-trade-post-Brexit-world-Liam-Fox-claims.html>
: “Ask yourself whether there has been a greater emancipator of the world’s 
poor than free trade,” he commanded the World Trade Organisation in September.

That’s the trouble with Fox, he only asks himself. Asking anyone who knows 
anything might result in a more complicated picture, in which the governmental 
nurture of homegrown industries – mainly by shielding them from foreign 
competitors – has always been a major element of emancipation from poverty. 
Nonetheless, this is the basket where they have all their eggs.

Who do they want all this free trade with? So far, the countries mentioned or 
visited by trade ministers as potential close trade partners include Saudi 
Arabia, Bahrain, Abu Dhabi, Qatar, Turkey, Israel and China. Tack this on to 
the Brexiters’ obsession with establishing a “prosperity zone” of North 
America, Australia and New Zealand (an alliance known, until the ideological 
ascendancy of pathetic liberals, as the “white Commonwealth”), and we have a 
slightly clearer idea of what they think trade is: the judicious export of
hardware needed by regimes who want to subdue their people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/08/uk-condemned-arms-sales-repressive-states>
, plus intense friendliness among nations who speak proper English.

In real life, our weapons market is greatly exceeded by our export of paper: 
brochures alone account for 10 times more income than all arms combined 
<http://atlas.media.mit.edu/en/profile/country/gbr/#Exports>. If we really 
wanted to maximise our assets, we would be visiting nations with a vibrant 
fringe theatre scene. Our other growth area is services, where – even leaving 
aside travel, banking and transport –the export value grew by 2.1% in 2014 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/businessindustryandtrade/internationaltrade/bulletins/internationaltradeinservices/2014>
, mainly accounted for by a boost in demand from the Netherlands. Meanwhile, 
our export of higher education continues to thrive, and will do right up until 
the hard Brexiters have to make good on their foolish immigration promises by
reducing student visas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/22/teresa-mays-hard-line-on-international-students-will-rob-us-of-income-and-talent>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fliberalism-tories-morality-post-brexit-decency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6b9aae915364f7bfaa53ccd68621ed159c322%2F0_237_4134_2480%2F4134.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=In%20their%20ruthless%20flight%20from%20liberalism%2C%20Tories%20have%20left%20morality%20behind%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fliberalism-tories-morality-post-brexit-decency%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=In%20their%20ruthless%20flight%20from%20liberalism%2C%20Tories%20have%20left%20morality%20behind%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fliberalism-tories-morality-post-brexit-decency%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F12b6b9aae915364f7bfaa53ccd68621ed159c322%2F0_237_4134_2480%2F4134.jpg>
 ‘The MoD wants to spend aid money on body armour and naval patrols.’ 
Photograph: Gary Calton for the Observer 
On to foreign aid: Priti Patel, the international development secretary, 
spelled out that “British soft power is exactly where DfID and our aid and 
other relationships around the world come together to deliver in our national 
interest, and deliver for Britain when it comes to free trade agreements but 
also life post-Brexit.” This isa bizarre new interpretation of the purpose of 
aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/sep/24/more-than-a-quarter-of-uk-aid-budget-to-fall-prey-to-rival-ministries-by-2020>
, which was conceived not to further the national interest, but to alleviate 
hardship. That’s why it’s called “aid”, rather than “PR” or “strategic 
nest-feathering”.

Yet only by Patel’s definition would it ever make sense for rival ministries 
such as that of defence to be bidding for slices of the aid budget. The MoD 
wants tospend aid money on body armour and naval patrols 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/30/ministry-defence-overseas-aid-patrols>
, notoriously helpful apparatus in the fight against poverty.

More chilling is the call of Admiral Sir Phillip Jones, the first sea lord, 
for “thearmed forces to more closely support the UK’s prosperity 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/first-sea-lords-defence-and-security-lecture-to-the-city-of-london>
” – and his pledge that “the Royal Navy stands ready once again to be melded 
and aligned for best effect with our nation’s growing global ambition”. It is a 
strange “free trade” that needs a gunboat to support it.

Underneath all the silliness, the sabre-rattling, the crowd-pleasing scorn for 
all things European, the narcissistic nationalism, there is a fundamental, 
unifying error: they have confused “liberalism” with “morality”. With the 
established liberal order collapsing everywhere, they gleefully seize the 
opportunity to repudiate its values. Yet many of these values are just as much 
part of the conservative self-fashioning as they are of the liberal. Trading 
peaceably and cooperatively, helping those in need, defending the weak against 
the strong: if these principles belong to the vanquished left, that would come 
as news to the Women’s Institute and the Rotary Club.

The Tories holding the reins may only be essaying this grandiloquent 
imperialism as a way to mask the absence of any meaningful strategy, but they 
trash human decency at their peril.
 