
Mahonia flowers 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/search-results?form-mode=false&query=mahonia>, 
fir and variegated holly garland the entrance to All Saints church – this 
year’s venue forCalstock parish’s <http://www.calstockhistory.org.uk/> 
Christmas tree festival. Inside the Victorian building with its tiled floor and 
vaulted ceiling, trees have been decorated by local schools, voluntary and 
community groups.

Built during the mining boom the church was also used as a school on weekdays, 
with a roll of 164 pupils in 1876. In 1879 a new school, one that would appeal 
to the Nonconformists too, was built by Mr Hunn of Metherell for £904 on half 
an acre of land, bought by the Education Board for £40 from the lord of the 
manor (Mr Williams of Caerhayes Castle).

Tamar's manure canal returns to nature
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/30/tamar-manure-canal-nature-autumn-country-diary>
Then, local mines still produced tin and arsenic ores, and the Coombe arsenic 
refinery was coming into peak capacity 
<http://www.cornish-mining.org.uk/delving-deeper/extracting-arsenic>. Mispickel 
(arsenical pyrites) was brought here for crushing, grinding and burning to 
produce tons of the white-powdered poison that had to be securely packed and 
carted to Calstock’s quays for eventual shipment to the US, Egypt, Sudan and 
India, where it was used tokill boll weevils 
<http://www.cotton.org/tech/pest/bollweevil/eradication2.cfm> in the cotton 
fields.

Today, few of the residents of the renovated terraces, newer bungalows and 
houses are tempted out into the dullness of this foggy afternoon. In the little 
field adjoining the church, newly planted apple trees and a row of beehives are 
overlooked by the misty outline of the arsenic flue chimney – now a 
consolidated and harmless relic of previous industrialisation.

Nearby, Rising Sun Lane is edged in drifts of soggy orange leaves and outgrown 
hedgerows of beech with mossy trunks alongside the Prince of Wales mine – now a 
scheduled monument. Fenced off shafts, tailings (dumps of waste sand) and 
ruined engine houses that used to work pumps, winding gear and stamps 
(crushers) are engulfedin birch trees <http://www.2020site.org/trees/birch.html>
 and flowering gorse.

Water droplets festoon twigs and prickles and add tiny glints of potential 
brilliance to the gloom. Later, out in the open and away from overhanging 
trees, a delicately luminous disc of light appears low in the south-west and 
marks the approach of the winter solstice.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 