
In her Hardworking Britain column each week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/hardworking-britain>, Frances 
Ryan focuses on stories of individuals who are affected by government policy, 
including the austerity agenda, which has led to a reduction in welfare 
spending over the past six years. If you have a story to share for this series 
then wewelcome your contributions here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/23/how-government-policy-affected-life>
.

One area we are particularly interested in is in-work poverty. The charity, 
Child Poverty Action Group hasfound that many working parents can’t earn enough 
to provide for their children <http://www.cpag.org.uk/cost-of-a-child-2016>; 
and one in threeLondoners doesn’t have the income necessary for a minimum 
standard of living 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/politicsandpolicy/around-1-in-3-londoners-do-not-have-the-income-needed-for-a-minimum-standard-of-living/?utm_content=bufferd3100&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer>
.

In April the Conservatives attempted to tackle this with the introduction of a 
“national living wage” –meaning all working people aged 25 and over earn £7.20 
an hour <https://www.livingwage.gov.uk/> or more. However, the Living Wage 
Commission recently warned that this was not enough, arguing thatwages needed 
to increase at a faster rate than rising rents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/21/national-living-wage-low-paid-wage-commission-rent-wages>
, petrol prices and heating bills to continue closing the gap between low- and 
high-paid workers.

The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, has said that Labour would go further 
if elected, introducing a “real living wage” of at least £10 an hour.

So what are your experiences? Do you struggle to survive on your current pay? 
Do your wages cover rent and your food bills? How has in-work poverty affected 
your family life, and your ability to provide for your children? Share your 
story with us below.
 