
The Scottish government’s latest oil forecasts show that the country would be 
more than £7bn a year worse off if it became financially independent, a new 
analysis has predicted. TheFiscal Affairs Scotland 
<http://fiscalaffairsscotland.co.uk/> (FAS) thinktank has found that under the 
Edinburgh government’s most optimistic forecasts for oil and gas revenue, it 
would be £1,308 per head worse off under full fiscal autonomy or independence 
in 2019-20 than if it remained funded by the UK.

Its analysis of the Scottish government’s latest oil and gas bulletin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/25/scottish-government-accused-of-trying-to-bury-report-on-falling-oil-revenues>
 also found that even if North Sea oil prices bounced back to $100 (£63) a 
barrel – a scenario considered highly unlikely – its oil revenues would still 
fall far short of previous estimates.

Published in June just before the Holyrood parliament went into recess, the 
Scottish government study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jun/25/scottish-government-accused-of-trying-to-bury-report-on-falling-oil-revenues>
 had to make far more pessimistic predictions about Scotland’s notional share 
of North Sea oil and gas receipts. These predictions came after the UK Treasury 
cut taxes and increased tax breaks to shore up slumping production following 
the collapse of global oil prices to $50 a barrel.


That analysis offered a far more cautious assessment of Scotland’s notional 
oil wealth in a clear sign that Nicola Sturgeon has distanced herself from 
exaggerated claims by Alex Salmond, her predecessor as first minister and 
Scottish national party leader. He repeatedly claimed before last year’s 
independence referendum that North Sea oil and gas reserves were worth up to
£1.5tn to the Scottish economy by 2040 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence-blog/2013/sep/04/scottish-independence-oil-treasury>
.

July’s bulletin said that oil revenues could be up to £40bn less over the next 
four years than Salmond’s government had predicted in its previous bulletin. It 
now assumesScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> will get 85% of 
overall UK oil and gas receipts, rather than the 90% during Salmond’s time in 
office.

But the FAS report found that under the most optimistic new scenario developed 
by Sturgeon’s officials, where the oil price rose to $100 per barrel, Scotland 
would remain in deficit until 2018-19, amassing a cumulative deficit of £36bn 
over the next five years in comparison with a per capita share of the UK’s 
forecast revenues.

In 2019-20, Scotland would see a per capita surplus of £192 within the UK, but 
a £1,308 per capita deficit if it was fiscally independent. Under the 
worst-case scenario, which the Scottish government based on Office for Budget 
Responsibility data and an oil price of $70 a barrel, that gap would be far 
larger: at £1,702 or £9.3bn in 2019-20.

The FAS headline figures appear more optimistic than predictions from the 
Institute in Fiscal Studies in April that Scotland’s deficit could be as high 
as £9.7bn in 2018/19, because the FAS used updated OBR figures from July and 
the Scottish government analysis.

John McLaren, a co-director of the FAS, said: “Under Nicola Sturgeon, the 
revised assumptions used, which could be seen as more realistic, have shown 
that even with a higher oil price, there’s still a gap with the UK.”
 