
Independent schools say they should not be forced to partner state schools 
“with a gun pointing at our heads”, and are calling onTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> to drop plans to link their 
charitable status to sponsorship of academies.

Mike Buchanan, the chair of the Headmasters and Headmistresses Conference 
<http://www.hmc.org.uk/> (HMC), which represents most of Britain’s leading 
public schools, will tell the group’s annual meeting on Monday that the 
government’s threats to revoke their charitable status would be 
counter-productive.

“Independent and state schools cannot make our relationships work with a gun 
pointing at our heads,” Buchanan, the headmaster of Ashford school in Kent, 
will tell the meeting of private school heads.

“We hope the prime minister understands that – after all she had the good 
sense to outlaw forced marriages as home secretary.”

The confrontation came after May launched the government’s latest education 
reforms, includinglifting the bar on new grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
. But the prime minister’s plans also include making the charitable status of 
independent schools dependent on sponsoring state schools, and stripping tax 
breaks from private schools that failed to do so.

Last month, May said independent schools needed to do more “so that children 
from a wider variety of backgrounds truly benefit from the excellent education 
they can deliver”.

In response, Buchanan will argue that independent schools already had 
partnerships involving 10,000 state schools, reaching 160,000 state school 
pupils, and were willing to do more.

“Using charitable status as a stick to beat us with is both a blunt instrument 
and one which is unlikely to hit its target. Indeed, it’s likely to erode some 
of the excellent charitable activities painstakingly built up over many years,” 
Buchanan will say, claiming that HMC schools give means-tested bursaries worth 
£500,000 a day to those unable to afford fees.

Ofsted chief criticises independent schools' lack of help for state schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/09/ofsted-chief-criticises-independent-schools-lack-of-help-for-state-schools>
The HMC represents nearly 300 independent schools, including traditional 
public schools such as St Paul’s, Fettes and Sherborne. They charge an average 
of £13,000 a year for day pupils. State schools typically receive about £5,000 
a year per pupil.

“We know that our colleagues in state schools often do a fantastic job with 
fewer resources, larger classes, more curriculum constraints and significantly 
different challenges and we do not presume to patronise them by suggesting we 
can necessarily run their schools better than they can,” Buchanan is to say.

“But with open-hearted collaboration and a flexible approach, great things can 
happen, and I am hopeful the prime minister’s evidence-based and practical 
approach will prevail.”

Buchanan will also say it is a myth that at private schools “pupils wear top 
hats and their parents are all Russian oligarchs”.

“Over one-fifth of families with children at independent schools earn less 
than £50,000 a year, and the majority have both parents earning. Only 5% of our 
pupils have homes overseas, a proportion that has been stable for years.”

Tension between the government and independent schools predate May’s arrival 
in No 10. Earlier this year, William Waldegrave, the provost of Eton and a 
former Conservative cabinet minister,threatened to resign 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/29/provost-of-eton-college-threatens-to-quit-conservative-party-ove/>
 from the Conservative party in protest at efforts to make employers take 
school type into account during recruitment.

Ashford school is part of the United Learning trust 
<https://unitedlearning.org.uk/>, whose chief executive, Jon Coles, has 
criticised May’s efforts to revive grammar schools.

Coles, a former top official at the DfE, told the BBC 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37513737> that the academic success of 
state schools in London showed that selection was not needed to raise standards.

United Learning manages a mixture of state academies and independent schools, 
including Paddington Academy in west London and Guildford high school in Surrey.
 