
Examine democratic and budgetary crises across the world and you’ll find a 
running theme – tax havens. Let’s take a look: in the last three years alone, 
in France thebudget minister has had to resign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/19/french-budget-minister-resigns> 
because he had cheated on his taxes for 20 years through unreported offshore 
accounts. In Spain, the former treasurer of the party in powerhas gone to jail  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/21/spain-mariano-rajoy-corruption-allegations>
after having revealed a hidden system of financing through Swiss banks. In the 
United States, Congress has revealed that Apple avoided tens of billions in 
taxes bymanipulating the location of its profits 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/05/21/business/apple-avoided-billions-in-taxes-congressional-panel-says.html?pagewanted=all&_r=0>
, at a time whenUS infrastructure is crumbling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/jul/27/america-infrastructure-roadways-highways-funding>
.

Accepting the status quo seems irresponsible.

Last week, the OECD released a plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/05/oecd-hopes-reforms-will-end-era-of-aggressive-tax-avoidance>
 to address some of the issues raised by offshore tax havens. The plan is 
designed to curb the growing shifting of corporate profits to Bermuda and other 
zero-tax countries, such as the British Virgin Islands and Cayman Islands. This 
effort, along with other recent initiatives, must be commended. But it is 
insufficient, because it fails to address the core problems raised by tax 
havens. Our corporate tax rules, decided by the League of Nations in the 1920s, 
have not been adapted to an age in which CEOs see it as their duty to dodge 
taxes and a world where a web of tax havens obliges.

Why is today’s corporate tax broken? According to the principles set forth by 
the League of Nations, taxes on corporate profits are to bepaid to the country  
<http://oecdinsights.org/2013/02/13/beps-why-youre-taxed-more-than-a-multinational/>
where profits are made. IfGoogle manages to report profits in Bermuda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ireland-business-blog-with-lisa-ocarroll/2011/mar/24/google-ireland-tax-reasons-bermuda>
, this income is taxable in Bermuda, where the tax rate is a modest 0%, even if 
no sales are made in Bermuda, if no office stands there or if no one works 
there. Now there are numerous ways for firms to shift the location of their 
profits to Bermuda artificially. This is the miracle of transfer pricing.

Transfer prices are the prices at which multinational firms exchange goods and 
services internally. In principle, according to the League of Nations’ rules, 
intra-group transactions should be conducted at the market price of the good or 
service traded, as if the subsidiaries were unrelated. In practice, transfer 
prices are routinely manipulated by armies of accountants. There are billions 
of intra-group transactions every year and tax authorities cannot possibly 
monitor all of them.

In addition, in many cases, there is no relevant market price, giving firms 
full latitude to choose the price that will minimise their tax bill. What was 
the “market price” of Google’s technologies when it transferred them to its 
Bermuda subsidiary in 2003, before it was even being listed as a public company?

Until recently, we did not have a clear view of the extent of corporate tax 
dodging. With few exceptions, economists have not been particularly interested 
in the role that tax havens play in the global economy.

There have been numerous journalistic investigations, which have pushed 
forward our understanding of the tricks used by multinational firms, but from 
careful case studies it is hard to infer the overall cost to government coffers.

In my new book, The Hidden Wealth of Nations 
<http://gabriel-zucman.eu/hidden-wealth/>, I try to fill this gap. I gathered 
the available data sources on the international investments of countries, the 
balances of payments, the on- and off-balance sheet positions of banks, the 
wealth and income of nations, the accounts of multinational companies and more.

Some of these statistics have never been used before and this is the first 
time that all this information has been collected, confronted and analysed with 
a single objective: to expose the true activities of tax havens and their costs 
to foreign nations.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477156470%2Fc3e2ee53-546f-40c9-823b-534efd0a7dd2-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477156470%2Fc3e2ee53-546f-40c9-823b-534efd0a7dd2-1360x2040.jpeg>
 What if Apple was taxed according to where it sold its goods? Photograph: Paul 
Sakuma/AP 
The results are striking. The artificial shifting of profits to offshore tax 
havens has reached extreme levels over the last years, with 55% of the foreign 
profits of US firms now “made” in a handful of almost zero-tax countries . 
That’s 20% of all US corporate profits, both domestic and foreign, a tenfold 
increase since the 1980s. Silicon Valley giants have been particularly 
innovative when it comes to dodging taxes.

While the US federal government hasn’t changed its nominal tax rate on 
corporations since the late 1980s – it has remained at 35% – the rate that US 
firms actually pay has declined to 20%. The available evidence suggests that 
the trends are similar in other countries: everywhere, firms have the same 
incentives to shift as much profits as they can to offshore havens.

Because no one openly condones illegal tax evasion, the proponents of profit 
shifting argue that it’s all legal. Yet theEuropean Commission has opened an 
investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2014/oct/08/european-commission-probe-amazon-tax-status-luxembourg>
 on the tax deals offered by Ireland and Luxembourg to companies such as Apple, 
Amazon, Starbucks and Fiat. What was said to be “legal” might turn out to not 
quite be so. The proponents of tax dodging also say that less tax on businesses 
means more investment and more jobs. This misses three things.

First, the taxes avoided by big companies have to be compensated for by higher 
taxes for the rest of us – higher income taxes on the middle classes and higher 
sales or property taxes for everyone, unless we cut spending on education, 
health and infrastructure.

Second, tax avoidance distorts competition; big firms get away with low tax 
rates because they can operate all over the world and can afford the pricey 
services of the big accounting firms, while nascent businesses have to face the 
statutory rates. This unfairness rigs the functioning of markets.

Yet the fundamental problem is that corporate tax avoidance increases 
inequality. Corporate taxes are one of the main way to tax capital. In Europe 
and the United States, about one-third of all capital tax revenue comes from 
corporate income tax, the rest comes from property taxes and individual taxes 
on dividends, interest, capital gains, estates and inheritances. When 
corporations skirt the tax system, they reduce the effective taxation of 
capital. Because capital is very unequally distributed, this reduction benefits 
only the wealthiest among us.

Corporate tax dodging is then tantamount to upward redistribution. A reduction 
in capital taxation also means higher rates of return for capital owners. 
History teaches us that higher rates of return tend to be associated with more 
wealth inequality down the road.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477573493%2F1ad14365-3b62-48f3-ab7a-5848377de260-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477573493%2F1ad14365-3b62-48f3-ab7a-5848377de260-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Amazon is famous for avoiding tax on its vast global sales. Photograph: 
EMMANUEL DUNAND/AFP/Getty Images 
What can be done?

The OECD plan that was agreed upon last week is useful because it may make it 
harder for firms to shift profits to tax havens. However, it falls short in two 
key areas. It fails when it comes to transparency. Although it calls for 
multinational companies to compile country-by-country accounts of their 
profits, sales, and employees, these accounts will not be publicly disclosed. 
Citizens, consumers, journalists and researchers will have no way of knowing 
which firms shift their profits offshore. More fundamentally, theOECD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oecd> retains the flawed framework of 
transfer pricing, which makes it too easy for corporations to escape taxation.

The good news is that corporate tax avoidance has a solution that is 
technically simple, proved to be effective and requires little international 
cooperation. Instead of taxing the subsidiaries of multinational groups as if 
they were separate entities, corporations should be taxed on their consolidated 
global profits.

Apple made $50bn in profits globally last year: this figure is known and hard 
to manipulate; it is the right starting point. We then need to find a way to 
allocate profits to each country. One easy way is to allocate profits 
proportionally to where sales are made. Let’s imagine thatApple 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple> made 10% of its sales in the 
United Kingdom. Therefore, 10% of its global profits, or $5bn, would be taxable 
in the UK.

Corporations can move their profits all over the world, but they can’t move 
their customers: they are in the US, the UK or Germany, not in Bermuda. That’s 
the beauty of the reformed corporate tax system, known as formula 
apportionment, that I’m supporting.

Is this idle fantasy? Not at all: this is exactly how US states tax US 
companies with activities across the country.

Profits within the United States are apportioned to California or New Jersey 
based on the share of US sales made in these states. In this way, a corporation 
can’t claim that its profits were all made in tiny Delaware (population 
935,000), where the corporate tax rate is 0%.

No tax system is perfect and America’s is no exception. However, it has been 
in place for decades, has a reasonably good track record and no one would 
ever imagine abandoning it in favour of the international transfer pricing 
model supported by the OECD.

Extending the US system to the international stage would make it impossible 
for Bermuda or Luxembourg to steal the tax bases of countries where economic 
activity actually takes place.

How do we get there? The UK could tomorrow unilaterally decide to tax 
multinational firms using an apportionment formula, without asking permission 
from anyone. The relevant information already exists: we know the global 
profits and sales of firms and it is easy to track the location of their sales. 
In that sense, corporate tax reform does not require a great deal of 
international co-operation.

More co-operation, however, is always better and it turns out we have a unique 
opportunity to reach an international deal.

The US and Europe are currently engaged in discussions to establish a 
transatlantic trade and investment partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/03/what-is-ttip-controversial-trade-deal-explained>
 (TTIP) and the US has similar talks with Asian economies. These free-trade 
talks are the right platform to reform corporate tax.

It makes no sense to talk free trade in 2015 while totally disregarding tax 
issues. Further trade liberalisation should be conditional upon reaching an 
international agreement on how to tax the Amazons, Apples and Googles of the 
world. Concretely, as part of TTIP negotiations, the EU and the US should agree 
on two simple things: a common definition of corporate profits and a fair rule 
for apportioning the profits of firms across the Atlantic, for instance, based 
on the location of sales.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477398119%2F0526c145-978e-4840-8717-86a1b935c901-1360x2040.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inequality%20is%20the%20great%20concern%20of%20our%20age.%20So%20why%20do%20we%20tolerate%20rapacious%2C%20unjust%20tax%20havens%3F%20%7C%20Gabriel%20Zucman&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2015%2Foct%2F11%2Finequality-will-continue-until-corporations-stop-avoiding-tax%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F10%2F1444477398119%2F0526c145-978e-4840-8717-86a1b935c901-1360x2040.jpeg>
 Jean-Claude Juncker, another president of the European Commission from 
Luxembourg Photograph: Michele Tantussi/Getty Images 
Tax havens such as Luxembourg  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/05/-sp-luxembourg-tax-files-tax-avoidance-industrial-scale>
and Ireland have an incentive to maintain the flawed status quo. For years, 
they have been blocking attempts to move to an apportionment system within the 
European Union. The benefits of stealing other countries’ revenues can be quite 
large indeed. Doing so helps attract a little bit of real activity, such as 
accounting firms, lawyers and financiers.

More importantly, it boosts the importance of offshore centres on the 
international stage. Luxembourg is a case in point: the Grand Duchy has one 
thousandth of the EU’s population, yet this is where two of the last five 
presidents of the European Commission come from.

There is a growing demand for transparency and reform among EU citizens. The 
United States already uses formula apportionment internally; it sees the virtue 
of this system. It is the responsibility of EU countries to forge an agreement. 
It took decades for the European Union to convince Luxembourg to partially 
abandon banking secrecy. Do we have to wait decades for corporate tax reform to 
occur?

An alternative approach involves threatening with economic sanctions the 
countries that want to facilitate tax avoidance and evasion. One type of threat 
would be trade tariffs, proportional to the costs that unco-operative tax 
havens impose on the governments of foreign countries.

Like most economists, I favour free trade: I believe it spurs growth and 
innovation. But if free trade means widespread tax dodging, rising inequality 
and tax unfairness, it has no future. The good news is that globalisation and 
tax justice are not incompatible. If we put taxes back at the centre of TTIP 
and other free-trade talks, we can quickly and thoroughly reform corporate tax 
and make widespread tax dodging a thing of the past.

Gabriel Zucman is assistant professor of economics at the University of 
California, Berkeley. He is the author ofThe Hidden Wealth of Nations: The 
Scourge of Tax Havens
 