
What a surprise to find that sporticidal maniac Gianni Infantino 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gianni-infantino> has added yet another 
awards ceremony to football’s calendar. As someone who believes that what the 
world really lacks is a further glittering night of industrial frottage, I am 
pleased to see the Fifa president identify the need for the football family to 
come together in this manner.

If only there was a tried and tested way for the footballing elite to measure 
themselves against each other – perhaps in regular competitions, tournaments, 
championships, derbies,clásicos, leagues, cups, and various other quaint old 
ideas that will presumably be phased out entirely in favour of competitive 
black tie and sponsored gifs.

There can’t be, though, because Fifa’s inaugural “The Best” Football Awards 
took place in Zurich on Monday night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/09/cristiano-ronaldo-wins-worlds-best-player-fifa-awards>
, and were packed to the goody bag with unnecessary prizes and cynical virtue 
signalling. An attendee gives me two hilariously end‑times vignettes: outside 
the ceremony, there were Swiss teenagers actually asking Infantino to autograph 
their football shirts. (Have a word with yourself, Switzerland.) And the last 
thing Infantino said to the TV cameras before he swept inside to a night of 
confected displacement activity was: “Football’s back.”
Explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=3d69dcc8-d1de-41a4-b9ec-4d791dd23be1>
I am not in the habit of claiming watertight theories, but here’s an 
exception: if you ever read the phrase “the inaugural X awards”, you can be 
sure that the X industry is in some kind of serious trouble and doesn’t know 
what to do about it. My own business is one of the clearest cases in point. 
There now seem to be about six annual press awards, all of which probably 
describe themselves as “the Oscars of our industry”, and all of which are 
desperate marketing exercises dreamt up or perpetuated by people who can’t 
think of anything better to justify their existence, much less ensure even its 
medium-term continuation. It is almost as if the more wrong and more 
financially challenged we are, the more opportunities for self-garlanding there 
will be.

Football is doing several leagues better than newspapers, obviously, but we 
must remember that Infantino is working tirelessly to address that. To this 
end, let’s take a look at his masterplan agenda for the past few days in Zurich:

1) Field himself in a “legends” match at Fifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/fifa> HQ. #legend

2) Inaugurate a sensationally unnecessary awards show.

3) Move to ruin football’s flagship competition by ushering in a 48-team World 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/fifa-vote-expand-world-cup-48-teams-from-2026>
.

And so to the wretched 48-team World Cup, which – needless to say – was 
rubber-stamped on Tuesday morning by a series of idiotic, insecure and grasping 
federations, including our own. As from 2026, the World Cup will have 16 groups 
of three teams each. Fifa has clearly realised it has no mountains left to climb
as far as financial corruption is concerned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/09/fifa-opens-corruption-case-against-sepp-blatter-and-jerome-valcke>
, and consequently has graduated to corrupting the product itself. Say what you 
will about the kleptocracy of Fifa over the past few decades – and heaven knows
I did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/oct/21/sheikh-salman-bahrain-fifa-presidency>
,almost weekly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/12/gianni-infantino-migrant-worker-fifa-world-cup-2022-qatar>
 – but at least you still actually wanted to watch all of the World Cup. (I 
realise there are some very pure souls who claim to have stopped years ago on 
principle, but most of us down here in the gutter were quite happy to.) But the 
early stages of a 48-team competition are a challenge to which many will feel 
it unnecessary to rise.

For my money, the most perfectly succinct verdict on this self-mutilation by 
Fifa came from the FT’s Moscow correspondent, whosimply observed 
<https://twitter.com/maxseddon/status/786849423406039040>: “World Cup 2026: The 
Phantom Menace.” Encapsulated in that three‑word verdict is everything you 
really need to know about what South Park once mildly depicted as the concept 
of franchise rape.

Money makes the World Cup go round: more teams means more cash | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2017/jan/10/world-cup-48-teams-gianni-infantino-fifa-money>
On the one hand, perhaps we should salute Infantino’s courageous stance 
against prevailing currents in populism, at least one of which has been rage 
against the culture of participation medals. Perhaps the Fifa boss thinks the
World Cup <https://www.theguardian.com/football/world-cup-football> must adapt 
to appeal to up-and-coming generations raised to think they’ve won if they’ve 
just taken part. On the other, perhaps he just wants the votes and Fifa the 
cash. It’s such a finely judged call, isn’t it?

What is inarguably clear in this new model is that quantity trumps quality. 
Already, the economics of sporting mega-events mean we spend 90% of time in the 
run-up to them discussing things such asinfrastructure “legacy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/20/what-is-rio-olympic-legacy-brazil>
 as opposed to athletic competition. Already, there is a distinct sense that 
the World Cup is becoming a McDonald’s commercial with an increasingly 
unimportant football tournament attached.

A 48-team World Cup simply confirms that this type of elite sport is becoming 
less elite and less about sport. Instead, it is explicitly – perhaps primarily 
– expected to function as a development tool or funding leg-up for stragglers. 
The Scottish FA’s chief executive talks about a 48-team tournament being “a 
positive thing for the smaller nations”, as though that were the point of 
sport. What is meritocracy, if not something that needs to be mitigated?

As for how this boringly bloated competition is supposed to function 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2017/jan/10/48-team-world-cup-fifa-plan-2026>
, I see that Infantino has suggested that Fifa may introduce penalty shootouts 
in the group stages to stop countries playing for results that favour them 
both. He says that now, but I do hope that’s just a cover for the inevitable 
solution. Let’s face it, there would be no more perfect way of saying 
“football’s back” than deciding all draws with an award ceremony.
 