
From vast woodland lodges to the tiniest of seashells, the homemakers of the 
animal kingdom display a huge range of skills – architecture, building, use of 
resources or just sheer ingenuity. They’re experts in working out ways to 
survive and thrive, whether in the outer reaches of the Arctic wilderness or 
under the shed in your back garden.

Beavers are ingenious builders that create the animal equivalent of a 
water-park to live in. Using mud and sticks they find in their riverside 
habitats, they build complex dams that form pools where they can live, play and 
hunt. Within these dams are “lodges” where families live and work together, 
constantly extending and improving their structures. The world’s largest beaver 
dam, inWood Buffalo National Park 
<http://www.pc.gc.ca/pn-np/nt/woodbuffalo/index.aspx> in Canada, stretches for 
half a mile – and can be seen from space.


Interior design tips: how to create a ‘warm’ room
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/interior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room>
Closer to home, a number of species are proving equally adaptable to human 
environments. As our society becomes increasingly urbanised – it’s estimated 
that by 2050, 70% of the world’s population will live in cities – animals are 
honing their homemaking skills right under our noses.

Foxes have been colonising our cities for the past 80 years, and they’re 
getting keener on urban life. One research project, led by Dr Dawn Scott of the 
University of Brighton, asked the public to send in their fox sightings. In 
1987, 65 areas reported no fox sightings; by 2012, foxes were spotted in all 
but two of those areas.


While their country counterparts live in spacious dens, town fox family groups 
downsize and move into whatever underground accommodation they can find. That’s 
usually under a shed, a garage, or even a house – particularly older houses 
with large spaces under the floorboards. Foxes aren’t the only ones that are 
making do with a smaller city pad, either. A study from the University of 
Frankfurt found that while country rabbits live in big communities of large, 
spread-out, complex burrows, city bunnies tend to live in smaller “studio” 
burrows, with fewer rabbit housemates.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fingenious-architects-and-homemakers-of-the-animal-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28aae72bbfcc4b9bab404b30c583359e86f4e81d%2F0_77_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ingenious%20architects%20and%20homemakers%20of%20the%20animal%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fingenious-architects-and-homemakers-of-the-animal-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ingenious%20architects%20and%20homemakers%20of%20the%20animal%20world&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fingenious-architects-and-homemakers-of-the-animal-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F28aae72bbfcc4b9bab404b30c583359e86f4e81d%2F0_77_2244_1346%2F2244.jpg>
 Hermit crabs form an orderly queue for a new shell. Photograph: Karen 
Brodie/Getty Images 
The animal kingdom even has its own landlords. Social weaver birds, who live 
in the Kalahari region of southern Africa, use twigs to construct vast and 
strong towns of birdhouses. Each nest can weigh up to a tonne and measure as 
much as six-metres wide. The nests are divided into rooms, with a pair of 
social weavers occupying one and birds from different species – including pygmy 
falcons and red-headed finches – in the others.


Like any good community, every bird has to pull their weight. A recent study 
of social weavers in Namibia found that the hard-working nest builders chase 
away lazier birds who don’t help – but these chastened birds are usually 
cooperative when they return.


And there’s plenty we could learn from animals when it comes to moving home. 
One species has even worked out a fairer, more efficient way to manage the 
housing market than us humans; all it takes is a bit of patience and 
consideration. In a study of hermit crabs living on the shore of Carrie Bow 
Cay, an island off Belize, researchers discovered that when they placed new, 
large shells on the shore, the crabs wouldn’t instantly claim them – even 
though they need bigger shells as they grow, to protect their soft bodies. 
Instead, the crabs would stand by their discovery for anywhere between 15 
minutes and eight hours, waiting for other crabs to show up and form an orderly 
queue. When the biggest crab arrived, it climbed out of its own shell and into 
the new one – and all the other crabs swapped their shells for bigger ones, too.
 