
Listening to Irish architects Yvonne Farrell and Shelley McNamara speaking 
about their work, you could be forgiven for thinking they were describing a 
dramatic mountain range, or the rocky coasts of County Clare. They talk of 
cliff faces, summits and ravines, of spaces being carved and cleft to form 
grottos, overhangs and terraces. When you encounter their buildings, it becomes 
apparent why: they feel like structures that have been wrestled into shape with 
geological force.

The result of their latest tectonic rupture was recently crowned “best new 
building in the world”, having been awarded theinaugural RIBA international 
prize 
<https://www.architecture.com/Awards/InternationalPrize2016/InternationalPrize2016.aspx>
 in December. This was a suitably momentous accolade for a vast concrete 
monolith that doesn’t pull its punches. Perched dramatically on the edge of a 
ravine that rises above a motorway in Peru, theUniversidad de Ingeniería y 
Tecnología <http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/> (UTEC) is a symphony of soaring 
buttresses and daring cantilevers, an apt home for Lima’s new university of 
engineering, where students will learn the art of mining minerals from the 
Earth’s crust.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa0882496a1004a5d25a9bae655b27eafa8ce74%2F0_0_6727_4485%2F6727.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Peru's%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Peru%27s%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffaa0882496a1004a5d25a9bae655b27eafa8ce74%2F0_0_6727_4485%2F6727.jpg>
 ‘No starchitect hubris’ … Shelley McNamara, left, and Yvonne Farrell of 
Grafton Architects. Photograph: Luke Walker 
“We’re interested in weight,” says McNamara, 64, who founded Grafton Architects
 <http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/> with Farrell, 65, as a co-operative in 
1978. “For us, the enjoyment in architecture is the sense of weight being borne 
down or supported, the feeling of moving within the forces of gravity. It’s a 
very primal need.”

It’s certainly a feeling that will be impressed upon the students walking into 
UTEC on their first day of term. Great structural fins march along the spine of 
the building at 20-metre intervals, supporting a vertiginous stack of 
laboratories and classrooms, rising up either side of a nave-like void that 
runs through the centre of the complex. Looking up, you get a thrilling view of 
intersecting concrete beams and slabs, an aerial ballet of staggered terraces 
connected by flying walkways and leaping staircases. Given the amenable 
climate, it is all open to the elements, allowing coastal breezes to flow 
through the atrium, and the sounds and smells of the street to bleed into the 
building.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc3b92a8134665c6089cfa1d553dcd031e16ee9c%2F0_0_3910_5865%2F3910.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Peru's%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Peru%27s%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc3b92a8134665c6089cfa1d553dcd031e16ee9c%2F0_0_3910_5865%2F3910.jpg>
 Primal … UTEC’s urban setting in Lima. Photograph: Iwan Baan 
“It’s an extension of the city,” says Farrell, describing how most people in 
Lima still build their own homes, pouring the concrete themselves (more cement 
is sold on the domestic market in Peru than in the commercial one). The result 
is a city of densely terraced, stepping rooftops clinging to the hillsides. “We 
needed to make something at a heroic scale,” she adds, “but which also had 
intimacy and a range of smaller spaces where students could retreat.”

Within this mountain of infrastructure, which looks like a fragment of an 
ancient colosseum, there are little nooks and patio gardens, sheltered places 
to be alone and enjoy the view out over the city. Drawing on the ancient 
terraced landscape tradition of Peru, they have crafted a modern-dayMachu Picchu
 <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/machupicchu>.

Located in the Barranco district, the building acts as a buffer between the 
busy highway and a quiet residential area, forming an urban cliff that will 
eventually extend 360 metres along (the completed building is the first of 
three phases). In its uncompromisingly muscular form, it might feel like a bit 
of a throwback to an earlier, brutalist era. There are definite echoes of the
Alexandra Road 
<https://municipaldreams.wordpress.com/2013/06/18/the-alexandra-road-estate-camden-a-magical-moment-for-english-housing/>
 estate in north London, designed by Neave Brown in the 1960s, and the stepped 
concrete fortress of theBrunswick Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2006/oct/23/architecture.communities> 
in Bloomsbury. Proposing this kind of megastructure might suggest the sort of 
dogmatic self-assurance of postwar planning, but Farrell and McNamara have 
no“starchitect” hubris. They are unusual in that they don’t present a project 
as a fait accompli, or the inevitable “right answer” to a brief or site.

Rather than thinking of a space and then finding a structre for it, we make a 
structure and that, in turn, makes a space

“We never really know what we’re doing when we start,” McNamara admits. “We 
like to create spaces you couldn’t design consciously, things that just happen 
somehow. Rather than thinking of a space and then finding a structure for it, 
we make a structure and that, in turn, makes a space.” They say they are 
interested in “the spaces in between, which haven’t been asked for in the 
brief” and describe their architecture as a kind of “scaffolding”, a 
non-prescriptive framework on which lives and events can be played out.

UTEC feels like a gigantic armature with the teaching spaces slotted in, a 
sense that gives it an ancient, almost ruined quality. Over time, its grey 
concrete bones will accrue a layer of the surrounding desert dust, lending it 
the warm earthy hue of the city’s older concrete structures, and adding to the 
primal feel.

The RIBA prize may have put Grafton in the spotlight, but they are no 
strangers to international gongs. They won the inaugural World building of the 
year award in 2008 for theirUniversita Luigi Bocconi  
<https://www.dezeen.com/2008/10/27/universita-luigi-bocconi-by-grafton-architects/>
building in Milan, clad in sheer walls of stone that appear to slip and slide 
past each other, while their sharply chiselled medical school and student 
accommodation for theUniversity of Limerick  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/aug/15/limerick-medical-school-architecture>
was shortlisted for the Stirling prize in 2013.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52957e3c1080a03b6b4f4db0a96367361d7305bf%2F0_0_1500_1125%2Fmaster%2F1500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Peru's%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Peru%27s%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52957e3c1080a03b6b4f4db0a96367361d7305bf%2F0_0_1500_1125%2Fmaster%2F1500.jpg>
 Grafton’s Universita Luigi Bocconi building in Milan, Italy. Photograph: 
Federico Brunetti 
Grafton’s tectonic power will soon be coming to London, with two substantial 
buildings currently in the works. Toning down the Richter scale to a level 
palatable for leafy suburbs, theirTown House for Kingston University 
<http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/Kingston-University-London> will be a handsome 
civic addition to the campus, providing teaching spaces and cafes arranged on 
cascading terraces around a central courtyard, with an open colonnade to the 
street to invite in the public.

Eschewing raw concrete for a polite palette of reconstituted stone and brick, 
in a nod to nearbyHampton Court Palace 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2011/sep/06/hampton-court-palace-video>
, the building will nonetheless share UTEC’s feeling of an open framework to 
encourage a fluid overlapping of activities. It was initially refused planning 
– likened to a “second world war flak tower” by the council planning committee 
– but further explanatory drawings thankfully convinced them there was nothing 
to be afraid of.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c8176cecc8a004d46fb3daa6bbd2d36c70f9a6%2F0_0_3440_5114%2F3440.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Inside%20Peru's%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Inside%20Peru%27s%20modern-day%20Machu%20Picchu%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0is%20this%20the%20best%20new%20building%20in%20the%20world%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fgrafton-architects-riba-international-prize-utec-yvonne-farrell-shelley-mcnamara-interview%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb4c8176cecc8a004d46fb3daa6bbd2d36c70f9a6%2F0_0_3440_5114%2F3440.jpg>
 Paul Marshall Building, London School of Economics connecting street building 
landscape and sky Credit Grafton Architects Photograph: Image courtesy of 
Grafton Architects 
In the even more curtain-twitching environment of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, across 
the square from theSir John Soane Museum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/gallery/2015/may/16/the-strange-cabinets-of-sir-john-soane-in-pictures>
, Grafton are honing their designs for a newfaculty building for the London 
School of Economics 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2016/04/21/grafton-architects-wins-contest-london-school-economics-paul-marshall-building/>
, which will turn this corner of London into a showcase of the best of Irish 
architecture, given that O’Donnell and Tuomey’s twisted brick Eiger, theLSE 
Student Centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/architecture-design-blog/2014/feb/21/lse-students-union-architecture-saw-swee-hock-centre-london>
, stands next door.

Taking inspiration from the atmospheric fan-vaulted undercroft of the 1600s 
Lincoln’s Inn Chapel 
<https://c2.staticflickr.com/8/7366/9450577599_9687c399a4_b.jpg>, Grafton 
Architects have proposed an internal structure that appears to grow in 
branching, tree-like umbrellas as it rises through the building. Spiralling 
staircases will corkscrew down the multiple levels, landing on a gently sloping 
open plaza, conceived as an extension of the public realm outside. The pair 
describe the space as having a similar quality to the Royal Festival Hall or 
the British Library, “acoustically as well as visually”, again revealing their 
attention to crafting spaces with an awareness of all the senses.

Their 25-person office (still small for a company engaged in projects of this 
scale) is also working on a bigtelecoms institute in Paris 
<http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/Institut-Mines-Telecom>, a university of 
economics in Toulouse 
<http://www.graftonarchitects.ie/Universite-Toulouse-1-Capitole> and a new city 
library in their home town of Dublin 
<http://www.dublincity.ie/design-team-selected-parnell-square-cultural-quarter-redevelopment>
, all won through competitions, while the duo somehow find time to teach at the
Swiss architecture school of Mendrisio <http://www.arc.usi.ch/en>, no doubt at 
home in the craggy surrounds.

“It feels like a monastery,” says Farrell of the building. “A place where 
there’s more time for conversations about how each place is unique – and why 
architecture’s role is to heighten that, not to smother it.”

 