
John Carr asks why the Open Rights Group is worried about requirements for 
people to verify their age with pornographic websites (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/21/block-on-pornography-would-make-it-possible-to-enforce-current-law>
, 22 November). Open Rights Group supports the many organisations calling for 
compulsory sex education that discusses pornography and relationships. We also 
welcome efforts by British internet service providers to help parents mediate 
their children’s internet access and keep them safe online.

However, the government’s proposals, outlined in the digital economy bill, 
could lead to the tracking of UK adults across the pornographic websites they 
visit. There are no specific privacy protections in the bill. In fact, the 
government wants a proliferation of age verification technologies. How will we 
know which are safe and which are putting us at risk of anAshley Madison-style 
data leak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/19/ashley-madisons-hacked-customer-files-posted-online-as-threatened-say-reports>
? Some sites might ask for your credit card details. Again, how will we know if 
this is genuine, or in fact a scam to steal your payment details?

Most pornographic sites will ignore the age verification requirement. So the 
government wants to give the British Board of Film Classification the power to 
block sites that don’t comply. To make this work, the BBFC would have to censor 
tens of thousands of legal websites. Censorship of this kind is an extreme step 
and should be reserved for illegal content. It is clear that the government has 
not thought any of this through.
Jim Killock
Executive director, Open Rights Group <https://www.openrightsgroup.org>

• The debate about how to enforce age verification systems on pornographic 
websites is hugely important if we are going to keep young people safe online. 
But the debate has now strayed into questioning the efficacy of self-regulation 
of child sexual abuse content, which is illegal for anyone, regardless of age. 
The UK is one of the most hostile territories in the world for hosting child 
sexual abuse. In 1996, 18% of known content was hosted here, but since 2004 
this has been less than 0.5% and in 2015 was 0.2%. If we find content in the 
UK, it’s typically removed in under two hours, which is a record unmatched 
anywhere else in the world.

In 2015, the IWF, working with the internet industry, removed a record 68,000 
URLs of child sexual abuse webpages. A number of children were safeguarded and 
thousands of children’s images were removed, stopping their re-victimisation. 
All this happened because the IWF self-regulatory model works and is held up as 
a global model of good practice. Internet companies work voluntarily with the 
IWF to remove this content as quickly as they can. The IWF self-regulatory 
model needs to be protected and valued for what it is: the most effective way 
to tackle a hideous crime.
Susie Hargreaves 
Internet Watch Foundation <https://www.iwf.org.uk>

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 