
Laura Cameron is operations director at Boringdon Hall Hotel and Gaia Spa 
<https://www.boringdonhall.co.uk/> in Devon

“We want our guests to feel relaxed from the second they arrive. We have a 
valet and concierge service to greet them, to park their cars and whisk their 
luggage away. While we check them in, guests are free to take a seat on a comfy 
sofa and enjoy a glass of mulled wine. We also use a signature scent in 
reception, with warm leather and wood notes, and play relaxing music.


“We leave a welcome card in the guest rooms with essential information, so the 
welcome book doesn’t overload them. There’s a complimentary turndown service, 
too: we leave our sleep balm and lavender fudge in the room and dim the lights. 
We also provide a sleep/awake card with tips for getting a restful night, so 
guests can feel nice and refreshed in the morning.


“Whether or not guests have stayed with us before, we remember their 
preferences. From their favourite magazine or newspaper, to the way they take 
their coffee, we provide what they like, without them having to ask for it.


“When guests leave we give them a departure bag with a personal note, 
macaroons and bottles of water to make their journey home more enjoyable. 
Generally, I try to replicate the hospitality I extend at home on a larger 
scale – that’s what inspires me.”


Laura’s top tip: “In a bedroom, neutral walls and linen make guests feel at 
ease, but purple is a good accent colour as it’s calming, gender-neutral, 
versatile and adds warmth.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Finterior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73a6df5e54db4d5e503107835729529fb395cb0%2F0_366_1525_1905%2F1525.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Interior%20design%20tips%3A%20how%20to%20create%20a%20%E2%80%98warm%E2%80%99%20room&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Finterior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Interior%20design%20tips%3A%20how%20to%20create%20a%20%E2%80%98warm%E2%80%99%20room&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Finterior-design-tips-how-to-create-a-warm-room%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc73a6df5e54db4d5e503107835729529fb395cb0%2F0_366_1525_1905%2F1525.jpg>
 Lucy Townsend: ‘No table is set without candles.’ Photograph: Michael 
Turek/GalleryStock 
A simply wild welcome

Lucy Townsend runs The Greyhound on the Test 
<http://thegreyhoundonthetest.co.uk/> pub in Hampshire and is the founder of 
Wilds Catering <http://wilds.catering/>

“Making people feel welcome is about paying attention to detail and allowing 
guests to be themselves. We’re not a business that believes in saying no to 
wellies in the restaurant, or banning dogs in the pub. Every guest is treated 
the same, whether they’re a first-timer or a regular visitor. The only 
difference with new guests is that we try to get to know them a little, so we 
can help them make the most of their stay in the area.

“We have a 600-year-old building with open fires, wood beams and aged oak 
mantels – this all adds to the warm and welcoming character of the Greyhound. 
We enhance it with candles and fresh flowers, newspapers and magazines, as well 
as continually maintaining the building to make sure it retains a warm ambience.


“Consistency is really important for us. We have exactly the same approach to 
hospitality, whether we’re out and about with Wilds or looking after guests at 
the Greyhound. With Wilds we get to know what the customer wants in much more 
detail, so we can create the right atmosphere.


“There has been a shift in entertaining serving styles in the catering and 
events industry; sharing platters are used much more widely now. We also source 
our produce locally and our menus change regularly, reflecting the seasons.”


Lucy’s top tip: “Sharing platters are an easy ice-breaker for guests and no 
table is set without candles.”

Mingle tingle

Anna Frankowska is a party planner and CEO of Party Hype 
<http://www.partyhype.com/>, a new party and nightlife app

“First impressions count, so I greet guests personally. When I’m hosting in a 
venue, I ensure that everyone knows exactly how to get there and won’t have any 
problems getting in. There’s nothing worse than guests starting off the night 
standing in the cold, making frantic phone calls to find the venue or gain 
entry.

A warm welcome in a digital age – the need for real connections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/2016/nov/25/a-warm-welcome-in-a-digital-age-the-need-for-real-connections>
“A broad structure helps in the initial stages of a social event; the 
provision of music, food, venue and drinks should be set in stone. Past that, I 
leave people to it. If you plan each minute meticulously, you end up flustered 
if things go differently. Once guests are all there, the food and drink is 
served and the music is on, you’re allowed to play it by ear – one of my 
favourite things about parties is how organic they are. My secret weapon for 
making people feel comfortable is to host a smaller get-together of close 
friends just beforehand, so there are already people at the party when guests 
arrive.


“With intimate dinner parties, I need to be confident that guests will be 
happy to spend the evening in each other’s company. Canapés work wonderfully 
for larger parties as guests can eat, catch-up and mill around without the 
confines of a table setting – and creative nibbles are a talking point.


“No one will stay somewhere they feel judged or unwelcome, and that certainly 
isn’t what my parties or my business is about. Lifeis one big party, so invite 
the right people to make it a good one.”


Anna’s top tip: “Whether it’s an intimate dinner or a party, lighting is key. 
Even in a house brimming with guests, a soft, flattering light puts people at 
ease, rather than feeling as if they’re in a dentist’s chair.”
 