
Are we the nation suggested by the 41% spike in hate crimes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/hate-crimes-eu-referendum-home-office-figures-confirm>
 that followed the Brexit vote? Where non-white Britons are abused in the 
street and people harangued for wearing the wrong clothes or presuming that 
they might speak in anything but English? Where Nadiya Hussain’s popularity 
after winning The Great British Bake Off could not save her from being 
confronted by the boor on a trainwho declared “I ain’t sitting near a Muslim” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/12/15/aint-sitting-near-muslim-great-british-bake-offs-nadiya-hussain/>
?

Where women wearing the hijab are attacked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/attacker-grabs-woman-hijab-oxford-street-muslim-headscarf-hate>
 in the street. Where a dark-skinned woman exercising her constitutional legal 
right to challenge the executive is threatened and bullied by assailants who 
tell her – not that she may be wrong –but that she should leave the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/article-50-claimant-gina-miller-safe-outside-brexit>
? It feels close to that now. The spike has fallen from its peak; still 
equilibrium seems distant: the air seems toxic.

Related: Wartime Britain’s welcome for black GIs was complicated | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/wartime-britains-welcome-for-black-gis-was-complicated>

And what is extraordinary is that no one in any position of power and 
authority is doing anything meaningful about it. Were the markets careering out 
of control, the chancellor would be touring television and radio stations 
trying to calm them. Were there to be a terrorist atrocity, the prime minister 
would rush to the scene.

The procedures for dealing with these big-ticket emergencies are well 
established. Not so the procedure for reacting to a dramatic erosion in the 
social glue. There is little by way of leadership from No 10. Nothing from the
communities secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/19/meaningless-readers-on-sajid-javids-british-values-oath>
 to suggest his title is anything other than honorific. There wasa statement 
from Robert Buckland 
<http://www.dailystar.co.uk/news/latest-news/568811/hate-crime-surge-stops-home-office-figures-return-to-pre-brexit-numbers>
, the solicitor general, declaring saying that levels of hate crimes – 2,778 
incidents between 5 and 18 August – had declined to 2015 levels. Some 
reassurance. In the year to 2015, hate crimes, at 52,000 offences,had jumped 
more than a fifth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/13/reported-hate-crimes-rise-by-almost-a-fifth>
.
 An African American GI dances with a white woman at the Bouillabaisse Club in 
London’s New Compton Street, Soho, 1943. Photograph: Felix Man/Getty Images 
This is business as usual, a new normal. Against the context of what is 
happening to minorities on the streets, on social media, that’s a dereliction 
of duty. All the more so because this acridity is not a given. We’re cranky 
now, with the handbrake off and inhibitions released, but at times more tense 
and fearful in our history we have been more willing to show kindness to people 
of difference. We have been better than this.

Related: Wartime Britain and black GIs united through music | Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/wartime-britain-and-black-gis-united-through-music>

Recently published in the UK is Forgotten: The Untold Story of D-Day’s Black 
Heroes <https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23460942-forgotten>, first released 
in the US, about the320th Barrage Balloon Battalion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/320th_Barrage_Balloon_Battalion>, an 800-strong 
unit of black American soldiers whose contribution to the D-day landings had 
all but been erased from history. After landing on the beaches, they deployed 
armed balloons and deterred enemy aircraft – a task for which they largely 
prepared over seven months in the British countryside, having docked in the 
north of Scotland.

Before the arrival of the Empire Windrush 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/23/immigration-windrush-west-indians-jamaica-britain>
 and the advent of mass immigration, there was an influx of foreigners at a 
speed and on a scale to give Nigel Farage a coronary. They were soldiers during 
wartime, so of course they were met with gratitude, you might say; but the 
point is more specific for in the era of savagely enforced segregation in the 
US, white GIs showed a brutal and racist disdain for black GIs posted alongside 
them in Britain. And the British government, to curry favour with white, 
predominantly southern soldiers – and a like-minded US military establishment – 
offered the black GIs scant protection.Author Linda Hervieux 
<https://www.goodreads.com/author/show/9805780.Linda_Hervieux> located 12 of 
them, and the most striking thing they recall is the extraordinary extent to 
which ordinary British people – themselves deprived in a time of penury and 
rations – were their tigerish supporters, protectors and cheerleaders.

When white GIs objected to black GIs at a village dance, they themselves were 
ordered to leave

Ollie Stewart <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ollie_Stewart>, a black American 
journalist, who reported on the deployment of 1,300 black soldiers to Britain, 
noted: “The English people show our lads every possible courtesy and some of 
them, accustomed to ill-will, harsh words and artificial barriers, seem 
slightly bewildered. They never had a chance to leave their southern homes 
before and never realised there was a part of the world which was willing to 
forget a man’s colour and welcome him as a brother.” Arthur Guest, a member of 
the battalion, recalled: “It was a spark of light. A different way of living.”

Hervieux records their billeting in places such as Checkendon, Oxfordshire, 
Pontypool and Chepstow. “Working-class people in the Welsh villages shared 
their meagre rations and the yield of their small kitchen gardens. Here they 
were Americans first.”

Compare and contrast. A few weeks ago, I spoke to a Romanian, a driver, who 
said he has become wary of asking for directions because of abuse triggered by 
his accent. And the worst place for that in his recent experience? Genteel 
Tunbridge Wells.

We can compare the arrogance of those who bully and smear foreigners now with 
those who did so years ago; with the white GIs who spread rumours that some of 
the black soldiers – even the college educated – could only bark and many had 
tails.

We can compare the indolence of our government now with that of Churchill back 
then. We don’t “want to see lynching begin in England”, noted an aide to 
Anthony Eden, the foreign secretary. But when Churchill was told of a black GI 
being hounded from a restaurant by white colleagues,he suggested the soldier 
acquire a banjo <http://www.nickelinthemachine.com/tag/churchill/> and seek 
entry as a member of the band.

Related: National anti-hate crime campaign to launch after spike in incidents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/01/national-anti-hate-campaign-to-launch-after-spike-in-incidents-betterthanthat->

Ordinary people, however, saw things differently. When a vicar’s wife from 
Somerset urged separatism, she was castigated. “There is and will be no 
persecution of coloured people in Britain,” thundered the Sunday Pictorial. 
When white GIs objected to black GIs at a village dance, they themselves were 
ordered to leave. To drive home the point, local people taunted the expelled 
GIs by buying the their black guests drinks. George Orwell, as ever, reflected 
the grassroots mood. “The general consensus of opinion seems to be that the 
only American soldiers with any manners are the Negroes,” he wrote in Tribune.

Of course, the comparison is inexact. There is a difference between an influx 
of soldiers deployed during wartime and the modern examples of difference: 
Britons who look, speak and dress differently, economic migrants whose presence 
undoubtedly has an impact on schools, hospitals, jobs and housing. Those who 
bully and abuse can seek to justify their behaviour by pointing to the stresses 
that we know exist. Still there is something to be gleaned from the experience 
of the black battalion. They were not “othered” as dehumanised symbols, even 
when their presence caused debate and tension. They were seen as flesh and 
blood individuals.

Jessie Prior, a Welsh woman who had never seen a non-white person before, sent 
a letter to New Jersey 
<http://www.freepressseries.co.uk/news/14970985.THE_LONG_VIEW__The_Black_GIs_who_found_a_welcome_in_the_valleys/>
, to the mother of a black GI her family had befriended. “While he is here, we 
shall take every care of him,” she said. “We look upon him now as our own.”

There are modern versions of her in every community. We should be proud of 
them, but it’s those who preach division who hog the limelight. With every 
racist act, every catcall, every rancid tweet, they betray Prior and all like 
her who once set a higher standard. We have been better than this, and can be 
again.
 