
Playhouses, schools and the government are failing to invest properly in 
future generations of theatregoers, the actorJonathan Pryce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/jonathan-pryce> has said.

The award-winning star of Wolf Hall and Game of Thrones, and a stage veteran, 
said young people needed to be shown the thrill of live theatre. He called for 
cheaper tickets and more school visits, rather than offering children filmed 
productions that he said could never recreate the excitement of the real thing.

Research by the Audience Agency has found that the largest age group for 
theatre audiences is 65 to 74.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba260ab81ede4a6e6f31cec5f6282bd7d973b33%2F300_0_1430_858%2F1430.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Invest%20in%20next%20generation%20of%20theatregoers%2C%20urges%20actor%20Jonathan%20Pryce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Invest%20in%20next%20generation%20of%20theatregoers%2C%20urges%20actor%20Jonathan%20Pryce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbba260ab81ede4a6e6f31cec5f6282bd7d973b33%2F300_0_1430_858%2F1430.jpg>
 Jonathan Pryce and Lorenzo Allchurch in The White King Photograph: Handout 
from film studio 
GCSE drama syllabuses by the exam boards AQA and OCR no longer require pupils 
to watch a live performance, a move condemned in April by David Harewood and 
Zoë Wanamaker, among other actors.

Pryce said: “There seem to be fewer school trips to the theatre. We’re now 
being told that it’s enough for a young person to experience digital theatre … 
a public record of a performance, but nothing like a live performance.

“It’s great that places that no longer have theatres can get to see quality 
theatre, but I’d be happier if money was put in to get those young people into 
live theatre. It’s an eye-opener when people are exposed to it for the first 
time.

“The audience in a live performance is the extra cast member. The make-up of 
that audience and how they respond to the play shapes the performance that 
night.”


He was speaking to the Guardian before a world tour of The Merchant of Venice 
by Shakespeare’s Globe Theatre in London – for which Pryce has been praised for 
his“richly realised” Shylock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2015/may/01/the-merchant-of-venice-review-jonathan-pryce-shylock-shakespeares-globe>
 – and the world premiere next Saturday of his latest production, The White 
King, at the Edinburgh international film festival.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38f456f1bfaad599c2b1b906f7395264ec81892%2F746_189_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Invest%20in%20next%20generation%20of%20theatregoers%2C%20urges%20actor%20Jonathan%20Pryce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Invest%20in%20next%20generation%20of%20theatregoers%2C%20urges%20actor%20Jonathan%20Pryce&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fstage%2F2016%2Fjun%2F12%2Finvest-next-generation-theatre-tickets-school-trips-actor-jonathan-pryce%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa38f456f1bfaad599c2b1b906f7395264ec81892%2F746_189_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
 Pryce in Game of Thrones. Photograph: HBO 
Over a 45-year career, his awards have included an Olivier for Hamlet. Other 
roles have included the Bond villain in Tomorrow Never Dies, Cardinal Wolsey in 
the BBC’s historical drama Wolf Hall, and the religious leader High Sparrow in 
Gameof Thrones.

Pryce, the son of a grocer, grew up in a small village in north Wales and did 
not go to the theatre until his late teens. Now 69, he has never forgotten his 
nervousness about his first visit.

“Young people feel that even more now because there are the financial 
constraints about going,” he said. “It is worrying.”

When he got his first acting job, in Liverpool in the 1970s, his wages were 
only £18 a week, but he could still afford to buy theatre tickets, which then 
were inexpensive.

He acknowledged that the National had a longstanding, successful partnership 
with Travelex, the foreign exchange company, which has enabled huge numbers of 
tickets to be sold at low prices.

But he wants theatre prices generally to be slashed. “The National Theatre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/theatre> and Royal Shakespeare Company, and 
any theatre that gets huge public subsidy, I’d like to see some of those prices 
come down,” he said.

Harry Potter and the curse of the ticket resellers: preview tickets for £250 
and up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/datablog/2016/jun/10/harry-potter-and-the-curse-of-ticket-resellers>
School trips to the theatre should be on the curriculum, Pryce said. “. This 
particular government is like being back in Thatcher’s days. She didn’t respect 
theatre … a lot of funding was withdrawn from theatres. This government is 
saying that theatre … doesn’t need to be on the syllabus.”

He said it was partly because of his concern about future generations that he 
was drawn to productions by young people. “In the mix of doing a big movie like 
GI Joe or a big TV series like Game of Thrones, to be able to work with young 
filmmakers is quite exciting.”

The White King <https://vimeo.com/169685815> is a debut feature film by Alex 
Helfrecht and Jörg Tittel, featuring Fiona Shaw, Olivia Williams and Greta 
Scacchi.

Based on the critically acclaimed 2005 novel by György Dragomán, which has 
been translated from its original Hungarian into more than 28 languages, it 
tells the story of a boy’s love for his father and a family’s struggle against 
repression under a brutal dictatorship.
 