
Ireland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> may never see the full 
€13bn (£10.8bn) in unpaid taxes owed by Apple, the European commission has 
said, if other EU countries go after the American tech giant for a share.

The EU executive also said Apple <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/apple>
 could reduce its multibillion-euro tax bill to Ireland if it increased 
payments to its US parent company, as it revealed the full text of its landmark 
ruling against the US tech giant for the first time.


Margrethe Vestager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/margrethe-vestager-eu-competition-commissioner-google-tax-deal-uk-government>
, the EU competition commissioner, suggested Ireland may not see the full €13bn 
in back taxes if Apple chose to pay larger amounts to its US headquarters to 
fund research and development.

Speaking to the Irish Independent 
<http://www.independent.ie/business/irish/apple-could-cut-13bn-tax-bill-by-paying-more-to-us-parent-vestager-35304707.html>
, she said the total paid to Ireland could be reduced because other EU member 
states may demand more tax from Apple if they concluded that the US tech firm 
had underpaid them, because it had been routing profits to Apple’s Irish 
headquarters in Cork.

The full text of the EU’s decision, published on Monday, sets the stage for a 
titanic legal battle, which pits the European commission against Apple and 
Dublin, with implications for hundreds of companies.

In August, the commission said a sweetheart deal devised by the Irish 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/apple-pay-back-taxes-eu-ruling-ireland-state-aid>
 had allowed Apple to pay tax of just 0.005% in 2014 and an average rate of 1% 
over many years.

Speaking on Monday, Vestager said the full amount may not be payable to 
Ireland.

Apple created two companies in Ireland, Apple Sales International and Apple 
OperationsEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, as it went on 
a journey to become the biggest profit-making firm in the world.

“The amount to be paid back to Ireland would also be reduced if the two 
companies were required to pay larger amounts of money to their US parent 
company to fund the research and development efforts,” Vestager said.

The Apple tax ruling – what this means for Ireland, tax and multinationals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/30/eu-apple-ireland-tax-ruling-q-and-a>
However, she also suggested other EU member states may want a slice. “Other 
countries, in the EU or elsewhere, can look at our investigation. If they 
conclude that Apple should have recorded its sales in those countries instead 
of Ireland, they could require Apple to pay more tax locally. That would reduce 
the amount to be paid back to Ireland,” she said.

Earlier in the year, the Danish politician said Ireland had given Apple a 
sweetheart deal worth €13bn. But thefull 130-page ruling 
<http://ec.europa.eu/competition/elojade/isef/case_details.cfm?proc_code=3_SA_38373>
 was only published on Monday, to allow lawyers to ensure confidential 
commercial information was kept out of the final report.


Hours ahead of publication, Dublin and Apple stepped up their war of words, 
vowing to fight the commission in court.


As it announced plans to lodge its appeal this week, Apple accused European 
regulators of a political crusade against a successful American company. In a 
personal attack on the Danish competition commissioner, a senior company 
executive said Apple was a convenient target for an official chasing headlines.


The company’s chief general counsel, Bruce Sewell, told Reuters: “Apple is not 
an outlier in any sense that matters to the law. Apple is a convenient target 
because it generates lots of headlines. It allows the commissioner to become 
Dane of the year for 2016,” he said, referring to thetitle accorded by Danish 
newspaper Berlingske last month 
<http://www.b.dk/nationalt/vestager-har-taget-bruxelles-og-den-halve-verden-med-storm>
.

Under Vestager, the commission has also taken on McDonald’s, Starbucks and 
Italy’s Fiat over tax, and launched investigations into overcharging by 
Gazprom, one of Russia’s most powerful companies.


In a submission to Europe’s second-highest court, Apple also accused the 
commission of ignoring Ireland’s tax experts. “The Irish have put in an expert 
opinion from an incredibly well-respected Irish tax lawyer,” Sewell said. “The 
commission not only didn’t attack that – didn’t argue with it, as far as we 
know – they probably didn’t even read it. Because there is no reference [in the 
EU decision] whatsoever.”


Apple’s combatative stance comes as no surprise – earlier in the year, the 
Apple chief executive, Tim Cook,dismissed the case as “total political crap”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/01/political-crap-tim-cook-apple-tax-ruling>

Apple has already agreed to pay €318m  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/30/apple-pays-234m-settle-italian-tax-dispute>
to the Italian authorities to settle a case of suspected fraud, where it failed 
to declare its earnings between 2008 and 2013. Ireland is expected to create a 
€13bn escrow account to store the money, pending potential claims by other 
member states.

Only national tax authorities can decide whether they wish to pursue Apple for 
taxes on profits booked in Ireland.

While Brussels is confident it will win its case, the Irish government accused 
the commission of riding roughshod over Ireland’s sovereignty, by trying to 
rewrite the country’s corporation tax rules.

Unveiling its formal legal submission 
<http://www.finance.gov.ie/sites/default/files/161219%20Summary%20of%20Appeal%20Grounds%20Publised%20under%20Embargo.pdf>
 on Monday, the finance department described how low taxes are the point of its 
sales pitch to foreign investors, arguing it was perfectly legal to levy far 
less tax on profits than imposed by competitors.

Under EU rules, governments have powers to set their own corporate tax rates, 
but are forbidden from giving an unfair competitive advantage to firms on their 
territory.


Ireland levies a tax rate of 12.5%, one of the lowest in the EU, nearly a 
third of the US rate of 35%. Irish ministers have stressed itslow corporate tax 
rate is non-negotiable, viewing it as the linchpin of the economy. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/11/apple-ireland-corporate-tax-finance-minister-michael-noonan-european-commission>
 The low headline rate, combined with complex use of shell companies, has 
helped Ireland to draw in scores of tech and pharmaceutical firms.

Apple employs 6,000 people in Cork, Ireland’s second city, and has pledged to 
remain loyal to the city it chose as its European base more than 30 years ago.

Ireland’s finance ministry contended that the commission had misunderstood EU 
competition rules, which are intended to ensure a level-playing field across 
the union. “The state aid rules by their nature cannot remedy mismatches 
between tax systems on a global level,” it said, contesting the EU’s argument 
that Apple got benefits denied to other companies based in Ireland.

Vestager made clear the commission was standing its ground: “This decision 
sends a clear message: member states cannot give unfair tax benefits to 
selected companies. No matter if they are European or foreign, large or small, 
part of a group or not.”
 