
Let’s be clear about second referendums. There are “good” ones and “bad” ones. 
A bad one is a desperate attempt by the government of the day and its allies to 
negate a first referendum it did not like. This was practised byDenmark (1993)  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/07/denmark-referendum-europe-optouts>
andIreland (2009) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/oct/04/ireland-votes-yes-lisbon-treaty>
. It worked, which is why the anti-Brexit lobby,now supported by Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/28/tony-blair-remain-voters-to-mobilise-against-brexit>
, likes the idea. Such a referendum was at least better than France in 2005 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2005/jun/02/eu.france2>, where a vote 
against the Lisbon treaty was simply ignored by the established parties, with 
consequences that may yet prove dire.

A good second referendum is quite different. It seeks approval for whatever 
deal is reached as a result of the first one. It seeks to take forward the 
first decision, not negate it.

The fury in some quarters that greeted the UK vote on Brexit last June swiftly 
morphed into a demand that voters be immediately re-polled, as if they would 
then repent the error of their ways. It was the arrogance of the old politics 
on parade, laughably led by certain members of the House of Lords. It showed 
how thin is respect for democracy (mostly) on the left in Britain.

Now comes a different question. The referendum said yes to the UK “leaving” 
the EU. David Cameron and Theresa May rightly accepted that decision, as they 
said they would. The divorce would proceed without hope of reconciliation.

But divorce is a clumsy metaphor. Neighbouring countries do not marry and 
divorce. They become more or less separate, hence the shorthand of “soft” and 
“hard” Brexit. There is a world of difference between these two outcomes – so 
much so that pundits vie with each other in claiming the impossibility of both.

The world must go on. At some point some sort of deal, however messy, will 
have to be done between Britain and the EU. There is no such thing as a wall in 
the Channel. Certainly the May government could fail in its negotiation. It 
could seek a general election mandate that could trump the Brexit referendum. 
But that is not a second referendum.

Ideally, when tempers have cooled, a deal will be reached that removes the UK 
from the institutions of the EU but reformalises trade and population movement. 
The likelihood is that such a deal would anger the “hard” Brexiters more than 
the “soft” ones, but either way it would be controversial. As such, it would 
best be authenticated by a second referendum.

This would not be an attempt to reverse the first referendum, merely to 
validate its outcome. It would be a “good” second referendum.
 