
How are passengers being let down? 

The numbers of commuters affected by the spectacular implosion of the Southern 
rail network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
 have made it the most eye-catching failure, but passengers in the south-west 
and north have also had reason for complaint, suffering some of the worst 
crowding, and riding onthe oldest, most ramshackle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
 rolling stock. In general, after improving for most of the past decade, rates 
of punctuality have plateaued and started to worsen in the past four years. 
Meanwhile, rail fares have continued to rise at more than twice the rate of 
wages during the last decade,going up another 2.3% on average this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/rail-fares-train-operators-accused-of-milking-the-system-as-rises-kick-in>
.

So are these dark days for the rail industry?

In many ways, quite the contrary. Passenger numbers have reached record 
levels, and investment from the government has remained comparatively high in 
the last decade or so. Large parts of the rail network have been upgraded and 
electrified, and new trains will be brought in by 2018 for long-distance 
journeys between Scotland and Wales to London, as well as on some commuter 
services. Stretches of new line have been built, opening connections in the 
Scottish Borders and in Oxford, and plans are afoot for more. Some stations 
have been transformed, with London Bridge’s redevelopment in progress. A 
revamped Thameslink and all ofCrossrail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/crossrail> should be running by the end of the 
decade, giving a massive boost to the capacity of lines across the capital and 
beyond. And construction should start this year on a proper high-speed railway,
HS2 <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/hs2>.

That sounds like lots of ‘jam tomorrow’?

Britain also has one of the safest railways in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/2016/aug/24/britains-rail-safety-record-deserves-some-credit-graham-ruddick>
 – it is almost 10 years since the last passenger fatality in a train accident. 
And compensation for delays is being improved and automated.

If things are so great, why are trains so crowded and late?

The rail industry likes to argue that it has been a victim of its own success 
– that a doubling of passenger numbers since privatisation has meant trains and 
track are more and more intensively used, especially at peak times.Passenger 
satisfaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/30/southern-rail-ranks-bottom-of-customer-satisfaction-table>
, measured by the national Transport Focus survey, confirms that people are 
particularly unhappy in the south-east, where soaring house prices have pushed 
more people out of the capital, meaning they must rely on commuter trains to 
maintain jobs. It is true that more train services are running, but that means 
the knock-on effects of any problems can delay a lot more subsequent trains 
than before. Network Rail says there are fewer incidents than in the past – but 
each one causes more delays. Plus, of course, major investment in engineering 
works tends to spell major disruption.

Have the engineering works been a success?

Some of the biggest upgrade plans have been partly skewered or delayed by cost 
over-runs at Network Rail – notablythe electrification of the Great Western 
mainline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/great-western-electrification-branch-lines-oxford-bristol>
, which has cost billions more than anticipated and now won’t be entirely 
completed. While plenty is getting done, in general, what was trumpeted as the 
greatest investment since Victorian times is now costing more and delivering 
less than promised – and of course, affecting services while it is carried out.

Tracking the cost: UK and European rail commuter fares compared – in data
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/datablog/2017/jan/06/tracking-the-cost-uk-and-european-commuter-rail-fares-compared-in-data>
What has brought industrial relations to such a low point?

The RMT <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> has never been slow to call 
a strike, but it is also true that train drivers have rarely walked out. Having 
said which, unions believe there is a concerted intent in the Department for 
Transport to push through cost-cutting measures in the name of modernisation, 
which they claim will impact safety and jobs – a suspicion worsened bysenior 
civil servant Peter Wilkinson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/peter-wilkinson-the-man-the-unions-say-is-driving-the-southern-rail-strike>
’s infamous comments about “breaking” drivers who resisted change, made at a 
public meeting last January. A landmark 2011 report by Sir Roy McNulty into 
value for money in the rail industry claimed its costs were 30% higher than 
necessary, especially compared to European neighbours.

So is that why my ticket is so expensive?

Partly. Successive governments have also made a conscious decision to make the 
passenger shoulder more of the cost than the taxpayer, with fares now forming 
more than 70% of the industry’s income. The government would certainly like to 
drive down the costs of running a railway, and reducing staff is one way to do 
so. Terms of new franchises are specifying that more services must run on 
driver-only operated trains. Train operators claim that profit margins are 
falling, but Labour and unions argue that – especially as shareholders take out 
dividends of around £200m a year –returning the whole system to public ownership
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/16/corbyn-to-launch-transport-campaign-with-rail-pledges>
 would spell lower fares.
 