
’Tis the season of self-hatred. The newspapers proffer stories ready-bent into 
rods to beat yourself with: you are fat and unambitious, your home full of 
clutter, and you almost certainly guzzle too many “units”. Most of all, you are 
overspent. On Christmas Day, Britons found time to spendabout £728m online 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-35178207>, reckons credit-rating agency 
Experian, on Boxing Day another £856m. Then they went down to the shops.

Britain is heading for another 2008 crash: here’s why | David Graeber
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/28/2008-crash-government-economic-growth-budgetary-surplus>
Public moralising on most of these issues rarely outlives January. But debt is 
the hardy perennial of morality tales, the one that has kept coming up ever 
since the banking crash of 2007-8. You doubtless know the story by now: how 
Britons followed Americans into borrowing money they couldn’t afford to buy 
stuff they didn’t need. How shoppers went crazy and entire economies got 
off-kilter – until catastrophe hit. How the feckless Anglo-Americans now need 
to tighten their belts, stop maxing out their credit cards and start saving 
like Germans.

This is that rare example of an account agreed by both the anti-consumerist 
left and the anti-welfarist right. And it is mostly tosh. It lacks history, and 
assumes that debt is a uniquely Anglo-American vice. It sits unnervingly close 
to hypocrisy: my necessary loan is your stupid debt. Most of all, in 
identifying debt and debtors as the problem, it identifies precisely the wrong 
targets.

Credit was around long before plastic cards, and for much of that time it was 
considered perfectly respectable, even a badge of status, to plunge into the 
red. In England in 1700, half of all heads of household died leaving 
outstanding debts. While Oscar Wilde was an undergraduate at Magdalen in the 
1870s, he twice in one month suffered what biographer Richard Ellmann calls the 
“fashionable Oxford indignity of being called up before the vice-chancellor’s 
court” for unpaid debts to tradesmen – including £20 (well more than £2,000 in 
today’s money) to a tailor for such essentials as a “super fancy Angola [sic] 
suit”.

This is credit as a toff’s plaything, a way of securing the baubles to which 
one is naturally entitled. As Frank Trentmann argues in his forthcoming bookThe 
Empire of Things 
<http://www.penguin.co.uk/books/empire-of-things/9780713999624/>: “It was when 
debt became more firmly associated with the poor that it spelled moral shame.” 
Credit was too good for workers, who had neither the assets nor the “character” 
to be worthy of it. Allowed to borrow, they were “like spoiled children with 
too many toys, always wanting something else”, observed one Victorian social 
reformer.

A professor of history at Birkbeck college at the University of London, 
Trentmann covers 600 years of consumer culture. But he also chucks several 
bricks into one of the most important debates in politics and economics today. 
In an age of household budgets and easy preaching about the evils of debt, he 
shows us how that earlier disdain for poor people getting their hands on too 
much money lingers on today. Even in the 60s, furniture bought on hire purchase 
would be delivered in “plain vans” so as to not to shame a family. He also 
punctures the idea that different nations have fundamentally different 
attitudes to borrowing. Until the late 19th century, America was much less 
spendthrift than Europe – most of its states banned usury. Then furniture shops 
introduced the idea of paying in instalments – and everything changed.

Over decades of visiting India, I’d got used to the idea of its urban middle 
class being the sort of thrifty souls to delight dour old Samuel Smiles: saving 
every spare rupee and never having any fun until retirement. The point I 
remember everything changing was about 10 years ago when an investment banker 
told me in scandalised tones that credit-card reps were waiting outside 
airports and pressing application forms on anyone with a boarding pass. In the 
new India, if you could afford to take to the skies, you could afford to get in 
the red.

Debt still attracts easy moralising and apocalyptic warnings, but it always 
has to be considered alongside one’s income and assets. It may be prudent for a 
young family to borrow, if they reckon their wages will go up over the next few 
years. As Trentmann shows, the golden age of credit in America and Britain was 
in the postwar decades, when both economies were growing fast and workers were 
seeing their pay rise year on year. But – and this is beyond the purview of the 
historian - that is not the case in either country today. Instead, the debt 
being taken out is being taken out on promises of growth that modern capitalism 
cannot deliver.

The roof is being fixed but beware the house crashing beneath it
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/06/geiorge-osborne-roof-being-fixed-beware-house-crash-beneath>
Encouraged by their governments, households in the UK and the US are now using 
their homes as cash machines. Using official statistics, the Centre for 
Research into Socio-Cultural Change has found that the value of home equity 
withdrawal under both Thatcher and Blair exceeded the value of GDP growth 
during their time in power. The two losing incumbents of the past 20 years, 
Major and Brown, both saw housing equity withdrawal slump on their watch.

That simple observation holds the key to explaining the post-79 era in British 
politics. How do you win an election? Inflate the property market. How do you 
mimic economic growth? Encourage housing equity withdrawal.

In savvier parts of the establishment, that relationship is now tacitly 
accepted. The latest Economist has a discussion onhousehold debt in the UK 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21685499-worries-about-rising-british-household-debt-are-overblown-down-earth>
 that concludes: “It remains unsustainable for household debt to rise relative 
to incomes indefinitely … But for the time being rising debt may not be a bad 
thing … The British economy may be somewhat unbalanced, but at least it is 
growing.” This is the house journal of the departure-lounge capitalist class 
admitting that the British economy may be tapped out, but at least we can keep 
borrowing.

Credit isn’t the problem; a lack of investment is. Debt shouldn’t be our 
primary worry; just where growth will come from for the mass of Britons 
must be. And that is going to be a much bigger and tougher problem to solve.
 