
Easy to overdose on orthodoxies. One such is the notion that throughout its 
history, Britain has an honourable record in absorbing newcomers, providing 
refuge to refugees and gradually becoming a diverse society. That’s pretty much 
my take on things, but it’s good to receive a contrary view, if only for the 
purposes of stress testing.

Such a challenge recently came my way in the form of a broadside from Pavle 
Popovic, a masters student at the University of Leiden in Holland, whose thesis 
concerns the exodus of Sino-Vietnamese refugeesand the reluctance of Margaret 
Thatcher to open the door to them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/dec/30/thatcher-snub-vietnamese-boat-people>
. Your view of things is too rose-tinted, he said. Everyone talks about happy 
endings, but not about the official hostility that always greets any actual or 
pending influx, and the racism many groups have encountered on arrival.

“Thatcher was wholly uninterested in the asylum seekers,” insisted Pavle. 
“When ministers proposed resettling the refugees to her, she infamously 
remarked that it was: ‘quite wrong that immigrants should be given council 
housing whereas white citizens were not’. When Britain finally became fully 
involved in the Indo-China crisis, it was not due to humanitarian motives but 
because its colony, Hong Kong, had become overladen with asylum seekers and 
‘illegal’ Chinese immigrants.”

Self-interest was the driver, he said, and the same motive lay behind 
Britain’s decision to acceptUgandan Asians expelled by Idi Amin 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/onthisday/hi/dates/stories/september/18/newsid_2522000/2522627.stm>
. “Their eventual resettlement in Britain was only because the attorney general 
reminded the incumbent Conservatives that they had an obligation to; many of 
the Ugandan Asians held British passports. The government selected the most 
skilled for resettlement and considered sending the unskilled and elderly to 
India.”

We need to be more honest about our actions and motivations in the past, he 
said, because they affect how we deal with these things in the present day.

He’s right in his way. The national interest does inevitably drives decisions. 
The issue is what constitutes the national interest. I like the quote from 
Edward Heath as he explained why his government decided to receive the Ugandan 
Asians: “We hold that it is in the interest of the British people that the 
reputation of Britain for good faith and humanity should be preserved,”Heath 
said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/03/refugee-crisis-test-david-cameron>
. As to how we reach that point, I always quoteChurchill, on America 
<http://www.peoriamagazines.com/ibi/2010/feb/americans-will-always-do-right-thing-after-they-have-exhausted-all-alternatives>
: they do the right thing having exhausted the alternatives, he said.
 