
For two days in early June every year, China 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> comes to a standstill as high school 
students who are about to graduate take their college entrance exams. Literally 
the “higher examination”, thegaokao is a national event on a par with a public 
holiday, but much less fun. Construction work is halted near examination halls, 
so as not to disturb the students, and traffic is diverted. Ambulances are on 
call outside in case of nervous collapses, and police cars patrol to keep the 
streets quiet. Radio talkshow hosts discuss the format and questions in 
painstaking detail, and when the results come out, the top scorers are feted 
nationally. A high or low mark determines life opportunities and earning 
potential. That score is the most important number of any Chinese child’s life, 
the culmination of years of schooling, memorisation and constant stress.

On 8 June, the final afternoon of this year’s gaokao, parents of exam takers 
at one school in Beijing were packed tight around the school gate, jostling to 
get to the front of the crowd where a white metal barrier held them back. 
Special security guards handed out water bottles and cheap paper fans, while 
another manned a first aid stand under a large parasol. Cars were parked all 
the way around the bend of the road leading to the gate, simmering in the 
summer heat. “They’re all here to pick up their kids,” a city police officer 
patiently explained to a driver struggling to find a space. A red banner above 
the barrier declared the school a “National unifiedgaokao examination point”. 
At the first sign of movement inside, the parents pushed in closer, craning 
their necks to spot their children emerging.

Is China’s gaokao the world’s toughest school exam? – podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/audio/2016/nov/04/is-chinas-gaokao-the-worlds-toughest-school-exam-podcast>
Shortly after 5pm, a student named Yuan Qi walked out clutching a clear pencil 
case and wearing a dazed expression. Around him, hundreds of exam-takers 
celebrated the end of their ordeal. Some clutched bouquets of flowers given to 
them by their parents; others posed awkwardly for photographs. Yuan Qi’s 
father, an administrator in the People’s Liberation Army, was dressed in shorts 
and a polo neck. He had been at the front of the crowd, holding his phone up 
high to record the moment. But when his son came out, he greeted him silently 
and led him away from the hubbub to where his mother was waiting. She took his 
pencil case to stop him fidgeting with it. “Hard?” another parent asked Yuan Qi 
as they passed. “Depends which subject,” he replied. His father beamed with 
pride.

Yuan Qi is 18, thin and wiry, with blue half-rim spectacles, close-cropped 
hair and budding wisps on his upper lip. A student at Beijing 101 school, one 
of the capital’s most prestigious boarding schools, he is the nervous sort – 
constantly fiddling with stationery or picking at his fingers. He has a habit 
of rushing to the end of his sentences, slurring his words when excited, as if 
frustrated that telepathy is not an option. Ever since he was a young boy, 
growing up in Hebei, the province surrounding Beijing, Yuan Qi has had a talent 
for maths, science and problem solving. He loves reading murder mysteries, 
especially Agatha Christie novels in Chinese translation, which is how he came 
up with his English name – Hercule – although his moustache is yet to live up 
to it.

The first time a teacher of his mentioned the gaokao, Yuan Qi was in primary 
school. Used as a distant incentive for working hard, the word kept cropping up 
in school and at the dinner table until it dawned on him just how high the 
stakes were. While college entrance is competitive in any country, in China the 
top universities can select as few as one in 50,000 students. Competition is 
intense for white-collar jobs, with a graduate unemployment rate of about 16%, 
and which college a student goes to has an immediate impact on career and even 
marriage prospects. That placement is decided by a single factor: their 
three-digitgaokao score.

Spy cameras, radios and earpieces that transmit questions and answers have 
been found hidden in pens and underwear

With so much to gain or lose, cheating is a big problem. Spy cameras, radio 
devices and earpieces that transmit questions and receive answers have been 
found hidden in jewellery, spectacles, wallets, pens, rulers and underwear. 
Most examination rooms install CCTV cameras, and some use metal detectors. Last 
year, police busted a syndicate in Jiangxi province, where professional 
exam-takers were charging parents up to a million yuan (£121,300) to pose as 
students. In Luoyang, a city in Henan province, examiners deployed a drone to 
hover above school buildings and scan for radio signals sent in or out. 
Fingerprint and iris-matching has been used to verify the identity of students. 
Exam papers are escorted to schools by security guards and monitored with GPS 
trackers, while the examiners who draft them are kept under close scrutiny in 
order to avoid leaks. This year, new regulations came into effect that could 
sentence cheats to up to seven years in prison.

Yuan Qi was quietly confident. In his mocks he was averaging in the 690s, out 
of a maximum of 750 – good enough to get into the capital’s elite universities. 
He had been cramming for 12 hours a day in the months leading up to the test, 
with extra classes at weekends. Since March, he had been operating on just six 
or seven hours sleep a night. Every possible step had been taken to maximise 
his chances of succeeding. The day before the first morning paper, his parents 
had rented a hotel room next to Tsinghua University middle school, where he 
would sit his papers, so that they could arrange his meals and attend to his 
every other need. By that point, Yuan Qi had spent so much time doing mock 
exams that he was totally inured to the real thing, which passed in a haze.

“It went about usual,” he told me as we walked back to his hotel, massaging 
his wrist. “Nothing out of the ordinary. Now I just want to go home and play 
some games.” Yuan Qi’s father was still recording videos of him, still 
grinning. “The exam is very nerve-racking, and each time when I was standing 
outside, before it began, I was terrified. But when you’re actually taking it 
it’s not so bad.” Now that the struggle was over, there was nothing he could do 
but wait for the result.

The gaokao is emblematic of the Chinese education system as a whole. In the 
west, it is often seen as monolithic and rote; in China as tough but fair. In 
Europe and America, there is the notion that Chinese schools produce automatons 
incapable of critical thought; in China, many seem to think that western 
classrooms are full of students standing on desks and ripping up textbooks, à 
la Dead Poets Society. Yet, where the Chinese model used to be roundly 
criticised for rewarding rote learning, now the system’s gruelling schedule and 
supposed high standards areincreasingly admired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/22/china-education-exams-parents-rebel>
 overseas. Thomas Friedman, the New York Times columnist, has praised 
Shanghai’s school system with at times absurd hyperbole. (One column was 
fawningly titled “The Shanghai Secret”.) Last year, the BBC invited two Chinese 
teachers to take over a sixth-form class in the documentaryAre Our Kids Tough 
Enough? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/04/china-schools-testing-britain-copy-government-pupils>
 (Spoiler: they weren’t, but nor were the teachers.)

In China there are no illusions about the system being perfect. The exam is 
widely criticised for putting impossible pressures on children. Dissatisfaction 
with thegaokao is one reason that, among wealthier segments of the population, 
large numbers of students are choosing to study abroad. But, ultimately, most 
people support it, or at least see no alternative. “China has too many people,” 
is a common refrain, used to excuse everything from urban traffic to rural 
poverty. Given the intense competition for finite higher education resources, 
the argument goes, there has to be some way to separate the wheat from the 
chaff, and to give hardworking students from poorer backgrounds a chance to 
rise to the top.

The tradition of a single exam that decides a young person’s prospects is one 
that goes back to antiquity in China. The imperial examinations orkeju, which 
tested applicants for government office, was introduced in the Han dynasty 
(206BC to AD220), and became the sole criterion for selection from the 7th 
century until its abolition in 1905. Aspiring bureaucrats sat a three-day exam 
locked inside a single cell, in which they also slept and ate. The 
“eight-legged essay” was the most important paper, an argument in eight 
sections that elaborated on a theme while quoting from classics such as 
Confucius and Mencius. All applicants were checked for hidden scrolls; writing 
quotes on underwear was a popular form of cheating until examiners cottoned on. 
The pass rate was 1%. Nervous collapses were routine. There is even a 
ghost-deity associated with exams in China: Zhong Kui, a scholar who killed 
himself when he was denied first place.

China’s memory manipulators | Ian Johnson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/08/chinas-memory-manipulators> 
While not a direct descendant, the gaokao is generally considered a distant 
relation of thekeju. First instituted in 1952 under the new Communist 
government, thegaokao was suspended during the cultural revolution. Most 
universities were closed, and remaining college places were assigned according 
to political background rather than academic ability. It was only in 1977, the 
year after Mao’s death, that thegaokao resumed in its modern form. The first 
sitting was open to generations who had been deprived of the chance to pursue 
higher education – 5.7 million people enrolled, competing for just 220,000 
university seats. Since 1978, it has been held every summer.

The gaokao is made up of four three-hour papers: Chinese, English 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/22/china-english-college-test-gaokao>
, maths and a choice of either sciences (biology, chemistry, physics) or 
humanities (geography, history, politics). The questions are mostly 
multiple-choice or fill-in-the-gap, and are notoriously hard – the maths paper 
has been compared to university-level maths in the UK. But for many students, 
the most intimidating element is the essay in the Chinese exam. Students are 
given an hour to write on one of two prompts, which are often infuriatingly 
elliptical. Prompts in 2015 included “Do butterfly wings have colours?” and 
“Who do you admire the most? A biotechnology researcher, a welding engineering 
technician or a photographer?”. This summer, Yuan Qi’s choice was between “Old 
accent” and “Mysterious bookmark”. (He picked old accent.)

It is no surprise that, for many students, the pressure heaped on them by 
parents, teachers and themselves, is overwhelming. It is possible to retake the 
exam one year later, but if a student continues to fail there is no safety net 
or alternative path to university. Suicides are a regular feature of every exam 
season; a 2014 study claimed that exam stress was a contributing factor in 93% 
of cases in which school students took their own lives. Last year, a middle 
school in Hebei province fenced off its upper-floor dormitory balconies with 
grates, after two students jumped to their deaths in the months leading up to 
thegaokao. And the academic stress starts early – in July a 10-year-old boy 
tried to kill himself in oncoming traffic after fighting with his mother about 
homework. But still the study mill grinds on.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77dd05fa1f6ec00d95ef26e0e52a4be81144b98a%2F0_159_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77dd05fa1f6ec00d95ef26e0e52a4be81144b98a%2F0_159_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
 Yuan Qi in his bedroom at his parents’ apartment in Beijing. Photograph: 
Gilles Sabrié for the Guardian 
In April, two months before the exam, the campus of Yuan Qi’s school was 
deceptively tranquil. A tree-lined boulevard led up to Beijing 101’s front 
entrance, where two guards with truncheons watched over the security gate. 
Inside, the school buildings glistened in the sun, surrounded by spacious 
sports grounds and a lake with a goose house and lotus flowers. Students walked 
around in colour-coded slacks that, like all school uniforms in China, more 
closely resembled pyjamas: dark blue for year 11, mauve and white for year 12, 
purple for year 13. The school nestles into the west flank of Beijing’s old 
Summer Palace – once the relaxation grounds of Qing dynasty emperors – and a 
back gate connects directly to the garden ruins. Founded in 1946, Beijing 101 
was initially set up to educate the children of China’s top officials, and it 
still has many such students among its ranks.

It was an accomplishment for Yuan Qi to even be there. At his local primary 
school in Hebei province, there had been 70 to 80 children in each class. The 
school’s football pitch was never used, as none of the teachers knew the rules. 
Yuan Qi’s residency papers, orhukou, dictated that he should have stayed in 
Hebei for middle school, but his father used his connections in the People’s 
Liberation Army and arranged a transfer to Beijing, with a newhukou. Once 
there, Yuan Qi enrolled in a better middle school and, thanks to a good 
performance in thezhongkao – the entrance exam for high school – got into 
Beijing 101 at the age of 16. Yuan Qi was now one step closer to securing his 
future at the college he dreamed of attending.

Just a hundred metres down the road from Beijing 101, in the heart of the 
city’s university district, lies Peking University (or Beida, as it’s known in 
China). With its illustrious history, roll call of famous alumni and romantic 
campus dotted with lakes and stone bridges, Beida is the Chinese equivalent of 
Oxford or Cambridge. Ever since his parents first told him about it as a child, 
Yuan Qi had always dreamed of going there to study maths. His parents and 
teachers were encouraging, but even their expectations, he told me, were 
nothing like the pressure he put on himself.

“In middle school I realised that primary school was easy,” he said. “And in 
high school I realised that middle school was easy.” At Beijing 101, classes 
had just 20 to 30 students, but the work was twice as intensive as before. As 
Yuan Qi’s grades were good, he was put into one of four “experimental classes” 
in his year, which went at an even faster pace. And on top of his regular 
subjects, like all Chinese students, he also took two hours of politics class 
each week. They included the compulsory modules of Mao Zedong thought and Deng 
Xiaoping economic theory, which were introduced in 1991 as part of a patriotic 
education campaign. I ordered online one of the politics textbooks that Yuan Qi 
would be studying from. It was titled Integrity of Thought, and a typical page 
featured a cartoon of three boys sitting around a table discussing the latest 
government initiatives (as one does), with an accompanying discussion question 
for students: “What are the everyday applications of these laws?”

The routine at Beijing 101 is punishing. At 6.30am Yuan Qi was out of his dorm 
bed, and he was in the canteen for breakfast by 6.50. At 7.20 came half an hour 
of self-study reading time. From 8am he had five 40-minute classes, broken by a 
half an hour of group calisthenics in the yard – a thousand students doing 
jumping jacks in unison – or running around the grounds. Another three 
afternoon classes were interrupted by five minutes of eye exercises, during 
which students massaged their tired brows while a recorded track told them to 
rub behind their ears and press their temples. School broke at 4.05pm, but 
there was still another three or four hours of homework to be completed before 
bed.

As summer arrived, the pace picked up for Yuan Qi and his classmates. Almost 
all classes were now spent looking at pastgaokao papers in methodical detail. 
After school, there were two extra hours of mock exams every day, on top of the 
homework, and five additional classes on Saturday. On Sundays, Yuan Qi’s 
parents had arranged private tuition for him in English and Chinese. His only 
relaxation was playing computer games, but whereas in middle school he had 
enjoyed complex online roleplayers, now he only had time for smartphone apps.

When I visited Beijing 101, the scene was not as disciplined as I had 
expected. School pupils in China are kids, after all, not robots – they goof 
around, joke, talk over each other. At the front gate as I waited to be let in, 
three boys were lifting up a fourth, giving him a wedgie. Inside was a bulletin 
board listing extra-curricular activities, from drama to traditional crosstalk 
comedy performances. A corrugated steel fence next to a basketball court was 
covered in graffiti, albeit sanctioned by the teachers and expletive-free: V 
for Vendetta; an alien face with the words “Once I was normal”; “Big Brother is 
Watching You”, with one of the letters replaced with a swastika. But in class 
the students quietened down, listened carefully and took notes. In years of 
reporting in China, I have never heard a single student grumble about their 
workload. To them, it is simply normal.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77a91d5125d4f25d455e67622392dfd4aebba84%2F0_0_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd77a91d5125d4f25d455e67622392dfd4aebba84%2F0_0_3896_2338%2F3896.jpg>
 The campus of Beijing University (Beida), one of China’s top universities. 
Photograph: Gilles Sabrié for the Guardian 
I sat in on one of Yuan Qi’s maths classes while the teacher – a tough but 
kindly woman with a strong Beijing accent – walked through exam-paper equations 
that left me feeling like a dunce. Yuan Qi followed along at his white plastic 
desk, where sheets covered in intricate geometrical squiggles were sprawled out 
next to his pencil case and a roll of toilet paper for blowing his nose. At the 
back of the classroom, a cartoon of Xi Jinping was drawn in coloured chalk on 
the blackboard next to the words “Wishing you a successful exam” and a 
reminder: “46 days”. This countdown is a national obsession. If you search for “
gaokao” on Baidu, China’s largest search engine, in the months leading up to 
the exam, an image appears at the top of the results page, with a clock 
counting down to the start of the exam, next to a cartoon of a schoolgirl 
riding a flying book.

Before Yuan Qi knew it, the countdown was at 30 days. 15. Ten. Five. With just 
three days left, on 4 June – while the rest of Beijing either forgot or ignored 
the 27th anniversary of the Tiananmen Square massacre – Beijing 101 held a big 
pre-exam event in the main lecture hall: part pep talk, part rules refresher. 
Yuan Qi and his friends joked among themselves, half-listening while the 
headteacher went through the exam drill in excruciating detail, from how 
students should register with their IDs to what to do if they needed extra 
paper. At the end, all the teachers lined up and waved at their pupils from 
under a PowerPoint slide that read: “We have already done abundant preparation! 
Wishing you every success! Awaiting the good news!”

With that, 12 years of primary and secondary education were finished. The 
climax of it all was in sight. Yuan Qi went home, and got his head straight for 
the first paper.

In China, the gaokao is sometimes described as a dumuqiao, which translates as 
“single-log bridge” – a difficult path that everyone has to walk. But some have 
better shoes than others. Rich families lay on extra tutoring for their 
children in what Jiang Xueqin, a Canadian-Chinese education scholar, described 
as an “arms race” among households looking to increase their child’s chances. 
Provinces with larger populations have tougher standards of entry into the best 
universities, while those that are sparsely populated set a lower bar. (This 
loophole has led to illegal “gaokao migrants” transferring to schools in Inner 
Mongolia just before the exam.) Students in Beijing and Shanghai get special 
privileges – they are the beneficiaries of generous local quotas for the best 
universities – despite being more likely to be privileged anyway.


“Scores are highly correlated with socioeconomic status,” Trey Menefee, a 
lecturer at the Hong Kong Institute of Education, told me. I asked if he 
considered the exam meritocratic. “I don’t,” he replied, “but almost every 
Chinese person does … Or it’s meritocratic only because it’s equally bad for 
everyone.”

There has been talk of reforming the gaokao for as long as it has existed, but 
little ever comes of it. The major concession in the early 2000s was to allow 
separate provinces to draft their own exam papers. This year, top universities 
trialled interviews with students who show special promise at school. Those who 
impress may be awarded extra points, which are added to their final exam score. 
Many students and their families have also called for the English paper – a 
stumbling block for many without access to private tuition – to be made 
optional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe970b6ce2765b0aae8261f3e457f2528e5724304%2F0_522_1573_944%2F1573.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe970b6ce2765b0aae8261f3e457f2528e5724304%2F0_522_1573_944%2F1573.jpg>
 Students revise for thegaokao in Jiaxing, China. Photograph: VCG/VCG via Getty 
Images 
Meanwhile, relatively small changes can meet fierce resistance. In May, the 
government announced that a quota of 80,000 university places in Jiangsu and 
Hubei provinces would be reserved for students from poorer regions, in an 
effort to address provincial inequality. But mobs of middle-class parents took 
to the streets in six cities to protest against the measures, fearful that 
positive discrimination in favour of poorer families meant their own children 
would lose out. “The gaokao isn’t for everyone,” Jiang Xueqin told me. “It’s 
for the middle class.”

When it comes to more comprehensive reform, the general consensus among 
education scholars in China is that any alternative would be too easily 
manipulated by the rich. Were coursework or regular school marks to be taken 
into account alongside exam grades, bribery would be even more rampant than it 
already is (parents often give “red packages” stuffed with banknotes to 
teachers in return for special attention for their child in class, or simply a 
seat nearer the front). The same goes for direct university admission. And so, 
futures are still decided by how well each child performs at a cramped desk in 
a closed room for two days in early June.

China’s funeral revolutionaries | Jonathan Kaiman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/08/chinas-funeral-revolutionaries> 
Not every student in China signs off their fate to the gaokao. Although more 
than nine million people still take it every year, the number is declining. 
This is partly down to the rising popularity of vocational courses, which often 
offer better prospects of finding a job after graduation, especially for those 
whose grades are less competitive. Above all, more and more students are 
heading abroad for university, and increasingly for high school. It used to be 
that the best students went to Beida; now they go to Harvard. There are more 
than 300,000 Chinese overseas students in US higher education and 90,000 in the 
UK. While many colleges overseas recognise thegaokao, it isn’t necessary to 
take it to secure a place. Just as China’s moneyed classes are deciding to 
protect their wealth by placing it overseas, their children are opting out of 
the country’s education system on an industrial scale.

One of Yuan Qi’s classmates in the experimental class at Beijing 101, Jiang 
Xinye, joined the exodus. During her last year of school, by arrangement with 
her teachers, she stopped coming to class and instead prepared applications to 
US colleges. Her parents hired the services of Bridge International Education, 
a company that helps students select colleges and pull application materials 
together (the bill was roughly £8,000; other companies charge up to £20,000). 
Instead of thegaokao she took the TOEFL, an English proficiency exam, and her 
SAT, the US college-entrance aptitude test. She settled on a major in business, 
and wrote in her personal statement about her experience selling phone cases at 
school. With the help of a college counsellor she filled in forms for 12 
universities. When it was all over she accepted a place at Brandeis, a private 
university in Massachusetts.

Jiang Xinye feels strongly that her chosen path is preferable to that of many 
of her classmates. Chinese schools just teach the exams, she told me, even more 
so than abroad. “We don’t solve problems ourselves,” she said, “the teacher 
just tells you the right answer ... and refuses to hear different voices.” One 
time, over a bowl of bibimbap in a Korean restaurant, the conversation turned 
to Yuan Qi and his other classmates who remained in the system. “They don’t 
realise that their imagination is limited. Even if they want to voice their 
opinions, they are too timid to challenge the teacher.” This struck me as the 
opposite of something Yuan Qi once told me: “Everything has a right answer. 
Even if it’s testing your argument, not the specific contents.” That’s why he 
disliked the more freeform essay question, while Jiang Xinye disliked 
everything else. While he sat thegaokao on 7 and 8 June, she was packing for 
America.

Yuan Qi often asked me what school was like in the UK. I swallowed my guilt as 
I mumbled something about less homework and bad food. One afternoon he used a 
term, qiutubeilun, which I didn’t understand. I looked it up on my phone: 
“prisoners’ dilemma”, the famous paradox about mutual competition despite the 
benefits of cooperation. “If every [student] agreed to take it more easy, and 
pursue their own interests and hobbies, then the competition wouldn’t be so 
intense,” he said. “But they would rather sacrifice that free time and spend 
all their time studying to have a greater chance of getting a high mark, and so 
everyone has to follow.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0497e71a152d48f59c263d119c407cbb9dc8947%2F0_0_5498_3300%2F5498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20China%E2%80%99s%20gaokao%20the%20world%E2%80%99s%20toughest%20school%20exam%3F%20%7C%20Alec%20Ash&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Foct%2F12%2Fgaokao-china-toughest-school-exam-in-world%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0497e71a152d48f59c263d119c407cbb9dc8947%2F0_0_5498_3300%2F5498.jpg>
 Parents wait for their children to finish taking thegaokao, outside the 
Beijing Renmin University Affiliated High School, one of the most prestigious 
in the country. Photograph: Kevin Frayer/Getty Images 
Yuan Qi sat at a corner window on the second floor of McDonald’s, slurping a 
McCafé red tea before picking apart the empty cup. It was the morning of 23 
June, two weeks after he had sat the exam, and the results would be posted 
online in a few minutes. The greasy wrapper of a crispy chicken fillet sandwich 
lay curled on the tray in front of him, next to a book titled Procrastination: 
Why You Do It and What to Do About It NOW. (In the margins, he had scrawled 
phrases such as “overcome fear” and “know your weakness”. Next to the sentence 
“You tell lies about how you organise your time”, he had written, in English, 
“ME”.) His phone was out on the tabletop and he checked it compulsively every 
few minutes, waiting for a text from his dad with his score.

The previous fortnight had been stressful but not idle. The day after his 
final exam Yuan Qi was back at the grind again, preparing for an interview at 
Beida – part of the new measures that now allow elite universities to meet with 
promising candidates. It took place a week after thegaokao: there was a written 
maths test, which was a breeze, and a sit-down with three Beida teachers and 
five other students, talking about Confucian culture and theoretical maths. The 
teachers liked him but the outcome was token: they could only give him a 
maximum of 10 points to be added to his score. After it all, he would still be 
just a number.

The results were released at noon. Most students checked them online, although 
they could also ring a hotline, or go to their school to check a printout 
posted on a bulletin board. Later, a full breakdown of their score would be 
mailed to each student, but for now it was a single mark for each exam and the 
all-important total, plus their ranking among other students in their province. 
Yuan Qi was so nervous that he couldn’t bear to be at home. He asked his father 
to text him, and repaired to McDonald’s instead.

Noon came and passed. I tried to distract him with smalltalk, but he was 
fiddling uncontrollably. Why hadn’t his dad texted yet?

At 12:41, his phone buzzed. “What is the score that you’re hoping for?”

“Just tell me, alright? ......” Yuan Qi fired back. “Don’t keep me on 
tenterhooks ............!!!”

Another three minutes. Buzz. “Are you on the first floor or the second floor?”

“Why in hell are you asking that for?”

“Is it a good time to talk?”

“Just send the text to me, you’re not allowed to ring!”

“Is anything wrong?”

Yuan Qi was visibly straining not to be rude as he replied. “Can you just send 
it, OK? Nothing’s wrong, but if you keep not telling me then it will be!!!”

A minute passed in agonising silence. Then it came, with no gloss.

“664, ranked 1,020 in Beijing.”

It was significantly lower than Yuan Qi, or his parents, had expected. Still a 
high mark, an achievement: 1,020th out of 61,222 examinees in Beijing. But only 
the top 500 had a real shot at getting into Beida, where the cutoff point was 
generally taken to be 680. Yuan Qi’s mock results were in the 690s but this 
mark, in his words, was “ordinary”. Not even in the top thousand.

His father texted again: “It’s OK son”. He stressed that they could apply to 
have his papers re-marked. But Yuan Qi was hyperventilating, taking short 
shallow breaths and pushing them out through pursed lips, as he stared at his 
phone. He scrolled down an online list of everyone’s results in Beijing, to 
double-check his ranking. The Katy Perry song Teenage Dream was blasting over 
the stereo. His peers were posting their scores in messaging app groups for 
each of his classes. I didn’t know what to say, and as a journalist I have 
never felt more intrusive as I watched a young man’s hopes crumble before my 
eyes.

Even with the full breakdown, Yuan Qi never knew exactly why he had 
underperformed. It was just one of those bad exam days. A few weeks after 
results day, he was accepted into Beijing Aviation and Space Flight University, 
known as Beihang for short. It is a good college, specialising in aeronautics, 
but with an excellent reputation for maths – not the best of the best, but the 
best Yuan Qi could have got into. He would go on to start college that 
September.

For now, he was using his summer to do all of the things he didn’t have time 
for while at school. He went swimming, took classes for the boardgame Go, 
learned how to ride a bike. And, now that it had served its purpose, hisgaokao 
mark could be forgotten – no longer relevant, like much of the knowledge he had 
crammed to achieve it. Yuan Qi still didn’t complain about the exam, even 
though, by its narrow definition of success, he had failed – just as the exam 
had failed to capture his individuality, his passion for learning and discovery.

“I don’t feel disappointed so much as lost,” he said, as we left McDonald’s 
that day. “If it was just me, if I didn’t have parents, then I would feel a bit 
better. But why do I feel like it’s they who are the most disappointed? From 
when I was little, they had such high expectations.”

He gathered himself, picked up his book on procrastination, and went home to 
finish reading it before getting ready for the next chapter.

• Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread 
<https://twitter.com/gdnlongread?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
, or sign up to the long read weekly emailhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2015/jul/20/sign-up-to-the-long-read-email>.
 