
It has been dubbed the "Costa Catastrophe". Hundreds of thousands of unsold 
new homes litter Spain's coastal provinces – and now the banks are finally 
pulling the plug on developers and selling off their stock for whatever they 
can get.

All the major Spanish banks have opened real estate websites (each translated 
into English to appeal to British buyers) to offload the new and repossessed 
homes on their books, promising discounts of as much as 60% off asking prices. 
But many experts think that prices inSpain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain> still have further to fall and that 
asking prices remain a long way from reality.

Santander's Spanish property website, Altamira 
<http://www.altamirasantander.com/index.jsp?lang=ES>, promises "housing for 
all, at yesterday's prices". It talks of "retro prices" of less than €50,000 
(£40,400), and after just a brief search we found afour-bedroom, two-bathroom 
<http://www.altamirasantander.com/buscador/ficha_inmueble_sm.jsp?c_inmueble=3261&c_agencia=&lang=ES&limit=20&maximizado_01_filt=1&c_tipinm_filt=0&c_tipges_filt=1&c_provin_filt=46&c_pobla_filt=0&c_agencia_filt=&maximizado_01_2_filt=0&precio_min_filt=0.0&precio_max_filt=0.0&m2_min_filt=0.0&m2_max_filt=0.0&nhabitaciones_filt=0&nbanos_filt=0&garaje_012_filt=0&trastero_01_filt=0&piscina_01_filt=0&ascensor_01_filt=0&a_acondicionado_01_filt=0&calefaccion_01_filt=0&terraza_01_filt=0&fotos_01_filt=0&videos_01_filt=0&order_by=precio_venta&foto_01=0&total_resultados=235&referencia=00063111&longitud=&latitud=&ant_sig=1&provincia=Valencia&agencia=Aportucasa&tipoinmueble=Piso&referenciainmueble=00063111&promocion=&c_campana_filt=0&oportunidad=0&proximos_01_filt=0&on_sm=sm&posicion_inmueble=38&n=1>
 apartment in Valencia for €18,000. Mind you, it was hardly holiday home 
material.
 Calle Camino De Los Milinos, Malaga 
Many of Altamira's more interesting properties are new-builds, where the 
developer has got into difficulty and left the bank with scores of flats. For 
example, in Estepona on the Costa del Sol, the bank is trying to sell16 flats 
<http://www.altamirasantander.com/buscador/ficha_promo.jsp?c_agencia=138&lang=EN&limit=20&maximizado_01_filt=1&c_tipinm_filt=0&c_tipges_filt=1&c_provin_filt=29&c_pobla_filt=0&c_agencia_filt=&maximizado_01_2_filt=0&precio_min_filt=0.0&precio_max_filt=0.0&m2_min_filt=0.0&m2_max_filt=0.0&nhabitaciones_filt=0&nbanos_filt=0&garaje_012_filt=0&trastero_01_filt=0&piscina_01_filt=0&ascensor_01_filt=0&a_acondicionado_01_filt=0&calefaccion_01_filt=0&terraza_01_filt=0&fotos_01_filt=0&videos_01_filt=0&order_by=orden_por_defecto,%20precio_orden&foto_01=1&codigoVideo=&total_resultados=19&provincia=M%E1laga&agencia=Proicar%20Promotora%20Inmobiliaria%20Cardenas%20S.L.&tipoinmueble=&referenciainmueble=&promocion=RESIDENCIAL%20JARDINES%20ELISEOS&tip_busc=1&c_promo=755&posicion_promocion=5&n=0&tip_busc=1&direccion=&tipoinmueble=&referenciainmueble=>
 in a development with a swimming pool 15 minutes' walk from the beach,pictured 
left. Prices for the two- and three-bed flats start at €85,456, but, 
tellingingly, none has yet sold. At the peak of the boom, similar properties 
were going for twice that price.

Servihabitat <http://www.servihabitat.com/svhPortal>, the site for properties 
owned by La Caixa bank, tells buyers "you set the price … we'll give you an 
answer in 24 hours". If reports from property agents in Spain are true, buyers 
should put in silly offers and see if the bank bites.

Bankia, a collection of seven failed banks which recently sought a €19bn 
government bailout, sells its repossessed properties throughBankiaHabitat 
<https://www.bankiahabitat.es/inicio>. Currently it is running an "andando a la 
playa" (walk to the beach) promotion offering hundreds of beachside flats and 
apartments starting at €39,050.

At the height of the boom in 2006, Spain built more than 760,000 homes, five 
times the level of housebuilding in the UK. Housing starts have since collapsed 
by 90% and the struggling banks can no longer "extend and pretend" the unpaid 
interest on the colossal loans advanced to developers.

The banks know that as they bring the property to market, prices will fall 
even further, so many offer 95% or even 100% loans at low interest rates so 
long as the buyer is willing to pay the original, inflated price. It's a gambit 
few believe will find many takers.

Official statistics mask the scale of price falls. The Bank of Spain says 
prices are 25%-30% below their peak, but estate agents say falls of 40%-50% are 
common in some areas.

Idealista <http://www.idealista.com/pagina/portada>, Spain's equivalent to 
Rightmove.co.uk, says prices have fallen most in Lleida, the coastal province 
south of Barcelona. Meanwhile, many analysts reckon prices remain far too high 
and could fall substantially this year. SocGen's Michala Marcussen expects 
prices to fall 15% this year, while Citi's Willem Buiter believes Spain is only 
halfway through its price declines.

There are reports of bargain hunters flocking to Spain to buy at knockdown 
prices, lured by scores of websites promising ultra-cheap properties and loans. 
But Clare Nessling, director at Conti, an overseas mortgage specialist, warns: 
"Bitter experience has taught thousands of overseas property buyers that 
scrimping on independent legal advice can effectively cost them their holiday 
home. And ensure an independent valuation of the property is carried out, even 
if you're buying with cash. This should point out any problems – subsidence, 
damp, wiring defects – and could also highlight possible boundary disputes."

Many developments were built cheaply and shoddily, with frequent reports of 
breaches of planning rules and licences. Buyers should also factor in high fees 
– typically 10% – when purchasing in Spain.

"Be very selective. Many so-called bargains are being offered at bargain 
basement prices because they are of poor quality and in undesirable locations," 
says Nessling.

"It's very easy to be pulled in by descriptions of 'cheap' or 'knockdown' 
prices, but you really don't want to end up with a toxic asset simply because 
you didn't do your homework or tried to cut corners."

Guardian Money contacted a number of estate agents around Spain, and the 
message was always the same: the best bargains are in the countryside, away 
from the beach where prices have fallen most. All were united in advising 
buyers that the asking prices on most websites are fantasy figures which 
vendors do not have a hope of achieving.

These are a few of the properties for sale which highlight price falls:
 Sotogrande, Costa del Sol 

• A luxurious five-bed five-bathroom house,  left, on a 2,754 square metre 
plot within the prestigious Sotogrande estate at the west end of the Costa del 
Sol has an asking price of €2.2m but would have sold for €3m-plus at the height 
of the market. Details fromSavills International 
<http://internationalsearch.savills.co.uk/>.
 Gandesa, Terra Alta 

• Priced at €149,000 three years ago and now with an asking price of €57,000, 
a two-hectare country estate with a restored three-bed bungalow, left, almond, 
olive and pine trees has been "realistically priced for a quick sale" . Details 
from Ebro Valley Properties on (0034) 977 416 117.

• A 5,500 sq m country finca with a three-bed, three-bathroom bungalow and 
swimming pool two hours from Barcelona and 15 minutes from Reus airport was on 
the market for €220,000 in 2007; it is now for sale at €99,000.Ebro Valley 
Properties <http://www.ebrovalleyproperties.com/index.php> on (0034) 977 416 
117.
 