
Is my face attractive? Don’t answer that. Not because I’m ducking out of this, 
but because you can’t. Attractiveness is subjective, perhaps the most 
subjective question of all; that we outsource the answer to Google (and we do, 
in our droves) is ironic since it depends on a bias that is impossible to 
unpack. Yet in searching the internet for an answer, it also reveals the 
question to be one of the great existential tensions of our time. Because, as 
we all know, being attractive is absolutely 100% the A-road to happiness.

If you are Googling to rate your attractiveness, then you are probably working 
on the assumption that you aren’t. You’re also, possibly, more vulnerable and 
susceptible to being told that you aren’t. In short, you’re a sitting duck, 
someone who had a sore throat and who asked good old Dr Google for advice only 
to be told it was cancer.

Still, it’s only in investigating precisely why Google is the last person you 
should ask – being a search engine therefore insentient – that you can start 
cobbling together an idea of what attractiveness really is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6457145033aa5622c3a6ef5106f8da3e5287c2f%2F0_235_2481_1488%2F2481.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20my%20face%20attractive%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Morwenna%20Ferrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20my%20face%20attractive%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Morwenna%20Ferrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6457145033aa5622c3a6ef5106f8da3e5287c2f%2F0_235_2481_1488%2F2481.jpg>
 Beauty is arguably hinged around genetics – but Charles Darwin wouldn’t agree. 
Photograph: English Heritage/PA 
It’s worth starting with semantics. Beauty is not attractiveness and vice 
versa, though we commonly confuse the two.Beauty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/beauty> (arguably) has a template against 
which we intuit and against which we measure ourselves. It is hinged around 
genetics and a particular look associated with this politically correct (and 
largely western-governed) model.

Darwin <https://www.theguardian.com/science/charles-darwin> wouldn’t agree: 
“It is certainly not true that there is in the mind of man any universal 
standards of beauty with respect to the human body,” he said. But a lot has 
changed since his time. Magazines, TV, porn and Instagram – the latter of which 
allows us to project a very specific image of ourselves – automatically render 
us as “packages”. Blame what you want, but there is a standard. And “beauty” 
now feels relatively arbitrary, like cravings or road rage. Attractiveness on 
the other hand is completely unpredictable – which is wonderful or disastrous, 
depending on how you view the glass.

Perhaps this explains the advent of “fit” as a word to describe 
attractiveness. Traditionally it suggests someone can hold their breath under 
water. And of course you might be into that. Being fit also implies a superior 
physicality. But its definition is amorphous, as is attractiveness.

As anyone who has ever been attracted to anyone will know, a fitty is hard to 
define

Instead of searching the internet for an answer, approach this question as you 
would aRorschach test <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rorschach_test>: openly 
and instinctively, with the idea that there is no right answer. As anyone who 
has ever been attracted to anyone will know, a fitty is hard to define. It’s 
ephemeral, spiritual, the way they talk, the way their eyes change when they 
laugh. It’s their approach to the welfare state or their work ethic. It’s 
whether they have money or don’t, like money or don’t, like children (or 
don’t). It’s the break in their nose, how well they pun, where their morals 
lie, how they eat crisps. Physicality is part of it, of course, but beauty and 
attractiveness are not intrinsically linked.

So if beauty is a societal thing, attractiveness is more anchored to the 
response of others, right? What’s my bag is not necessarily yours. This is 
helpful, because heaven forbid we all fancied the same person. But, it is also 
fundamental to evolution.

As Darwin also said: “If everyone were cast in the same mould, there would be 
no such thing as beauty.” This may muddle beauty and attractiveness, but makes 
the same sanguine point. Of course the two can coexist, especially if you are 
able to transcend the idea of beauty. This would mean closing down your browser 
– another bitter irony of the internet is that it doubles up as a hellhole of 
unrealistic beauty ideals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd0a10afb2ffef9643997416e98f269b1c2ef69%2F190_181_1294_776%2F1294.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20my%20face%20attractive%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Morwenna%20Ferrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20my%20face%20attractive%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20%E2%80%93%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Morwenna%20Ferrier&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2Fis-my-face-attractive-google-autocomplete%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabd0a10afb2ffef9643997416e98f269b1c2ef69%2F190_181_1294_776%2F1294.jpg>
 ‘Susan Sontag offers the kindest social definition of beauty.’
 Photograph: Bob Peterson/Time Life Pictures/Getty Images 
Our tendency towards confusing attractiveness with beauty is understandable. 
Beauty certainly feels more defined. If you are beautiful, bully for you. But 
it’s worth remembering that a conventionally beautiful person can also be 
unattractive. In fact, beauty often whips up some unattractive quirks, such as 
arrogance and over-confidence. Again, these quirks might be attractive to you 
and not to me, so we’re back at the start.

Susan Sontag offers the kindest social definition of beauty 
<http://www.amacad.org/publications/fall2002/sontagweb.pdf>, describing it as 
“a gladness of the senses” and something “to multiply the notion, to allow for 
kinds of beauty, beauty with adjectives, arranged on a scale of ascending value 
and incorruptibility”. It sounds a little idealistic, but it’s something to 
work towards.

I haven’t washed my hair in days – I’m part of the new beauty backlash | 
Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/21/beauty-backlash-overwhelming-wash-hair-female-grooming>
It also varies according to gender. Women tend to take more cognitive values 
into account when defining their own attractiveness. Men are a little simpler. 
But no one is immune to it, and while we can get an intellectual handle on its 
role, we are vulnerable to its power. Nancy Etcoff, a Harvard academic, opened 
up the dialogue in her bookSurvival of the Prettiest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/jun/28/gender.uk>. Eleanor Roosevelt, a 
wildly successful and bright woman, was once asked if she had any regrets. She 
said she wished she had been prettier.

The final (and perhaps most damning) hurdle is the beauty paradox. If we 
confuse physical beauty with attractiveness, and set about trying to achieve 
the former in order to become the latter, and if we fall short of what we deem 
to be universally beautiful (inevitable) then we automatically become 
unattractive.

The best approach is to look at what makes someone attractive to you and work 
backwards when thinking about yourself. Working on the assumption that beauty 
is stagnant, remember attractiveness tends to evolve and shift. The current, 
and indeed the most explicit, mode in psychology suggests that what makes 
someone attractive often comes down to whether their values and outlook match 
our own.

There are some social psychologists who believe values are the guiding 
principles in a person’s life, part of our self-conception. And how you behave 
is a massive part of it. The older we get, the wiser we get, the more we know 
what we want, the narrower the window of attraction can become. I don’t know if 
you are attractive, but someone definitely thinks you are. “Someones”, even. 
But I, like Google, can’t tell you.
 