
Nigel Farage <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> returned to 
the European parliament on Tuesday and delivered a withering speech to the 
chamber he had been trying for 17 years to leave. The address began 
inauspiciously with Farage telling fellow MEPs: “You’re not laughing now.”

But it was Farage’s comment about his colleagues never having done a “proper 
job”that attracted the most boos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/meps-boo-nigel-farage-insults-in-european-parliament>
, and a rebuke from the chairman.

“I know that virtually none of you have ever done a proper job in your lives, 
or worked in business, or worked in trade, or indeed ever created a job,” 
declared Farage.

It was a pithy line that feeds into the schtick about a bloated Brussels 
filled with born bureaucrats. But is it true?

There are currently 748 members of the European parliament (MEPs). Of the 73 
from the UK, a fair smattering have had careers based solely in the world of 
politics – as advisers and speechwriters, as councillors, or working for trade 
unions.

It might be inferred from his remarks on Tuesday that these occupations would 
not be considered by Farage to be “proper jobs”. And, yes, one MEP’s 
pre-political career is listed as “county cricketer”.

But among the group are also a restaurateur, an actor, a police officer, 
several farmers, a couple of teachers, an NHS medical scientist, the director 
of an umbrella business, a psychiatrist, an investment banker, a couple of 
accountants, a solid showing of lawyers, and a few academics.

Geoffrey Van Orden, a Conservative party MEP, served in the British army for 
more than 20 years, after which he became an instructor of German armed forces 
in Hamburg. He was made brigadier in 1991, and was only elected to the European 
parliament after a stint at the joint intelligence committee in London and 
another at Nato.

MEPs boo as Nigel Farage hurls insults in the European parliament
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/28/meps-boo-nigel-farage-insults-in-european-parliament>
Vicky Ford, also a Conservative MEP, ticks the Farageian box of having “worked 
in business”. She spent 14 years in banking, most of which were spent at JP 
Morgan, of which she eventually became a vice-president.

Then there’s Neena Gill, who prior to being elected as a Labour MEP in 1999 
was the chief executive of Asra group and the Newlon housing group, which 
provide affordable housing across England. During her hiatus from the European 
parliament between 2009 and 2014 she worked as vice-president of corporate 
affairs for SAS Software.

From Farage’s own party come Julia Reid, who has a PhD in pharmacology and 
worked as a diabetes laboratory researcher, Steven Woolfe, a barrister, and 
Patrick O’Flynn, former political editor of the Daily Express. (It is 
uncertain, however, that journalism would be regarded by the Ukip leader as a 
proper job, either.)

Beyond the Ukip clan, Alyn Smith (SNP) was a commercial lawyer, Sajjad Karim 
(Conservative) a solicitor working on serious fraud cases, Kay Swinburne 
(Conservative) worked in investment banking, and Mary Honeyball (Labour) spent 
her career in the voluntary sector, and was general secretary of the 
Association of Chief Officers of Probation and chief executive of Gingerbread, 
a charity for single-parent families.

And one can only imagine the indignation at Farage’s comments of Richard 
Ashworth, MEP and previous leader of the Conservative party in the European 
parliament, who prior to his political career spent more than 30 years as a 
dairy farmer in East Sussex and acted as chairman of United Milk Plc and NFU 
Corporate.

Attention, meanwhile, turned on Tuesday to Farage’s own record while an MEP in 
the European parliament. As one observer pointed out on Twitter, it’s not 
exactly the scorecard of a star employee:
Polina Ivanova (@Polina__Ivanova) 
#Farage <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Farage?src=hash> - no MEPs have done 
proper job. Someone remind him of his attendance as MEP: 747th worst out of 751?
#Brexit <https://twitter.com/hashtag/Brexit?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/Bk5BOrqfhI
 <https://t.co/Bk5BOrqfhI>
 <https://twitter.com/Polina__Ivanova/status/747746481084506112> June 28, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/Polina__Ivanova/status/747746481084506112>  