
This could be it for Ken Livingstone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/28/labour-has-serious-problem-with-antisemitism-peers-claim-politics-live>
 and the Labour party. To be cast into the wilderness by his party once, as he 
was before winning the London mayoralty as an independent at the turn of the 
century, may have been survivable, particularly as then, he was more sinned 
against than sinning. But this time, suspended by those he would always have 
called his friends, from a Labour party run by the left, the wilderness may 
claim him.

Labour suspends Ken Livingstone over Hitler and antisemitism row - Politics 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/apr/28/labour-has-serious-problem-with-antisemitism-peers-claim-politics-live>
He will need to apologise and to do so in humble fashion. Therein lies a 
problem – he hates to apologise. He loathes reverse gear, especially when 
called upon to find it by media or political opponents for whom he has no 
respect. “I cannot say to you words I do not believe in my heart,”he once 
declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/feb/15/uk.pressandpublishing>, in 
the white heat of another self-ignited firestorm. And yet he will also hate the 
idea of life outside Labour, cut adrift from the structures and people that 
sustain his political life. He is lodged between the rock and that hard place.

But no one who has studied Livingstone in recent years can claim complete 
surprise. He is a man happiest in the limelight, discomforted by the periphery. 
Despite initial indications at the outset of the Corbyn regime that Livingstone 
would be a key figure, he has not been so. The light does not find him so he 
attracts it, like a faded primetime star reduced to appearing on reality shows.

He will have felt impelled to defend Naz Shah 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/27/naz-shah-timeline-of-events-leading-to-mps-suspension-from-labour>
, not least because he customarily defends minority and leftwing figures 
criticised by the establishment or media. A previous beneficiary of the maxim 
that his enemy’s enemy is his friend wasLutfur Rahman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2015/jun/10/tower-hamlets-the-rise-and-fall-lutfur-rahman>
, the ousted and disgraced mayor of Tower Hamlets.

And few will have been surprised that when Livingstone chose to mount a public 
defence of Shah, heresorted to inflammatory imagery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-suspended-from-labour-after-hitler-remarks>
. It is his way. It attracts the light. This is the man who said that members of
the Saudi ruling royal family should be hung from lamp-posts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/feb/18/london.pressandpublishing>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-and-john-mann-clash-over-hitler-comments-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Livingstone%20and%20John%20Mann%20clash%20over%20Hitler%20comments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-and-john-mann-clash-over-hitler-comments-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Livingstone%20and%20John%20Mann%20clash%20over%20Hitler%20comments%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-and-john-mann-clash-over-hitler-comments-video&media=>
Ken Livingstone and John Mann clash over Hitler comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-and-john-mann-clash-over-hitler-comments-video>
No one will be astonished that he waded into the Shah controversy – an issue 
of acute sensitivity – with such glaring insensitivity. As mayor, as we know, 
he likened a Jewish newspaper reporter who legitimately sought comment from him 
to a“concentration camp guard” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2005/feb/12/pressandpublishing.londonpolitics>
. He only narrowly escaped sanction from the standards watchdog by arguing 
that, as he spoke, he was off duty because he had already donned his hat and 
coat.

And no one should be surprised that once again he referenced Hitler. Seasoned 
observers would have been surprised if he had not, for he does so repeatedly, 
regardless of the anxiety it causes. Prior to the 2012 mayoral election, he 
said the battle between himself and Boris Johnson was akin to“the great 
struggle between Churchill and Hitler” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/21/ken-livingstone-you-cant-say-that-memoir>
. Framing an economic critique, he said that worldwide capitalismkilled more 
people annually than Hitler did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/apr/11/londonmayor.uk>. Explaining 
an acknowledged pattern, he said Hitler is a reference point for Britons of his 
generation – a ready shorthand for all that is wicked or undesirable. He has 
always played down the extent to which such rhetorical flourishes give offence.

The elephant in the room in Labour’s antisemitism row | Keith Kahn-Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/labour-antisemitism-row> 
With a light shining brighter in his direction than he might wish, Livingstone 
will again face charges of antisemitism. He will deny them now, as in the past. 
He will once again seek to make the distinction between what he sees as 
antisemitism, which he would deprecate, and legitimate criticism of the 
government of Israel. Many might do the same and rightly so, for such a 
distinction exists.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-naz-shaw-vanessa-feltz-labour-antisemitic-row-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ken%20Livingstone%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20heard%20anyone%20in%20Labour%20say%20anything%20antisemitic%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-naz-shaw-vanessa-feltz-labour-antisemitic-row-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ken%20Livingstone%3A%20I%E2%80%99ve%20never%20heard%20anyone%20in%20Labour%20say%20anything%20antisemitic%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F28%2Fken-livingstone-naz-shaw-vanessa-feltz-labour-antisemitic-row-audio&media=>
Ken Livingstone: I’ve never heard anyone in Labour say anything antisemitic – 
audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/apr/28/ken-livingstone-naz-shaw-vanessa-feltz-labour-antisemitic-row-audio>
But what he will struggle to deny is that once again, his own quirks and a 
lack of care and precision in his language have allowed those charges to be 
repeated, and at a time when both he and his party are vulnerable to them. He 
will have to explain why he is a repeat offender, knowing that each time his 
explanations seem less credible.

The wound is self-inflicted. It was unnecessary. And if this time it proves 
fatal to his place in the party and public life, he has only himself to blame.

• This article was amended on 29 April 2016. An earlier version said 
“everyday” where “annually” was meant.
 