
It appears inevitable now that almost all legal domestic ivory markets will be 
closed. This is the plan A of a large consortium of animal rights and welfare 
organisations aimed at stopping elephant poaching – informed by the belief that 
legal trade provides cover for illegal trade and stimulates demand.


Do away with legal trade, say the ban proponents, and demand will fall. Any 
elephant ivory seen for sale will be illegal, resulting in the dual benefits of 
making it easy for law enforcement to take action and for consumers to avoid 
buying an illegal product. And increasingly this is a majority position. In 
September International Union for theConservation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/conservation> of Nature adopted a 
motion recommending the closing of domestic ivory markets globally. A few weeks 
later in October a similar proposal was adopted at the 17th Conference of the 
Parties of Cities, the international convention that regulates wildlife trade.

Live Q&A: Elephants are disappearing, so how can we save them?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2016/nov/18/live-qa-elephants-critically-endangered-how-save-them>
Animal welfare proponents believe that selling ivory legally creates a cover 
for laundering. “It’s a pity that countries with existing legal domestic ivory 
markets ignored the risks legal markets may bring to elephant populations and 
local communities due to the opportunities they create for the laundering of 
illegal ivory under the guise of legality,”said Grace Ge Gabriel 
<http://www.ifaw.org/africa/news/cites-parties-fail-agree-stricter-measures-protect-elephants>
, Asia regional director for the International Fund for Animal Welfare (IFAW).

And President Xi Jinping of China and outgoing US president Barack Obama 
apparently agree with the long-standing argument of both WCS and IFAW that 
legal trade promotes illegal trade. Both announced last year that they would 
prohibit ivory sales, as far as national laws in each country would allow. Most 
EU countries are also further restricting sales of ivory. In Africa, all but a 
few holdouts have already banned ivory trade, as have most countries in Asia.

In the near future, there is a good chance that almost all major ivory 
consuming countries will have domestic ivory bans in place. So, will these bans 
solve the elephant poaching problem? Probably not.

As Tom Milliken, an ivory expert from wildlife trade monitoring group Traffic, 
said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/03/bid-for-stronger-protection-for-all-african-elephants-defeated-at-wildlife-summit>
: “All the paper protection in the world is not going to compensate for poor 
law enforcement, rampant corruption and ineffective management.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55fa167cf0940b551ebbbee6c71c08b41683aae1%2F0_0_4018_2656%2F4018.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20there%20a%20plan%20B%20for%20elephants%3F%20The%20next%20step%20in%20saving%20them%20is%20even%20harder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20there%20a%20plan%20B%20for%20elephants%3F%20The%20next%20step%20in%20saving%20them%20is%20even%20harder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55fa167cf0940b551ebbbee6c71c08b41683aae1%2F0_0_4018_2656%2F4018.jpg>
 A ranger of the Kenyan Wildlife Service holds an elephant tusk confiscated 
from poachers. Photograph: Tim Wright/Getty Images 
I led a study of the drivers of ivory demand 
<https://www.linkedin.com/pulse/real-reason-drop-illegal-raw-ivory-prices-china-daniel-stiles?trk=hp-feed-article-title-comment>
 in eastern Asia in 2015. We found that roughly 200 tonnes of illegal ivory 
were smuggled annually into China-Hong Kong during the peak of the elephant 
poaching crisis in 2009-14. We estimated that only about 10 tonnes of it was 
processed a year to satisfy consumer demand. The balance of 190 tonnes a year 
was most likely stockpiled by speculators, betting that ivory prices would 
remain high.

The study estimated that about 3.5 tonnes of ivory was consumed in China in 
the legal sector each year, from ivory purchased in 2008 in southern Africa in 
a Cities-approved sale, making total consumer consumption about 13.5 tonnes a 
year in China. Doing the maths, three-quarters by weight of all ivory sold in 
China was illegal in 2009-14.

If you count in terms of pieces, rather than weight, more than 90% of ivory 
items sold in China was illegal. That’s because legal outlets produce and sell
much larger pieces 
<http://savetheelephants.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/2014_ChinaConservationChallenge.pdf>
 than their illegal counterparts, the latter of which sell more jewellery items 
and trinkets, which weigh less.

The elephant who helped me through one of the darkest periods of my life
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/31/traumatised-elephant-helped-me-overcome-abuse>
What is plan B for closing the illegal market in China, which takes in an 
estimated 70% of all poached elephant tusks from Africa? Closing the legal 
market will only account for 10% of the ivory consumed in China. The illegal 
ivory that consumers buy will increase from 90 to 100% of the market. Have the 
NGOs that are pushing for closure of legal domestic ivory markets formulated 
plans for closing the much larger black market?

I posed this question to Alexander Rhodes, head of Stop Ivory 
<http://www.stopivory.org/home/>, at the 105-tonne ivory burning event 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/30/kenya-to-burn-largest-ever-ivory-stockpile-to-highlight-elephants-fate>
 in Kenya last April. Stop Ivory is a close partner with WCS and IFAW, who 
said: “Yes, that is something to think about.”

Studies have found that the majority of illegal ivory in China and elsewhere 
is sold online 
<http://conservationaction.co.za/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/Elephant-ivory-trade-in-China.pdf>
 in members only chatrooms and through social media sites, which are difficult 
to monitor.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F495080ac6888469177d64710db034b5275214d9c%2F694_1401_5957_3346%2F5957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Is%20there%20a%20plan%20B%20for%20elephants%3F%20The%20next%20step%20in%20saving%20them%20is%20even%20harder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Is%20there%20a%20plan%20B%20for%20elephants%3F%20The%20next%20step%20in%20saving%20them%20is%20even%20harder&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Felephants-closing-legal-ivory-markets-need-plan-b-elephants%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F495080ac6888469177d64710db034b5275214d9c%2F694_1401_5957_3346%2F5957.jpg>
 A network of elephant trails bisects the green grasses of Lake Amboseli, at 
the center of Amboseli National Park. Photograph: George Steinmetz/Getty Images 
Now that the goal of a total ban on legal international and domestic ivory 
markets is in sight, waving the victory flags is perhaps premature. Elephants 
still have to worry that their tusks – obtained exclusively from illegal 
killing now – will continue supplying the huge black market.

And if it is speculation and stockpiling of tusks, rather than “insatiable” 
consumer demand, that is driving poaching, plan B must take this inconvenient 
fact into consideration. Plan B had better be good.

Daniel Stiles, an independent consultant, has been investigating ivory markets 
around the world for more than 15 years

Join us online on Tuesday Nov 22 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/live/2016/nov/18/live-qa-elephants-critically-endangered-how-save-them>
, between 1-2.30pm GMT, to discuss the future of elephant conservation.

 