
The publisher of one of Israel’s largest newspapers has been interviewed for 
eight hours as part of a sprawling police investigation into the country’s 
embattled prime minister,Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/benjamin-netanyahu>.


The mammoth questioning of Arnon “Noni” Mozes, owner of the critical Yedioth 
Ahronoth tabloid, came as Netanyahu accused the country’s media – which has 
been publishing almost daily leaks from the case – of trying to “topple” his 
government.

Central to the affair, which police have called Case 2000, is the allegation 
that Netanyahu tried toensure more positive coverage in the Israeli media 
<http://www.haaretz.com/opinion/.premium-1.764535> by offering to reduce the 
circulation of a rival, pro-government paper in exchange for kinder coverage 
from Yedioth Ahronoth.

A separate police investigation, Case 1000, is also taking place into gifts 
received by Netanyahu’s family from wealthy businessmen.

Netanyahu has denied any wrongdoing in relation to both investigations. 

The two investigations have dominated the Israeli media for weeks and led to 
speculation among Netanyahu’s political rivals – as well as some ministers in 
his own government – that he might be forced to resign, or trigger elections, 
if he is formally charged.

Media interest in Case 2000 has revolved around leaks of reported transcripts 
of recordings of Netanyahu and Mozes found at the home of Netanyahu’s former 
chief of staff, in which the two men appear to discuss a deal to keep Netanyahu 
in power by shifting the long-critical Yedioth Ahronoth behind him.

Netanyahu has accused the media of using the leaked transcripts to 
systematically destroy him. Writing on Facebook, he said: “The system is 
simple: day after day, night after night, they [his critics] disseminate 
carefully selected, filtered transcripts and deliberate lies about both of the 
[investigations].

“Obviously, as long as the investigation is in progress, I have no possibility 
of defending myself. I can’t tell the public the real story behind this, which 
would make clear that no crime occurred.”

While Netanyahu has tried to rally support, the story of Case 2000 is seen as 
encompassing key themes in his years in office, not least his obsession with 
attempting to secure soft-ball coverage.


Famously thin-skinned about his treatment by the Israeli media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/01/raviv-drucker-the-israeli-journalist-incurring-the-wrath-of-netanyahu>
, Netanyahu also serves as communications minister.

He has long benefited from the support of Israel Hayom 
<http://forward.com/opinion/359673/explained-could-netanyahu-be-ousted-over-talks-with-sheldon-adelsons-media/>
, a freesheet owned by the American casino magnate Sheldon Adelson. The 
loss-making paper has been nicknamed the “Bibiton”, which combines Netanyahu’s 
nickname Bibi with the Hebrew word for newspaper.Netanyahu has repeatedly denied
 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/pms-office-denies-it-approves-israel-hayom-headlines/>
 that he has any input.

But leaks from the tapes appear to paint a different picture of Netanyahu’s 
relationship with Israel Hayom and its main rival, Yedioth Ahronoth. In the 
leaked version of the tapes, Netanyahu appears to suggest he could cut the 
circulation ofIsrael <https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> Hayom in 
exchange for Mozes’s support, including appointing more friendly journalists.

Legal experts have been divided over whether the revelations from the tapes 
depict a criminal conspiracy.

“This is an improper contact between a government and newspaper,’’ Eliyahu 
Matza, a former Israeli supreme court justice told Israel Radio recently. “It’s 
forbidden in every way. This is against journalistic ethics. It is against 
democratic values. Is there a criminal element? Yes, I think so.”

Avraham Diskin, a political science professor at the Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem, was unsure about whether there was criminality, but said that if an 
indictment came, Netanyahu could not survive it.

“There is no question [the investigation] damages his image,” Diskin said. 
“And in Israel political affiliation is, for many people, not really towards 
specific parties but towards camps of parties.


“We all know in the last election, because of the atmosphere of urgency, 
people from other right and centrist parties moved to [Netanyahu’s] Likud. Now 
I’m sure the movement is in the opposite direction.”


 