
On a small stage in the basement of a Jerusalem bar, singer Inbal Djamchid 
pauses during her performance to describe the inspiration for the next song to 
be played by her group, Ecoute.

She explains that it describes a lyricist’s unrequited love for one of Egypt’s 
most famous singers,Umm Kulthum <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=77JkWlSpQk8>, 
revered in the Arab world.

When the music starts, the song is haunting and unfamiliar, but while 
Djamchid’s voice echoes the melodies of Algerian, Moroccan and Egyptian music, 
the lyrics are sung in Hebrew.

Djamchid and her husband Gilad Vaknin, who plays electric guitar in the group, 
are third-generation Mizrahi Jews, whose families came toIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> not from Europe but from the Middle 
East and north Africa.

The music they seek to reinterpret is what their parents and grandparents once 
listened to in cities across the Middle East, from Cairo to Baghdad; a style 
that slipped out of mainstream Israeli Jewish cultural life amid the long years 
of discrimination – economic,cultural 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/culture/theater/.premium-1.631990> and 
political – against the Mizrahi by institutions long dominated by Ashkenazi 
Jews of European origin. 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/culture/theater/.premium-1.631990>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D97kFOtVmN_c&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D97kFOtVmN_c>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D97kFOtVmN_c&media=>
As a result the music has echoed the wider story of the Mizrahi, who came to 
Israel after independence in 1948 – either expelled from Arab countries or 
choosing to immigrate to Israel –and arrived to confront both racism and 
marginalisation 
<http://972mag.com/the-roots-of-anti-mizrahi-racism-in-israel/114424/>, problems
that have not disappeared 
<http://forward.com/opinion/325657/racist-israeli-hanukkah-video-mocks-sephardic-and-mizrahi-jews/>
 despite Jews of Arab descent constituting roughly half of the total Israeli 
population.

Now, amid a newfound political confidence, this musical and artistic culture 
once pushed to the sidelines is quietly reasserting itself.

A few days after Ecoute’s performance, the couple are in a coffee shop in 
central Jerusalem to discuss another project – a school Vaknin has opened this 
month to teach children eastern styles of music.

“We both trained at the Academy [of Music and Dance] in Jerusalem,” explains 
Djamchid. “We were trained in the western musical tradition. Eastern music was 
not available. Later Gilad studied under a master of Moroccan music and slowly 
it became what we were interested in.

“For us it was a process of wanting to connect with a Jewish culture that had 
come from Arab countries. To say a sense of that connection is present, alive 
and exists.” In this way, the musicians seek a connection with places where, in 
many cases, Jews have been rejected and expelled; where a sense of belonging is 
no longer possible but where a desire for some relationship still exists.

If there is a distinction between musicians like Ecoute and an earlier 
generation of Mizrahi musicians – who were barely accepted by the dominant 
Ashkenazi culture – it is foregrounding of the link to an Arabic culture and 
language often airbrushed out by their predecessors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e09658adffcb3fcf591de217dae4f74396cfc6%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israel's%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israel%27s%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86e09658adffcb3fcf591de217dae4f74396cfc6%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Two musicians from the Firqat Alnoor orchestra, which plays an eastern 
repertoire, take a break during rehearsals in Tel Aviv. Photograph: Peter 
Beaumont for the Guardian 
Ironically, perhaps, the grassroots emergence of Mizrahi Jewish artists comes 
at a time when encouraging Mizrahi culture has become an issue in Israel’s 
rightwing politics – not least because of the identification of often 
working-class Mizrahi voters with prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s Likud 
party.


In particular, the issue has been pushed by the culture minister, Miri Regev, 
as a counter to the perceived left-leaning tendencies of an Ashkenazi cultural 
elite.

One man collaborating with Ecoute is the novelist and poet Almog Behar, who has
blamed a “cultural amnesia” 
<http://www.wordswithoutborders.org/dispatches/article/artists-talk-israel-palestine.-an-interview-with-almog-behar/>
 on both the part of Israel and the Arab world for severing a connection to a 
group the novelist Shimon Ballas has called the “Arab-Jews”.

Behar has been in the vanguard 
<http://www.wordswithoutborders.org/dispatches/article/artists-talk-israel-palestine.-an-interview-with-almog-behar/>
 of artists attempting to forge a new connection with both the Arabic his 
grandparents spoke and the culture from which they came – in his case from Iraq.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69a85718b49caaa827d374aa363eb2c1258cbb01%2F0_71_4760_3254%2F4760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israel's%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israel%27s%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F69a85718b49caaa827d374aa363eb2c1258cbb01%2F0_71_4760_3254%2F4760.jpg>
 The Israeli poet and novelist Almog Behar who writes in Arabic as well as 
Hebrew and is one of the key figures among Mizrahi artists rediscovering Arabic 
speaking culture. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
“[There is] an understanding on both sides – the Israeli and the Arab – that 
the Mizrahim were not Arabs and never were part of the Arabic world,” he 
explained in an interview several years ago. “And in this sense, instead of 
being a bridge between the two sides, the Mizrahim have actually succeeded in 
being disconnected from both sides.”


Speaking to the Guardian, Behar, whose grandmother came to Israel from 
Baghdad, explains that it was his grandparents’ death that prompted his 
realisation that a personal cultural connection was in danger of being severed.

“When my grandmother died I became aware of an absence. For the last six 
months of her life my grandmother suffered from dementia and she went back to 
speaking in Arabic. I was 17 at the time and Arabic was spoken in the house but 
from childhood it was clear that we were supposed to speak Hebrew. Arabic was 
not good.”

In his poem, My Arabic is Mute, Behar addresses the taboo, and writes:

My Arabic is mute/ Strangled in the throat/ Cursing itself/ Without uttering a 
word/ Sleeping in the suffocating air/ Of the shelters of my soul/ Hiding/ From 
family members/ Behind the shutters of the Hebrew.

Behar says after her death he focused on language as a way to “deal with a 
sense of something absent from our culture”. Now, he says, a new generation of 
artists like him “want to take this culture back to the centre from the 
periphery”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa75599e04ecd7234886c38f7dbf47bd563385f23%2F0_48_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Israel's%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Israel%27s%20sidelined%20Mizrahi%20musicians%20and%20artists%20reclaim%20centre%20stage&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fisraels-sidelined-mizrahi-musicians-and-artists-reclaim-centre-stage%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa75599e04ecd7234886c38f7dbf47bd563385f23%2F0_48_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 The Firqat Alnoor orchestra rehearses in Tel Aviv. The instrument in the 
centre of the picture is the kanun, prominent in eastern music either as a solo 
instrument or part of an ensemble. Photograph: Peter Beaumont for the Guardian 
In a suburb of Tel Aviv, the Firqat Alnoor orchestra is rehearsing. Founded 
two years ago by Hana Fataya after years of effort, the aim of the ensemble is 
to recreate the kind of eastern orchestras famous for accompanying the likes of 
Umm Kulthum, Faredi al-Atrash, and the National Broadcast Arab Orchestra of 
Israel – once hugely popular but which dissolved decades ago.

Unlike Ecoute, Firqat Alnoor perform the songs of Umm Kulthum in Arabic, as 
well asJewish liturgical songs of eastern origin – known as piyut – also sung 
in Arabic. 
<http://www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org/jsource/judaica/ejud_0002_0016_0_15840.html>

One challenge of the revival becomes apparent in the rehearsal space. For an 
upcoming performance several western-trained musicians have been asked to play 
too. Used to reading from scores and notation, they struggle to mesh with their 
eastern-trained colleagues versed in the improvisational style of theArabic 
maqam melodic system. <http://www.pianoscales.org/maqams.html>


Fataya says she sees a change in attitudes towards Mizrahi musical culture but 
one which is long overdue. “It is part of how people in Israel thought of 
Mizrahi culture – that it was lesser.

“It wasn’t taught and had no place. It was part of these feelings you got that 
Mizrahis were not good enough. In the last few years there has been a growing 
awareness of a Mizrahi culture.”

Fataya, too, sees the embrace of the Mizrahi culture’s links with wider Middle 
Eastern culture as a potential for building bridges amid conflict. “I hope we 
can show how people can live together by bringing Jews and Arabs together to 
recognise that there are things we share.”
 