
Ofsted’s latest update for inspectors 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/572048/School_inspection_update_November_2016.pdf>
 stresses – again – that inspectors should not be passing judgement on marking 
in schools. In the update, Sean Harford, HMI National Director for Education, 
explains: “There is remarkably little high-quality, relevant research evidence 
to suggest that detailed or extensive marking has any significant impact on 
pupils’ learning.”

Is this the solution to the teacher workload crisis?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/16/is-this-the-solution-to-the-teacher-workload-crisis>
He advises inspectors that “until such evidence is available, and regardless 
of any area for improvement identified at the previous inspection, please do 
not report on marking practice, or make judgements on it, other than whether it 
follows the school’s assessment policy.”


The irony of this will not be lost on the 53% of teachers who, in the 
Department for Education’s 2015Workload Challenge survey 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/workload-challenge-analysis-of-teacher-responses>
, argued that the excessive nature, depth and frequency of marking was too much 
to balance alongside their already heavy workloads. And where did this pressure 
come from? Ofsted.


That was the finding of the Workload Review on Marking 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/reducing-teacher-workload-marking-policy-review-group-report>
, released in March. Oftsed itself was cited as the original promoter of 
extensive written feedback, something that has become “disproportionately 
valued by schools and is unnecessarily burdensome for teachers”.


Triple-impact marking is one of worst culprits. Staff mark students’ work, 
students respond to feedback and then teachers mark it again, creating a 
never-ending cycle of what education researcher and writer David Didau terms 
“meaningless exchanges.” On his blog, ‘The Learning Spy 
<http://www.learningspy.co.uk>’, Didau illustrates such an exchange 
<http://www.learningspy.co.uk/leadership/triple-marking-wrong-not-fault/>:


Student: “The work was fun. I found it easy.”
Teacher: “Please use capital letters and write in full sentences.”
Student: “I will, thanks sir.”

In search of evidence

Teacher and author Sue Cowley says the problem began with the requirement to 
produce evidence. “I think this happened when Ofsted said they would no longer 
specify the teaching methods that had to be used, or grade teaching, but that 
they wanted to see evidence of ‘progress’.


Secret Teacher: my school cares about our workload, others should too
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/sep/05/secret-teacher-school-cares-workload-others-should-too>
“The teachers I work with worry most about this – how do they provide evidence 
of progress in a way that Ofsted will find acceptable? This then seems to get 
translated into ‘Write a lot in the children’s books to show it.’”

Tied up with increased teacher workload is the teacher shortage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/24/almost-third-of-teachers-quit-within-five-years-of-qualifying-figures>
. Almost 1 in 10 teachers quit in 2015, according to the DfE’sSchool Workforce 
in England report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/533618/SFR21_2016_MainText.pdf>
, the highest in a decade, and just 75% of teachers who qualified in 2012 
remained in the profession in 2015 – one of the highest drop-out rates 
recorded. AnNUT and YouGov survey 
<https://www.teachers.org.uk/news-events/press-releases-england/nutyougov-teacher-survey-government-education-policy>
 from the same year found that more than half of teachers were considering 
leaving, with “volume of workload” cited by 61% as the chief cause.


So just what can be done now to produce what The Workload Review deemed a 
“meaningful, manageable and motivating” approach to marking?


“We still need to show children that we look at their individual work, but we 
need a balance of ‘tick-and-flick’ and marking for specific errors,” Cowley 
continues. “You can’t close mark everything, and you don’t need to mark 
everything. But we still need to make marks on children’s writing, not least 
because it’s an acknowledgement of their effort.”


Matt Pinkett, a head of English at a school in Surrey, says a smarter way of 
marking is essential. “Rather than scrawling endless comments over 30 books, I 
now write down things the class do well – or not so well – on a crib sheet of 
A3 paper and feed this back verbally to the class. This means I only need to 
write one target per student. And this I’ll only do once a half term. Students 
still improve.”

Eight ways teachers can reduce their marking mountain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/15/eight-ways-teachers-can-reduce-their-marking-mountain>
Cowley says it’s important to get new teachers into the right habits around 
marking. “When I work with newly qualified teachers, I share lots of tips on 
marking faster. Things like writing on a child’s book as you discuss their 
writing with them, or identifying common errors with a number system and 
getting the students to write down the related targets. There are lots of 
practical ways you can come at marking that don’t involve extra workload.”


Part of the problems for NQTs, says Pinkett, is that teacher training doesn’t 
address the issue sufficiently. “There’s a responsibility for training 
providers to get up to date with research here,” he says. “If all PGCE and 
school-based training providers had a designated research lead, abominations 
like Vak learning and flawed marking processes wouldn’t be seeping their way 
into classrooms all over the country.”


‘Ludicrous imposition’

Phil Beadle, a literacy consultant, English teacher and trainer, agrees that 
sensible marking must be covered early. “I see a lot of teachers who don’t have 
the first idea of base principles. Marking is an intrinsic part of an [English] 
teacher’s job and you must find a way to enjoy it. I am somewhat odd in that I 
love doing it. It’s a joy to engage with their learning and to watch them 
progress through the exercise book.”

Beadle says that issues of marking often spring from well-intended policies 
created by senior leadership teams. “Where a marking burden becomes 
unacceptable, it is where esoteric new approaches are used as policy. Some of 
these – the purple pen of progress – for example, are risible. Triple-impact 
marking is also a ludicrous imposition on busy teachers.”

'I wish they would write more clearly': students speak out about marking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/apr/03/wish-would-write-more-clearly-students-marking>
In a recent report on the topic, the Education Endowment Foundation 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/public/files/Publications/EEF_Marking_Review_April_2016.pdf>
 (EEF) says school leadership teams must recognise that it’s unfeasible to 
“deep mark” every piece of work, or to correct every accuracy mistake. 
Likewise, grading every piece of work is seen as excessive and even 
counterproductive, as students can end up concentrating on the grade rather 
than formative comments.


The report also advocates marking only the final draft of work, after students 
have attempted to correct their own accuracy errors through more purposeful 
self and peer assessment.


Their views are echoed by leading researchers on learning such as John Hattie 
<http://visible-learning.org/john-hattie/> and Robert Bjork 
<https://www.psych.ucla.edu/faculty/page/bjork>, who have written extensively 
about making feedback more purposeful. But it seems some senior leadership 
teams haven’t got the message.


Pinkett agrees: “Ofsted have been trying to bust myths for years, but is isn’t 
getting through.Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> need to 
actively engage with the new inspection guidance and relay the information to 
staff on the ground.”


Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 