
Twelve months ago, British holidaymakers were enjoying some of the best deals 
on their holiday money for many years. Sterling was riding high, with £1 buying 
€1.43 in the eurozone and $1.56 in the US. But post-Brexit the pound slumped, 
and it now buys just €1.19 and $1.31 respectively. It means that families who 
had a budget of £750 for spending in Spain last year will have to find around 
£880 this summer if they want to buy the same things.

What’s more, the above exchange rates are the “pure” market rates not usually 
offered to holidaymakers – the bad news is that some bureaux de change are 
offeringbarely above €1 for £1 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/13/uk-airports-low-exchange-rates-euro-dollar>
 – especially if you leave it to the last minute and change your money at the 
airport.

Making matters worse are the myriad charges unsuspecting tourists endure. 
Britain’s biggest bank, Lloyds, whips 2.99% off the customer every time he or 
she uses their debit card in a restaurant or shop abroad – then adds another £1 
fee on top. When the card is put in a cash machine in Spain it takes as much as 
£4.50 a time.

Some credit card fees, meanwhile, are eye-watering – as much as 5% at a cash 
machine abroad, on top of the 25%-plus interest rate charged from the day the 
money is withdrawn.

So what is the best approach before you fly and once you are in the resort?

 The cards from hell


Avoid, if you can, using the standard debit cards from most of the big banks. 
MoneySavingExpert’s Martin Lewis brands the debit cards from Lloyds, Halifax, 
Santander, Bank of Scotland and TSB as the “cards from hell” because they 
typically charge 2.25% to 3% “loading” fees on spending, plus a flat fee of 
£1-£1.50 each time they are used in the shops, and up to £4.50 at cash 
machines. If you must use them, it makes sense to make a single large 
withdrawal from a foreign ATM rather than lots of small ones, as each one will 
attract a flat fee.

The best deals for cash before you fly

The trick here is to order online before you head off on holiday, and collect 
the next day (you can also book further in advance). This doesn’t mean having 
to find some obscure bureau de change in a city backstreet, as most of the big 
supermarket chains and retailers now offer this service, such as Tesco, Asda, 
Sainsbury’s, M&S and the Post Office. Even if you can’t make it along to one of 
these locations, you can ask for it to be delivered – though that usually means 
paying an extra fee of around £5, which often drops to zero if you are ordering 
lots of money. Sometimes the best deal is one of those usually pricey airport 
exchange bureaux, so long as you reserve the euros online at least the night 
before.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bfef0973a12846a47abae66e1a251b10a166c09%2F0_1_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20summer!%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20get%20the%20best%20deal%20for%20your%20travel%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20summer%21%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20get%20the%20best%20deal%20for%20your%20travel%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bfef0973a12846a47abae66e1a251b10a166c09%2F0_1_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 The best of the big brands for cash before you fly is the Post Office. 
Photograph: Adrian Dennis/EPA 
So which one should you use? The website TravelMoneyMax.com 
<http://travelmoney.moneysavingexpert.com/> is your friend here. You put in 
your postcode and it searches for the best deal near your home. We used the 
Guardian’s postcode and it said the best deal was with Thomas Exchange (not 
part of Thomas Cook) at King’s Cross and its other branches around London, 
giving us a rate of €1.17 for our pounds (on a day when the pure market rate 
was €1.19) if we reserved and collected at the bureau.

The best of the big brands, and more useful if you are outside of a big city, 
was the Post Office, which offered us €1.165, followed by Thomas Cook, 
Sainsbury’s and Tesco, which were all paying around €1.16. M&S was a short gap 
behind.

The surprise was Moneycorp at Gatwick airport. On the day we checked, it was 
offering an abysmal rate if you rock up at the airport with your sterling, 
giving just €1.05 per £1. But when we used its reserve and collect service, 
booking at least 24 hours before and picking up the cash at the airport, it was 
among the most competitive, giving us €1.17. You can even leave it as late as 
11.59pm the night before to buy euros and dollars if you have a morning flight 
the next day.

The worst deals for cash before you fly



Apart from the lousy rates on offer for walk-up customers at the airport, 
never use your credit card at a bureau de change, or at one of the 
reserve-and-collect sites, to obtain your euros or dollars. You will be treated 
as if you were withdrawing cash abroad and will be hit with lots of fees. 
Always use a debit card for cash before you fly.

The best cards to use in  foreign cash machines

The big banks love it when you stick your standard debit card in an ATM in 
Spain and take out €20 – they effectively skim off around a tenth of your 
money. There is one notable exception: Nationwide building society. Customers 
with the society’s FlexPlus current account can take out money from cash 
machines abroad for no fee at all, with their money changed from sterling into 
euros at near-pure market rates. This account has a monthly fee of £10, 
although that includes worldwide family travel insurance and car breakdown 
cover, so it’s well worth it.

The real cost of getting cash while abroad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jun/20/money-abroad-bank-charges-debit-credit-cards>
Other current accounts that allow you to use your debit card cheaply abroad 
are from Norwich & Peterborough building society and Metro Bank.

If you don’t want to move your current account, the specialist credit card 
deals are the next best thing. Halifax’s Clarity MasterCard is the clear leader 
here, allowing you to withdraw up to £500 in cash from any ATM abroad without 
the 3% loading fees typical with standard debit cards, and with the money 
exchanged at that day’s MasterCard rate. The drawback is that you will be 
charged interest on the money from the moment you take it out of the machine, 
at a rate of 19%-26%, but so long as you pay off in full at the end of the 
month it is still cheaper than using a conventional debit card.

Another drawback is that you may not actually qualify for a card from Halifax 
if your credit rating is a mess. Other cards with zero ATM fees abroad that are 
worth trying are the Creation Everyday MasterCard and the MBNA Everyday Plus 
Amex card. Santander Zero used to be a popular cheap card for use abroad, but 
the bank stopped accepting applications a few years ago.

If you are tempted to spend heavily when abroad, remember that a credit card 
gives you better protection than a debit card if the spend is above £100. But 
with the sterling exchange rate now so poor, it is unlikely to make financial 
sense to buy anything but essentials abroad this summer.

The best deal when spending in shops and restaurants


Conventional bank debit cards charge a “non-sterling transaction fee” every 
time they are used abroad. For NatWest and HSBC customers it is 2.75% of the 
value of what you’re buying, such as a restaurant meal, while at Barclays and 
Lloyds it is 2.99%. The worst add another flat fee charge on top: Halifax grabs 
another £1.50 per purchase on top of its 2.75% fee, while Lloyds adds £1. If 
you hand over your basic Halifax debit card for a €10 purchase that’s £8.35 at 
current rates. But on your bank statement when you get home you’ll find you’ve 
been charged £10.07. So you’re actually paying more than £1 for each €1.

The Travelex Supercard was so popular at launch it had to suspend sales, but 
it is now on offer again

A new alternative, and one that you can probably obtain within the next two 
weeks before heading abroad, is the Travelex Supercard. This was so popular at 
launch they had to suspend sales, but it is now on offer again. You go on to 
the Travelex website and download the card app. You then link it to your 
existing debit or credit card, and in the meantime they post you the card. When 
you use it on holiday it effectively takes the money off your standard card, 
but does not apply the non-sterling transaction fee. All you pay is whatever 
the market exchange rate is that day. But there is one major caveat: do not use 
it in cash machines abroad as it will charge you 2.99%. Instead, keep it for 
spending in shops and restaurants only. And don’t bother using it in the UK, 
where nearly all transactions are charged £1 plus 1%.

If the Supercard is not your thing, then the alternatives are much as above: 
the Halifax Clarity, Post Office Platinum, and MBNA Everyday Plus credit cards 
all charge no fees on purchases abroad. But once again, these only make sense 
if you are rigorous about paying off the full amount at the end of the month.

Prepaid cards

These are the cards where you load money on to them before you go abroad, then 
spend until the balance on the card reaches zero. You can’t overspend, but you 
can top it up again using cash, a bank transfer or a bank card.

Many of them don’t charge when used to make purchases abroad, such as euro 
cards from FairFX and CaxtonFX, and you usually obtain an excellent exchange 
rate. The drawback is that they nearly all charge fees for ATM withdrawals, and 
there can be application fees and “inactivity” fees. Also, you tend to come 
back from holiday, leave it in a drawer somewhere and forget you still have an 
outstanding balance on the card.

Avoid the ‘pay in pounds’ sting
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03fd0deef2fae4eb6d7fa5f6b1062f26e2832ce%2F0_146_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20summer!%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20get%20the%20best%20deal%20for%20your%20travel%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20summer%21%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20get%20the%20best%20deal%20for%20your%20travel%20money&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjul%2F23%2Fbest-deals-holiday-cash-brexit-travel-money%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc03fd0deef2fae4eb6d7fa5f6b1062f26e2832ce%2F0_146_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 When shopping abroad, such as in an El Corte Ingles store in Spain, don’t pay 
in pounds rather than euros. Photograph: Pablo Blazquez Dominguez/Getty Images 


Cash machines abroad, especially in Spain, will always ask if you want the 
transaction to be in pounds sterling rather than in euros. In such places as an 
El Corte Ingles store the smiling shop assistant will say you can be billed in 
sterling if you want. In both cases, just say no.

What happens if you say yes is that the Spanish bank or shop will apply its 
own exchange rate, and you can be guaranteed that it will be rubbish. The banks 
call it “dynamic currency conversion” (DCC), but it’s simply another way to 
extract a fee. Yes, you have the comfort of knowing what will be billed on your 
statement in sterling when you return home, but it’s not much of a comfort when 
all it means is that you’ve been charged extra money.

When DCC first emerged, Nationwide building society was at the forefront in 
warning customers it was a bad deal. But the big banks like it, and the DCC 
operators encourage retailers to push it on to customers by offering them a 
share of the revenue stream generated by the poor exchange rates.
 