
In 2016, the tide of rightwing populism has seemed unstoppable. From Britain’s 
vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-has-voted-to-leave-the-eu-what-happens-next>
 after a referendum campaignsoaked in foreigner-bashing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/19/michael-gove-george-osborne-condemn-nigel-farage-anti-immigration-poster-eu>
, toDonald Trump’s elevation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 to the White House. Britain’sNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, France’s Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> and the Netherlands’ Geert 
Wilders <https://www.theguardian.com/world/geert-wilders> were rarely spotted 
without a smirk etched on their faces.

The last great domino of 2016 was supposed to be Austria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/23/far-right-candidate-defeated-austrian-presidential-election-norbert-hofer>
. A narrow defeat for the xenophobic right in the second round of the 
presidential elections in May was annulled, and the Freedom party’s Norbert 
Hofer looked set to become the first far-right Austrian-born head of state 
since the fall of Adolf Hitler.

The rise of fascism is not inevitable – just look at Bridges Not Walls | Ellie 
Mae O’Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/27/bridges-not-walls-protest-trump-20-january>
“For those who think 2016 has been an awful year, and I for one am not one of 
them, I think it’s been rather good, well I’m sorry there’s a lot more bad news 
to come,”crowed Nigel Farage 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/737329/Nigel-Farage-Ukip-Labour-voters-Paul-Nuttall>
. Among his predictions was that Austria, too, would succumb to rightwing 
populism: “A candidate will win the campaign committed for Austria to have a 
referendum of the membership of the union.”

Well, Farage, your boy got a beating. In fact, Hofer lost nearly 100,000 votes 
in six months; Green-backed candidate Alexander Van der Bellen, on the other 
hand, gained more than 200,000. Somewhat comically, Hofer partly blamed Farage 
for his loss, saying his intervention “didn’t help, it hindered us” and 
denounced it as a“crass misjudgment” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
.

But in truth, it wasn’t Farage who caused Hofer’s defeat. It was the forces of 
hope organising in Austrian society. It was a “massive civil society 
mobilisation,” Maria Mayrhofer from activist organisationAufstehn 
<https://www.aufstehn.at/> tells me. “In the repeated election it was all about 
mobilisation,” above all, encouraging “undecided or frustrated” people to vote. 
Van der Bellen pulled together a broad coalition, and a diverse range of NGOs, 
sport clubs and neighbourhood initiatives got involved.

Aufstehn distributed 50,000 political door hangers across the country: 
crucially, though they weren’t emblazoned with Van der Bellen’s name, but 
rather called for a “respectful togetherness, a tolerant and internationally 
renowned Austria”. The strategy was to make the campaign about values rather 
than a candidate, an approach that reached out to those who weren’t usually 
politically active.

As Peter Kraus from the Austrian Greens tells me, the short answer to how the 
far right was defeated was: “We just organised.” The traditional establishment 
parties collapsed in the presidential election – a process, to varying degrees, 
that is being mirrored acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. Van der Bellen’s campaign had 
to offer a break from old-style politics. They might differ on certain issues, 
but they were united in wanting “to stop the far right and their threat to 
democracy and Europe”.

Kraus’s role was to involve prospective activists who registered online. “At 
the end of them we had more than 10,000 of them” in Vienna alone. He set up 
workshops to give them a basic understanding of campaigning. Crucially, it 
wasn’t a top-down campaign. Instead, it became decentralised. A phone bank in 
Vienna spoke to potential activists in ruralAustria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/austria> and gave them the material they 
needed to set up their own campaigns.

Austria defeated the far-right Norbert Hofer – finally, some hope for Europe | 
Julia Ebner
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/defeat-austria-far-right-norbert-hofer-hope-europe>
Across Europe, Austria’s far right manipulated fear and prejudice over the 
refugee crisis. But, as Kraus notes, Vienna – where most refugees are settled – 
voted overwhelmingly for Van der Bellen. Hofer, on the other hand, performed 
strongly in communities with no refugees. The very people living with those 
from other countries were least likely to succumb to the far right.

There is no room for complacency, of course. That 46% of a western European 
nation voted for a far-right candidate is chastening. In the Austrian 
parliamentary elections to come, the far right can expect to do very well 
indeed, and perhaps be in a position to form a government. But in politics, 
momentum is precious indeed. Austria interrupted the march of rightwing 
populism. The country showed that the victory of the radical right is not 
inevitable: if further defeats happen next year in France, the Netherlands and 
Germany, that will be a blow to the ambitions of Vladimir Putin andDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. Our future does not belong 
to the Trumps, the Farages or the Le Pens. Hatred can be defeated. After the 
traumas of 2016, Austria shows us how.
 