
Inbred? That’s about as abusive as anyone can be about a community, this time 
the“poor ghetto” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-isle-of-wight-poor-ghetto>
 of the Isle of Wight. When it comes from someone overseeing the nation’s 
educational standards, it’s outrageous. But Ofsted chairDavid Hoare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/31/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-profile>
 has only offered a non-apology, which is worse than saying nothing: “I 
apologise for any upset or offence that I may have caused by the comments I 
made about the Isle of Wight.”

Ofsted chair apologises for calling Isle of Wight a ghetto full of inbreeding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-isle-of-wight-poor-ghetto>
I was born on the Isle of Wight – though my parents were “overners”, as 
outsiders are known. When I went back towrite about it before the 2015 election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/07/isle-wight-tory-rehearses-collapse>
, many people mentioned the bad performance of the schools as a reason why it 
was hard to attract professionals to live and work on the island. It is also 
hard to get GPs and consultants for the NHS and teachers for schools. Hoare is 
right in saying it has the second-worst local authority for secondary education 
with the third-worst primary schools. It has now been linked with Hampshire 
county council over the water to try to raise standards.

The editor of local newspaper County Press, Alan Marriott, says he told his 
children to leave – and many do. For all its swankyRoyal London Yacht Club 
<http://www.rlyc.org.uk/> reputation, like most seaside towns deprived of trade 
and opportunity on all sides, and with expensive ferries for commuting, the 
Isle of Wight has severe problems and a lack of good jobs.

But “inbred” is an insult that transforms their economic problems into genetic 
mental deficiency, a curse cast on all the island. According to Hoare’s logic, 
children are destined to fail, not because their schools are bad, with too few 
good teachers and too few opportunities to aim for after school – but because 
the genetic stock of their island breed is at fault.

What’s the answer to their problem, then? Eugenics? Since the dawn of time, 
some groups of people have cast other regional or national groups as 
genetically deficient, innately stupid. This casual racism, or in this case 
classism, seeps out all too often from those who see themselves as effortlessly 
superior.

Hoare usefully offers this image: “I have a house overlooking the Isle of 
Wight and often over a dinner party, someone will ask ‘How is education?’” Did 
no sense of self-preservation, no tinkle of a warning bell ring in his head, 
when he spoke of telling his guests of the inbred stupidity of the folk across 
the water? This wasn’t an overhead drunken throwaway remark, but in all 
solemnity “inbred” is whathe told the TES 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/exclusive-ofsted-chairman-describes-underperforming-isle-wight-inbred>
, the teachers’ journal.

There is always a tendency in those born into privilege to look for easy 
reasons why the rest fail

But then he is a former City banker. Appointed to the Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> chair, the education department 
described him as “a proven business leader who has … expertise in leadership 
and governance”. Captain of industry in various companies, the wonder is that 
such people are in charge of so much in Britain. “Inbred” perhaps more aptly 
describes his establishment, reproducing their own kind endlessly on to one 
board after another, each as ignorant as the next about the life of the country 
over which they wield such unthinking power. If you are a master or mistress of 
the universe, it’s comforting to think your place was earned through the 
inherent brilliance of your genes. There is always a tendency in those born 
into privilege to look for easy reasons why the rest fail. “Inbred” is a very 
good excuse.

The best person to turn to for the balance between genes and environment is 
the work of Prof Steve Jones. His recent book,The Serpent’s Promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/apr/26/in-the-beginning-jones-review>
, examines how nurture and nature are inseparably intertwined. The human genome 
project was for a while the modern version of eugenics, but Jones says it has 
disappointed those who thought it would reveal the destiny of physical traits, 
let alone psychological ones: “The more we learn about genes, the more 
important the environment appears to be.” Robert Plomin spent years scanning 
children for success genes, but never found them, reports Jones. In life, 
“success and failure depend far more on the economic than the genetic accidents 
of birth”. There was no magic change in the genes of his native Welsh 
population when on average they have grown two inches and increased their IQ 
since the 1950s. Moving to affluence increases a working-class child’s IQ by 15 
points, he says.

Wealth is considerably more heritable than genes. So look to the economics of 
the Isle of Wight, not to nonsense about their inferior genes. And Hoare 
clearly is in need of a re-education on this, if he is to continue in his 
current job.
 