
Like so many of the biggest formats in the golden era of reality TV 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/reality-tv>, Brexit is set on an 
island. Back in the early years of the millennium, you were nothing in 
unscripted programming unless you were marooned on an island or in a McMansion, 
then forced to fight your way to the prize by scheming, screaming, demeaning, 
and not forgetting the lyrics to Dance with My Father. The transatlantic spirit 
of the age was Simon Cowell, a populist whose love of plebiscites did little to 
disguise his totalitarian ambition. When he declared,“No one is ever going to 
publish a book called Simon Cowell, My Struggle’’ 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-1216245/SIMON-COWELL-A-letter-shallow-reckless-cocky-younger-self.html>
, I wept for the loss of the German edition.

The holy grail of reality formats was conflict, as orchestrated by cynical, 
unseen producers, who manipulated participants into degrading themselves and 
the public into voting – at financial cost – for the result. Absurd props and
esoteric MacGuffins <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/MacGuffin> were spoken of as 
solemnly as if they were articles of a country’s constitution.Tribal Council 
<http://survivor.wikia.com/wiki/Tribal_Council>. The Diary Room 
<http://bigbrotheruk.wikia.com/wiki/Diary_Room>. Bushtucker Trials 
<http://www.itv.com/imacelebrity/bushtucker-trials>. The £350m Bus  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/content/dam/news/2016/07/18/103540912-battle-bus-2-large_trans++pVFtQMSn7ZYEgFkbAp9DEhzhm9ukKltySsJ2KXyWHb0.jpg>
.Judges’ Houses 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_X_Factor_(UK_TV_series)#Bootcamp_and_judges.27_houses>
.Unelected Judges’ Houses <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/blogs/the_papers>. Hang on 
– a couple of those have ended up in the wrong list. Still, you get the idea.

Demand mounts for Trump Apprentice tapes that may hold 'far worse' footage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/donald-trump-apprentice-tapes-search-mark-burnett>
As any number of dystopian fictions from Rollerball to The Hunger Games have 
long warned us, the future is a televised contest played for the highest 
stakes. So we must have known the current shitshow was in the post. Either way, 
it turns out all those who used to tut, “How low can reality TV go?” were 
totally asking the wrong question. Look how high it’s gone! Never mind history 
repeating itself as farce – reality TV is repeating itself as history. On the 
other side of the Atlantic, arguably thebiggest reality star 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> of that golden era is 
currently the Republican nominee for the presidency. Over this side, to many 
narcotised by two decades of the genre, the uncomplicated certainties of its 
voting are regarded as less of a conspiracythan judicial process 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
.

With the exception of X Factor, where the hostility was more covert, reality 
TV voting was always disapproval voting. You voted off. You voted out. And that 
was that. A significant section of the population believe the EU was voted off 
on 23 June, and now are beginning to openly dismiss the rule of law, as though 
it were Jedward, or a Survivor contestant who disparaged the Ulong tribe’s 
plans for a shelter with an awesome sex crib attached. Who does Cayla even 
think she is? What even is the rule of law? Who made it queen of everything?
Tory MP David Davies doesn’t believe in it 
<https://twitter.com/DavidTCDavies/status/794133320162537472>; half the papers 
don’t believe in it; others have already taken their lead without 
encouragement. Maybe the rule of law’s “journey” on the show has come to an 
end, and we should crank up Everybody Hurts and bid it farewell with a montage 
of its best bits.

The vicious assault on UK judges by the Brexit press is a threat to democracy 
| Charles Falconer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/04/assault-uk-judges-brexit-press-judiciary-constitution>
Today’s Daily Express front page likened the “threat” of a high court ruling 
on the triggering of article 50 to that of Hitler. Guys – if you hate Hitler so 
much, stop publishing front pages that read like future exhibits in a museum 
show called Before the Militias. The second most WTF-laden intro was in the 
Daily Mail, which assigned ark-of-the-covenant-like qualities to a leaflet 
whose only prior claim to fame was being dismissed as a biased disgrace in the 
Daily Mail. As Friday’s paper had it: “MPs last night accused judges of failing 
to read the £9m taxpayer-funded publicity leaflet that stated the referendum 
result would be followed directly by ministers.” Wait – MPs accused judges of 
failing to read a leaflet? Did they also accuse them of failing to follow the 
rules of Bootcamp? Can we settle this with an immunity task/a sing-off in the 
karaokosseum/ a catfight between the leaflet and the bus? Also: didn’t the 
Daily Mail watch the shows? The mean judgeis always a Brit 
<http://tvtropes.org/pmwiki/pmwiki.php/Main/TheMeanBrit> – and in this case, 
there are three of them. Can’t at least one of these leaflet-shunners be 
replaced by X Factor judge – and Brexiteer – Sharon Osbourne?

Having banged on about their failure to remotely understand what they were 
asking for at the time, I do have to offer another slow handclap for the 
generation of politicians such as Gordon Brown – a man so obsessed with the X 
Factor thathe once wrote personal letters to the finalists  
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/3532903/Gordon-Brown-writes-personal-letters-to-X-Factor-contestants.html>
 – who were forever on about wanting“an X Factor politics” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/may/17/gordonbrown.television>. 
Newsflash, Gordon: this is what X Factor politics looks like. Try not to choke 
on it!

Now his ratings are on the slide, Cowell can at least take comfort that his 
plan to “give politics the X Factor” has come to pass. “The fact we’re allowing 
the public to make the decisions most of the time is a really good thing,” 
Cowellonce mused of his various shows 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/scotland/edinburgh_and_east/8045423.stm>. “The 
great thing is when you start seeing it in places like China and Afghanistan. 
It’s democracy. We’ve kinda given democracy back to the world.” Man, he had it 
all figured out, didn’t he? A bit like his best mate Philip Green – whose 
report into government efficiency concluded that running the vast and complex 
machinery of the statewas akin to retail 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/commentators/matthew-norman/matthew-norman-parsimony-topshop-style-2104810.html>
 – Cowell’s reputation as a man with the answer to everything is likely to 
oxidise rapidly.

At one stage he punted the idea of a TV show where the public voted every week 
on a political issue – and perhaps Simon passed on this faith in frequent 
referendums to David Cameron, whom he backed in a major Sun splash on the eve 
of the 2010 election. Cameron, he reckoned, was a man of “substance” with “the 
stomach to navigate us through difficult times”.

Can Ed Balls’s Strictly stint reinvigorate New Labour? | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/ed-balls-strictly-new-labour>
In the end, it’s amazing – considering how histrionic and uncivilised many 
found it at the time – quite how rule-abiding and righteous reality TV now 
looks compared to actual reality. There were parameters on the shows, even on 
many of the ghastlier ones. I mean, at least soundstages were frequently 
equipped with lie detectors. Imagine how much better this US election would 
have been with a polygraph. Imagine how much better the referendum campaign 
would have been with a polygraph. Imagine how much better both would have been 
if politicians had been bleeped and called into the producers when they said 
something racist.

Please don’t take all this as the view from above. It is hardly a matter of 
pride, but I suspect I am as unwittingly, hopelessly addicted to the 
horrifyingly debased dramas of today’s politics as many others. I used to watch 
lots of reality shows, but they haven’t done it for me for years now. Maybe the 
hit I used to get off their dramas and conflicts – was it dopamine? – requires 
a bigger stimulus. In the mad fever dream of the US election and the 
increasingly frightening divisions of Brexit, both amplified by social media, 
maybe I and countless others have found it. This used to be the way we watched. 
Now it’s the way we seek to govern; the way we govern; the way we live.
 