
You know the one about the scrounging disability-benefit claimant: that woman 
with the limp who has always got the latest designer handbag; the unemployed 
guy across the road who has been given a “free car” by the state. Everyone’s 
heard a version of it. Mainly because certain politicians and the rightwing 
media have been peddling it for years.

'We'd have been prisoners in our home': readers help people hit by benefit cuts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/09/prisoners-in-home-guardian-readers-benefit-cuts>
The cultural shift against social security sharpened considerably in 2013. 
That was when, as part of theabolition of DLA – disability living allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jan/03/coalition-abolishing-disability-living-allowance>
 – the Conservatives pledged to scrap “lifetime awards” of the benefit: 
essentially, what enables some disabled people to have indefinite help for care 
or mobility needs.

The policy played straight into people’s greatest fears about the benefit 
system <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2013/apr/24/benefits>
: that not only are there hordes of people with disabilities living off 
taxpayers’ money, but they’re receiving all that cash practically unchecked. As 
the myth has it, it’s just a case of filling in a few forms, complaining about 
a bad back, and free money arrives every month for life. As the then work and 
pensions secretary, Iain Duncan Smith, put it to explain the policy change, 
disabled people on lifetime awards are “just allowed to fester 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9263453/500000-to-lose-disability-benefit.html>
”.

Three years later, in the final stages of the mass re-testing of DLA’s 
replacement, PIP – personal independence payments – we’re now deep into the 
consequence of this myth: disabled people who had been told their support was 
for life suddenly being forced through reassessment. And in many cases seeing 
their support pulled away.

People like Phil Spanswick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/14/thalidomider-scrounger-disability-pip-benefits-cut>
: born with shortened limbs, three fingers on one hand and four on the other, 
as a result of thethalidomide scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/06/thalidomide-caused-up-to-10000-miscarriages-infant-deaths-uk>
. The 54-year-old – who is unable to shower, get dressed, or use the oven or 
washing machine without help – had been on a lifetime award of high-rate DLA 
since the 1980s. Spanswick’s disability will quite obviously never improve, but 
he was forced to go to a PIP reassessment. The woman who assessed him “was 21”, 
says Spanswick, “and had trained as a paramedic, and asked me three times how I 
had got my disability and what age was I when I got it”. He had his benefit 
downgraded: a cut of almost £40 a week.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwe-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc25c2eb9ef9adccf377bf9523e4f8d7c5a5144%2F0_286_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=It%E2%80%99s%20deeply%20shaming%20to%20have%20to%20prove%20to%20the%20state%20you%E2%80%99re%20still%20disabled%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwe-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=It%E2%80%99s%20deeply%20shaming%20to%20have%20to%20prove%20to%20the%20state%20you%E2%80%99re%20still%20disabled%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fwe-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffc25c2eb9ef9adccf377bf9523e4f8d7c5a5144%2F0_286_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Phil Spanswick, athalidomide victim, has had his benefit cut by almost £40 a 
week. Photograph: Tom Pilston for the Guardian 
Or Carly Tait, a Paralympian born with cerebral palsy, who this week returned 
from competing for Great Britain as a wheelchair racer in Rio. Tait has been on 
a lifetime high-rate award of DLA for mobility since she was a teenager but had 
to go through a medical for PIP this year. She had her benefit bumped down to 
the standard rate and was subsequently told shewould lose her specialist car 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/paralympics-carly-tait-lifeline-car-disability-benefit-cuts>
. Tait told me that when she asked the assessor why she had to be tested when 
she had previously been given a lifetime award, “He said ‘there might be 
medical advances’. There’s no cure for cerebral palsy. I’m never going to get 
any better.”

Logic has no place in Britain’s new benefit system. We are firmly in hysteria 
mode, where it is seen as prudent to use taxpayers’ money to check whether a 
disabled person’s neurology or genetic makeup has changed. There are no 
exemptions or “good sense” limits to this. The re-testing of PIP claims means, 
in practice, blind people, paraplegics and those with Down’s syndrome will be 
put through reassessment: forced to provide information about their disability 
that the government already has and cannot possibly have changed.

PIP is a disaster for disabled people. At last the full horror is emerging | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
Because there is no possibility of lifetime awards when it comes to PIP, 
people will not only have to be tested this time for disabilities that have 
already been assessed – but re-tested over their lifetime, again and again. 
That the system that’s assessing them has been shown to be a disaster –from 
lost applications and year-long delays to inept assessors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/07/pip-disaster-disabled-access-report-benefits>
 – makes this even worse.

The truth is, “lifetime awards” are a genuinely useful part of our social 
security system. They are a sensible and humane response to the reality that 
some people’s disabilities will never get better: allowing a person to go 
through the difficulty of a benefit assessment only once. There is something 
deeply shaming about having to prove to the state you are still as disabled as 
you used to be, in having to convince a stranger – hired by the government – 
that you still deserve support for the chronic illness, mental health problem 
or disability that will be part of you for life.

In a climate of fear and suspicion around so-called welfare, the government is 
choosing to put its disabled citizens through this ordeal because it fits the 
narrative it helped to create. This is what it’s come to: orchestrating 
widespread benefit testing that feeds the myth of disabled people as 
scroungers, out to milk the system.
 