
They will blame James Comey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/fbi-director-james-comey-clinton-emails-trump>
 and the FBI. They will blamevoter suppression 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/donald-trump-voter-suppression-campaign-north-carolina-florida>
 and racism. They will blameBernie or bust 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jun/11/bernie-sanders-voters-interview-hillary-clinton-video>
 and misogyny. They will blame third parties and independent candidates. They 
will blame the corporate media for giving him the platform, social media for 
being a bullhorn, and WikiLeaks for airing the laundry.

Donald Trump to meet Barack Obama at the White House – live updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
But this leaves out the force most responsible for creating the nightmare in 
which we now find ourselves wide awake: neoliberalism. That worldview – fully 
embodied byHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>
 and her machine – is no match for Trump-style extremism. The decision to run 
one against the other is what sealed our fate. If we learn nothing else, can we 
please learn from that mistake?

Here is what we need to understand: a hell of a lot of people are in pain. 
Under neoliberal policies of deregulation, privatisation, austerity and 
corporate trade, their living standards have declined precipitously. They have 
lost jobs. They have lost pensions. They have lost much of the safety net that 
used to make these losses less frightening. They see a future for their kids 
even worse than their precarious present.

At the same time, they have witnessed the rise of the Davos class, a 
hyper-connected network of banking and tech billionaires, elected leaders who 
are awfully cosy with those interests, and Hollywood celebrities who make the 
whole thing seem unbearably glamorous. Success is a party to which they were 
not invited, and they know in their hearts that this rising wealth and power is 
somehow directly connected to their growing debts and powerlessness.

For the people who saw security and status as their birthright – and that 
means white men most of all – these losses are unbearable.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> speaks directly 
to that pain. The Brexit campaign spoke to that pain. So do all of the rising 
far-right parties in Europe. They answer it with nostalgic nationalism and 
anger at remote economic bureaucracies – whether Washington, the North American 
free trade agreement the World Trade Organisation or the EU. And of course, 
they answer it by bashing immigrants and people of colour, vilifying Muslims, 
and degrading women. Elite neoliberalism has nothing to offer that pain, 
because neoliberalism unleashed the Davos class. People such as Hillary and 
Bill Clinton are the toast of the Davos party. In truth, they threw the party.

Trump’s message was: “All is hell.” Clinton answered: “All is well.” But it’s 
not well – far from it.

Neo-fascist responses to rampant insecurity and inequality are not going to go 
away. But what we know from the 1930s is that what it takes to do battle with 
fascism is a real left. A good chunk of Trump’s support could be peeled away if 
there were a genuine redistributive agenda on the table. An agenda to take on 
the billionaire class with more than rhetoric, and use the money for a green 
new deal. Such a plan could create a tidal wave of well-paying unionised jobs, 
bring badly needed resources and opportunities to communities of colour, and 
insist that polluters should pay for workers to be retrained and fully included 
in this future.

It could fashion policies that fight institutionalised racism, economic 
inequality and climate change at the same time. It could take on bad trade 
deals and police violence, and honour indigenous people as the original 
protectors of the land, water and air.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
People have a right to be angry, and a powerful, intersectional left agenda 
can direct that anger where it belongs, while fighting for holistic solutions 
that will bring a frayed society together.

Such a coalition is possible. In Canada, we have begun to cobble it together 
under the banner of a people’s agenda calledThe Leap Manifesto 
<https://leapmanifesto.org/en/the-leap-manifesto/>, endorsed by more than 220 
organisations from Greenpeace Canada to Black Lives Matter Toronto, and some of 
our largest trade unions.

At 96 I couldn’t wait to vote for a female president. I feel let down by 
America | Esther Diamond
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/waited-life-vote-female-president-hillary-clinton>
Bernie Sanders’ amazing campaign went a long way towards building this sort of 
coalition, and demonstrated that the appetite for democratic socialism is out 
there. But early on, there was a failure in the campaign to connect with older 
black and Latino voters who are the demographic most abused by our current 
economic model. That failure prevented the campaign from reaching its full 
potential. Those mistakes can be corrected and a bold, transformative coalition 
is there to be built on.

That is the task ahead. The Democratic party needs to be either decisively 
wrested from pro-corporate neoliberals, or it needs to be abandoned. From
Elizabeth Warren <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/elizabeth-warren> to Nina 
Turner, to the Occupy alumni who took the Bernie campaign supernova, there is a 
stronger field of coalition-inspiring progressive leaders out there than at any 
point in my lifetime. We are “leaderful”, as many in the Movement for Black 
Lives say.

So let’s get out of shock as fast as we can and build the kind of radical 
movement that has a genuine answer to the hate and fear represented by the 
Trumps of this world. Let’s set aside whatever is keeping us apart and start 
right now.
 