
Italians are voting in a referendum on 4 December that is causing concern 
across Europe after the UK’s vote to leave the EU and Donald Trump’s US 
presidential election victory. The votecould lead to the resignation of Matteo 
Renzi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
, the prime minister. However, the fallout from a no vote on Sunday could be 
economic and financial as well as political.

Why are financial markets worried about Sunday’s referendum?

Italy’s vote is seen as the biggest threat to Europe since the UK’s referendum 
on EU membership in June <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>. 
The fear is that a vote against the government could trigger a chain of events 
that might see Italy – a member of the EU since its inception – spiral out of 
the single currency.

But isn’t the referendum on a narrow political issue?

It is and it isn’t. The referendum is about constitutional changes but is also 
seen as a vote of confidence in Renzi. The proposed changes to parliament are 
part of his attempts to modernise Italy, both politically and economically. 
Markets like Renzi’s technocratic approach; they think he is needed to sort out 
the deep-seated problems of Italy’s banks – the weakest in the eurozone – and 
are worried because he haspledged to quit if the referendum is lost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/17/matteo-renzi-repeats-vow-quit-italian-pm-loses-referendum>
.


After Trump victory, Italy referendum is seen as test of populism's rise
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/24/after-trump-victory-italy-referendum-is-seen-as-test-of-populisms-rise>
Markets fear that defeat for Renzi would trigger a general election that could 
result in power shifting to theFive Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement>. An anti-establishment 
party formed by former standup comedianBeppe Grillo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/beppe-grillo>, it has suggested it would 
call a referendum on membership of the EU.

“With a wave of elections in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> in 2017, such a shift in 
sentiment would undermine political integration and increase demand for 
national sovereignty,” said analysts at Jefferies.

What’s wrong with the economy?

Pretty much everything. Italy <https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> has an 
unemployment rate of 11% and living standards have barely grown since the 
country became a founder member of the single currency 15 years ago.

Nine years after the onset of the financial crisis in 2007, output remains 8% 
down on its pre-crash level. Shweta Singh, of Lombard Street Research, said 
Italy’s weakness since the turn of the millennium was the result of three 
factors: a slow takeup of new information technology; the inability of the 
government to devalue the currency to restore competitiveness; and the 
challenge posed by China in many of the markets where Italy has traditionally 
been strong.

“Italy’s share of global exports has plummeted,” Singh said. “Since the turn 
of the century, Italy has lost more market share than most developed countries, 
including those in the euro area.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d299c9a2dd620a8e825e08c50eb82481fca968%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Italy%20referendum%20Q%26A%3A%20the%20big%20economic%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Italy%20referendum%20Q%26A%3A%20the%20big%20economic%20questions%20answered&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fitaly-referendum-q-and-a-economic-questions-answered%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb3d299c9a2dd620a8e825e08c50eb82481fca968%2F0_182_5472_3283%2F5472.jpg>
 Matteo Renzi campaigning for a yes vote. Photograph: Andrew Medichini/AP 
What’s wrong with the banks?

They are in “terrible shape”, according to Kathleen Brooks, research director 
at City Index. The country’s banking system is fragmented, with more branches 
than restaurants dotted across its high streets. They are weighed down by 
€360bn (£305bn) of bad debts.

The industry took too long to tackle the mountain of bad debts and by the time 
the regulators wanted action a change in EU rules meant it was difficult to set 
up a “bad bank”. Renzi is credited with helping devise a solution, creating a
backstop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/10/battle-prop-up-italy-banks-eu-brexit-grexit-bad-loans>
 fund – known as Atlante – for the industry.

Italy referendum: all you need to know about Renzi's crunch vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, the world’s oldest bank, is also one of 
European weakest afterstress tests imposed by the European Banking Authority in 
July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
 showed its financial strength would be sapped if markets came under strain. A 
bailout plan is in train.

So what will happen if there is a no vote?

The anxiety is that the banks will crumble. Brooks said: “If [Renzi] loses the 
referendum and resigns, then the big question for traders will be if the 
bailout plan still stands. If not, then eight of Italy’s lenders could be at 
risk of collapse.

“Due to the interconnectedness of the global banking system, and the weakness 
of some other European lendersnotably Deutsche Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/deutsche-bank-how-did-a-beast-of-the-banking-world-get-into-this-mess>
, a collapse in Italy’s banking system could lead to intense pressure on global 
financial stocks in the aftermath of a no vote.”

Wouldn’t the European Central Bank do something? 

Almost certainly. The ECB buys €80bn of eurozone bonds each month and in the 
short term would make buying Italian bonds a priority. That might limit the 
upward movement in bond yields – the interest paid on government debt. The 
European commission would also be under pressure to soften rules that put 
restrictions on individual governments bailing out their banks.

If there is a yes vote does that mean it is a case of crisis over?

Almost certainly not. There might be a relief rally and the shares of 
Unicredit and Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena could bounce after recent 
selling, but the problems of the Italian economy and the country’s banking 
system will remain. The key issue of whether Italy can live with the pressures 
of eurozone membership will be unresolved.
 