
Has ground been broken on Melania Trump’s auto-parodic anti-bullying initiative
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/03/melania-trump-cyberbullying-campaign-speech>
 yet? Only I can’t help feeling the second lady could kick things off with a 
case close to home. “Dear Me. I believe my husband isgaslighting 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gaslighting> me. It’s more subtle than the lamps 
dimming without explanation. I mean, he’s spent years saying the only thing 
stopping him from coming on to his hot daughter is the fact they’re related. 
Then yesterday I went into the gold drawing room and found Ivanka sitting in 
for the meeting with the Japanese prime minister …”

Nigel Farage’s perfect job: aide to Trump, the groper-in-chief | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/11/nigel-farage-donald-trump-groper-in-chief-ukip>
She’s not wrong. Thanks to a picture circulated by the Japanese government, we 
now know that Donald Trump shared a curved sofa in a room in his New York 
penthouse with Shinzo Abe,while Ivanka watched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/japan-confidence-trump-president-shinzo-abe>
 from a reproduction tub chair (her husband, Jared Kushner, seems to have shown 
up for photos at the end). How screamingly quaint it now seems that the 
Simpsons were once frequently described as America’s most dysfunctional family. 
The Trumps are clearly of a different order of magnitude. I’m not going to get 
into the elder sons today – Uday and Schmuday, as my friend Matthew refers to 
them – but the dynamics of the Donald-Melania-Ivanka triangle increasingly read 
like a script rejected by David Cronenberg for being “a bit too weird, thanks”.

Now that Trump is the president-elect, of course, Ivanka is supposed to be 
running his business interests, along with her talentless brothers, in some 
kind of blind trust/King Lear prequel. Which, as you hardly need to be 
sharp-eyed to point out, makes it a bit odd that she’s sitting in on 
presidential state business. I guess a meeting with the Japanese premier is a 
diplomatically tactless moment to bring up the concept of Chinese walls. 
Anyway, we can probably surmise that Chinese walls don’t even make the top 10 
of Donald’sfavourite notional walls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/26/donald-trump-links-mexico-border-wall-plan-to-israels-successful-separation-barrier>
. And that journalists are already clamouring for a keyboard shortcut for the 
phrase “conflict of interest”.

After all, throughout the campaign, Ivanka was at pains to state that she was 
not political, and that she was seeking no role at all in her father’s 
administration.“I’m going to be a daughter,” 
<http://www.vogue.com/13502616/ivanka-trump-politics-donald-trump/> she 
elaborated earlier this week. However: “I’ve said through the campaign that I 
am very passionate about certain issues. And that I want to fight for them.” 
Maybe one of those issues is advancing the rights of Tokyo to get a Trump hotel 
built in it.

Behold, then, an Ivanka’s-eye view of Dad’s first day at the international 
office – peering through the candelabra in a Trump Tower room whose decor 
offers one clue as to whyDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> can never bring himself to 
condemn, or even dislike, various dictators. After all, he shares the classic 
despot’s taste in interior design. To take in the full scheme of the room is to 
wonder what is just out of shot – a 20-foot gold statue of Saddam, or a room 
full of slot machines? Possibly both. I am given to understand it is a large 
apartment.

Disappointingly, though, Ivanka has failed to inform the legions of Americans 
who’d be Tasered if they came within a 20-foot exclusion zone of Trump Tower 
what it is she’s wearing for her conflict of interest. When madam appeared 
alongside her father and various other family members on last Sunday’s edition 
of 60 Minutes, her firm promptly press-released a“style alert” 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/opinion/commentary/ct-ivanka-trump-bracelet-business-20161116-story.html>
 in relation to the $10,800 bangle she had been wearing during it. For those 
whose eye was caught by the piece in question, as opposed to the coming war on 
abortion rights or whatnot, I can share the details: “Ivanka Trump was wearing 
her favourite bangle from the Metropolis Collection.” We must await the Rust 
Belt Collection with interest.

Given that Trump essentially conducts himself as a Trump parody account, it 
seems uncharacteristically restrained of him to have not begun press-releasing 
his own products when they feature in presidential business. By what vast 
oversight can we still be in the dark as to whether the president was wearing
Empire by Donald Trump <http://www.trump.com/merchandise/trump-fragrance/> or 
Success by Donald Trump for this meeting with Abe, both of which male 
fragrances retail at a competitive price point? I would like the presidential 
cologne choices to be announced from now on, allowing us to really put 
ourselves inside the smells of a Trump bilateral.

As for Ivanka’s closeness to her father, there is perhaps a historical 
precedent for this kind of indispensability, though not quite on this scale 
(and certainly not including the ogling). Donald Trump’s favourite book is 
clearlyThe Art of the Deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/19/trump-co-writer-says-candidate-could-end-civilisation-the-art-of-the-deal-tony-schwartz>
 by Donald Trump, many passages of which he is even believed to have read, or 
at least listened to on audiobook while getting a massage.

What Citizen Trump can’t stand – the story is of Melania, not him | Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/melania-donald-trump-citizen-kane-plot-device-wifes-amazing-story>
His second favourite book, though, is highly likely to be his well-thumbed 
copy ofTeam of Rivals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2009/feb/28/abraham-lincoln-review>, Doris 
Kearns Goodwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/feb/16/doris-kearns-goodwin-biographer-presidents-interview>
’s study of Abraham Lincoln’s journey to the White House, and his subsequent 
success in drawing his most formidable opponents into his cabinet, managing 
their conflicting personalities, and getting the best out of their skills.

In which case, Trump will be more than familiar with the figure of Salmon Chase
 <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salmon_P._Chase>, once Lincoln’s rival for the 
Republican nomination, who mouldedhis daughter Kate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kate_Chase> as his political helpmeet, and who 
would clearly have had the function of a de facto first lady, had Chase beaten 
Lincoln to the White House. By the age of 45, Chase had buried three of his 
wives – not figuratively, like Donald, but literally – and instead looked to 
his daughter as his partner in politics. I am sure Trump would point out that 
Ivanka is merely the Kate Chasede nos jours – however tough on her stepmother 
that may be.

Admittedly, there will be those who insist that Ivanka’s family ties are born 
of a darker place, and seem rather more reminiscent of something out of the 
Lannisters from Game of Thrones. To many of us foreign outsiders, the fact that 
Ivanka has already been touted as a future US presidential candidate (along 
with Michelle Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/11/michelle-obama-run-for-president-politics>
) does increasingly suggest that the White House has become analogous to the 
Iron Throne, with just a few families permitted to fight and scheme for it. 
Chelsea Clinton as the eventual mother of dragons? Only time will show. For 
now, we must simply marvel at Ivanka’s ability to straddle two worlds, and 
order her pavé diamond Security Clearance Amulet just as soon as it hits the 
stores.
 