
My friend Jagdish Gundara, who has died aged 78, was a shrewd and nuanced 
commentator on the theory and practice of education for diversity. He wasUnesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/unesco> professor of intercultural studies 
and teacher education, and emeritus professor of the Institute of Education, 
University College London. He was, from its inception in 1979, director of the 
centre for intercultural education at the Institute of Education.

Jagdish shared his ideas about interculturalism at conferences throughout the 
world, and was founder and president of the International Association of 
Intercultural Education. Convivial and mischievous, he was never happier than 
when fulminating against reactionary idiocy with friends over lunch in 
Bloomsbury.

He was born in Nairobi, the son of Darbar Singh, a forester, and his wife, 
Jagir Kaur Gundara. He attended the Duke of Gloucester school, an Indian 
grammar school in Nairobi. His first degree, in international relations, was 
from Bowdoin College in Maine; it was followed by a masterâ€™s from McGill 
University and a doctorate at Edinburgh University, where his thesis was on 
British extraterritorial jurisdiction in Zanzibar in the 19th century.

After a spell as a teacher at Starcross school, Islington (later Elizabeth 
Garrett Anderson school), he became a multi-ethnic liaison officer for the 
Inner London Education Authority in Islington. When the ILEA and Institute of 
Education decided in 1979 to set up the pioneering centre for intercultural 
education, he was appointed its director.

He was committed to getting educational diversity better understood, going 
beyond simplistic notions of anti-racism and social cohesion. He supported the 
campaign to get the UK back into Unesco after the Thatcher government had 
withdrawn, and was active in promoting human rights in the Commonwealth. He was 
chairman of the Scarman Trust, a commissioner for the Commission for Racial 
Equality, and a member of the Board of Trustees of Unicef. He was the author of 
Interculturalism, Education and Inclusion (2000) and published widely on human 
rights, education and multicultural studies.

He is survived by his wife, Sarah.
 