
Name: Jam.

Age: Four months old.

Appearance: A little squeezed in the middle.

Are we talking fruit spread, traffic or a thing that people pump up 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9EcjWd-O4jI>? None of those. Jam is a clever 
acronym schemed up by the government to describe a new phenomenon.

Just Ask May? Jeremy Argues Morosely? No and no. Jam actually stands for Just 
About Managing.

I don’t follow. In July, in her first speech as prime minister, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> addressed those she described 
as “just managing” in their financial affairs.Now it has been reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/17/autumn-statement-hammond-to-give-modest-boost-to-just-managing-families>
 thatPhilip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>’s 
first autumn statement will also be targeted at those same people, those who 
just about manage to pay their bills. Just about manage. See? Jam.

That’s a bit belaboured, isn’t it? Not really. Politicians are busy people, 
and time is always of the essence. Why say “members of the public who just 
about manage to pay their bills”, when you could simply call them Jams?

This sounds quite familiar. Right, because you’re probably thinking of 
“hard-working families”, the phraseGeorge Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> used over and over again 
in the run-up to the last general election.

No, that’s not it. Then maybe you’re thinking of the “squeezed middle”, the 
phrase thatEd Miliband <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/edmiliband> used 
over and over again in the run-up to the last general election.

Still no. Then maybe you’re thinking about “alarm-clock Britain”, the phrase 
thatNick Clegg <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nickclegg> kept repeating 
to himself when he was deputy prime minister.

Hang on, aren’t all of these terms referring to the exact same group of people?
 You mean anyone without an abundance of disposable income?

Yes! This is infuriating. Is this what our politicians do now? Sit around and 
dream up pointless buzzwords to replace pointless buzzwords that already exist, 
just to make it seem as if they care more about normal people than they 
actually do? Well, technically, a Jam is a working-class Brexit voter who feels 
alienated by the creeping march of globalisation.

Oh, God. At least this means I’m not a Jam. Look, let’s just let Hammond have 
his moment. It could be worse. He could be tailoring the budget to Weetabix: 
Witless Europhobic Extremists, Terrible Advocates for Brexit (Including 
Xenophobes).

Do say: “Jargon Ain’t Magnificent.”

Don’t say: “All this jam talk has marmalade me mad.”
 