 James Bond has been brought out of tax exile to bolster the SNP's flagging 
election campaign.
When a political party resorts to using one of its 'celebs' in a serious 
attempt to win votes, you know they are in big trouble.

All parties use celebs to bolster their support, yet we all know that they are 
unlikely to win any votes. Everyone does it, because everyone else does, but 
this is the first time I can remember that anyone has seriously believed it 
will work.

Labour, having blocked a gong for Sean Connery and received universally 
hostile coverage inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, has 
rightly been reluctant to go on the offensive.

However, the 'official spokesman' who said that it seemed a strange choice to 
use a man who paid no tax in Britain to support a party who wanted to raise 
taxes certainly hit a raw nerve

Indeed the SNP has become very nervous over the past week. It even banned me 
from attending Connery's election rally yesterday, which is a pity because he 
will not now feature in the film of the election I am making for Scottish 
Television.

Still, come to think of it, Connery doesn't really need the publicity an 
appearance in my film would bring. The SNP have every right to be nervous 
following the events of last week.

In every election campaign the hacks wait eagerly for a big event that will 
bring the campaign to life. We needed a 'Jennifer's ear' or a big defection. 
This campaign has been particularly boring and so the big event when it came 
was greeted with delight by most of the media, except the paper that broke the 
story, which is seen in Labour circles as a SNP rag.

The story was the Systems 3 poll in the Herald here in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, which had the SNP trailing by 20 
points to Labour. 'SNP in freefall' was the banner headline.

As the first editions hit the streets, the SNP went into an emergency session, 
or 'crisis meeting' as the Record put it. The next day we learnt of the SNP's 
reaction to the disastrous poll. They were to relaunch their campaign.

Most political relaunches don't come in the middle of an election campaign 
(the Tories have had dozens already), so we were told it was all the fault of 
the media who were distorting their policies.

It was nothing to do with the fact that they were proposing higher taxes than 
the English or that Alex Salmond had attacked the war in Kosovo. They were to 
take their campaign to the people and abandon morning press conferences.

The next day Salmond went on a walkabout in Govan followed by a huge media 
scrum. The London media, sensing a good story, joined the throng and we ended 
up with Salmond giving the press conference in a school playground. The TV 
pictures, looking like a rugby scrum with cameras, only added to the sense of 
crisis.

As is always the case with polls, the party behind say that's not what they 
are hearing on the doorstep and the leading party says they are not going to be 
complacent.

I did notice, however, that as soon as it became apparent that the Labour 
campaign was doing well, stories miraculously began to appear saying that 
Mandelson had somehow been involved. Will he stop at nothing to take the credit?

At least the SNP seems to have returned to its core messages that it is 
'Scotland's party' and Labour is 'London Labour'. I doubt somehow that will 
work. Gordon Brown has been very visible during the campaign, though I see that 
some numpty, as they would say up here, wrote in the Spectator that he was 
hiding away in the Treasury because of the war.

It seems that some people in England won't realise there is an election on 
until it's over. I don't think that the Scots see Gordon as 'London Labour' and 
I certainly don't believe that Blair is a liability up here either. Neither do 
the campaign strategists, who are anxious for him to return this week.

The big question in Scotland now is: whether Blair really wants Labour to win 
by a landslide and thus scupper the chances of a coalition with the Liberals? 
There is no doubt that the Scottish Labour Party would dearly love to go it 
alone and that's hardly surprising given the fact that the Liberals have done 
nothing to help beat off the threat of the SNP.

The political pundits have been universal in their criticisms of the Liberals' 
campaign and it must rankle with them that even the Tories have been seen to 
have done better.

Despite what the polls say, I still expect the Liberals to hold the balance of 
power and to go into the coalition government with Labour, thus adding another 
building block to Blair's great project.

Â• Charlie Whelan was Gordon Brown's special adviser from 1994 to January 1999. 
 