
If, like me, you enjoyed Andrew Lloyd Webber’s recent observation that the 
theatre is “hideously white” 
<https://www.thestage.co.uk/news/2016/andrew-lloyd-webber-hideously-white-uk-theatre-industry-will-be-sidelined-without-change/>
, you will have loved his turn on breakfast telly this week, where he mentioned 
that he’dalmost discovered Rihanna “about 12 years ago” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/14/andrew-lloyd-webber-claims-he-discovered-rihanna-in-barbados>
.

As it goes, it was almost exactly 12 years ago that Rihanna was signed to a 
six-album deal with Def Jam 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/rihanna-audition-2016-3?r=US&IR=T>, on the 
rapturous recommendation of the label’s then president, Jay Z. I can’t help 
thinking a straight signing fight between Lord Lloyd Webber and Jay Z would be 
a plotline too high-camp even forEmpire, the Dynasty of our day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/apr/25/lee-daniels-taraji-p-henson-empire>
. But as it turns out, that wasn’t how Andrew remembers it all anyway.

Over to him. “I saw her singing karaoke in Sandy Lane hotel in Barbados 12 
years ago,” his lordship told Good Morning Britain. “I turned to my friend and 
said, ‘She’s very good.’ I wondered if we brought her back, it might be like a 
picture you buy on holiday and then you get home and think, why did I buy that? 
I thought I might get her home and wonder what to do with her.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjay-zs-got-99-problems-but-fighting-andrew-lloyd-webber-for-rihanna-wasnt-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66ef9f9f34acee40e1ad1ee4740b722cccbdcf15%2F0_138_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jay%20Z%E2%80%99s%20got%2099%20problems%2C%20but%20fighting%20Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20for%20Rihanna%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjay-zs-got-99-problems-but-fighting-andrew-lloyd-webber-for-rihanna-wasnt-one%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jay%20Z%E2%80%99s%20got%2099%20problems%2C%20but%20fighting%20Andrew%20Lloyd%20Webber%20for%20Rihanna%20wasn%E2%80%99t%20one&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fjay-zs-got-99-problems-but-fighting-andrew-lloyd-webber-for-rihanna-wasnt-one%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66ef9f9f34acee40e1ad1ee4740b722cccbdcf15%2F0_138_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 Soon after she was spotted, Rihanna was one of the world’s biggest stars, but 
oh, what could have been. Photograph: Variety/REX/Shutterstock 
Well now. As a side issue, I love the way Andrew thinks he’s universalising 
this moment by comparing it to that totally relatable rose-tinted holiday 
mistake: the one where you buy an adorable local painting that ends up looking 
naff when you get it back to Chelsea. Clearly, what he should instead have 
compared potential acquisitions likeRihanna 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/rihanna> to is a bottle of the spirit from 
wherever it is you’re holidaying. You know the sort of thing: tastes like 
ambrosia on those long hot nights; drink it anywhere in UK airspace and it 
relieves you of your epiglottis.

The main event, however, is clearly Lloyd Webber’s hilariously excruciating 
implication that Barbados is still a place from where a powerful British person 
brings back what they choose – be it a naive painting, a woman of colour, or 
the deeds to a sugar plantation.

I don’t want to go out on a limb here, but I can’t help feeling Rihanna had a 
lucky escape not being “discovered” by Andrew. Perhaps we’ll never pinpoint the 
exact timing of his noticing of her in relation to the moment she was in fact 
signed to Def Jam. Either way, it’s probably for the best that she didn’t bin 
them off to accompany Andrew back to the West End, presumably on the promise of 
starring in a yet-to-be-written period musical called something like Sugar 
Daddy. Even if he had assured her that the clever thing is that it turns out to 
be a love story about the slave liberating the owner, rather than the other way 
round.
 