
Jean Stead, who has died aged 90, was one of the outstanding figures in 
Guardian journalism from the 1960s to the 80s. She helped to transform the 
paper’s news coverage after it began to print in London, and went on to 
establish a dynamic tradition of investigative journalism on which others have 
built since.

Her work as a staff reporter from 1963 onwards was wide-ranging, but she 
immediately took a special interest in housing, alerting the public and the 
government to the problem of slum landlords. “Rachmanism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/she-said/2014/mar/23/the-ghost-of-peter-rachman-still-stalks-the-halls-of-britains-rented-properties>
” was a particular evil in the Notting Hill district of west London, and Jean 
revealed how alsatian dogs and armed thugs were used to prise higher rents out 
of impoverished West Indian tenants. The evidence she provided for Whitehall 
resulted in a change to the law on evictions.

Jean became deputy news editor in 1966, halfway through my stint as news editor
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/08/john-cole>. I had concentrated 
on reorganising the brilliant, but occasionally chaotic, news coverage provided 
by the paper’s home specialists. She added a determination to strengthen the 
general news service, and used her enthusiasm to galvanise a generation 
of younger reporters.

Her people skills were highly developed and young reporters who were taken 
under her wing, as many were, quickly learned the value of doggedness in 
pursuit of a story. She could communicate her enthusiasm to others and had a 
rare capacity to see the things that needed to be investigated. She would not 
take no for an answer.

Jean always feared that a Guardian tendency to concentrate on debate and 
analysis would divert us from the daily grind of news-gathering. From time to 
time she would say that “some of us have to get on with the work and not have 
opinions” – while simultaneously throwing a couple of strongly held prejudices 
over her shoulder. She was always an amusing and loyal comrade.

There was a tendency on the paper to revere “writers” above reporters that 
left her impatient, and she saw it as her role to assert the primacy of 
news-gathering. Like me, she grew weary of the frequent jibe byCecil King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2011/sep/16/daily-mirror-bbc>, 
who was in charge of the Daily Mirror as chairman of IPC, that “what the 
Telegraph reports today, the Guardian comments on tomorrow”. She played a major 
part in changing that.

Jean succeeded me as news editor in 1970, and held the post for eight years, 
along the way also becoming an assistant editor of the paper. As well as 
covering everything that came out of the Troubles in Northern Ireland, her 
newsroom produced a series of outstanding exclusives that had an influence on 
public policy.

In 1971 the Australian journalist Peter Harvey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/mar/26/peter-harvey-obituary> revealed 
that inquiry agents had made a business out of eliciting private information 
from the Inland Revenue and other Whitehall departments, the Criminal Records 
Office, and from banks. The prime minister,Edward Heath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/jul/18/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, ordered an inquiry, though for long periods it seemed that Scotland Yard was 
more interested in discovering the Guardian’s sources for the story than in 
finding what lay behind the breaches in privacy. Eventually the government 
ordered tightening of security in the leaky departments.

Another investigation began in 1973, while the reporter, and later author, 
Adam Raphael was on leave with his wife’s family in South Africa. He showed 
that leading British companies were paying their African workers wages often 
below the starvation level. When he returned to London with the results of this 
investigation, Jean at once recognised its significance and promoted it within 
the paper. Eventually, after many threats of legal action, most of the 
companies held their hands up, especially after a select committee of the House 
of Commons, chaired by Bill (later Lord) Rodgers, took up the issue. Higher, if 
still insufficient, wages for many African workers were the result.

Jean had a shrewder knowledge than most journalists of her own strengths and 
weaknesses. Her great quality was enthusiasm. She demonstrated often her 
ability to convert a quiescent reporter into a zealot for information. But she 
recognised that this enthusiasm needed a rein, and she often found this in the 
editor,Alastair Hetherington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/oct/04/guardianobituaries>, who would 
insist on all necessary checks being made before the Guardian embarked on her 
latest campaign. It was a formidable partnership.

When Hetherington retired in 1975, Jean applied for the post, keen that a 
woman should be among the candidates. In the event, it went to Peter Preston 
and Jean thought of giving up the news editor’s job. Her husband,John Bourne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/nov/02/john-bourne>, the lobby editor 
of the Financial Times, and a former Guardian man, had suffered a medical 
accident in 1971 that left him partly paralysed.

However, she continued in the job until 1978, when she moved to being special 
projects editor. In addition to supervising investigative reporting, she wrote 
on the nuclear disarmament movement, particularly in Germany, and on the 
women’s protest against the siting of US cruise missiles at Greenham Common, 
Berkshire. While covering a Scandinavian women’s peace march across the Soviet 
Union, she interviewed dissident writers under house arrest.

Her enthusiasm was given a new stimulus when, in 1983, she became Scottish 
correspondent, based in Glasgow. The excitements of a new country, with the 
devolution debate, the miners’ strike of 1984-85 and the decline of industrial 
Clydeside providing her with abundant news, kept her happily occupied until her 
retirement in 1988. She also developed a late interest in motorcycles, covering 
grands prix across mainland Europe and amazing her colleagues by coming into 
the newsroom in racing leathers: having bought a motorbike herself, she was 
taught to ride it by a Guardian printer.

Born in Huddersfield, West Yorkshire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/yorkshire>, Jean was the only daughter of 
Jessie (nee Hobson) and Harry Stead. Harry was a Royal Artillery officer in 
both world wars, and ran the family building contractors’ firm with Jean’s 
brother, Peter.

Childhood illness prevented her from having a conventional education until she 
was 12, when she went to a boarding school,Hunmanby Hall 
<http://www.hunmanby.com/hallhist.html>, in east Yorkshire. When she left, she 
knew straight away that journalism was what she wanted to do. She learned her 
craft as the only woman in the Yorkshire Post newsroom in Leeds at the time, 
and later she moved to its London office.

In 1954 she married John, and after having her two children, Victoria and 
Matt, began to seek occasional work on the Guardian. Soon she was doing regular 
reporting shifts, and eventually persuaded the paper to give her a permanent 
job, by pointing out that the Yorkshire Post wanted her to come back full-time. 
(In those days, before maternity leave, re-employment was far from automatic.)

On leaving the post of Scottish correspondent, Jean divided her time between 
London and Cornwall. But she also wrote on archaeology for the Guardian, after 
protests about the burial of London theatre sites associated with William 
Shakespeare – the Rose and the Globe. She reported on discoveries in Britain 
and abroad, notably at the site of the Berlin Wall.

Jean was an instinctive feminist. On one occasion she gave a female reporter a 
hard time for asking that women on night duty be allowed to take taxis home. 
She and others had fought for the right of women to do night duty on equal 
terms with men and she was not about to have that principle watered down. 
Though she was well to the left politically, her feminist zeal caused her to 
admit to a guilty enthusiasm for Britain’s first female prime minister, even if 
this stopped well short of approving ofMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
’s policies.

Her book Never the Same Again (1986) told the story of women in the miners’ 
strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnmeducationcentre/women-miners-strike-1984-85-jean-stead-teaching-resource-gnm-archive>
, and her campaigning instincts persisted. While working in Scotland, she was 
actively hostile to the Faslane nuclear submarine base, and in 2002 she 
supported the UK Women’s Link With Afghan Women. A coordinator ofGrandmothers 
for Peace International <http://www.grandmothersforpeace.org>, in 2006 she 
organised an exhibition at the Guardian’s Newsroom visitor centre to mark the 
25th anniversary of the Greenham Common protest.

John died in 2012, and Jean is survived by Victoria and Matt, and her 
grandchildren, Dorothy, Flora and Edward.

• Jean Laura Stead, journalist, born 30 May 1926; died 2 December 2016

• John Cole <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/nov/08/john-cole> died in 
2013
 