
Frontline doctors have issued an unprecedented warning that patient safety is 
at risk at many A&E units across theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> because hospitals are overwhelmed, as 
the health secretary ­provoked controversy by suggesting the four-hour 
treatment target should exclude people who waste time by presenting with minor 
ailments.

Share your experiences of the NHS this winter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/share-your-experiences-of-the-nhs-this-winter>
The Royal College of Emergency Medicine said a substantial number of A&E 
departments were falling significantly short of the four hour standard – but
Jeremy Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> said that as 
many as 30% of those turning up were neither an urgent case nor a genuine 
emergency.

The college, which represents doctors in emergency care, warned: “In our 
expert opinion, when an emergency department falls below 75% against the 
four-hour standard, it shows a significant level of overcrowding and begins to 
put safety at risk. Present figures suggest a substantial number of departments 
are falling below this level.”

The number of patients waiting more than 18 weeks for treatment for ear, nose 
and throat surgery rose 124% between 2012-13 and 2015-16 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-09T16:35:59/embed.html>
The college believes that one in four A&E units are at risk of offering poor 
care, citing delays in assessing patients and administering pain relief.

In an emergency statement to the Commons prompted by reports of intense 
pressure at A&E units around the NHS in England, Hunt said that the four-hour 
waiting time had to be revised to remove non-urgent cases.

“This government is committed to maintaining and delivering that vital 
four-hour commitment to patients,” Hunt said. “But since it was announced in 
2000 there are nearly 9m more visits to our A&Es, up to 30% of whom NHS England 
estimate do not need to be there. And the tide is continuing to rise.

GPs working longer hours won’t ease the pressure on the NHS | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/15/gps-working-longer-hours-wont-ease-the-pressure-on-the-nhs>
“So, if we are to protect our four-hour standard, we need to be clear it is a 
promise to sort out all urgent health problems within four hours, but not all 
health problems, however minor.”

NHS Providers, which represents hospital bosses, welcomed the change as 
“potentially helpful” in relieving the record levels of strain A&Es are 
experiencing. But Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary, said: “Is he 
now really telling patients that rather than trying to hit the four-hour 
target, the government is now rewriting and downgrading it?”

The four-hour target, introduced by Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in 2004, initially obliged 
hospitals in England to to see and either admit, transfer or discharge 98% of 
A&E patients within that period. The coalition relaxed that to 95% in 2010 – 
but the NHS’s latest figures show that some hospitals are only dealing with 
50-60% of A&E arrivals within the supposed maximum four hours.
Between November 2015 and October 2016, on average in any one month, there 
were 193,405 instances of patients awaiting surgical treatment for more than 18 
weeks 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-09T16:33:30/embed.html>
Hunt’s move came as growing numbers of hospitals were forced to declare an 
alert because they had run out of beds and did not know where to put the large 
numbers of patients who needed to be admitted.


The medical director of Kettering general hospital said the situation at his 
hospital was serious. Dr Andrew Chiltern texted colleagues at lunchtime on 
Monday to say: “On the verge of significant internal incident. Situation is 
dire. We need to achieve discharges. May need to take action of cancelling all 
two-week waits tomorrow and outpatient department activity if we can’t get 
control.”

Croydon university hospital in south London said it began looking after adult 
patients on a ward that is usually reserved for children who have had surgery. 
It has moved the people it normally cares for there into extra beds it has 
opened up on one of its children’s wards. It made the temporary switch last 
week in response to the huge difficulties hospitals are having finding enough 
beds for patients who are so sick that they need to be admitted for treatment.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flabour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d521b438ea470f6901a59b0a4480984a5551000%2F0_79_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Hunt%20ditches%20four-hour%20target%20as%20A%26E%20crisis%20deepens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flabour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Hunt%20ditches%20four-hour%20target%20as%20A%26E%20crisis%20deepens&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Flabour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6d521b438ea470f6901a59b0a4480984a5551000%2F0_79_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 Jeremy Hunt said the current target is ‘a promise to sort out all urgent 
health problems within four hours’. Photograph: Dan Kitwood/Getty Images 
The health secretary also told MPs that hospitals may have to cancel 
operations and outpatient appointments so that staff can concentrate on the 
sickest patients. GPs may also be drafted in to help hospitals cope with record 
demand for medical care.


NHS Providers also voiced its fears that the overload facing A&Es could 
endanger patients. It said: “Persistently large number of trolley and 12-hour 
waits is a proxy for significantly elevated risk to patient safety and 
potential for significant harm. The same applies to persistently large numbers 
of long ambulance waits [outside an A&E with a patient unable to be handed over 
to busy hospital staff].”


The warning has prompted concern because the three triggers it identifies for 
patient safety being compromised are all now found fairly regularly at some 
hospitals.


In November, 237 patients waited more than 12 hours to get a bed at the Royal 
Stoke university hospital, while some ambulance crews were stuck outside 
hospitals in Merseyside last week for up to eight hours, unable to hand over 
their patients to A&E staff. A number of trusts – including Lewisham in London, 
Mid Essex, Addenbrooke’s in Cambridge and East and North Hertfordshire – had to 
declare a red or black alert on Monday because they were so hard-pressed.


NHS Providers denied that the NHS was in meltdown and rejected the British Red 
Cross’s claim thatthe NHS is experiencing a “humanitarian crisis” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
 as an exaggeration. It said that the “vast majority” of trusts were coping, 
but added that a “small number of trusts are failing to cope and have seen 
persistently large trolley and 12-hour waits” and some hospitals have seen the 
demand for A&E care soar by 20% in a year. While NHS personnel have been 
working flat-out recently to maintain services, “this level of staff goodwill 
is becoming unsustainable”.

The Liberal Democrat former health minister Norman Lamb warned that it could 
lead to some patients being left to wait ­indefinitely in A&E.

“This is a slippery slope towards the downgrading of standards of care across 
the NHS,” he said. “The government cannot just keep moving the goalposts as the 
health service struggles to cope with rising demand.”

Hunt, who spoke hours after Theresa May gave a keynote speech on mental 
health, said that Tuesday 27 December had been the busiest day in the NHS’s 
69-year history. Pressures may intensify further later this week with the 
arrival of very cold weather, he warned.

“We need to have an honest discussion with the public about the purpose of A&E 
departments”, he added. However, NHS experts said that inadequate GP and social 
care services were partly to blame for the relentless rise in A&E attendances.
 