
Expect trouble. On Tuesday, health secretary Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> and NHS England head Simon 
Stevens appear before the Commons health committee. Sarah Wollaston, GP and 
chair, has already said she wants no one quoting the mythical “£10bn extra” the 
government pretends the NHS has received, yet Hunt brazenly used it again on the
Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04c8l87>.

NHS maternity wards in England to be rated by safety record
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/17/maternity-wards-in-england-to-be-rated-by-safety-record>
Thankfully, Stevens is unlikely to indulge in the same delusional fantasies 
about the state of his service. He already warned thepublic accounts committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/public-accounts-committee/>
 in September of this “incredibly financially challenging period”, and 
“incredible” is the word he should cleave to. As every trust is forced to 
produce a financial plan that balances on paper, most – in private – admit 
these are fairy-tales;Chris Hopson 
<https://www.nhsproviders.org/about-us/our-team/chris-hopson> of NHS Providers 
makes plain these pigs won’t fly. Hunt relies on threats and micro-managing. 
Just yesterday he put another three debt-ridden trusts into “special measures” 
to warn others their heads will be on Whitehall spikes. But there’s safety in 
numbers: he can’t sack them all.

Theresa May has said there is no more money: the NHS must save £22bn by 2020, 
despite three quarters of trusts being up to their ears in debt and missing 
waiting targets by miles. If she could cut police costs by 20%, why can’t the 
NHS, she asks. Because crime has dropped like a stone over recent decades while 
NHS need heads skywards, with growing numbers of the old, and collapsing social 
care. She risks a brutal brush withNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>
 reality before long.

But that’s not all. By Friday all 44 areas have to produce a sustainability 
and transformation plan (STP), unleashing vehement local protest against any 
mergers or closures.

After Lansley’s catastrophic 2012 act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/mar/20/nhs-reform-health-bill-passes-vote>
 blew the NHS into myriad competing fragments, this re-reorganisation was meant 
to repair the damage and glue the fractured parts together again – a good idea. 
Stevens devised STPs to bind each area into a single unit, combining GPs, 
mental health and hospital services in one budget as a coherent whole. That 
might mean amalgamating maternity or A&E departments, rationalising stroke or 
cardiac care. Good idea, in theory.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjeremy-hunt-cant-fix-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d1be6ae20ba87d3332a056f75511766fa7f5227%2F52_251_5052_3031%2F5052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Jeremy%20Hunt%20can%E2%80%99t%20fix%20the%20NHS.%20No%20one%20now%20believes%20a%20word%20he%20says%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjeremy-hunt-cant-fix-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Jeremy%20Hunt%20can%E2%80%99t%20fix%20the%20NHS.%20No%20one%20now%20believes%20a%20word%20he%20says%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fjeremy-hunt-cant-fix-nhs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0d1be6ae20ba87d3332a056f75511766fa7f5227%2F52_251_5052_3031%2F5052.jpg>
 Junior doctors protest in London during April. Photograph: Joe 
Pepler/Rex/Shutterstock 
But these plans collide with the £22bn “savings”, so how will local people 
trust the good intentions of these plans? NHS England has rightly taken fright: 
theHealth Service Journal <https://www.hsj.co.uk/> reveals there have been 
orders requiring each area to send every STP announcement to the headquarters 
communications team to make sure they “articulate tangible benefits for 
patients” in language that is “clear and compelling”. But it may take more than 
“compelling” language to assuage local fears.

Few of these plans have yet been agreed, allowing rumours and fears to fester 
– and when they do emerge, the government can expect no backing, not even from 
their own MPs and councillors. Expect every politician, irrespective of party, 
to dash to join the local “Save Our Hospital” demo. Any who pause to suggest 
some plans might be good for patients will be mown down in the stampede. 
Bandwagon campaigners will join every protest, regardless.

A cluster of hospital protesters went to Downing Street and the Commons last 
week, with petitions about closures from Barnstaple, Dewsbury, Chorley, 
Huddersfield, Grantham and St Helier. Each has their own circumstance, so it’s 
well-nigh impossible for local people to know which units should be “saved” and 
which rightly closed.

Among them were protesters about the Horton hospital in Banbury. At last 
week’s prime minister’s questions, the Tory MP for North Oxfordshire, Victoria 
Prentis, asked an impassioned question: “Does the prime minister share my 
sadness that the majority of Banbury’s babies cannot be delivered, as I was, at 
the Horton general hospital? Will she join with me to put pressure on the trust 
to reopen the unit?” The PM replied: “Every effort is being made …”

Horton swears they've moved heaven and earth to hire doctors but none would 
come: there's a 24% vacancy rate

The Horton maternity unit closed abruptly this month after failing to hire 
middle-grade doctors, leaving a midwife-led unit. Part of the Oxford University 
Hospitals, its HR director swears they have moved heaven and earth to hire 
doctors but none would come: there’s a 24% vacancy rate in the district. The 
Horton obstetric unit lost its validation for training doctors as too few 
babies were being born there to qualify, so junior doctors won’t apply. They 
are still advertising, promising to reopen if they can recruit. Managersspell 
out the situation in painstaking detail 
<http://www.ouh.nhs.uk/hospitals/horton/news/questions-and-answers.aspx>, 
answering every possible query. But all this is to no avail.

A vociferous local Keep the Horton General campaign gathered 5,000 people to 
hold hands round the hospital, amid longstanding suspicions that it might be 
axed despite a plan to rebuild it. Every party supports the protest, with their 
Tory MPas militant as the rest 
<http://victoriaprentis.com/horton-general-hospital/>. She says she doesn’t 
trust the management: “They make decisions about us without us.” She and the 
campaigners mistrust whatever they are told.

The Banbury Guardian relishes the story, as the local press always does. “It’s 
lovely how the community has come together,” Prentis says. Banbury businesses 
are offering any obstetric doctor recruited free shirts, free beer, cheap 
accommodation and discounted fees at a local private school. A packed meeting 
roasted NHS managers about the journey time for mothers in labour to travel to 
the John Radcliffe in Oxford. Nothing creates such feelgood community cohesion 
as a local NHS threat.

The secret life of a GP: a family doctor is there for everyone else’s before 
their own | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/secret-life-gp-family-doctor-patients>
Talking to both sides, I am inclined to believe the managers’ good faith. But 
with deeper cuts scheduled for the years to 2020, can anyone know for certain 
where they might fall? At theWitney byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/witney-byelection-hard-brexit-may-be-key-issue-in-camerons-former-constituency>
, the Horton and other Oxfordshire NHS closures feature prominently. How Tory 
MPs get away with it beats me: they voted for these NHS cuts.

Watch this pattern repeated around the country as STP plans unfold. “Clear and 
compelling” language may not be enough when the NHS professionals, even the 
doctors, struggle to be believed. In the fog of war, with suspicions rife, 
local people have no way of detecting the good plans from dangerous cuts. As 
Stevens warned MPs: “Let’s be clear, there are going to be significant 
challenges, there will be choices, there will be controversies.”

The tragedy is that STPs were a progressive way to reunite NHS community, 
hospital, GP and social care services. But with no capital for rebuilding and 
even less for day-to-day spending, they risk wreckage. The cuts dig deep. How 
long before Simon Stevens decides to walk away?
 