
Jews are better educated than any other major religious group in the world, 
with an average of 13.4 years of schooling and a majority going on to higher 
education, a study has found.

At the other end of the educational scale, Hindus and Muslims have the fewest 
years of formal schooling, with an average of 5.6 years.


Related: One in four young people in developing countries unable to read, says 
UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2014/jan/29/illiteracy-education-young-people-developing-countries>

The main reason for the disparity is that Jews are largely concentrated in 
Israel and the US, countries with high levels of education generally, whereas 
98% of the world’s Hindus live in the developing countries of India, Nepal and 
Bangladesh.


Among Muslims, those that live in countries with strong economies are 
well-educated, but those who live in developing regions have comparatively 
short periods of formal schooling – and girls fare worse than boys.


But there are also notable differences between religious groups in the same 
areas of the world, such as sub-Saharan Africa, where Christians are generally 
better educated than Muslims.


The study, Religion and Education Around the World 
<http://www.pewforum.org/2016/12/13/religion-and-education-around-the-world/?utm_source=adaptivemailer&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=16-12-13%20rel&ed%20immediate%20release&org=982&lvl=100&ite=599&lea=109399&ctr=0&par=1&trk=>
, was published on Tuesday by the Washington-based Pew Research Center.

 See the full visual 
It found that, compared with the Jewish average of more than 13 years of 
formal schooling, Christians had 9.3 years, Buddhists 7.9, and Muslims and 
Hindus 5.6. Adults with no religious affiliation spend 8.8 years in school on 
average.

Almost one in five of all adults – more than 680 million people – received no 
formal schooling, but for Muslims and Hindus, the number missing out on 
education rose to around two in five.


However, in recent years the amount of time spent at school has increased 
among all groups.


According to Pew, the youngest Hindus in the study (born between 1976 and 
1985) spent an average of 7.1 years in school – nearly twice as long as the 
oldest Hindus (born between 1936 and 1955).


Within three generations, Muslims, similarly, were spending an extra three 
years at school, with an extra 2.5 years for Buddhists. Over the same period, 
Christians gained just an extra year and Jews less than half a year.

Among religiously unaffiliated adults, the youngest had an extra 2.9 years in 
school, overtaking Christians for the number of school years for this age group.


Pew found similar changes when looking at the educational gender gap. Although 
overall a much higher proportion of women had received no formal education, and 
those that had generally spent fewer years in school, the gap was shrinking 
with successive generations.


But among Hindus, there was still an 18-point gap between the youngest men and 
women, with 38% of women having no formal education compared with 20% of men.


The gender gap among the youngest Muslims was 10 points, with 33% of women not 
going to school compared with 23% of men.


The religiously unaffiliated had closed the gap within three generations, 
although there were still 2% of men and women having no formal education.


In higher education, Jews strikingly reversed the gender gap. In the youngest 
group, 69% of women have degrees compared with 57% of men – reversing a 
seven-point gap in favour of men among the oldest Jews to a 12-point gap in 
favour of women. Christians and the religiously unaffiliated also reversed gaps 
but to a lesser extent.

 See the full visual 
The report emphasises the difference in education between people in 
economically developed areas and those in poorer, less developed ones, 
regardless of religion. Among the factors affecting education levels are 
socioeconomic conditions, armed conflict, child labour and child marriage.


Christians in Europe and North America tend to be much more highly educated 
than those in sub-Saharan Africa.


Hindus have relatively low levels of education in India, Bangladesh and Nepal 
– but in the US, 96% have college degrees, a higher share than any other major 
religious group.


In general, religious minorities in the US are more likely to have college 
degrees than the Christian majority (Hindus 96%, Jews 75%, Muslims 54%, 
Buddhists 53%, unaffiliated 44%, Christians 36%).


In sub-Saharan Africa, Muslims are more than twice as likely as Christians to 
have no formal schooling – and the gap is widening.


The report says: “Some scholars suggest that the source of the 
Christian-Muslim attainment gap is rooted in the location of Christian 
missionary activity during colonial times. Missionary-built educational 
facilities were often located in what became heavily Christian areas rather 
than predominantly Muslim locales … As a result, Christians gained an 
educational edge over Muslims that lasted decades.”

 