
The USA remain favourites to prevail at the 2018 Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> after confirmation that Jim Furyk 
will serve as their captain for the defence of the trophy in France. Furyk, 
whose team are odds-on to win back-to-back Ryder Cups, will find himself in 
opposition to Thomas Bjorn.

Furyk’s elevation is no surprise after he served as a vice-captain to Davis 
Love III during the USA’srecent victory at Hazeltine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/02/usa-win-ryder-cup-rory-mcilroy-europe>
. With the policy of the USA now to promote captains from within, the prospect 
of Fred Couples upstaging Furyk to the post – as was suggested – never appeared 
likely. Furyk cited valuable experience under Love, whom he has instantly named 
as a vice-captain for 2018.

“Going forward, our future captains will have served as a vice-captain,” Furyk 
said. “You are going to see our captains even more prepared. It’s no secret; 
this has been my favourite event throughout my entire career. I am really 
excited about rolling my sleeves up and getting started. I can’t wait to start 
this process.”

Furyk, 46, who won the US Open in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2003/jun/16/golf.usopengolf20031>, has 
endured mixed Ryder Cup fortunes. In nine playing appearances, he tasted 
victory only twice.

Together with Phil Mickelson, he holds the American record for the most number 
of matches lost in the biennial event, at 20. In majors, too, Furyk is regarded 
as something of a nearly man having returned 14 finishes of fifth or better 
alongside that success of 14 years ago.

Nonetheless, Furyk has always been regarded a highly popular character on the 
PGA Tour and one who spans generations. Only last August he had a singleround 
of 58 at the Travelers Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/07/jim-furyk-golf-pga-tour-record-58>
.

“This is such an honour,” Furyk added. “I’m actually a little overwhelmed, I 
didn’t think it would be that way. In my opinion, the Ryder Cup embodies 
everything that is special about golf. Davis is going to be a tough act to 
follow. He put a system in place, got the players behind it. His experience, 
two captaincies and a vice- captaincy, will be priceless for me so I’m happy to 
have him by my side.”

Furyk refused to rule out completely a playing appearance at Le Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> National on the outskirts of Paris. “I 
don’t want to say no,” he said. “But all my focus is on being the best captain 
I can be. I want to get the 12 best players on this team.”

At Hazeltine the USA ended a miserable run of six defeats to Europe in seven 
attempts. After theheavy loss at Gleneagles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2014/sep/28/ryder-cup-2014-jamie-donaldson-seals-win-wedge-shot-life-keegan-bradley>
 in 2014, Furyk formed part of a task force established to reverse American 
fortunes.

“We have to look to the future, how can we improve, how can we get better,” 
Furyk said. “I have had a lot of support and a lot of resources behind me, I 
plan on using them to the full. Thomas Bjorn is a good friend of mine. We had a 
match as vice-captains at Hazeltine where we walked and chatted for seven holes 
about the future. He asked if I would be the next captain, he was hoping to get 
the nod on his side, so we were both hoping for this.”

When introducing Furyk at a media conference in Florida on Wednesday, the PGA 
of America’s president, Paul Levy, insisted that there had only been one man 
for the job. “For more than two decades, Jim Furyk has stood proud and tall on 
the American golf stage and we are thrilled to have him as our Ryder Cup 
Captain,” said Levy.

“His accomplishments as a player are well known but his inherent competitive 
spirit and leadership traits are what made his candidacy so attractive. Jim 
offers the total package and is well suited for the task at hand.”

Bjorn immediately and publicly sent congratulations to Furyk. “I’m looking 
forward to our shared times ahead,” said the Dane, whowas named as Europe’s 
captain last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/06/thomas-bjorn-named-captain-europe-2018-ryder-cup>
.
 