
On Thursday, Joe Biden had 
<http://time.com/4633604/joe-biden-obama-cries-medal/?xid=time_socialflow_twitter>
 a very human reaction after Obama surprised him with the Presidential Medal of 
Freedom. At afarewell tribute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/barack-obama-joe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom>
, the vice-president grabbed a tissue from his back pocket and started to bawl. 
He took deep breaths, wiped away tears and stared into cameras and smartphones 
with glistening eyes.

The heartfelt response to being presented the highest civilian award 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Presidential_Medal_of_Freedom> is completely 
warranted – I’ve shed bigger tears watching dog videos. But Biden’s bawl is 
noteworthy because it’s rare to see male politicians display “feminine” 
behavior in public. While it’s important that guys see high-profile depictions 
of healthy masculinity, the president and vice-president’s emotional 
vulnerability over the past eight years has made politics a more welcoming 
place for women.

Male politicians usually showcase stereotypically alpha characteristics. 
Donald Trump and Chris Christie are bullies who use schoolyard insults to 
weaken their opponents. Anthony Weiner and Bill Clinton are charismatic 
megalomaniacs whose insatiable egos are fuelled by political power and sexual 
conquest. Bernie Sanders yells until he’s red in the face to make a point.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joe%20Biden%20surprised%20with%20Presidential%20Medal%20of%20Freedom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joe%20Biden%20surprised%20with%20Presidential%20Medal%20of%20Freedom%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fjoe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video&media=>
Joe Biden surprised with Presidential Medal of Freedom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/12/joe-biden-presidential-medal-of-freedom-obama-video>
Where does this macho behavior leave women with congressional ambitions? They 
either put on a pantsuit and act like one of the boys or decide to work in 
fields where sensitivity isn’t considered a weakness. It’s no surprise that 
given the testosterone-fuelled atmosphere,Congress 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2015/01/05/the-new-congress-is-80-percent-white-80-percent-male-and-92-percent-christian/>
 is 80% male. But both Biden and Obama have made it easier for women to enter 
politics by being role models who embrace their feelings.


Too many men still think a woman who cries is acting hysterical. For some 
baffling reason, punching a hole in the wall or another person in the face is a 
more culturally acceptable way to release pain than sobbing into a pillow. And 
politics is no different. Anger makes you a strong candidate while sadness 
makes you frail. The result is that many female politicians swallow their 
emotions in an effort to appear tough.

During Hillary Clinton’s concession speech, I yearned for the secretary of 
state to let down her steely guard. When she said:“This loss hurts,” 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/11/9/13570328/hillary-clinton-concession-speech-full-transcript-2016-presidential-election>
 I wanted her to show that pain and unleash the tears piling up behind her eyes.

But of course, I know why she didn’t. In a nasty campaign during which she was 
scrutinized and mistreated because of her gender, Clinton didn’t want to give 
her critics any more fodder. On top of losing to a man with zero experience who 
boasted about sexually assaulting women, Clinton didn’t need Donald Trump 
calling her a pathetic puddle of tears who couldn’t handle her loss “like a 
man”.

The stereotype that women are overly emotional, hormonal beings who are unfit 
to lead still exists. Powerful men like Obama and Biden who embrace their 
feelings on a public stage help to combat the ridiculous political stigma 
against sensitivity. Every time these political powerhouses become misty-eyed, 
they send the message that having human feelings doesn’t equal incompetence.

Obama cried 
<http://www.popsugar.com/news/President-Obama-Crying-42869929#photo-42871125> 
in front of his staff after his re-election, after theSandy Hook 
<http://www.popsugar.com/news/President-Obama-Crying-42869929#photo-42871126> 
shooting and mostrecently <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EkrulXGNZYQ> during 
his farewell address. Bidenshed tears 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/01/12/remarks-president-and-vice-president-presentation-medal-freedom-vice>
 when his son nominated him as vice-president at the 2012 Democratic national 
convention and had tears in his eyes throughout his entire medal of freedom 
speech. While the stereotypical view of a powerful leader is a man who gives 
stern orders, stays composed and washes away his feelings with whiskey, Obama 
and Biden have proudly displayed their sensitivity as a strength.

The president and vice-president have also always been candid about their 
friendship. At the White House correspondents dinner, Obamasaid 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2015/04/25/obama-white-house-correspondents-dinner_n_7144706.html>
 he loved “Joe” and joked: “We’ve gotten so close that in some places in 
Indiana, they won’t serve us pizza anymore.” He appeared in aBuzzFeed video 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5eE7Da_6AMM> making a friendship bracelet for 
his right-hand man; Biden later posted a photo of the braceleton Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/vp/status/761253705341480962?lang=en>. During his eulogy 
at Beau Biden’s funeral, Obama called himself an honorary member of the Biden 
family before wrapping the vice-president in a hug andkissing 
<http://www.cnn.com/videos/us/2015/06/06/obama-hugs-kisses-biden-after-eulogy-beau-biden.cnn/video/playlists/beau-biden/>
 him on the cheek.

Their relationship is incredibly refreshing to watch for women who regularly 
have openly affectionate bonds with one another. In the workplace, we’re more 
likely to sign e-mails with “xo” and use exclamation marks in e-mails to put 
our colleagues at ease. But our emotional thoughtfulness towards one another is 
often considered unprofessional by men who prefer cold directives. Obama and 
Biden’s bromance proves that tight bonds have a place at work.

The president’s and vice-president’s emotional honesty is beautiful to watch. 
But more importantly, Obama and Biden have made politics less macho. By being 
the kind of men who are unafraid to openly love one another and cry in public, 
they have sent a message to aspiring female politicians that being human 
doesn’t come with a penalty.
 