
Those who enjoy the Chieftains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2012/apr/19/chieftains-voice-of-ages-review> 
may not realise that the band took their name from a collection of short 
stories,Death of a Chieftain 
<http://www.worldcat.org/title/death-of-a-chieftain-and-other-stories/oclc/2154610>
 (1964), by the Irish poet John Montague, who has died aged 87.

Anyone who heard Montague himself performing, however, is quite likely to 
recollect what the poetDerek Mahon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jun/17/new-selected-poems-derek-mahon-review>
 called his “mythical stammer”. This struggle to express himself, to find words 
for the ineffable or the unspeakable (as in the poem about an attempted rape, 
The Wild Dog Rose) is crucial to his often autobiographical work. If the bogs 
were an adequate symbol of the Troubles forSeamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/aug/30/seamus-heaney>, 10 years his 
junior,Montague dipped his hands in a more “fluid sensual dream” 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poem/item/8075>, deeper into 
Yeatsian archetypes.

He was a master of dinnseanchas or “place wisdom”, finding music in “place 
names that sigh / like a pressed melodeon / across this forgotten / Northern 
landscape”, but conscious of his own placelessness, as suggested in the rather 
Jungian title poem of Mount Eagle (1989) – almost an anagram of his own name. 
It is no surprise that one of his essays was onOliver Goldsmith’s pastoral poem 
The Deserted Village 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2010/may/31/poem-week-goldsmith-deserted-village>
, which he considered deeply Irish, “a protest against the Enclosure Acts”. In 
his own much anthologised poem Like Dolmens Round My Childhood, the Old People 
(published in The Rough Field, 1972), after describing characters from his 
youth, he eventually harrumphs: “Ancient Ireland, indeed! I was reared by her 
bedside.”

In fact, Montague was born in Brooklyn, New York, during the depression (a 
year younger than Mickey Mouse, he would joke), the son of Irish Catholics 
recently emigrated. Although sent back home, along with his brothers, Seamus 
and Turlough, at the age of four by his sick mother, Molly (nee Carney), in his 
poetry he clings to those first years – her“flowering absence” 
<http://www.poetryinternationalweb.net/pi/site/poem/item/8077>; the misery of 
his father, James, in his brother’s speakeasy, or caged in “his grille / in the 
Clark Street IRT 
<https://morehastohappen.com/2016/12/16/john-montague-poet-from-the-land-of-poets/>
”.

Both parents had been active in Ireland during the border turmoil of 1916, the 
area where young John would grow up. Although separated from his brothers on 
arrival in Northern Ireland in 1933, he came to regard the seven years he spent 
with two unmarried aunts on their farm in Garvaghey, County Tyrone, “as a 
blessing”. Garvaghey, the so-called “rough field”, would providematerial and 
the title for his most celebrated book 
<https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/1517217.The_Rough_Field>, an extended (and 
illustrated) dramatisation of “a kind of vision” he had had while sitting on a 
bus, of “my home area, the unhappiness of its historical destiny”.

After attending Garvaghey and then Glencull primary schools, and avoiding the 
priesthood at St Patrick’s College, Armagh (“religion did fascinate me [but] … 
girls were constantly on my mind”), he went to University College Dublin, where 
loneliness, desire and the presence of figures including the poet and critic
Anthony Cronin 
<http://www.londonfictions.com/anthony-cronin-the-life-of-riley.html> led him 
to verse. A Fulbright scholarship to Yale in 1953, then stints at Iowa (where 
he met his first wife, Madeleine de Brauer) and Berkeley, brought him in to 
contact with the American poetic style.

When The Rough Field appeared almost two decades later (by which time he was 
heading for Cork, settling there with his second wife, Evelyn Robson, and their 
two daughters, Oonagh and Sibyl, and becoming a magnetic presence at the 
university), he had already published Forms of Exile (1958), Poisoned Lands 
(1961), A Chosen Light (1967) and Tides (1971). Many of these were beautiful 
Dolmen Press editions, as were A Slow Dance (1975) and The Great Cloak (1978), 
the latter an arrestingly erotic collection. But, significantly, when it 
eventually came to a Collected Poems (1995, expanded 2012), Montague opened it 
with the full text of his Ulster sequence.

For all its notoriety and political heft – perhaps because of it – The Rough 
Field had nothing like the enduring effect ofHeaney’s 1975 collection North 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/48393>. Nor did 
a string of subsequent volumes, such as The Dead Kingdom (1984), or the late 
masterpiece Border Sick Call, which closes the first edition of the Collected 
Poems, and tells movingly of visiting his doctor brother’s rural patients 
during a snowstorm.

Despite a vigorous final period – Smashing the Piano (1999), Drunken Sailor 
(2004), Speech Lessons (2011) and Second Childhood (due to be published in 
February 2017) – and the enviable succession of selected volumes (from Oxford 
University Press, 1982, Bloodaxe, 1990 and Penguin, 2001) – Montague aways 
seemed to be overlooked, overshadowed by those who influenced him, including 
his drinking companion and fellow walker Samuel Beckett, and those – like 
Heaney orEavan Boland <https://www.poets.org/poetsorg/poet/eavan-boland> – whom 
he influenced.

Apart from stories, essays (The Figure in the Cave, 1989) and autobiographical 
writings (Company, 2001; The Pear is Ripe, 2007), Montague also editedThe Faber 
Book of Irish Verse <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Faber_Book_of_Irish_Verse> 
(1974), featuring many of his translations.

He was involved with the founding of Claddagh Records, which publishes 
traditional artists and leading literary figures inIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>. The label released a number of 
recordings of Montague’s work, including a 1973 live performance of The Rough 
Field, at the Roundhouse in London, with music by the Chieftains.

He was much honoured in Ireland, becoming the first holder of the Ireland 
Chair of Poetry in 1998, and in the US too, and his personality seemed 
particularly well adapted to life in France. His first two wives were both 
French and he translated the French poetsClaude Esteban 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poets/detail/claude-esteban>, 
Philippe Jaccottet and Eugène Guillevic.

Montague was made a chevalier of the Légion d’Honneur in 2010. In his latter 
years, he and his third wife, the novelist Elizabeth Wassell, whom he married 
in 2005, divided their time between an apartment in Nice and their farmhouse in 
west Cork.

His first two marriages ended in divorce. He is survived by Elizabeth, Oonagh 
and Sibyl, and his grandchildren, Eve and Theo.

• John Montague, poet and writer, born 28 February 1929; died 10 December 2016
 