
John Jacobs, who helped found the European Tour and was twice European Ryder 
Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/11/jim-furyk-us-ryder-cup-2018-captain-france>
 captain, has died at the age of 91.

From Tiger Woods to the Solheim Cup: 10 golfing hopes for the year ahead | 
Ewan Murray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/11/10-golfing-hopes-for-2017-tiger-woods-solheim-cup>
Born in Woodsetts, Yorkshire, Jacobs led the Ryder Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rydercup> teams in 1979 and 1981, which were 
the first two competitions to feature a combined European side. His death was 
announced on the European Tour website. In 1954, Jacobs led the calls for the 
modernisation of the game, to include an increase and better distribution of 
prize funds.

Jacobs took up the role of tournament director-general of the PGA executive 
committee in October 1971 and would go on to establish a ‘Continental Swing’ 
which embraced the French, German and Spanish Opens, with the latter becoming 
the first official European Tour event at PalsGolf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Club in Girona during April 1972.

Recalling the developments during an interview which marked the European 
Tour’s 40th anniversary, Jacobs said: “If you look at where the Tour started 
when Ken [Schofield] took over and where it was when he left, it is almost 
unbelievable, and George [O’Grady] followed that on by moving things even 
further forward. Great credit must go to both of them.”

“This is an extremely sad day for everyone connected with the European Tour 
and our thoughts and prayers go out to John’s family and his many friends 
across the world of golf,” said European Tour chief executive Keith Pelley. 
“His memory for the details around the creation of the Tour were incredible 
and, quite simply, without his vision and determination, the European Tour we 
know today wouldn’t exist.”

Jacobs was made an OBE in 1997 and in 2000 was inducted into the World Golf 
hall of fame.
 