
Donald Trump’s attempt to discredit US politician and hero of the civil rights 
movement John Lewis in a series of tweets has backfired, propelling Lewis’s 
books to the top of the bestseller lists as dissent grew over the inauguration 
of the president-elect.

On Saturday, Trump criticised the Democrat congressman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
 after Lewis told NBC News that he did not regard the incoming president as 
legitimate.

Within hours, two graphic novels and a memoir by Lewis took the top three 
spots on Amazon after Trump tweeted: “Congressman John Lewis should spend more 
time on fixing and helping his district, which is in horrible shape and falling 
apart.”

March, Lewis’s graphic novel about the US civil rights movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/17/rep-john-lewis-national-book-awards-refused-entry-to-library-because-black>
, shot from 451st place in the overall bestseller lists to No 1, while his 
memoir Walking the Wind: A Memoir of the Movement rose a vertiginous 8,699 
places to No 2.

Further down the charts, his 2012 book Across That Bridge: Life Lessons and a 
Vision for Change, which recounted lessons learned as an activist, leapt from 
34,480 to 175 in the overall bestseller list onAmazon.com <http://amazon.com/> 
and took top spot on the online bookseller’s philosophy of ethics and morality 
chart. All three were holding their places on Monday as fury over the tweets 
grew.

The third volume of March, written with Andrew Aydin and illustrator Nate 
Powell, was the first graphic novel to win a National Book Award when it was 
published in 2016. The trilogy tells the story of the struggle for equality 
through his own experiences as leader of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating 
Committee. The youngest speaker at the March on Washington in 1963, the 
75-year-old is the only surviving speaker who was on the Lincoln Memorial with 
Martin Luther King.

The congressman courted the president-elect’s ire when he told the US news 
channel NBC that he did not regard the recent election as legitimate and was 
not planning to attend Trump’s inauguration this Friday. “I think the Russians 
participated in helping this man get elected. And they helped destroy the 
candidacy of Hillary Clinton,” he said.

In a typically robust series of tweets, Trump reacted to Lewis’s comments by 
accusing him of being “all talk, talk, talk – no action or results”. He added: 
“Congressman John Lewis should finally focus on the burning and crime infested 
inner-cities of the US. I can use all the help I can get!”

Twitter users jumped to Lewis’s defence. As well as attacking Trump for 
impugning the veteran campaigner’s reputation, several other US politicians 
followed his lead and announced they would not attend the new president’s 
swearing-in.

“After reading classified Russian hacking doc & ‪@realDonaldTrump 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump> offensive tweets to ‪@repjohnlewis 
<https://twitter.com/repjohnlewis> I will not be attending the Inauguration,” 
fellow congressman Mark Pocan tweeted.

In a 2013 interview about the first volume of March for Entertainment Weekly, 
Lewis said: “When you see something that is not right, not fair, not just, you 
have to do something about it.” Exhorting young people to protest peacefully, 
he added: “I say to young people today, whether it’s in New York or in Florida, 
if you see something, do something about it.”
 