
The editor of the Spectator <https://www.theguardian.com/media/the-spectator> 
magazine, Fraser Nelson, is from Scotland. This week, in an argument with him 
over press regulation, the comedian John Cleese took an ad hominem position by
wondering on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/JohnCleese/status/782691995034722304?ref_src=twsrc^tfw> 
why it was that “we let half-educated tenement Scots run our English press”. 
Was it “because their craving for social status makes them obedient retainers”? 
Later, replying to the predictable flurry of complaint that followed, Cleese 
tweeted again: “It’s not casual racism, it’s considered culturalism.”
John Cleese (@JohnCleese) 
Why do we let half-educated tenement Scots run our English press ? Because 
their craving for social status makes them obedient retainers ?
https://t.co/uCXEvbZssE <https://t.co/uCXEvbZssE>
 <https://twitter.com/JohnCleese/status/782691995034722304> October 2, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JohnCleese/status/782691995034722304> 
As a famous person was involved, it became news. Cleese wants to be Dr 
Johnson: “the noblest prospect which a Scotchman ever sees, is the high road 
that leads him to England …” and so on. Despite all his tweeting, he seems cut 
off from modern life. In 1902, the unpleasant English satirist TWH Crosland 
wrote that “Hoo are ye the noo?” was the conventional greeting in newspaper 
offices, Scots figuring disproportionately in a profession “into which you can 
crawl without inquiry as to your qualifications, and … in which the most 
middling talent will take you a long way”. But the Scottish domination of 
London journalism ended long ago, even before the disappearance of blue pencils 
and copy boys. (When I arrived on a national paper in 1970, only two other 
Scots worked on it, both elderly; one had covered political campaigns by Ramsay 
MacDonald.) What persists still, inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> as a diminished fact and elsewhere as 
a pejorative, is the tenement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd633ee123e424b8e21a93192aa07f19c23cf6a08%2F0_506_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Cleese%20has%20shown%20his%20ignorance%20about%20poor%20people%2C%20bad%20housing%20and%20modern%20life%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Cleese%20has%20shown%20his%20ignorance%20about%20poor%20people%2C%20bad%20housing%20and%20modern%20life%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd633ee123e424b8e21a93192aa07f19c23cf6a08%2F0_506_3614_2169%2F3614.jpg>
 A tenement block in the Gorbals before demolition in the early 60s. 
Photograph: Albert McCabe/Getty Images 
The word comes from the medieval Latin tenementum, meaning a property held by 
tenure; a house divided into separate, rented homes became known a tenement 
house. In the walled cities of medieval France and Italy, separate dwellings 
arranged over several floors of the same building were a vertical solution to 
the problem of limited space. Edinburgh built some spectacular examples in the 
17th century – at 12 storeys, they were among the tallest buildings in Europe – 
but it was VictorianGlasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> that made 
them its own. Tenements became the defining feature of the townscape, shaping 
the nature of the city and the lives of the people in it more than any other 
single factor, diet apart.

They had a modest start, arriving with Glasgow’s first manufacturing industry, 
cotton, as brick-built barracks for mill workers, but landlords were quick to 
adopt their basic form – two or more storeys divided into flats, reached by a 
common entrance or close and a common stair – as the easiest solution to the 
housing needs of the thousands of migrants who moved to the city from Ireland 
and the Highlands to find jobs in shipyards and engineering works. Glasgow’s 
population was77,000 in 1801  
<http://www.understandingglasgow.com/indicators/population/trends/historic_population_trend>
and 762,000 a hundred years later; it had swollen by a factor of 10. Families 
crowded into apartments of one room (“the single end”) or two (“the 
room-and-kitchen”), which were the two most common types of accommodation.

Between 1872 and 1876, boom years for the Glasgow economy, the city authorised 
the building of more than 21,000 tenement houses. Long canyons of four-storey 
terraces created new working-class suburbs of yellow sandstone that were soon 
turned black by factory and household smoke. This was the period that created 
what you might call “peak Glasgow” – the Glasgow of popular memory and 
imagination that suffered little wartime damage to its fabric and lasted more 
or less unchanged until the last tram ran in the 1960s. But in all that time 
the tenement’s reputation had grown more soiled and squalid, so that there was 
little opposition when plans were made for the demolition of entire 
neighbourhoods to make way for tower blocks and a motorway.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4a30889b7d44a204a018f09636afa3e7270db%2F28_265_4052_2431%2F4052.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=John%20Cleese%20has%20shown%20his%20ignorance%20about%20poor%20people%2C%20bad%20housing%20and%20modern%20life%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=John%20Cleese%20has%20shown%20his%20ignorance%20about%20poor%20people%2C%20bad%20housing%20and%20modern%20life%20%7C%20Ian%20Jack&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F08%2Fjohn-cleese-ignorance-housing-scots-tenements%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19c4a30889b7d44a204a018f09636afa3e7270db%2F28_265_4052_2431%2F4052.jpg>
 Victorian tenements in Edinburgh. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
The reputation was in part unfair. Many solid and spacious homes had been 
built on the tenement principle until, in 1910, new legislation bit into the 
profits from building them. There was an informal league table of desirable 
tenement types. At the top stood those built of red sandstone with decorative 
tiles in their closes and grass flourishing in their backyards, and at the 
bottom those with blackened yellow stone and an infrequently whitewashed 
close.There were several gradations in between, but below them all lay the 
abyss of single ends and room-and-kitchens, with their curtained-off beds and 
communal WCs accessed from the common stair.

Externally, even these tenements could have a kind of nobility: according to 
the architectural historianFrank Worsdall 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/12697499.Frank_Worsdall/>, the inspiration 
for many early tenement elevations lay in the Renaissance palaces of Rome and 
northern Italy. But even the Corinthian pilasters of thePalazzo della 
Cancelleria <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Palazzo_della_Cancelleria> could 
scarcely compensate for the poor health, disease and early death that came with 
bad sanitation and a 14ft by 12ft room that catered for the waking and sleeping 
needs of a family of six.

Even the Corinthian pilasters couldn't compensate for the poor health, disease 
and death that came with bad sanitation

By the mid-19th century, bad housing had become Scotland’s most notorious 
social problem: two thirds of the population lived in homes of not more than 
two rooms and many one-room homes had no access to natural light. England did 
better. Thecensus of 1911 <http://www.ukcensusonline.com/census/1911.php> 
showed that 45% of Scots lived at a density of more than two people per room, 
while the figure in England was only 9%. Two thirds of Glasgow’s population 
lived in one or two rooms, but only a third of London’s.

Come the Bolshevik revolution, this had consequences. Outbreaks of popular 
unrest in Glasgow – “the red Clyde” – made Britain and America anxious about 
the future. According to the writerWilliam Bolitho 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/William_Bolitho_Ryall>, sent on assignment to 
Glasgow in 1924 byNew York World 
<https://www.britannica.com/topic/New-York-World>, “the smouldering danger … 
had ceased to be a local anxiety, and become an interest and alarm to the whole 
civilised world”. There was “something deeply wrong with the Clyde; the whole 
middle-class of England knows it, though hardly in detail”. What was this wrong 
thing? Bolitho decided that the root grievance was housing … “a simple term for 
a cancerous condition which, starting from the lack of space and light in the 
homes of the workers … has developed into a political movement, quite apart 
from Marxianism [sic], which threatens to harden into almost as rigorous an 
extremism as Leninism itself”.

Hard Brexit could cost Scotland £2,000 a head and 80,000 jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/hard-brexit-could-see-scotland-lose-80000-jobs-and-cost-2000-a-head>
As it turned out, the tenement’s legacy was less straightforward. It began to 
feature in newspapers as the home of the criminal rather than the political. In 
No Mean City, the notorious 1935 novel about razor gangs, the action moves in 
and out of decrepit Gorbals tenements. The protagonist’s family of 11 shares a 
room and kitchen, and in the opening scene he rises from his cavity bed to have 
a pee in the kitchen sink. Before the novel appeared, the Gorbals was unknown 
beyond Glasgow. After it, the Gorbals and Glasgow were synonymous.

“Born in a tenement in Gorbals Cross / Of all the teddy boys he was the boss,” 
we sang in 1956 to the tune of Davy Crockett. To those who knew no better, the 
word had come to mean slum – a meaning that Cleese expanded to include the 
suggestion that ignorance and servility were common in the Scottish population 
as a whole, not excluding the Spectator’s editor, who grew up in the 
tenement-free Highlands and went, like Cleese, to a private school.

But we know who the ignorant one is in this case. Long ago – perhaps it was 
the same year as Davy Crockett – I woke up in a tenement for the first time. I 
lay in the recess bed in the kitchen and watched the activity around me. A fire 
was already burning in what my aunt called “the range”, a large and complicated 
piece of black ironwork with hinged doors and hotplates. My uncle was getting 
ready to leave for work. My aunt and two cousins sat at the kitchen table 
drinking tea and eating morning rolls. Sun streamed through the window. Looking 
back at this scene, I conclude that the tenement’s reputation has been badly 
traduced, but of course not included in the picture but invaluably there just 
out of shot are a sitting room, two bedrooms and a long narrow bathroom – here 
was a tenement fit for a king.
 