
Departing CIA director John Brennan criticized Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> on Sunday for his approach to 
national security, saying the president-elect should not be carelessly “talking 
and tweeting” without understanding Russia’s threat to the US.

Mike Pence insists Trump campaign has not been in contact with Russia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/mike-pence-trump-campaign-russia>
Brennan also said he took “great umbrage” at Trump’s suggestion that agencies 
biased against him were behaving as if the US were “Nazi Germany”.

“Now that he’s going to have an opportunity to do something for our national 
security as opposed to talking and tweeting,” Brennan told Fox News Sunday, 
“he’s going to have tremendous responsibility to make sure that US and national 
security interests are protected.

“I think he has to be mindful that he does not have a full appreciation and 
understanding of what the implications are of going down that road.”

Trump has repeatedly praised the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and 
criticized American intelligence officers, accusing them of letting “fake 
news”, about what intelligence agencies believe to be Russian hacks on 
political parties and alleged contacts with Trump’s campaign, appear in press 
reports.


“One last shot at me,” Trump tweeted this week. “Are we living in Nazi 
Germany?”
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Intelligence agencies should never have allowed this fake news to "leak" into 
the public. One last shot at me.Are we living in Nazi Germany?
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096> January 11, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096> 
Brennan called the comparison of the CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia>, NSA, FBI and the director of 
national intelligence offensive to American officers.

“What I do find outrageous is equating an intelligence community with Nazi 
Germany,” he said. “I do take great umbrage at that, and there is no basis for 
Mr Trump to point fingers at the intelligence community for leaking information 
that was already available publicly.”

Undaunted, on Sunday Trump used Twitter to comment further on this week’s 
publication by BuzzFeed of an unsubstantiated intelligence dossier,writing 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/820725491812487170>: “Thank you to 
[journalist] Bob Woodward who said, ‘That is a garbage document … it never 
should have been presented … Trump’s right to be upset (angry) about that …

“Those Intelligence chiefs made a mistake here, & when people make mistakes, 
they should APOLOGIZE. Media should also apologize.”

Obama aide: Trump should 'reach out' to Democrats boycotting inauguration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/democrats-inauguration-boycott-john-lewis-trump>
After weeks of insisting that China or “a 400-pound guy” could have hacked his 
political opponents, Trump conceded this week: “I think it wasRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.”

His transition team has denied, however, alleged contacts between Trump aides 
and high-ranking officials in Russia. On Sunday, Vice-President-elect Mike 
Pence insisted there were no such contacts during the campaign.

Trump’s national security adviser, retired general Mike Flynn, spoke with 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/michael-flynn-russia-ambassador-trump-dossier>
 Russia’s ambassador to the US, Sergei Kislyak, in late December around the 
time the US imposed sanctions on Russian officials. According to Pence, the men 
did not discuss those sanctions.

“It was strictly coincidental that they had a conversation,” Pence told CBS’s 
Face the Nation. “They did not discuss anything having to do with the United 
States’ decision to expel diplomats or impose censure against Russia.”
 