
Standing tall in a park, shading an avenue or populating a woodland walk, 
trees are the background to, and guardians, of a healthy life. They clean our 
air, improve water quality and connect us with nature – vital in an 
increasingly urban and virtual life. But, our green and pleasant land is fading 
away.

 The slow loss of our woodland heritage can easily go unnoticed, as a park 
becomes a car park, a road widens, a hedgerow is uprooted or housing rises. 
Equally, through storm damage or disease, an ancient oak or copse might be 
toppled and replaced by stumps, bramble, scrub or, worse, concrete.

 Historically, our wild woods were felled by the Bronze-Age axe for cultivated 
land, then, from William the Conqueror onwards, claimed as royal hunting 
grounds. Through the centuries since, trees provided timber for homes, ships 
and fuel. So by 1905, England’s once proud forests and woods covered just 5.2% 
of the land.

 Much has improved in the space of a century, in part due to the establishment 
of a Forestry Commission in 1919, but the UK is, surprisingly, still one of the 
least wooded countries in Europe with just 13% woodland cover compared to a 
European Union average of 37%. In the UK, Scotland has 18% forest cover and 
Wales has 14% – but England only has 10% and Northern Ireland just 7%.

Take pride in your own woodland

In 2013, the government set a target to boost woodland cover in England from 
10% to a more respectable 12% by 2060. To achieve this, 5,000 hectares of new 
tree planting is needed every year – the equivalent of 5,000 Trafalgar Squares 
of fresh woodland. It is a fine aspiration, but this seed has borne little 
fruit. Last year, just 700 hectares of woodland were planted – a massive 
shortfall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjoin-the-tree-planting-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F424d77edd6adb8ae4d1c72f13796ba2974c2b90e%2F0_25_730_438%2F730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Join%20the%20tree-planting%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjoin-the-tree-planting-campaign%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Join%20the%20tree-planting%20campaign&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-tress%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fjoin-the-tree-planting-campaign%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F424d77edd6adb8ae4d1c72f13796ba2974c2b90e%2F0_25_730_438%2F730.jpg>
 Trees are the background to a healthy life. Photograph: Tommy Martin/Trigger 
Image 
Trees are vital to our well-being and the nation’s wildlife. That’s where the 
Woodland Trust comes into its own. As the UK’s largest woodland conservation 
charity, with half a million supporters, it protects over 1,000 sites covering 
22,500 hectares of woodland, that are free to visit. The Trust is spearheading 
a campaign to plant 64 million new native trees in the UK over the next 10 
years – one tree for every person in the UK. Many of these will be planted to 
re-establish lost hedgerows that divide farmland, providing corridors for 
animals; some will restore and create new woods and forests.

You can make a difference

Planting 50% more trees in 10 years than it has in its 44-year history is a 
massive challenge. You can be part of it too. Sign up for anautumn discovery 
pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/autumnpack/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
 and find out how you can help the UK on its way to a leafier future. The 
Woodland Trust campaign will explain why we need to be planting more trees in 
the UK, the essential benefits of a thriving woodland, the fascinating myths 
and traditions related to trees and how to plant and care for your own. Every 
tree makes a difference. Let’s bring the woods back to the UK with a new tree 
for every one of us.
 