
It’s the time of year when millions flock to gyms in an effort to shed the 
weight they put on over Christmas. But the only thing many will be burning off 
is their cash. Gyms like to keep their prices private, tempting you to visit so 
they can then give you the hard sell. So how much do they really charge, and 
what can you do to keep the price down?

We tested the major chains, checking prices in both Manchester and Bristol. 
What is immediately apparent is the vast gulf between the luxury operators and 
the new breed of budget gyms which offer remarkably low-cost deals. For 
example, in Manchester we found that The Gym’s Ashton Old Road branch would 
charge just £153.88 in the first year for a new member – little more than a 
tenth of luxury brand David Lloyd across town at its Trafford City club.

What separates the budget operators is that they rarely offer swimming pools 
or “spa facilities”. So don’t expect intimately-lit pools or luxury design. 
But, in their favour, there’s a refreshing transparency around contracts.

The Gym and PureGym offer deals that do not tie members into lengthy contracts 
and therefore avoid subsequent cancellation problems. Money’s Consumer 
Champions regularly deal with readers who think that, by cancelling their 
direct debit, they are leaving – only to find painful terms and conditions that 
tie them in for months.

Refreshingly, many of the chains we tested now offer their prices online. 
However, neither David Lloyd nor DWFitness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/fitness> do, and, when we phoned, 
they were very reluctant to give out membership costs. Each time we were 
referred to a sales person, who asked lots of questions about our lifestyle and 
potential gym usage. Even then, they were hesitant about saying exactly what 
the monthly rates would be. Only after lots of prodding were we able to obtain 
prices. Our findings are below.

Your choice will be down to the level of luxury you want or can afford, as 
well as local factors such as car parking. But there are other factors to 
consider before you sign up.

Free taster days

Plenty of chains offer free taster days. But, inevitably, you have to give all 
your details and must be prepared to be heavily sold to, either at the gym or 
later on via marketing emails. Some, such as PureGym, Fitness First and Anytime 
Fitness, offer free passes lasting three days, while Nuffield and DW Fitness 
have free one-day passes.

Cheap day passes

Many gyms now allow you to buy a one-day pass, which is often not much more 
than paying for entry into a local authority gym. For example, Bannatyne in 
Chepstow Street, Manchester sells day passes for £10 for a recently-upgraded 
health club that includes gym, pool and sauna. If you are too lazy to bring 
your own towel, you can hire one for £2.50.

The Gym sells day passes starting at £4.99 (lots of workout equipment, but no 
pools) or a multi-day pass that gives you access for three or five consecutive 
days from £12.99.

For irregular users, these may be much better value than paying monthly or 
annually for facilities you rarely use.

Monthly pay as you go

A big decision for gym-goers is whether to lock into a cheaper 12-month 
contract, or opt for the more expensive monthly rolling contract. Paying as you 
go on a monthly basis gives you a lower-cost way to try out a gym before 
committing for a year. The budget chains have adopted this mentality for their 
business model, with no tie-ins, leaving you free to quit any time simply by 
cancelling your direct debit.

Use a gym broker



PayAsUGym is an interesting concept: enter your postcode into the site and it 
selects deals in your area. It’s particularly good for short-term deals – 
finding passes that let you in for one, five or 10 days, or a month. It may 
also find hotels that have good health spas attached. For example, in Bristol 
it lists the Mercure hotel’s gym and pool at £5.50 for one visit or £46.80 for 
10.

Avoid the joining fee

These have generally tumbled in recent years, and you’re a bit of a mug if you 
pay one. Most gyms offer deals in January with no joining fees, and at other 
times of the year if you are signing up for 12 months, a little haggling should 
get you out of it.

Corporate membership

The upmarket operators, such as David Lloyd, Nuffield Health and Virgin 
Active, offer negotiable discounts to corporate members, usually knocking 
around 10% off the membership price. Pure Gym also offers corporate membership 
and is upfront about the discounts: 5% off if the company signs up 25-50 
employees, or 10% of there are more. It also waives the £10 joining fee.

'I know I should go to the gym more but, really, who's got the time?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/apr/24/exercise-housework-gardening-walking-dog-cycling-fidgeting>
Local authority gyms



Don’t forget your local leisure centre. Many have decent facilities that 
hugely undercut the prices of the swish private centres. For example, Hough End 
in Manchester charges non-members £4.90 for entry, plus £2.50 for the pool. But 
the arrival of the budget operators such as The Gym and Pure means that 
local-authority annual membership deals are sometimes more expensive than the 
private sector.

Tesco Clubcard points

If you shop at that supermarket, check out deals it has for Clubcard points. 
For example, it is currently offering a four-week membership of Nuffield Health 
for £18.50 in Clubcard vouchers.

Avoid the tricks of the trade

The Office of Fair Trading and the Competition and Markets Authority have 
clamped down on some of the shadier gym practices of recent times, but you 
still need to be wary.

Always ask what happens if you are ill or injured, move house, get pregnant or 
change jobs. Can you freeze your membership or transfer it to someone else?

Remember, most gym contracts will renew automatically. Ask how much notice you 
are required to give to cancel, and note the date by which you should inform 
the gym if you do.

How to cancel

Citizens Advice says do it in writing and keep a copy. Send it recorded 
delivery so you have proof of when you sent it, and can find out whether the 
gym has received it or not. If you have requested cancellation of your contract 
and you are within your rights to do so, cancel your direct debit so they can’t 
take any more money from you. If it is a “continuous payment authority” you can 
still cancel, despite what misinformed bank staff might tell you.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgym-membership-guide-to-cutting-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b988da59658074134c07e00c0567d50fd8b25e6%2F0_204_5390_3234%2F5390.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Joining%20a%20gym%3F%20Save%20pennies%20as%20you%20shed%20the%20pounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgym-membership-guide-to-cutting-costs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Joining%20a%20gym%3F%20Save%20pennies%20as%20you%20shed%20the%20pounds&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fgym-membership-guide-to-cutting-costs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3b988da59658074134c07e00c0567d50fd8b25e6%2F0_204_5390_3234%2F5390.jpg>
 We tested prices for the main gym chains. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
What you will pay

We tested prices in Manchester and Bristol for the main national chains, using 
alternatives where they weren’t represented in those cities.

Most chains make their prices available online, except for David Lloyd and DW 
Fitness – both asked us to visit the club first.

Prices exclude any special offers - many clubs have January deals where the 
joining fee is reduced, or have first-month half-price deals.

Bannatyne Health Club

Manchester Chepstow Street (Tier 11) £32-a-month rolling contract plus £20 
joining fee. Total: £404 for a year, or £322.40 on a 12-month contract.

Bristol (Tier 4) £55-a-month rolling contract plus £20 joining fee. Total: 
£680 for a year, or £614 on 12-month contract.

All prices available online.

Middle-to-upmarket chain with gyms across England, Scotland and Wales founded 
by Duncan Bannatyne, one-time star of TV’s Dragons’ Den. The various “tiers” of 
membership reflect the levels of luxury.

David Lloyd Clubs

Manchester Trafford City “Average £90 to £100 a month plus £50 joining fee”. 
Equal to £1,130 to £1,250.

Bristol Long Ashton £960 per year off-peak. Would not disclose peak-time rate. 

Prices not available online.

Upmarket club with 55 locations around the UK. Big focus on racket sports – 
tennis and squash – as well as luxury pool, spa and gym facilities.

DW Fitness

Manchester Trafford £32 a month, equal to £384 a year.

Bristol £35 a month, equal to £420 a year. No joining fee. No monthly rolling 
contract until 12 months’ membership.

Prices not available online.

Mid-market chain, formerly JJB. Clubs include pool and spa.

Fitness First

Birmingham Solihull £48-a-month one-month rolling contract plus £30 start-up 
fee. Total: £606 a year, or £462 if paid in advance.

Bath £68-a-month one-month rolling contract plus £35 start-up fee. Total: £851 
a year, or £611 if paid in advance.

All prices available online.

Mid-market chain of 58 gyms, owned by DW Fitness. No gyms in Manchester or 
Bristol so we used Birmingham and Bath.

Nuffield Health

Manchester Printworks £56 a month rolling contract plus £20 activation fee. 
Total: £692 a year, or £572 if paid in advance for year.

Bristol £86-a-month rolling contract plus £30 activation fee. Total: £1,062 a 
year, or £954 if paid in advance.

All prices available online.

Generally upmarket chain with pools and spa facilities as well as gyms.

Big focus on health, offering members free regular health checks

Pure Gym

Manchester Spinningfields £21.99 a month, plus £10 joining fee. Total: £263.88 
a year.

Bristol Union Gate £19.99 a month plus £10 joining fee. Total: £249.88 a year.

Prices available online.

Budget operator, no tie-in contracts, open 24 hours. More than 160 gyms but 
few with swimming pools.

The Gym

Manchester Ashton Old Road £11.99 a month plus £10 joining fee, equal to 
£153.88 a year.

Bristol £16.99 a month, no joining fee, equal to £203.88 a year.

Prices available online.

Budget operator, no tie-in contracts, open 24 hours. No pools.

Virgin Active

Manchester Salford Quays £66-a-month one-month rolling contract plus £20 
joining fee. Total: £812 a year, or £728 on 12-month contract .

Solihull £72-a-month one-month rolling contract plus £20 joining fee. Total: 
£884 a year, or £716 on a contract .

Prices available online.

Upmarket operator promising luxury facilities, with racket sports at some 
locations. No gym in Bristol, so we used Solihull.
 