
Julian Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange>, the founder 
of WikiLeaks, has offered guarded praise of Donald Trump, arguing the 
president-elect “is not a DC insider” and could mean an opportunity for 
positive as well as negative change in the US.


Assange described his feelings about the US election results in an interview 
as “mixed” before going on to sharply criticize Democratic nomineeHillary 
Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and providing a 
more ambivalent assessment of Trump’s ascent to the White House.

“Hillary Clinton’s election would have been a consolidation of power in the 
existing ruling class of the United States,”Assange told the Italian newspaper 
la Repubblica 
<http://www.repubblica.it/esteri/2016/12/23/news/assange_wikileaks-154754000/>.

“Donald Trump is not a DC insider, he is part of the wealthy ruling elite of 
the United States, and he is gathering around him a spectrum of other rich 
people and several idiosyncratic personalities.”

He added: “They do not by themselves form an existing structure, so it is a 
weak structure which is displacing and destabilising the pre-existing central 
power network within DC. It is a new patronage structure which will evolve 
rapidly, but at the moment its looseness means there are opportunities for 
change in the United States: change for the worse and change for the better.”

In the week leading up to the election, Assange used his whistleblowing 
website topublish a cascade of emails connected to the Democratic party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
 and the Clinton campaign.

Trump adviser reveals how Assange ally warned him about leaked Clinton emails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/trump-adviser-clinton-emails-wikileaks-roger-stone>
The releases were highly damaging to Clinton, and US intelligence officials 
now believethey were hacked by Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
 and passed to WikiLeaks to boost Trump’s bid for the White House. Assange has 
repeatedly declined to be drawn on the source of the hacked emails he published.

Roger Stone, a longtime Republican operative and associate of Trump, said in 
August 
<https://politicalwire.com/2016/08/09/an-october-surprise-for-hillary-clinton/> 
that he had been in communication with Assange over an “October surprise” to 
foil Clinton. WikiLeaks began publishing emails hacked from the Democratic 
National Committee and the email account of Clinton’s campaign chairman, John 
Podesta, in October.

It is impossible to know how much the email disclosures affected the outcome 
of the race, but there islittle doubt the revelations harmed Clinton’s prospects
 <http:// http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/wikileaks-hillary-clinton/> 
during the crucial last weeks of the campaign.

Assange made the disclosures from the Ecuadorean embassy in London, where he 
has been hold up for more than four years, claiming asylum to avoid extradition 
to Sweden, where prosecutors are investigating allegations of rape against him. 
Assange denies the accusations.

Some of the earliest and most high-profile WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> revelations, including those 
based on leaks by Chelsea Manning, occurred when Clinton was secretary of state.

“Hillary Clinton and the network around her imprisoned one of our alleged 
sources for 35 years, Chelsea Manning, tortured her according to the United 
Nations, in order to implicate me personally,” Assange claimed in the 
interview. He went on to accuse Clinton of being the “chief proponent and 
architect” of the military intervention in Libya, which he claimed had created 
instability throughout the region and the refugee crisis in Europe.

Appearing to suggest the disclosures in the run-up to the election were a form 
of payback, he added: “If someone and their network behave like that, then 
there are consequences. Internal and external opponents are generated. Now 
there is a separate question on whatDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> means.”

The la Repubblica interviewer noted that most of Wikileaks biggest revelations 
concerned what she described as “US human rights abuses”. Asked why human 
rights abuses in China and Russia had not produced similar leaks, and what 
could be done to “democratise information in those countries”, Assange said 
there was already a “vibrant” Russian media which included critics of the 
Kremlin.

He said: “In Russia, there are many vibrant publications, online blogs, and 
Kremlin critics such as [Alexey] Navalny are part of that spectrum. There are 
also newspapers like “Novaya Gazeta”, in which different parts of society in 
Moscow are permitted to critique each other and it is tolerated, generally, 
because it isn’t a big TV channel that might have a mass popular effect, its 
audience is educated people in Moscow. So my interpretation is that in Russia 
there are competitors to WikiLeaks.” In addition, he claimed “no WikiLeaks 
staff speak Russian, so for a strong culture which has its own language, you 
have to be seen as a local player.”

Dozens of journalists have been killed <https://cpj.org/killed/europe/russia/> 
in Russia in the past two decades, and Freedom Houseconsiders 
<https://freedomhouse.org/report/freedom-press/2016/russia> the Russian press 
to be “not free” and notes: “The main national news agenda is firmly controlled 
by the Kremlin. The government sets editorial policy at state-owned television 
stations, which dominate the media landscape and generate propagandistic 
content.”

 * This article was amended on 29 December 2016 to remove a sentence in which 
it was asserted that Assange “has long had a close relationship with the Putin 
regime”. A sentence was also amended which paraphrased the interview, 
suggesting Assange said “there was no need for Wikileaks to undertake a 
whistleblowing role in Russia because of the open and competitive debate he 
claimed exists there”. It has been amended to more directly describe the 
question Assange was responding to when he spoke of Russia’s “many vibrant 
publications”.  