
A lawyer for Julian Assange has indicated that the WikiLeaks founder is ready 
to face extradition to the US after Barack Obama commuted the sentence of US 
army whistleblowerChelsea Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/chelsea-manning>.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Who is Chelsea Manning? - video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/18/who-is-chelsea-manning-video-profile>
Assange has been holed up at the Ecuadorian embassy in London since claiming 
asylum there in 2012. He has refused to meet prosecutors in Sweden, where he 
remains wanted on an allegation of rape, which he denies. He has repeatedly 
said he fears extradition to the US on espionage charges if he leaves the 
embassy, though at the moment the only public extradition ruling against him 
comes from Sweden.

Assange welcomed Obama’s decision to free Manning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/17/chelsea-manning-sentence-commuted-barack-obama>
, who passed 700,000 documents, videos, diplomatic cables and battlefield 
accounts to WikiLeaks. “Your courage and determination made the impossible 
possible,” Assange said in a statement thanking campaigners for their efforts 
to get her released.

He did not mention a pledge made last week that he would agree to US 
extradition if Obama granted clemency to Manning:

But Melinda Taylor, who serves on Assange’s legal team, said he would not be 
going back on his word. “Everything that he has said he’s standing by,” she 
told the Associated Press.

The WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> Twitter accounted 
also suggested its founder was ready to go to the US:

The White House insisted on Tuesday that Assange’s offer to submit to 
extradition if Obama “grants Manning clemency” did not influence the US 
president’s action.

“The president’s decision to offer commutation was not influenced by public 
comments by Mr Assange or the WikiLeaks organisation,” the White House official 
said. “I have no insight into Mr Assange’s travel plans. I can’t speak to any 
charges or potential charges he may be facing from the justice department.”


In his statement, Assange said Manning should never have been convicted and 
described her as “a hero, whose bravery should have been applauded not 
condemned”.


Assange went on to demand that the US government “immediately end its war on 
whistleblowers and publishers, such as WikiLeaks and myself”.

Another lawyer for Assange, Barry Pollack, did not address whether Assange 
intended to come to the US.


“For many months, I have asked the DoJ to clarify Mr Assange’s status. I hope 
it will soon,” he said in a statement. “The Department of Justice should not 
pursue any charges against Mr Assange based on his publication of truthful 
information and should close its criminal investigation of him immediately.”

Related: Republicans voice disdain after Trump tweets support for Julian 
Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>

The justice department has never announced any indictment of Assange and it is 
not clear that any charges have been brought under seal. The department, in 
refusing to turn over investigative documents sought by Manning under the 
Freedom of Information Act, has acknowledged that theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> is continuing to investigate the 
publication of national security information on WikiLeaks arising from 
Manning’s disclosures.

“That investigation concerns potential violations of federal criminal laws, in 
the form of serious threats to the national security, and the investigation 
continues today,” department lawyers wrote in a court filing last year. “From 
the terms of her request, it is clear that Manning seeks to obtain documents 
concerning that investigation.”

Separately, the FBI is also investigating Russian meddling through hacking in 
the US presidential election. Hacked emails from top Democratic officials and 
Hillary Clinton campaign aideswere posted on WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/11/clinton-campaign-wikileaks-hack-russia-donald-trump>
 in the final weeks of the presidential race.

With the commutation coming just days before Obama leaves office, any decision 
on whether to charge or seek to extradite Assange will now fall to theTrump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.
 