
WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange says he will walk out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/julian-assange-wikileaks-arrest-friday-un-investigation?CMP=twt_gu>
 of the Ecuadorian embassy in London if a United Nations panel rules against 
his claim that he is being illegally detained.

Assange’s rise to prominence and the decisions that led to his 
three-and-a-half years in the embassy have made legal history in courts around 
the world.

Julian Assange says he will 'accept arrest' on Friday if UN rules against him
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/feb/04/julian-assange-wikileaks-arrest-friday-un-investigation>
The circumstances that led to his time in the embassy are bound to his work as 
the founder ofWikiLeaks <https://wikileaks.org/> and the publication of 
hundreds of thousands of US files that have revealed countless diplomatic, 
military and political scandals around the world.

The outcome of the UN decision on Friday may well bring us closer to the last 
step in the long saga.

Here’s a brief guide to how Assange got here, and what could happen next.

Why can’t Assange leave the Ecuadorian embassy?

Assange sought asylum in the embassy after entering it in June 2012 following 
a series ofdramatic legal challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2012/feb/01/julian-assange-extradition-battle>
 through British courts to a European arrest warrant sought by Sweden. He is 
technically free to leave but says he cannot because he is in breach of a 
European arrest warrant that was granted to extradite him to Sweden, and faces 
arrest if he does so.

Why was the arrest warrant sought? Has Assange been charged in Sweden?

Assange has not at any point been charged with an offence under Swedish law. 
He was sought for questioning by Swedish authorities in relation to complaints 
of sexual assault raised by two women in 2010. Swedish authorities at the time 
sought to interview him in person in Sweden over the complaints, and refused to 
accept his offer of a statement from Britain.

Assange had raised repeated concerns about Swedish demands that he be 
questioned in person over the allegations, fearing he may be extradited to the 
US. A US grand jury investigation is still believed to be underway following 
WikiLeaks’s publication of vast caches of US military and diplomatic files 
including theAfghan war diary <https://wikileaks.org/afg/> and US diplomatic 
cables. <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-us-embassy-cables>

As a result of the failure of his legal challenges to the arrest warrant, and 
his concerns about possible further extradition to the US, Assange opted to 
seek asylum in the Ecuadorian embassy rather than comply with the order.

What is the United Nations working group on arbitrary detention? Can it force 
British authorities to let Assange walk free?

The working group is a UN body set up to investigate the lawfulness of state 
detention on individuals. It can take on cases to determine whether a person 
has been detained arbitrarily having regard to various international law 
instruments.

Assange’s legal counsel has submitted 
<https://justice4assange.com/IMG/pdf/assange-wgad.pdf> that his time in the 
Ecuadorian embassy has not been by his choice, and should be considered 
arbitrary detention. They have argued the flawed arrest warrant sought against 
him has led to Assange being unable to access the full benefits of asylum 
afforded to him by Ecuador.

The submissions state: “If all the names, details and events were redacted, it 
could be distilled to the simple and irrefutable fact that a political refugee, 
who has never been charged, has been deprived of their liberty for nearly four 
years, and confined in a very small space for over two years. The matter has 
come to a head because his mental and physical health are imperilled.”

 Like many international bodies, the UN working group does not have binding 
powers that would force British authorities to allow Assange to walk free. 
However, the decision may prove an important tool for pressuring the British 
and Swedish governments to allow Assange to leave the embassy. It could also be 
persuasive in any further challenge sought in the European court of human 
rights.

What will happen if Assange loses and leaves the embassy?

If Assange were to walk outside the embassy after the UN ruling was handed 
down, he is likely to be arrested on the spot by British authorities. He could 
still then be extradited to Sweden for questioning.

If he wins, Assange will still have to weigh up further legal options, or use 
the UN decision to continue to pressure the British government to allow him to 
leave the embassy.
 