
A senior Swedish prosecutor has begun interviewing Julian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> at Ecuador’s embassy in 
London, six years after a woman in Stockholm accused the WikiLeaks of rape.

Ingrid Isgren, Sweden’s deputy chief prosecutor, arrived at 9.30am on Monday 
at the central London embassy where Assange has been confined since June 2012.

Assange sought asylum from Ecuador <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ecuador> 
to avoid extradition to Sweden over the accusation, which he denies.

Isgren was greeted by dozens of photographers, international TV crews and a 
small number of the Australian’s supporters, who unfurled banners and chanted 
their support. She paused briefly for photographs but did not speak to 
reporters.

Prosecutors have said they will not comment while the investigation is ongoing.
Why can't Assange leave Ecuadorian embassy? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=19e4c3a8-0a8d-4710-ad8e-9ee37c06c41a>
Three days have been set aside for the interview, which is being conducted by 
an Ecuadorian prosecutor, following a list of questions submitted earlier this 
year by the Swedish prosecution authority.

Isgren is allowed to ask Assange to clarify his answers, but not to put 
additional questions, and will receive a written transcript of the exchanges 
from Ecuador after the interview has concluded. Her office has said it will 
seek to take a DNA sample from Assange if he agrees.

Assange’s Swedish lawyer, Per Samuelson, said he had been barred from the 
interview. “Ecuador refuses to let me in and insists that the questioning will 
continue without my presence, against my client’s wishes to have me there,” he 
told Reuters.

Samuelson said he still hoped to be admitted if the interview continued, “but 
a good chunk of questioning has already taken place, as far as I understand”.

In a statement released on Monday night, WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> said there had been “numerous 
irregularities” in the Swedish investigation. “Unfortunately, the 
irregularities with procedure have continued today,” it said, citing the fact 
that Samuelson had not been permitted to attend, which it called a “clear 
breach of process”.

It said Assange “felt compelled to participate even with these problems”.


Sweden’s investigation of the rape accusation has been locked in stalemate 
since he fled to the embassy. Prosecutors initially insisted he would have to 
travel toSweden <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden> to be interviewed, 
but Assange refused, arguing that it would put him at risk of onward 
extradition to the US for potential prosecution over WikiLeaks publications.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjulian-assange-to-face-swedish-prosecutors-over-accusation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F885e402b874fa1d7519470fae14c9c399708761e%2F843_424_4716_2829%2F4716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Julian%20Assange%20faces%20Swedish%20prosecutor%20in%20London%20over%20rape%20accusation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjulian-assange-to-face-swedish-prosecutors-over-accusation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Julian%20Assange%20faces%20Swedish%20prosecutor%20in%20London%20over%20rape%20accusation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fjulian-assange-to-face-swedish-prosecutors-over-accusation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F885e402b874fa1d7519470fae14c9c399708761e%2F843_424_4716_2829%2F4716.jpg>
 Peter Tatchell (second from right) holds a message of support for WikiLeaks 
outside the Ecuadorian embassy in London. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Prosecutors finally agreed to questioning in London after coming under 
increased pressure in Sweden to move the case forward. In November 2014, 
Sweden’s appeal court rejected Assange’s appeal against the warrant but 
criticised the country’s chief prosecutor, Marianne Ny, over her failure to 
examine alternative avenues of investigation.

The court upheld the warrant again upheld in September this year. In February, 
a UN panel said Assange’s continued presence at the embassy amounted to 
“arbitrary detention”.

An investigation into separate sexual assault allegations a second Swedish 
woman made against Assange had to be dropped last year after the deadline to 
bring charges expired.

The human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell joined the Australian’s supporters 
outside the embassy. He said he was appalled that it had taken Swedish 
prosecutors six years to come to interview him.

“I have always said that Julian Assange should answer the serious sex 
allegations. For the last six years he has been willing to answer those 
allegations. He has never been charged with any offence,” Tatchell said.

There was no sign of the WikiLeaks founder, but his pet cat, which has its own 
Twitter account,@EmbassyCat <https://twitter.com/embassycat?lang=en-gb>, 
appeared at the window wearing a fake collar and tie.
 