
Julian Assange <https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> will be 
questioned next week in the Ecuadorian embassy in London over an allegation of 
rape, Sweden’s public prosecutor’s office has confirmed.

The WikiLeaks <https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> founder, who has 
been holed up in the embassy since 2012, welcomed the news through his lawyer, 
saying he was looking forward to the “chance to clear his name”.

The Swedish authorities said one of the prosecutors on the case, Ingrid 
Isgren, as well as a Swedish police inspector, would also attend the 
questioning on 14 November and report the findings toSweden 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/sweden>. 


“A DNA sample will also be taken, provided that Julian Assange agrees to it,” 
the prosecutor’s office said.
Julian Assange explainer 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=19e4c3a8-0a8d-4710-ad8e-9ee37c06c41a>
The whistleblower sought refuge in Ecuador’s embassy in London in June 2012, 
fleeing allegations of rape and sexual assault in Sweden dating back to 2010. 
Assange, 45, denies the claims.

The Australian national claims he refused to travel to Sweden for questioning 
because he feared extradition to the US over WikiLeaks’ release of 500,000 
secret military files on the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq.

“We have requested this interview repeatedly since 2010,” his lawyer, Per 
Samuelsson, said. “Julian Assange has always wanted to tell his version to the 
Swedish police. He wants a chance to clear his name. We hope the investigation 
will be closed then.”

The lawyer said the “shape of the questioning” was under discussion.A first 
hearing scheduled for October with the prosecutor Toainga Wilson had been 
postponed at Assange’s request, citing “his rights to the protection and 
defence of his person”, according to Ecuadorian prosecutors.

Swedish prosecutors dropped a sexual assault investigation, concerning another 
woman, against Assange last year after the five-year statute of limitations 
expired.

But they still want to question him about the 2010 rape allegation, which 
carries a 10-year statute of limitations. Assange insists the sexual encounters 
in question were consensual.

Last month, the Swedish prosecutor’s office rejected Assange’s request to 
temporarily suspend his arrest warrant so he could leave the Ecuadoran embassy 
to attend the funeral of his mentor, Gavin MacFayden.

WikiLeaks has returned to the spotlight in recent weeks with the damaging leak 
of tens of thousands of emails from the US Democratic party and presidential 
candidate Hillary Clinton’s campaign.


 