
Exactly four years ago, surrounded by placards saying “Equality” and “Rights”, 
Junior Sterling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/tvandradioblog/2012/aug/30/paralympics-opening-ceremony-review>
 was performing to millions of people in London’s Paralympic opening ceremony. 
But despiteall the talk of the Games’ legacy 
<https://www.paralympic.org/news/legacy-plan-people-disability-set-uk> for 
disabled people in Britain, the 55-year-old, who was born with a muscle-wasting 
disease andclub foot 
<http://www.nhs.uk/Conditions/Talipes/Pages/Introduction.aspx>, has been left 
to live in a kitchen covered in mould and with a bucket for his bathroom.

In his one-bed council flat in Shepherd’s Bush, west London, Junior talks 
avidly about London’s Paralympics in 2012. He was a volunteerGames Maker 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-19512993>, working as a steward at the wheelchair 
tennis, and part of the famed“Spasticus Autisticus!” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ANRNdRG3Gx4> segment of the opening ceremony. 
In the run-up to the Games, Junior even had his photo taken with Sebastian Coe 
after creating a sign spelling out 2012 in braille. What no one realised, 
however, was that after spending his day around Paralympians, as Junior puts it 
to me: “I’d go back to my home infested with bugs.”

Junior has been in this flat for 20 years; his first home after eight years 
of, in his words, “living in cardboard boxes” on London’s streets. The flat is 
on the top floor of the block, up three flights of steps and there’s no lift, 
which isn’t ideal for someone who struggles to walk. But Junior took the flat, 
afraid that if he didn’t he’d be sent to the bottom of the council’s housing 
list.
 ‘The toilet in his bathroom flushes but because of the damp and the smell, 
he’s afraid to go in there.’ 
The problems inside the flat started several years later, in 2002. At first it 
was a simple problem with his shower. By the time of London 2012, the plumbing 
had got so bad through the whole flat it had flooded Junior’s downstairs 
neighbour causing their shower tiles fall off.Filter flies 
<http://www.doyourownpestcontrol.com/drainflies.htm>, drawn to drains and 
sewage, contaminated his bathroom.

Since then, little has changed. In fact, it’s got worse. As of this summer, 
Junior has been without a working bathroom or kitchen for five years. The 
shower is disconnected and the bath has a panel missing. Damp and mould cover 
the ceiling and walls. The housing association responsible for the 
accommodation, Peabody Trust, got rid of the fly infestation but the stench 
remains, Junior says. The kitchen sink is still bust; Junior’s been told by the 
manager of his housing block not to use it (water leaks down the walls of the 
neighbour beneath him).

The effects of the damp then spread into the front room. The carpet is cut up 
– a scrap left in the middle of the floor – and a loaf of bread, tinned milk, 
tuna, and corn flour are stacked on the furniture. The water and mould in the 
kitchen means Junior has to keep the food where he sits, but flies are 
attracted to it, especially when it’s hot.

Junior has contacted Peabody housing association 
<http://www.peabody.org.uk/home> repeatedly over the years – he shows me a 
journal he’s kept of it all, 10 pages going back over a decade – but says he’s 
barely heard a whisper back. Still, they keep collecting the rent: £129 per 
week, paid straight from Junior’s council. He says when he does hear back from 
them, Peabody claims it’s not been able to get in touch with him. “They make so 
much money, but this? They can’t sort this.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flondon-paralympics-games-maker-legacy-living-conditions-disabled-person-homeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F591fbeca84d3304282cc23a0ffbf6af5a2299ca7%2F0_0_640_393%2F640.png>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Junior%20was%20a%20London%20Paralympics%20Games%20Maker.%20Don%E2%80%99t%20talk%20to%20him%20about%20%E2%80%98legacy%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flondon-paralympics-games-maker-legacy-living-conditions-disabled-person-homeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Junior%20was%20a%20London%20Paralympics%20Games%20Maker.%20Don%E2%80%99t%20talk%20to%20him%20about%20%E2%80%98legacy%E2%80%99%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Flondon-paralympics-games-maker-legacy-living-conditions-disabled-person-homeless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F591fbeca84d3304282cc23a0ffbf6af5a2299ca7%2F0_0_640_393%2F640.png>
 ‘With no working shower, if he wants a shave, he gets water from a hose.’ 
A Peabody spokesman offered to put the wheels in motion to sort the problems 
out, stating that the team had already tried to resolve them, but that the last 
contact they had with Junior was in March 2015. “Prior to that we worked 
extensively with the council and our contractors to draw up a specification of 
works. These were unable to be completed as the contractor was repeatedly 
refused entry by the tenant,” he added. “Mr Sterling has declined to deal with 
us directly, insisting that all communication went through his solicitor. If Mr 
Sterling would like our contractor to make fresh inspections and carry out 
repairs, he will need to get in touch and let them into the home.”

Sam can’t speak – or challenge the housing that is ruining her health | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/sam-cant-speak-disabled-housing-ruining-health>
Junior says someone from Peabody​ came to take pictures of his flat but he is 
unaware of anyone trying to the carry out the necessary work. He had a 
solicitor to help him for three years, but without legal aid he was unable to 
take the case to court. In the meantime, he can barely keep clean. The toilet 
in his bathroom flushes but because of the damp and the smell, he’s afraid to 
go in there. Instead, a toilet for Junior is now “a bag and a box”. With no 
working shower, if he wants a shave, he gets water from a hose outside the 
flat. Two buckets for when he needs a wash.

Because of the kitchen leak, it’s the same routine each time he has a hot 
drink. “If I want tea or coffee, I have to fill up a water bottle,” he says. 
“Go down [to the hose]. Fill it up with water. And then do it again.”

Anyone’s health would get worse from living like this, but when you’re 
disabled, it’s devastating. Junior’s two stone lighter now (“I can’t eat in the 
flat”) and the mould gives him recurring chest infections. Not being able to 
shower or bathe for years has led to him losing his hair through dry skin, and 
his feet – already vulnerable – are now covered in callouses.

Junior still has his London 2012 Paralympic band around his wrist. “I can’t 
tell you the tears I’ve cried,” he says. “I may as well be homeless again.”
 