
A health worker in Pontypool told me what happens when people lose their sense 
of purpose. “You don’t get up in the morning. You might see a spiral in 
depression,” she said last week. “You lose contact with the outside world.” The 
dismal list went on: no self-worth, no self-confidence ...

Burning anger in the land of Nye Bevan: why a Labour heartland is backing 
Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nye-bevan-labour-heartland-backing-brexit-south-wales>
As she talked, I realised her description didn’t apply only to people. Places 
and communities can be stripped of their purpose too. That is certainly what’s 
happened to Pontypool.

If I could send Theresa May and her chancellor, Philip Hammond, anywhere 
before tomorrow’sautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/autumn-statement-what-might-the-chancellor-have-up-his-sleeve>
, it wouldn’t be to some love-in with big business at a swanky London hotel – 
but to this south Wales market town. It might make them think.

The story of Pontypool is a story of riches squandered, of dynamism blocked, 
of an entire community slung on the slagheap. Sat atop vast deposits of iron 
ore and coal, it was probably the first industrial town inWales 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>. For a time, under Victoria, it was 
richer than Cardiff. Even now, to look along its skyline is to see traces of 
wealth: the park with its Italian gardens and bandstand; the covered market 
with its olde price list for snipes or a brace of pheasants; the 25 listed 
buildings that make this one of the most sumptuous small town centres in 
Britain.

Then look down. On a typical weekday, the indoor market is a desert. Those 
bits of the high street that aren’t to let are betting parlours, vaping dens 
and charity shops: the standard parade for hollowed-out towns across Britain. 
The reason isn’t hard to fathom: the mines shut down decades back; the 
factories have pretty much disappeared. Those big employers still left aren’t 
big employers any more. One of the staff at BAE tells me that when he joined in 
1982, it had 2,500 workers on its shopfloor; now, he reckons, it has 120.

Swaths of Pontypool and the surrounding region of Torfaen now rank among the 
poorest in all Britain. On part of one of its housing estates in Trevethin, 75% 
of all children under four are raised in poverty. Over half – 53% – of all 
households who live on that stretch are below the poverty line. With that come 
all the usual problems: families that can’t pay the rent, that are more likely 
to fall prey to a whole range of sicknesses, from mental health to cancer. 
Those people can expect to die 20 years before their near-neighbours in some of 
the better-off areas in Pontypool. First the economy died out, now its people 
are too.

We are divided by more than north and south | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/24/we-are-divided-by-more-than-north-and-south>
Pontypool is like the rest of south Wales, like many other parts of Britain I 
have reported from. It’s what politicians and economists call 
“post-industrial”. That term, though, implies something coming after; here, 
hardly anything has come after. A few years ago Pontypool town centre was 
declaredon the verge of death 
<http://www.stroudnewsandjournal.co.uk/news/4644426.Councillor_fears_Pontypool_is_dying/>
 by a local councillor, who bore a coffin lid in a mock funeral procession.

It’s a similar story in Hull, Sunderland, in so many places across Britain. 
For three decades Tories and Labour thought they could buy the acquiescence of 
residents with benefits and public-sector jobs. Then came the 2008 crash and 
the cuts that have followed. Then came the Brexit referendum.

I visited Pontypool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/07/nye-bevan-labour-heartland-backing-brexit-south-wales>
 a few weeks before that vote – and it was on that trip that the suspicion 
dawned that the remain camp didn’t have it in the bag at all. True to form,
Torfaen voted nearly 60% to 40% 
<http://www.itv.com/news/wales/update/2016-06-24/torfaen-votes-leave-with-59-8/>
 to leave the EU.

If May is to have any hope of lasting in No 10, it will be places such as 
Pontypool that she needs to pacify. The early signs do not look good. 
Everything promised or leaked from the autumn statement so far this week – the 
cuts in business taxes, the extra billion pounds for new roads, and 
infrastructure – south Wales has had some version of already, and nothing has 
worked.

The reason the political geography of Britain is so divided is because its 
economic geography is so unequal

After the heavy industry went, the future for south Wales was meant to lie in 
luring new business investment. Mark Hooper, a local social entrepreneur, terms 
it the “Welsh dowry”: the advance the Welsh elite gives to any multinational 
that promises to settle down with them. Count among that the millions the 
Cardiff government spent on bringing in anAmazon distribution centre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/gallery/2008/nov/15/consumer-affairs-amazon>
, even building billionaire Jeff Bezos a new road. Add the millions lavished on
Ford in Bridgend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2004/may/06/motoring.carindustry>. Most 
of all, look at the LG factory into which Westminster and Cardiff pumped so 
much political and financial capital – and which wassoon abandoned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2003/jun/01/theobserver.observerbusiness1>
. As the first Brexit chancellor, Hammond’s growth strategy mostly consists of 
doing the same across the rest of the UK. I see no reason why it should work 
any better.

In the heart of Trevethin, the poorest stretch in all of Pontypool, I asked 
two community councillors how many of their residents would count as “just 
about managing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-jams-rhetoric-just-managing-families-autumn-statement>
” – May’s latest coinage. One in three families, they reckoned, were not 
managing at all, simply landing themselves in more debt. As for the rest, they 
were barely holding it together in the face of the benefit cuts.

“I have good working people knocking on my door for help,” Jon Harlor told me. 
He remembered how “one girl came to me in tears”. A young mum of three and a 
shop worker on zero hours, she never knew how much her income would be from 
week to week – and the tax credits were no help. “They’re reliant on the food 
banks to smooth out the peaks and the troughs.”

Britain's shrinking economy: why the level of debate is farcical | Aditya 
Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/28/britains-shrinking-economy-debate-farcical>
What would it take to fix a place such as Pontypool? First, reverse the 
benefit cuts – which are a wrecking ball for communities of the working poor. 
Second, drop the hi-vis and hard hats of infrastructure spend. Such offerings 
might draw multinationals into central London; they don’t work here.

Finally, learn one of the hardest lessons of Brexit: the reason the political 
geography of Britain is so divided is because its economic geography is so 
unequal. Treasury levers and Bank of England billions are barely any use here. 
Instead, what’s needed is an attentiveness to place.

In his Deep Place studies of local Welsh economies, the academic Mark Lang 
starts from what places like Pontypool already have, and what can be built on. 
He pulls together members of the community and asks them what they need. Hisnew 
report 
<http://www.marklang.co.uk/single-post/2016/10/27/All-Around-Us-The-Pontypool-Deep-Place-Study>
 on Pontypool shares a lot with the work on the foundational economy done by the
Centre for Research on Economic and Social Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/28/britains-shrinking-economy-debate-farcical>
, which i’ve written about here before. It starts from a recognition that 
chasing multinationals and chain retailers pays only limited dividends in a 
place that’s had its purpose stripped out. It argues for focusing on what 
locals need: social care, good schools, broadband. This isn’t Westminster 
politics with its big announcements, or even Cardiff politics and its 
ribbon-cutters’ charter. It’s more modest, perhaps even pessimistic. To me, it 
rings more true.
 