
Judge a nation – and its future – on the way it treats its poorest children. 
No government should stand by while more and more children grow up hungry or 
homeless. Yet that is what is happening here in Britain in the 21st century. 
Alreadyone in four of our children live in poverty 
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/child-poverty-facts-and-figures>, and the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies warns we are about to see thebiggest increase in child poverty 
in a generation 
<http://cpag.org.uk/content/uk-set-biggest-increase-child-poverty-generation>.

Fears after government abolishes civil service's child poverty unit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/fears-after-government-abolishes-civil-services-child-poverty-unit>
That is the backdrop to the government’s decision to abolish the child poverty 
unit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/20/fears-after-government-abolishes-civil-services-child-poverty-unit>
 – as uncovered by my Labour colleague Dan Jarvis. It may not sound like a big 
deal. But it follows on from the abolition of thechild poverty income targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jul/01/government-scrap-legal-requirements-child-poverty>
 and a series of policies that have hit low-income families. For all that 
Theresa May has the right words on helping families, her government has the 
wrong policies and a fundamentally flawed view of how to tackle poverty and 
injustice.

Conservative ministers argue that government should focus not on family income 
but look instead at the root causes of poverty – particularly parental 
worklessness and educational attainment. But it’s not either/or. Labour tried 
to do both – that’s why we set upthe child poverty unit 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/the-child-poverty-unit> to coordinate 
action across every department. And I’m worried that its abolition means the 
Conservatives now plan to do neither.

Contrary to Conservative rhetoric, the work the child poverty unit did under 
Labour was on the causes of poverty. Before 1997 child poverty had risen 
steeply for years. After Tony Blair’s1999 speech calling for an end to child 
poverty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1999/sep/28/labourconference.labour14>, 
ministers from across government worked on a plan for change. Childcare and 
targeted employment support helped hundreds of thousands of people get into 
work as a result of the major expansion of childcare and targeted employment 
support. As health minister in 1999, I worked with the child poverty unit on 
teenage pregnancy strategy (halving the number of teen mums in a decade) and 
the roll out of Sure Start children’s centres. As housing minister I worked 
with the unit on getting families out of bed-and-breakfast accommodation and 
into secure homes. New policies on tackling domestic violence and improving 
literacy and numeracy in schools all had an impact.

If the Conservatives had chosen to boost that work on the root causes of 
poverty that would have been a help. InsteadSure Start centres have closed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/sure-start-closures-almost-doubled-last-year-figures-show>
, homelessness is rising, inequality is widening and now the unit tasked with 
drawing up a strategy has gone. Just getting parents into work isn’t enough 
when more than half of the children now living in poverty are in working 
families, or when parents are too sick or disabled to work. Focusing on 
educational attainment is really important – but progress will always be 
limited if children can’t do their maths homework or concentrate on exam 
revision because they don’t have a roof over their heads.

Nor will it ever work to ignore family income. Money matters and the only 
people who think it doesn’t are those who have always had plenty of it. If kids 
grow up feeling cold or hungry, of course they do worse at school. If children 
can’t go on school trips, or afford the books or opportunities others have, of 
course they fall behind. If parents are forced to depend on food banks to put a 
hot meal on the table, that insecurity and anxiety they feel affects the 
children too. All the evidence shows that both absolute and relative income 
poverty affect children’s chances in life – and affect their lives for decades 
to come.

A generation of UK children will suffer in poverty. Suddenly that’s normal | 
Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/uk-children-suffer-child-poverty-crisis>
That’s why Gordon Brown brought in tax credits and why Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> introduced the national minimum 
wage. As a result of all that work, absolute poverty halved and 600,000 
children were lifted out of relative poverty. But the regressive budgets that 
this government has brought in since 2010 – including huge cuts to tax credits 
and child benefit – are blighting our children’s future. And like many MPs I am 
very worried about what is to come when universal credit is rolled out next 
year.

Just before the 2010 election I worked with other ministers to bring in the 
Child Poverty Act <http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2010/9/contents>, 
embedding targets into law and requiring the government to take action each 
year. It was our attempt to build cross-party consensus and ensure progress, no 
matter which party was in power. That’s what we need again now.

Fail to help children and we are failing not just them but our future. If 
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> really wants to 
show she cares about working families she should start January by rethinking 
universal credit, start February by backing Dan Jarvis’s private member’s bill 
and drawing up a new cross-government plan, and start March with a budget to 
help working families. Helping children in poverty just needs the political 
will.
 