
Among all her responsibilities, children’s social services may not be top 
priority forJustine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, Theresa May’s new 
education secretary. But they are crucial to the welfare and safety of children 
and families in difficulty.

It should be of concern, therefore, that Greening has inherited policies from 
her predecessors, Michael Gove and Nicky Morgan, that are potentially 
destructive for children’s social services and the families who depend on them.

In July, the education select committee – which has a Conservative chair and 
majority –called on the government 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmeduc/201/201.pdf> 
[pdf] to drastically rein back its plans to fragment the social work 
profession. It also called for a halt to attempts to take statutory children’s 
social services responsibilities, such as child protection and the care of 
children away from their families, away from local authorities and place them 
in the hands of less accountable independent organisations.

A second major independent report published in October 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/children-in-need-of-help-or-protection/> by the 
National Audit Office concluded that changes promoted and pushed through by the 
government have not led to improvements in services.

There is widespread alarm that these warnings are being ignored. Within weeks 
of the select committee’s report,another council 
<http://www.bbc.com/news/uk-england-birmingham-37572560> was told to transfer 
its statutory children’s services to an independent trust.

Social workers row over children’s bill | Louise Tickle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/18/social-workers-fierce-row-childrens-bill>
The biggest concern is that despite strong opposition from organisations 
<https://togetherforchildren.wordpress.com/latest/>, social care professionals 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/content/uploads/2016/10/24068.pdf> [pdf] and the 
public 
<https://you.38degrees.org.uk/petitions/protect-the-rights-of-vulnerable-children-and-care-leavers>
, the government is still pushing ahead with the children and social work bill. 
On 8 November the House of Lordsvoted against it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/08/lords-defeat-government-over-child-protection-proposals>
, condemning the government’s plans to abandon legislation and regulations 
protecting children’s rights and enshrining the responsibilities of local 
authorities to help children and families.

The government has already made a U-turn 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/10/20/government-makes-u-turn-plans-control-new-social-work-regulator/>
 on one major proposal in the bill: that the Department for Education (DfE) 
should control who can be registered and de-registered as a social worker, how 
and by whom social workers are educated and trained, and what this education 
will consist of. There is still unease, however, about the independence of the 
proposed new regulator. Ministers would, for example,appoint the chair, board 
and chief executive 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2016/11/04/social-work-england-quick-guide-regulator-set-replace-hcpc/>
 of the new body, and approve subsequent appointments. The proposed regulator, 
unlike the current one, would be accountable to government, not to parliament 
as a whole, and would need its standards for social workers and social work 
education agreed and approved by the government.

There should also be significant consternation about the government’s plans to 
abandon children’s rights and withdraw responsibilities from services. Thenew 
proposal 
<http://www.cypnow.co.uk/cyp/news/2002595/government-to-establish-expert-panel-to-vet-exemption-clause-bids>
 suggests an independent expert board would be established to advise the 
education secretary. Beware!


Greening should reflect, rethink and rebuild relationships with those who know 
most about helping children

Here are two examples of “independent” and “expert” boards set up by recent 
secretaries of state and the DfE. In 2014, the DfE created the Innovation Fund 
to promote new practice within children’s social care, with a board to oversee 
operations and set its strategic direction. It appointed three people with 
financial services and investment banking experience (one of whom was appointed 
as the board’s chair), plus Isabelle Trowler, the chief social worker for 
children. The only person on this board with practical experience in children’s 
social care was the chief social worker.

When the government sought to promote and publish more serious case reviews 
the same year, it again appointed an “expert panel” to make it happen. The four 
members ofthe panel 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/474652/First_report_Serious_Case_Review_Panel.pdf>
 [pdf] were a journalist, a barrister, an air traffic accident investigator and 
a former career civil servant who had been chief executive of the Big Lottery 
Fund before becoming the head of the NSPCC. Not one of the panel had any 
frontline experience in child protection or its direct management.

It's time to pause the misbegotten children and social work bill
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/oct/25/its-time-to-pause-the-misbegotten-children-and-social-work-bill>
This is a recurring tendency. The government recently appointed a new chief 
executive for Ofsted who has no experience as a teacher or of managing a 
school, and no children’s social care experience. This sufficiently concerned 
members of the education select committee that theyrejected her appointment 
<https://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/education-committee/news-parliament-2015/ofsted-pre-appointment-report-published-16-17/>
, but the government continued with it anyway. It previouslyappointed a new 
Ofsted chair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jul/31/new-ofsted-chief-david-hoare-trustee-academy-chain>
 whose background was in business.

What should we learn from these examples? First, how little value the DfE sees 
in using the professional experience and expertise of those who work to assist 
and protect children and families.


Second, when the government appoints “experts” to oversee and direct 
children’s social services it has consistently considered commercial and 
financial expertise more relevant than direct experience.

Third, we would be wise to be wary about the government’s intention to set up 
expert panels advising the DfE about children’s social services.

Carefully crafted legislation will see piecemeal changes decided by the 
education secretary, leading to the salami slicing of children’s rights and 
agency responsibilities. This is based on the assumption that excessive 
bureaucracy for social workers and a lack of flexibility for agencies are 
inherently created by legislation. But what is driving the audit culture and 
rampant data collection in local authorities is theOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> inspection regime and fear of 
being judged a failure. This ought to be the focus of attention.

A new children and social work bill: views from the social care sector
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2016/may/18/children-social-work-bill-queens-speech>
It would be wise for Greening to withdraw the badly drafted bill she has 
inherited, currently barely held together by a series of knee-jerk amendments 
forced on the government. It is discredited and disintegrating. Instead, 
Greening should take some time to reflect, rethink and rebuild relationships 
with those who know most about helping and protecting children.

Join the Social Care Network <https://register.theguardian.com/social-care/> 
to read more pieces like this. Follow us on Twitter (@GdnSocialCare 
<https://twitter.com/GdnSocialCare>) and like us on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/guardiansocialcarenetwork> to keep up with the latest 
social care news and views.
 