
As someone who has never played the game of football to the highest level, I 
wonder if I dare even giggle atGary Neville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gary-neville>? The hierarchies of English 
football and the various industries that surround it – including Her Majesty’s 
sports press – frequently remind me of some failing post-war minor British 
public school, where bumptious members of the Remove are always being slapped 
down by the bigger boys, for reasons as bygone as the empire. Pointless rules, 
desiccated conventions, rigid systems of deference – what is any of it for, 
except propping up the establishment for the same reason establishments always 
demand propping up?

Hang on, where on earth was I? Ah, yes. Gary Neville, prefect of punditry over 
atSky Sports <https://www.theguardian.com/media/sky-sports>. In the course of a 
wide-ranging interview last week, the malfunctioning Liverpool keeper Loris 
Karius, 23, had the mildest of digs at Neville, 41, from whom he has absorbed 
at least his fair share of unsparing criticism.

Jürgen Klopp attacks Neville brothers over Loris Karius criticism
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/jurgen-klopp-attacks-neville-brothers-gary-phil-over-loris-karius-criticism>
In retaliation, Neville took to social media to post a newspaper report of 
some of his co-pundit Jamie Carragher’s disparaging comments about the young 
keeper. Appended to it was a message of acid charm: “My sincere apologies 
Karius. You’re right. A failed manager hasn’t a clue. I won’t copy your great 
fan, pundit and club legend again.”

Oh, Gary! I am enjoying the revelation that you “copy” Carragher, a detail 
which casts you as the Shearer to his Hansen. But honestly, slapping down 
people in this fashion displays a level of insecurity normally found only in 
presidents-elect.

In a football context, this is the sort of nuclear affront we saw when Frank 
Lampard reacted to some Joey Barton impudence by declaring: “I don’t think Joey 
should even talk about me and Steven Gerrard. That probably says enough.” It 
did, if not in a good way.

“Timing wrong,” Neville later ruled in one of several further digressions on 
the Karius interview, oddly judging that it’s not at all interesting for fans 
to hear about athletes for whom things are going wrong as well as right. 
“However if he’s going to do it his press adviser should have told him to stay 
clear of this situation.”

Wait – a publicist should have told Karius to steer clear of a situation in 
which he might have a momentary pop at Gary Neville? I think the world has too 
many of those sort of publicists already, and I’m rather sorry that Gary – 
whose analysis I otherwise really admire – doesn’t share this view.

Were that not enough, Gary’s brother Phil weighed in to tell Karius that at 
his vintage “you say nothing to no one” and “keep your mouth shut”, a piece of 
tag-teaming which drew an amusing response from Chris Sutton. “What are Phil’s 
criteria when players should be allowed to speak? Does that mean no one from 
the lower leagues is allowed, or do you have to have 50 caps, 100 caps, do you 
have to win the Premier League?” Of Gary and Phil, he mused: “They’re like the 
Mitchell brothers, aren’t they?”

Naughty Chris. This is the most outrageous bit of Neville-mocking since Jaap 
Stamcalled the brothers “busy cunts” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/observer/osm/story/0,,543938,00.html>. Finally, in 
case Karius was still under any misapprehension about his place in the 
universe, Carragher also weighed in, telling Karius to “shut up and do your 
job”.

Oh dear. I’m pretty sure I’ve done it myself a few times over the years, but 
the older I get, the more horribly wrong I think I was. Telling people to pipe 
down does no one any favours (and not just because in my line of work, it’s 
good for business).

On the most basic level, we hear too little from players as it is. The chief 
complaint of writers and readers of the sports pages over the past few decades 
has been the problem of access to the athletes.

As sports have become bigger and more lucrative, higher and higher walls have 
been put between those who play them and those who watch and love them. Anodyne 
post-match interviews don’t count.

I would almost always like to hear more from athletes, particularly those with 
the courage to speak candidly, whether or not I might end up agreeing with 
their opinions. Why shouldn’t people speak freely, even – perhaps especially – 
if they’re having a shitter of a season? The Mail journalist who conducted the 
offending interview with Karius said afterwards it had been set up before his 
latest unfortunate game, and he had naturally assumed the player’s people would 
cancel it. All credit to Karius for fronting up – though I can’t imagine the 
next person will bother.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fklopp-neville-brothers-they-dont-liverpool-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Klopp%20rebukes%20Neville%20brothers%3A%20they%20don't%20like%20Liverpool%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fklopp-neville-brothers-they-dont-liverpool-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Klopp%20rebukes%20Neville%20brothers%3A%20they%20don%27t%20like%20Liverpool%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fklopp-neville-brothers-they-dont-liverpool-video&media=>
Klopp rebukes Neville brothers: they don’t like Liverpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/12/klopp-neville-brothers-they-dont-liverpool-video>
. 
On a deeper level, I find that repeated command to “shut up and play” 
particularly uncomfortable. As the radical US sportswriter Dave Zirin has 
pointed out on so many occasions down the years, the put-down is associated 
with silencing athletes – mainly black ones, in the States – who dare to speak 
out of turn.

That this sledgehammer should have been deployed to put a lid on Karius – 
whose only crime was to reflect defensively on a horrid season that we’ve all 
been able to watch – serves as a reminder that even the titchiest challenge to 
established ways of doing things is regarded as a threat in football. It must 
be, or why would Neville and Carragher give a toss about it?

The more we see them at work, the more it should be clear that many of 
football’s established hierarchies and omertas are bullshit or worse. Either 
they are enemies to progress, as in the case of the FA,five of whose former 
chief or senior executives this week called for the outside imposition of reform
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/dec/12/football-association-premier-league-parliamentary-committee-reform>
. Or they are hierarchies which can be co-opted into infinitely darker schemes, 
as the emerging scale and dynamics of child sexual abuse in the game is showing.

Obviously, older former players may well be wiser than younger current ones. 
You’d certainly hope so. Things might have been different in their day – but 
that doesn’t mean they were always better. Let players say what they like, be 
glad when they do, and encourage far more of it than is currently dared. The 
game and its grandees should be big enough to take it.
 