
A headteacher in Kent has defended sending pupils home from school because 
their skirts were too short, saying parents who did not like the strict uniform 
rules could choose to have their daughters educated elsewhere.

Girls at Ebbsfleet academy in Swanscombe were turned away on the first day of 
term after Christmas because their skirts did not conform to uniform policy 
which stipulates that skirts should be navy, A-line or pleated, and no shorter 
than 5cm above the knee.

One parent contacted the local news organisation, the Gravesend Reporter 
<http://www.gravesendreporter.co.uk/news/outrageous_uniform_row_sees_students_sent_home_from_ebbsfleet_academy_on_first_day_of_term_1_4835465>
, anonymously to complain: “It’s outrageous, my daughter has been sent home 
from school along with about 200 other girls because their skirts are above the 
knee – but these are the skirts the school tells us to buy on their website.”

Alison Colwell, the school principal, dismissed the figure of 200 as nonsense, 
saying there were only 240 girls at the school in total. “It was less than 10% 
of the number quoted,” said Colwell, whose strict uniform policy attracted
national headlines 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2418983/Ebbsfleet-Academy-head-sent-home-5-pupils-wrong-uniforms.html>
 when the academy opened three years ago.


Then, according to the Daily Mail, 5% of pupils were sent home in one day for 
breaching new uniform rules. One girl was reportedly turned away because her 
bag was too small, while another was sent home because she had used an eyebrow 
pencil.

'No excuses': inside Britain's strictest school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/30/no-excuses-inside-britains-strictest-school>
In common with many schools, Ebbsfleet’s uniform code is lengthy and detailed. 
The only acceptable footwear is “plain, black, sturdy leather shoes with wide 
flat heels” – no trainers, no fabric shoes, no coloured stitching, labels or 
laces.


The only jewellery permitted is a watch with a plain strap and a single pair 
of small studs worn in the lower lobe of the ear. Makeup is banned, including 
fake tan, nail varnish or nail extensions, and there are rules for hairbands,
hijabs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2015/jun/24/hijab-not-oppression-feminist-statement-video>
, hair ties and scrunchies.

Hair “must be worn in a simple style”, no shorter than a number two, the 
uniform code states, adding: “An unnatural striking appearance is 
inappropriate. If in doubt over whether a planned style would be acceptable, 
parents/students should contact the academy and seek advice before having the 
hair styled.”

Colwell, a former police officer, said a letter was sent to parents before 
Christmas reminding them about uniform policy because of concern that a small 
number of girls were wearing inappropriate skirts that revealed “lots of thigh”.


Then, on the first day after the Christmas holiday, “a tiny number” turned up 
with unsuitable skirts, she said. Those whose parents could show a new skirt 
was on order were allowed to remain in school; others were offered longer 
skirts from the school’s second-hand collection, but a small number went home.

“We are no different from any other school. We just enforce the rules,” said 
Colwell. “A lot of schools say they have rules, then they don’t enforce them. 
It’s about the authority of the school. I think it’s important to look smart 
and to prepare our young people for going out into the world.

School uniform frees girls from pressures | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jul/14/school-uniform-frees-girls-from-pressures>
“The overwhelming majority of our parents are very supportive and love what we 
are doing for the school. A tiny, tiny minority of our parents don’t believe in 
the rule and authority of the school.” Those that disagreed with the strict 
rules were entitled to take their children elsewhere, she said.

Ebbsfleet Academy replaced Swan Valley Community School. Last summer 56% of 
pupils achieved the benchmark of five good GCSEs including English and maths, 
compared with 24% at the former school, and last term the academy received a 
positive Ofsted report and was judged “good” in all categories.

It is one of a growing number of schools to hit the headlines because of the 
increasing popularity of a zero-tolerance approach to uniform violations. Last 
Septemberpolice were called to Hartsdown academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/06/police-called-school-pupils-sent-home-wrong-uniform-hartsdown-academy-margate>
 in the Kent seaside resort of Margate after about 50 pupils were sent home for 
wearing the wrong clothes.
 