
Given that she is deputy speaker in parliament, the holder of a PhD and has 
served as an assistant dean at one of Kenya’s leading universities, Joyce 
Laboso should be eminently qualified to run for any political office inKenya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/kenya>.

However, the central issue in her campaign to become governor of Bomet, a 
county in the heart of the Rift Valley in western Kenya, has been her marriage.

Her husband’s ethnic group is different from the one that dominates Bomet, 
which means Laboso has had tofend off accusations 
<http://www.the-star.co.ke/news/2016/06/15/dont-fight-me-because-my-husband-is-luo-says-laboso_c1368961>
 of being an “outsider” with “divided loyalties” stemming from her husband’s 
heritage.

Laboso’s campaign in the run-up to elections in August highlights one of the 
many challenges women face when they venture into Kenya’s male-dominated 
politics.

‘They speak against it by day and cut girls at night’: fighting FGM in 
southern Kenya | Anthony Langat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/16/speak-against-by-day-cut-girls-at-night-fighting-fgm-southern-kenya-maasai>
Although considered one of Africa’s most progressive democracies, Kenya 
remains a laggard in addressing the gender gap in political representation.

Between 2007 and 2013, only 9.8% of MPs 
<https://www.issafrica.org/iss-today/kenyan-politics-where-have-all-the-women-gone>
 were women. Following the introduction of a revised constitution in 2010, 47 
counties were created, each with its own female representative. That has pushed 
the number of women in parliament up to 19.5%.

However, Kenya still trails far behind other countries in the region, such as 
Rwanda, where64% of seats 
<http://www.rw.one.un.org/press-center/news/women-secure-64-cent-seats-rwandan-parliamentary-elections>
 in parliament are held by women.

Legislation to trigger a clause in the constitution limiting to two-thirds the 
number of seats held by one gender in any public institution has beenrepeatedly 
blocked 
<http://www.cisanewsafrica.com/kenya-parliament-rejects-bill-on-two-third-gender-rule/>
 by the male-dominated parliament.

Women in politics also complain about encountering sexism on the campaign 
trail. In November, a popular TV talkshow wasdropped 
<http://nairobinews.nation.co.ke/news/embattled-jeff-koinange-leaves-ktn-with-apology-to-viewers-over-rape-comment/>
 after avideo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=SOU29ne_SYE> of a male 
politician’s comments to a female candidate for Nairobi governor went viral and 
caused widespread outrage.

Lawyer Miguna Miguna, one of the candidates, called his rival Esther Passaris 
a “socialite bimbo” and said she was selling her looks, not her leadership 
abilities. “Everybody is raping Esther. Esther is so beautiful everybody wants 
to rape her,” said Miguna during a break in the show. He was filmed and the 
recording leaked online.

According to the 2014 Kenya Demographic and Health Survey 
<http://hrw.pr-optout.com/Tracking.aspx?Data=HHL%3d8-78%3d5-%3eLCE593719%26SDG%3c90%3a.&RE=MC&RI=3980655&Preview=False&DistributionActionID=113685&Action=Follow+Link>
, 45% of women aged 15 to 49 have experienced physical violence, and 14% have 
suffered sexual violence. The same survey showed high rates of acceptance of 
wife beating among both men and women.

Nairobi University lecturer Winnie Mitullah says women should not shy away 
from politics despite the challenges they face. “Cultural attitudes and 
hang-ups will always be there,” she says, arguing that candidates should 
instead be better prepared to take on men at the ballot box.

 “The immediate priority should be how to train women to manoeuvre in the 
rough theatre of politics. We have to look at the pool of resources available 
to them, and that doesn’t just involve money. It includes things like security 
and technical advice to ensure that the playing field is levelled and that they 
can have an equal chance to sell their agenda based on merit and competence.”

Near-autonomous counties 
<http://www.worldbank.org/en/country/kenya/brief/kenyas-devolution> run by 
elected governors were introduced in the 2010 constitution to devolve power and 
resources to the grassroots. It was aimed at tempering competition for national 
office, which contributed to theviolence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2007/dec/31/kenya.haroonsiddique> that 
followed the disputed 2007 election.

Africa's crackdown on tax avoidance nets £204m to boost development
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/dec/07/africa-crackdown-tax-avoidance-nets-204m-to-boost-development-undp-helen-clark>
With the winner in county polls gaining control of an annual budget running 
into billions of shillings and enjoying virtual autonomy in deciding local 
priorities, the position of governor has become one of the most hotly contested 
posts. All 47 governors elected in 2013 were men. But in next year’s election 
several women, including two former presidential candidates, Charity Ngilu and 
Martha Karua, have emerged to challenge this male dominance.

Many others, including Martha Wanjira, a nominated senator who is running for 
MP in a constituency in the Rift Valley, are contesting elective posts. But 
they face challenges familiar to those who came before.

“I don’t think there is a female politician in Kenya who has not been called a 
prostitute at one point or another,” says Wanjira.

She calls on the media to avoid coverage that objectifies women. “It’s already 
hard enough because you have to work twice as hard to be recognised half as 
much, and it’s very unfortunate when journalists who should know better allow 
people to put down women,” she says.

Nominated senator Beatrice Elachi, a candidate for MP in a Nairobi 
constituency, adds: “It is interesting that society believes you can be a 
doctor or pilot or anything else but when it comes to political power, that is 
when culture sets in. Politics is seen as the vehicle of ‘real power’, and when 
you run for election, that is when you see real resistance to the concept of 
women leaders.”

Mitullah says women should continue to press their case to the electorate, 
arguing that “cultural attitudes are not cast in stone” and that consistently 
challenging outdated assumptions is the best way forward.
 