
The House of Commons is never more absurd than when kicking a man when he is 
down.Sir Philip Green <https://www.theguardian.com/business/philip-green> is 
finished, one of the most unpopular men in Britain, barely safe even on his own 
yacht. Indulged, pampered and praised for decades, his life’s work is in ruins. 
And all MPs can do iscall him “a spiv” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/oct/20/mps-support-stripping-billionaire-spiv-sir-philip-green-knighthood-video->
 and vote to strip him of his knighthood, which is not even in their gift. It 
shows where MPs’ priorities lie, in reputation and baubles.

As the Green empire unravelled over the past year, one thing became glaring. 
Every branch of the establishment let him get away with his greed. MPs devote 
an entire day to debating the man, yet all they seem to care about is his 
honour.

Napoleon or billionaire spiv? MPs line up to take a shot at Philip Green
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/napoleon-or-billionaire-spiv-mps-line-up-to-take-a-shot-at-philip-green>
Why no castigation of Green’s factotum chairman, Lord Grabiner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/26/lords-veneer-establishment-credibility-worth-little-bhs-grabiner>
? Could it be that he is also a “distinguished” member of the other house of 
parliament? Why no examination of the antics of Green’s other patsy 
non-executives during the sale of BHS to the former bankrupt,Dominic Chappell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/dominic-chappell>? Perhaps too many MPs 
are also gracing the boards of enterprises.

Shouldn’t there be government examination of the role of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), accountants to the great and good, whose duty is 
to protect the shareholders and employees of these corporations from the wilder 
shores of predatory capitalism? PwCreceived £2m in audit fees 
<http://www.theaccountant-online.com/features/comment-bhs-and-the-silence-of-the-auditors-4923573/>
 over the critical six years of BHS’s decline, plus £9m for “consultancy”. We 
might wonder whether perhaps the latter money could be seen to obfuscate the 
former, which looks like a conflict of interest.

As accountancy professor Prem Sikka wrote of the saga 
<http://www.theaccountant-online.com/features/comment-bhs-and-the-silence-of-the-auditors-4923573/>
 in The Accountant about this matter: “No auditor is going to advance his/her 
career by being sceptical or robust and losing such a lucrative client.” This 
is utterly unsatisfactory. So where is the regulator, the Financial Reporting 
Council? The answer, as Sikka points out, could look like in the pocket of the 
big accounting firms which always escape these fiascos scot free.

'Billionaire spiv' debate about Sir Philip Green was entertaining but absurd | 
Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/20/billionaire-spiv-debate-about-sir-philip-green-was-entertaining-but-absurd>
How can the tax affairs of the Green family and its companies have passed 
muster for a decade with HMRC? Is it because HMRC has a revolving door with the 
accountancy profession?

And where in the Commons was there castigation of Goldman Sachs, the firm that 
put its gilded stamp of approval on the transfer ofBHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs> to Chappell? A first-year banking 
student could see this deal appeared to ditch losses and shaft pensioners.

Why do MPs not call to strip Grabiner of his peerage? Why not demand a ban on 
public sector consultancies for the useless PwC? Why not exclude Goldman Sachs 
from all further Whitehall contracts? Are these questions above the pay grade 
of our poor MPs?

It is not capitalism that is rotten just now, but its frothing-at-the-mouth 
guardians.
 