
Finally, a re-advent we can all get behind: Kim Kardashian’s arse is back! And 
before you say: “Oh I know, I saw him in the lobby of Trump Tower,” – I’m 
talking about her literal one, not her metaphorical one. The manner in which 
Kanye opts to recover from his breakdown is a matter as private as it is 
idiosyncratic.

As for Kim, you may be aware that she has observed a 10-week social media 
silence, followingthe Paris burglary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/kim-kardashian-west-gunpoint-robbery-manhunt-paris>
 in which she had a gun held to her head, before being gagged and thrown into a 
bathtub, while thieves robbed her of millions of dollars’ worth of jewellery. 
Since then, there has been all sorts of conjecture that she was totally 
overhauling her image as a consequence.

Happily, this distinctly censorious speculation appears to have been 
unfounded. Madam has this week broken her social media silence by posting some
mesmeric footage of her own gyrating backside 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/3am/celebrity-news/kim-kardashian-makes-very-racy-9461511>
, and a still photo of what appears to be her cleavage resting on someone 
else’s bottom. The only text accompanying them teases: “December 16th”. I can 
probably wait to find out what it all means, but still: welcome back, old stick!

Needless to say, that view is not universally shared. The most toxic reaction 
to this comes from pointless überbloggerPerez Hilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/perez-hilton>, who has always excelled at 
turning fluffy showbiz gossip into a form of creepy bigotry. (Possibly the only 
hatreds Perez is convincingly against would be homophobia and Hispanophobia, 
for the simple reason that they affect him personally.)

“I was expecting so much more from your return to social media,” he opines in 
an open message to Kim. “Sad. Sad. Sad. After your ‘traumatic’ Paris robbery, 
THIS is how you return toInstagram 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/instagram>? Clearly nothing’s changed.”

And yet, what should have changed? I think Kim probably already knew that 
aggravated burglary was a bad thing before it happened to her. Still, it is 
always instructive to hear from the high sparrow of drawing cocks onto women’s 
faces, and we must wish Perez the compliments of the season.
 