
More than 10,000 badgers have been killed this autumn 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/578144/summary-badger-control-monitoring-2016-annexa1.pdf>
 in a cull supposedly to combat the disease of bovine TB in cattle. This was 
the fourth year ofculling badgers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/16/badger-cull-kills-more-than-10000-animals-three-months-bovine-tb>
 but, in truth, we have been slaughtering our largest wild carnivore for 
decades. We have to ask one question: why has this bloody killing gone on for 
so long?

Badger cull kills more than 10,000 animals in three months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/16/badger-cull-kills-more-than-10000-animals-three-months-bovine-tb>
I use the b-word more as an adjective than an intensifier, since the blood of 
the innocents continues to be spilt. Scientists dislike value judgments such as 
“innocent” and “guilty”. But even if the badger was “guilty” of spreading 
bovine TB to cattle, it would be an innocent victim of man’s arrogance and 
blind stupidity.

More than 30 years ago, while working for the World Wildlife Fund 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Wide_Fund_for_Nature>, I was asked to 
write a book about badgers and bovine TB.The Fate of the Badger 
<http://www.theecologist.org/reviews/2988189/the_fate_of_the_badger_the_great_badger_scapegoating_conspiracy.html>
 was published in 1986. I never thought the controversy over controlling the 
bovine TB in cattle by killing a protected wild animal would become such a 
tortuous saga. Astonishingly, in the three decades since then, nothing much has 
changed.

Thirty years ago we aimed to fight the official slaughter of a protected 
species through government-led badger culls by science not emotion. Then we met 
politics.

For three years I was an adviser to the government – a depressing experience. 
I had a mole in theMinistry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ministry_of_Agriculture,_Fisheries_and_Food_(United_Kingdom)>
 (now Defra). He told me that the decision to cull badgers was taken at No 10. 
My staunchest ally at that time wasthe great Phil Drabble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2007/aug/02/broadcasting.guardianobituaries>
, the countryman and presenter of One Man and His Dog. He would phone me with a 
stream of unprintable invective against the department. Apart from being a TV 
celebrity, he wrote for The Field magazine and had a direct line of 
communication with our opponents. Where is his equivalent today?

Politicians rise because they are clever, but few are blessed with a 
scientific mind. Themyth of badger culpability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/bovine-tb-not-passed-on-through-direct-contact-with-badgers-research-shows>
 forbovine TB in cattle <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/bovine-tuberculosis> is 
rooted in poor science – and economics.

First, the science. This year, I wrote an updated edition of The Fate of the 
Badger. I concluded by remarking on the size of theMycobacterium bovis bacillum 
– the cause of bovine TB. At 3-4microns 
<http://www.thefreedictionary.com/microns>, many thousands could fit on this 
full stop. Even at 300,000 bacilli per millilitre, it has been estimated that a 
cow would need to drink three millilitres of badger urine to obtain an 
infective dose. Thus the size of a badger is irrelevant and many other 
scapegoats wait in the wings – deer, dogs, cats, pigs, sheep and alpacas all 
also carry bovine TB.

What is not irrelevant is the mode of transmission or locus of infection: is 
an animal suffering pulmonary (located in the lungs and caused by inhalation of 
the bacilli) or extra-pulmonary (elsewhere in the body) TB? Cows tend to get 
the former. It has beenknown since the 1980s that “kissing cows” 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=hN4nii9Fba8C&pg=PA19&lpg=PA19&dq=%27The+guilty+secret+of+kissing+cows%27&source=bl&ots=UV0yMDFnGo&sig=qAm8sF_dIze3larKt7mL-GnE-js&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiQ-pm3pYDRAhXJLsAKHSWmDy4Q6AEIHDAA#v=onepage&q='The%20guilty%20secret%20of%20kissing%20cows'&f=false>
 – nuzzling each other over fences – arethe principal route of transmission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/05/bovine-tb-not-passed-on-through-direct-contact-with-badgers-research-shows>
, so why this fixation on badgers?Extra-pulmonary TB 
<http://www.webmd.com/lung/tc/tuberculosis-tb-topic-overview> occasionally 
affects badgers and is caused by bite wounds affecting the neck. It is much 
less infectious than pulmonary TB.

Second, the economics. The economic rationale for culling badgers is bound up 
with the question: who controls the countryside? Just36,000 individuals 
<http://www.countrylife.co.uk/articles/who-really-owns-britain-20219> own half 
of rural land in England and Wales. These big landowners are members of the 
Country Land and Business Association and the National Farmers Union (NFU). And 
Defra and the NFU are bosom buddies: next door neighbours in Smith Square, 
London.

Modern farming is a business and there is little space for sentiment in 
business. The NFU is inordinately powerful, yet most farmers are pretty 
ignorant about life beyond the farm gate. Most have no conception of 
epidemiology or biological processes yet, as a force, they are loud and 
intimidatory, even behind the collars and ties of the NFU.

The extension of the badger cull is horribly cruel – and it won’t help farmers 
| Brian May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/26/badger-cull-bovine-tuberculosis-tb>
But if farmers were better businessmen, they’d rumble the NFU propaganda 
they’ve been fed for so long and direct their ire at the politicians, not a 
defenceless, harmless wild animal that just happens to be big and noticeable.

The bloody killing continues because of politics. The badger cull is an 
intellectual heirloom. So much has been invested in a catastrophic fallacy 
borne of political expediency that there is no way for the government now to 
save face: no hiding place despite all its exit strategies.

Continuing to cull badgers to demonstrate their commitment to tackling bovine 
TB, ministers cannot – dare not – admit that original fatal error. As Albert 
Einstein remarked: “Insanity is doing the same thing over and over again and 
expecting different results.” The trouble is,as Robin Day noted 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/4727494/Why-I-walked-out-on-Robin-Day.html> 
during the Falklands war, politicians are “here today, gone tomorrow”. Cows 
continue to die of bovine TB and innocent badgers continued to be killed 
because politicians are the ultimate short-term animal.
 