
La La Land review: Ryan Gosling and Emma Stone shine in a sun-drenched musical 
masterpiece
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
I fully expected to loathe La La Land 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/31/la-la-land-review-ryan-gosling-emma-stone>
, being, as I am, rather proprietorial about my beloved hometown of 25 years, 
and having been robustly dismissive of director Damien Chazelle’s last movie,
Whiplash <https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jan/15/whiplash-review>. But, 
to my delight, Chazelle had me in the palm of his hand right from the opening 
sequence, when the two leads – underemployed jazz musician Ryan Gosling and 
aspiring actor Emma Stone – meet cute during an-all singing, all-dancing 
traffic snarl on the soaring overpass connecting the 105 and 110 freeways over 
Watts, which affords the most beautiful view of LA you can find. I was swept 
away by La La Land’s fierce ardour for its locale, its unapologetic romanticism 
and its kinetic perpetual motion (and emotion).

Obviously, the film fetishises and adores classic musicals, in the MGM Freed 
Unit mould, and the parti-coloured 1960s French variant as practised by Jacques 
Demy and the Dorléac sisters. It magically manages to honour both without ever 
betraying itself. But it is also head over heels in love with what LA Times 
architecture critic Christopher Hawthorne has dubbed “Third LA” – that’s to 
say, the vibrant, confident, colourful, municipally self-conscious (and, let’s 
admit, gentrified) Los Angeles as it has reconstituted itself in the 
quarter-century since tearing itself apart withthe 1992 Rodney King riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/may/01/la-riots-rodney-king-race>.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20'The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ryan%20Gosling%20on%20La%20La%20Land%3A%20%27The%20world%20is%20quick%20to%20shame%20you%20for%20trying%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview&media=>
Ryan Gosling on La La Land: ‘The world is quick to shame you for trying’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2017/jan/13/ryan-gosling-emma-stone-la-la-land-video-interview>
Golden Globes 2017: La La Land leads pack with seven nominations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/12/golden-globes-2017-la-la-land-leads-pack-with-seven-nominations>
Third LA – like La La Land – also knowingly venerates “Second LA” (as 
Hawthorne calls southern California’s explosive postwar economic boom, which 
finally flatlined in 1992) for its Googie architecture, its Spanish-revival 
apartment houses, the Watts Towers, the Colorado Street Bridge, the old Rialto 
cinema in Pasadena, the Angels Flight funicular, and the Griffith Observatory, 
where the knife-fight in Rebel Without A Cause was shot. (Rebel, another 
colour-coded icon of Second LA, features heavily in La La Land). And it’s 
remarkable how the movie snugly integrates its pastel-hued artifice and its 
real locations. I haven’t seen a movie this gloriously drunk on LA and SoCal 
sinceZabriskie Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/oct/23/zabriskie-point-review-michelangelo-antonioni>
, though Knight Of Cups and 500 Days Of Summer come close.

Best of all, this was the only time for me since 8 November that I was 
successfully able to shut out all thoughts of Trump-World for over two hours, 
to forget about it utterly. Middlemarch couldn’t get the job done, nor Anna 
Karenina, nor binge-watching Netflix for a solid month, nor even scotch in 
unhealthy measure. ButLa La Land <https://www.theguardian.com/film/la-la-land>, 
if only for a while, quite rid me of anger, cynicism and anxiety. It made me 
happy, and it made me cry. For that kindness alone, I give it best picture.

La La Land is in cinemas from Friday
 