
The Labour party is not split, it is splattered. The “divorcing couple arguing 
over the children” metaphor doesn’t work unless we accept there are countless 
children who don’t want to live with either parent. The battle cry of “Which 
side are you on, boys?” doesn’t work because we are not all boys and there are 
not simply two sides. There is, instead, a babble of voices that does not 
cohere into one narrative. The search for a convincing story is one that I 
heard spoken of at conference in Liverpool this week, but never quite found. To 
be optimistic, we could say that this is a party in transition and that somehow 
the fragments will be glued together; indeed, that fragmentation is just the 
nature of the modern world. But the modern world is itself something of a 
problem forLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>.

Inside conference there were endless debates about the structure of the 
party’s national executive committee. During those, you lose all track of time 
and don’t even know what year it is. This kind of navel gazing felt wrong, 
frankly, whensubjects such as Syria and Brexit were not debated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/26/why-isnt-labour-debating-brexit-at-its-conference>
. Over the summer, it was possible to watch various Labour people arguing 
endlessly on Twitter and forget that there was a Tory government. Conference is 
like Twitter come to life: inward-looking and strangely meaningless.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Can%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20Labour%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Can%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20unite%20the%20Labour%20party%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fcan-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video&media=>
Can Jeremy Corbyn unite the Labour party? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/28/can-jeremy-corbyn-unite-the-labour-party-video>
One day it is possible to think that Labour is about achieving socialism in 
one country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/26/labour-conference-john-mcdonnell-speech-says-labour-will-run-interventionist-government-politics-live?page=with:block-57e9133ee4b0f55a9f4035dd#block-57e9133ee4b0f55a9f4035dd>
. Thenext we are told it is not against capitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/sep/27/labour-conference-jeremy-corbyn-tom-watson-says-party-must-prepare-for-fourth-industrial-revolution>
. Does it exist simply to soften the hard edges of an economic system it knows 
it can’t change? If so, what are the values it keeps harping on about? Words 
such as “fairness” and “equality” and “freedom” and “opportunity” are used by 
every party. The language of anti-austerity is further sloganeering. It is a 
sentiment not a policy. During the last election several voters asked me what 
austerity meant.

In a way, the discussions that Momentum were having 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/28/new-politics-protest-momentum-jeremy-corbyn-labour-government>
 were trying to articulate the values that define Labour. It was all a bit 
back-to-basics, and felt like a school fete in north London. Momentum is a 
mishmash of sensibilities but any comparison with Militant is overblown. One 
look at the clothes would tell you that. Militant knew that working-class 
people didn’t want to look poor; Momentum is more baggy in every sense. It’s a 
strange mix of the past and the future. They are keen on networks and 
automation, which is a world away from the mutterings of some union bosses. The 
attitude to work is different; as is the attitude to Trident and fracking. The 
Momentum crew are less good at explaining who will do the work of caring in the 
future because they have zilch in the way of gender politics beyond loving sex 
workers. They have energy but the beatification of Jeremy Corbyn is not enough 
to generate a coherent philosophy. For he is simply a cipher, too often a 
regurgitator of policy-lite platitudes. His limitations are sold as his USP. 
Actually, he reminds me increasingly of Blair, a man who believed above all in 
his own self-righteousness. Like Blair, he surrounds himself with the “Live 
Tory-Vote Labour” types who live in big houses and send their kids to selective 
schools.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fandy-burnham-to-quit-shadow-cabinet-to-focus-on-manchester-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Andy%20Burnham%20to%20quit%20shadow%20cabinet%20to%20focus%20on%20Manchester%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fandy-burnham-to-quit-shadow-cabinet-to-focus-on-manchester-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Andy%20Burnham%20to%20quit%20shadow%20cabinet%20to%20focus%20on%20Manchester%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F28%2Fandy-burnham-to-quit-shadow-cabinet-to-focus-on-manchester-video&media=>
Andy Burnham to quit shadow cabinet to focus on Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/sep/28/andy-burnham-to-quit-shadow-cabinet-to-focus-on-manchester-video>
He is merely a symptom of a problem, not the problem itself. Is Labour simply 
the Retro party? Parts of it look back to the glory days of when we lost the 
miners’ strike; others to that time Labour won elections. What it cannot do is 
offer an account of where we are now. God knows, that is difficult … but we do 
not yet live in this world of robots. We live in a scary, insecure world. The 
challenges to neoliberalism have come from the right – Nigel Farage or Donald 
Trump – and this means two things for a party of the left. It has to present a 
competent economic plan and it has to make the case for social liberalism in 
conjunction with other parties. Now is not the time for a politics of purity or 
paranoid purges. This is a terrible narrowing-down.


What is opening up are the divides between the places where it remains in 
control – the cities with Labour mayors and the Welsh Assembly – and what are 
referred to as the old Labour heartlands, full of small towns. It is in many of 
these northern English constituencies that some Corbynites plan to deselect, 
mostly women, MPs. The fracturing of class solidarity means that the leadership 
of the party wants to hold on to what it considers to be socially conservative 
voters but has no way to address them. The disdain of the Remainers for the 
Brexiteers made that clear. The left regards its own people as gullible, stupid 
and largely suffering from false consciousness. At least Corbyn addressed this 
in his speech. But he needs to reach out beyond his base.

There is potential in local politics, a new kind of devolution that is 
evolving organically. There is still a reluctance to talk about Englishness, 
but national identity is up for re-imagining. It is happening. Labour can join 
that conversation or cede it to the right. If Labour cannot find a way of 
talking about a nation that embodies modernity as well as making the case for 
spending on a state that makes us feel more secure, whether that’s defence or 
the NHS; if it cannot speak of a civic morality, then what is it for? The 
problem is not faith in Corbyn but faith in this common purpose.
 