
Is Labour finished? Is the collapse of the party that turned this country from 
an enclave of aristocratic power into a functioning democracy inevitable? I 
wouldn’t bet against it. The MPs trying to bring downJeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> seem unable to understand 
that, in the volatile new politics, Labour can sustain itself only by becoming 
the grassroots movement it once was, driven by the unruly but determined 
energies of its members. This transformation – from the opaque, corrupt 
bureaucracy created by Tony Blair, to a party owned by and responsive to its 
members – is Corbyn’s great achievement.

This Tory chaos won’t last. Labour must take its chance | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/tory-labour-conservatives-jeremy-corbyn>
Yes, his opponents in the party want to win elections. But it is not clear why 
they want to win. If they possess a political programme (and most of the time 
it is unintelligible), it amounts to a slightly modified version of Tory 
neoliberalism. Lacking anything resembling an inspiring vision, their chances 
of success (if somehow, they manage to install a new party leader) are even 
smaller than his.

Those who support Corbyn seem unwilling to understand that the Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party will fail unless its 
leaders launch devastating attacks against established power. A kinder, gentler 
politics is a wonderful thing – until it allows the government and financial 
elite to get away with murder. Without a visible and effective demolition of 
the dominant political narrative, and the thrilling and voluble creation of a 
new story, his party cannot generate the excitement required to turn the vote. 
The lords of misrule will not be overthrown by mumbling.

But to blame the collapse of the party on its immediate difficulties would be 
unfair to both sides. Labour’s problems run much deeper than the current 
struggle between members and representatives. The party rose on whatJB 
Priestley, in 1929, called the “grey-green tide of cloth caps” 
<http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/625233.The_Good_Companions>: a coherent, 
organised industrial labour force, with common goals and common means of 
achieving them.

This coherence was destroyed not only by deindustrialisation, but also by 
powerful and ineluctable social change, much of which pre-dated industrial 
collapse.As Tony Judt noted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2010/apr/11/ill-fares-land-tony-judt>, the 
New Left in the 1960s rebelled against both the injustices of capitalism and 
the constraints of collectivism. “Individualism – the assertion of every 
person’s claim to maximised private freedom and the unrestrained liberty to 
express autonomous desires … became the leftwing watchword of the hour.”

The result was an astonishing liberation: from millennia of social, gender and 
sexual control by powerful, mostly elderly men. But the flowering of identities 
that began 50 years ago led inevitably to a decline in the sense of common 
purpose.

Identity and autonomy, championed at first on the left, were soon co-opted by 
the neoliberal right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
. Liberating individualism was transformed into exploitable atomisation, 
creative self-expression replaced by a depoliticised, desocialising consumerism 
that enabled the rise of a new oligarchy. The most enduring political legacy of 
the New Left is not to be found in leftwing movements, but in the radical 
right’s institution-smashing insurgency.

Unless something drastic happens, the next election threatens to become a 
contest between the Tories and Ukip

In none of its incarnations has Labour produced a credible response. It has, 
at different points in the past half-century, either burrowed back into the 
lost world or abandoned its core principles to deliver a slightly less toxic 
version of the Tory assault. It has not been able to find a place of comfort on 
the spectrum between dreary and frightening, perhaps because this is thewrong 
spectrum <https://www.opendemocracy.net/neal-lawson/downfall>. It has failed to 
articulate what must be the core project of a new progressive politics: 
discovering the common purpose in diversity.

Nothing demonstrates this more clearly than its repeated refusal (which is now 
beginning to soften 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/labour-john-mcdonnell-proportional-representation-pr-make-votes-matter-protest-a7018056.html>
) to support demands for proportional representation. Our first-past-the-post 
electoral system served the old party well. It is disastrously mismatched to 
the fragmented and emergent politics that replaced the grey-green tide.

As Jeremy Gilbert, one of the crucial thinkers charting a new direction for 
the British left,points out 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/ourkingdom/jeremy-gilbert/what-hope-for-labour-and-left-election-80s-and-%E2%80%98aspiration%E2%80%99>
, by placing general elections in the hands of a few middle-income voters in 
market towns, our system grants inordinate power to the corporate media, which 
needs only to influence them to capture the nation. A combination of a media 
owned by billionaires, unreformed political funding and first-past-the-post 
elections is lethal to democracy.

Unless something drastic and decisive happens, the next election threatens to 
become a contest between the Tories and Ukip: in other words, between rightwing 
technocrats owned by the banks and rightwing demagogues owned by Arron Banks. 
What is this drastic something? A progressive alliance.

Where’s the evidence that Jeremy Corbyn is to blame for Brexit? | John Curtice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/evidence-blame-jeremy-corbyn-brexit-remain-labour-conservative>
This means Labour, the SNP, Liberal Democrats, Greens, Plaid Cymru, Sinn Féin 
and other parties agreeing to field just one candidate between them in every 
constituency. Whether that means a unity candidate representing all parties 
(perhaps chosen in an open primary, asthe political innovator Paul Hilder has 
suggested 
<http://www.newstatesman.com/politics/staggers/2016/06/progressive-voters-must-ditch-party-differences-gain-voice-brexit-britain>
), or making way for the party representative most likely to capture the 
progressive vote is a question that needs to be debated. The Greens and Lib 
Dems seem ready to play. What about Labour?

Joining such an alliance means giving up Scotland and giving up its hopes of a 
majority in England and Wales. You could see that as a lot to ask, or you could 
see it as accepting the inevitable. Here’s where the kinder, gentler politics 
is required: to abandon tribalism and strike generous bargains with old 
opponents. It’ll be hard, but the urgency of the task, as we confront an elite 
that is now empowered to tear down the remains of postwar social democracy, 
should be apparent to everyone. By giving up hopes of governing alone, Labour 
could be offered a last chance of survival – but only as part of a wider 
alliance.

Combined, these forces can win the next general election, whenever that might 
be. Apart, they will inevitably lose. A progressive alliance need win only 
once, then use that victory to reform our electoral system, to ensure that the 
parties of the left and centre never again engage in destructive competition.

After submitting this column, I jumped on a train to attend a mass meeting in 
London. The topic? Building apost-Brexit alliance 
<http://www.compassonline.org.uk/post-brexit-alliance-event-livestream/>. It 
brings together senior figures from the Lib Dems, the Greens, the SNP and, yes, 
Labour. Did hope die on 24 June? Or was it perhaps reborn?
 