
Jeremy Corbyn has had a “speak your brains 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Day_Today>” day trip this week and it seems 
to have achieved something quite unthinkable. He has managed to alienate some 
of his hardcore support, who have, until now, stuck with him despite the fact 
that he is Jeremy Corbyn.Being Jeremy is indeed the new strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-rebranded-labour-leader>
 – let him be, it can’t get any worse – and who knows, the pure, unspun essence 
of Jeremy may cut through and inspire the doubters. We all need to be “woke” in 
the days of fake news and “populism” – a word that is often used, but little 
understood. The “real Jeremy” was to be unleashed. This presumes that the real 
Jeremy is something we are all equally enamoured with and want to see more of. 
Some do – but where others see kindness, I see only repressed anger. Where 
others see principle, I see a refusal to think and to learn. But then we all 
know I am guided by lizards, am a Tory, a Blairite, evil or just a stupid woman 
or any one of the multiple-choice insults for the unbelievers. Yadda yadda 
yadda.

So, rebooted and resuited, Corbyn reappeared, somewhat confused about a policy 
on pay differentials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 and thenupsetting some of his core support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
 who certainly do not want a hard Brexit or for freedom of movement to be 
compromised. Quite a feat. Was he sacrificing a principle (freedom of movement) 
for power – to appeal to leavers – to shore up power? If so, then surely he 
must feel power ebbing away.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Jeremy Corbyn proposes setting maximum cap on earnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-setting-maximum-cap-on-earnings-brexit-speech-video>
This is painful to watch. Labour now dwells in a kind of limbo. Nothing can 
move forward until he goes, and he will only go in an electoral wipe out. This 
is the ultimate selfishness from someone who we are told by his groupies is 
some kind of saint.Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> can’t 
regenerate with him in charge and, indeed, Labour’s problems are far bigger 
than this one personality. He is now a bed-blocker – yes, this is a horrible, 
ageist metaphor – in terms of renewal. The merry band who preach with 
revolutionary zeal that we are on the verge of overthrowing the elites seem to 
be having some sort of flashback. In reality, people are joining the Lib Dems, 
Wales is no longer a heartland, the NHS is in meltdown. What there is left of 
the party when Corbyn is gone may not even be leftwing.

Related: Jeremy Corbyn 2.0: can the rebranded Labour leader make his mark? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-rebranded-labour-leader>

Many – including, perhaps, even the man himself – assumed this leadership was 
a holding pattern until someone else took over – perhaps with Corbynite 
blessing. That this, somehow, could lift the paralysis of Labour.

Jon Lansman of Momentum used the word paralysis, too. He was talking of the 
structure of the “movement”, which hopes toaffiliate to the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/momentum-iwar-of-words-labour-affiliation>
 and work for its electoral success. Of course, this has angered some of the 
far-left groups who can now no longer use Momentum to infiltrate Labour. This 
may be some sort of reality check for party activists, but it’s not one that 
has reached Corbyn’s inner circle.

Talking about pay differentials is good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/corbyn-wage-cap-pay-city-labour>
, riffing without facts or figures is not. Likewise, vague expressions of 
concern about austerity, inequality and neoliberalism are now a political code 
that results in a vast switch off. More code was uttered by Corbyn with his 
talk of “managed migration” and “access” to the single market. Everyone has 
access; the point is the terms of that access, and managed migration is not 
going to be one of them. That makes his utterances meaningless.

One of the lessons learned here from populists such as Trump or Farage is 
about language. If Corbyn is to be rebranded as a populist by his inner circle, 
there has to be a feel for the way people actually speak. There has to be a 
real understanding of how populism is located. We are not Spain or Greece, or 
even Michigan. What do we learn from Syriza or Podemos? We need an extremely 
strong sense of the location, identity and territory that is being defended and 
a clear idea of the enemy. It can be the country, the nation state, the city 
state and its people. The EU. Wall Street. The establishment is defined against 
them. But the left as a whole remains squeamish about location, seeing it as 
only divisive. It cedes this to the right – and indeed Brexit is part of this.

A populist leader emerges from a movement. This attempt to grow a movement off 
the back of Corbyn’s leadership has been incoherent. If this movement, rather 
like him, sees extra-parliamentary activity as the way forward, this is going 
to be problematic for a political party. The dizzying degrees of self–deception 
that parts of the left have been involved in here, often played out in full 
view on social media, have been utterly destructive.

No one thinks Corbyn can win, nobody thinks he can be deposed.

Labour are hamstrung by the inflexibility of its leader and its own internal 
structures. As the world shifts – as free trade is being attacked from the 
right – the least an opposition can do is to respond quickly.

Instead, there are long absences where Corbyn is not visible. He was in Mexico 
hanging out with like-minded folk 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/corbyn-takes-a-festive-break-with-mexican-maverick-0v7tlgr06>
, now he’s back in the UK, spreading discord. What vainglorious egotism, this 
willingness to kill a party for the thing he loves. One fundamental of populism 
is simply that it is popular. He is not. Please let Corbyn Unchained be the 
final roll of the dice.
 