
Jeremy Corbyn’s intervention in the EU debate was notable, but it wasn’t what 
journalists were talking about after his speech. The hot topic was thechorus of 
boos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/02/eu-referendum-live-cameron-and-corbyn-make-the-case-for-remain-separately>
 for their presence, and the hisses for the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg.

That followed hot on the heels of the Vice documentary about Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/jeremy-corbyn-bbc-obsessed-damaging-leadership-vice-documentary>
, in which the Labour leader complains extensively about bias in the press. One 
of the things he has learned as leader, he says, is “how shallow, facile and 
ill-informed many of the supposed well-informed major commentators are in our 
media”. I suppose I should just be glad he reads my columns.

To be honest I didn’t really understand why so many journalists got so 
sensitive about it. Surely the role of the media is to hold politicians to 
account, not to be liked by them. You might even say disgruntled politicians 
are a symptom of journalists doing their jobs properly. I won’t shed a tear for 
the end of those cosy relationships between hacks and MPs, which – at the 
extreme end of the spectrum – involvepolitical leaders becoming godfathers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/sep/05/tony-blair-murdoch-family-fold>
 to the children of media moguls.

And when it comes to media bias, Corbyn has a point. I went to John 
McDonnell’s New Economics conference 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/uk/ellie-mae-ohagan/inside-labours-new-economics>
 on 21 May. It was an impressive and substantial event, at which dozens of 
world-renowned figures came together to debate a departure from the neoliberal 
economics that has dominated Britain for the past 35 years. And what was the 
main topic of media coverage the next day? The fact that a Labour party staffer 
accidentally sent members an email that began with the phrase“Dear Firstname” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/05/22/labour-members-have-reacted-furiously-to-email-addressed-to-firs/>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D94ptAcbfKP0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D94ptAcbfKP0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D94ptAcbfKP0&media=>
 Vice documentary: Jeremy Corbyn, The Outsider 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=94ptAcbfKP0> 
This was facile on behalf of the press, and readers deserve better. Indeed, in 
a response to the Vice documentary, the Sun (apparently without irony) rebuffed 
the charge that the media give Corbyn a hard time by describing him as“hapless” 
and “snarling” 
<http://www.thesun.co.uk/sol/homepage/news/politics/7187057/Jeremy-Corbyn-claims-BBC-is-obsessed-with-trying-to-damage-me-in-fly-on-the-wall-documentary.html>
.

But it is at this point that I part company with lots of other Corbyn 
supporters. Since he won the leadership last year I have spoken with many who 
insist the media is so unfairly biased against him that it is simply not worth 
engaging with, except to chastise certain journalists for bad reporting. The 
solution, these Corbyn supporters say, is to connect with the public in other 
ways: by utilising social media, or simply refusing to cooperate with the 
public school dorm culture of the lobby.

The question of how Corbyn maintains his integrity while succeeding in a 
deeply cynical system is a tough one to answer

I sympathise with this position, but it seems unfeasible. For one thing, most 
people still consume news via the mainstream media. A 2013 Ofcom report found 
that 78% of people rely on television as theirmain source of news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2013/sep/25/bbc-uk-top-source-news-ofcom>, 
compared with 19% who use Facebook and 10% who use Twitter. Crucially, less 
than a third of respondents regarded Twitter as trustworthy. If Corbyn were to 
circumvent the mainstream media, he would lose the opportunity to communicate 
with a significant chunk of the British public.

More importantly though, I think complaining about media bias fundamentally 
misunderstands the way Westminster politics works. It’s easy to mistake 
parliament for a civilised place: the archaic traditions, opulent settings and 
glut of privately educated old men suggest as much. I imagine if most people 
were asked to compare Westminster to another institution they might choose a 
court of law or a university. But the truth is, Westminster is more like a bear 
pit. Those within it must do whatever they can to survive, they cannot display 
any signs of weakness, and the whole thing unfolds as a rather sordid public 
spectacle.

If someone chooses to enter frontline politics, as Corbyn has, they are 
climbing into the bear pit. Once they’ve done that, they can’t just stand there 
complaining it’s not the gentlemanly pursuit they hoped it would be, because 
they’ll get eaten alive. Once you’re in, the only choice you have is to fight 
for your life, even if – as in Corbyn’s case – the odds are unfairly weighted 
against you.

Jeremy Corbyn: the BBC is 'obsessed' with damaging my leadership
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/01/jeremy-corbyn-bbc-obsessed-damaging-leadership-vice-documentary>
Practically speaking, this means designing a media strategy involving a few 
key messages about the state of the economy and repeating them endlessly until 
they bore you to tears. It means leaping upon all the mainstream media 
platforms you possibly can, no matter how odious you regard them to be. It 
means identifying the key demographics you need to win over for electoral 
success and relentlessly pursuing them. It means taking advantage of the 
government’s weaknesses at every opportunity. And it also means saying things 
you’d rather not say, and self-censoring on occasion, because you’re conscious 
of how your words might be manipulated by others to undermine your overarching 
aims.

Of course, this is harder for Corbyn than it sounds. He has been ushered into 
power by people who like him precisely because he refuses to take part in 
Westminster bloodsports. So the question of how he maintains his integrity 
while also succeeding in a deeply cynical system is a tough one to answer.

And as someone who has been watching his team at close range, I suspect that 
finding the time to design a long-term media strategy has been sabotaged by the 
immediate firefighting required to stymie the constant threat of bad headlines 
and internal coups. In that respect Corbyn’s camp are doing a better job than 
they have been given credit for.

Even so, the media is the wrong target here. Yes, it is part of the 
establishment. But it is also a conduit through which Corbyn can communicate 
with millions of people. To that end, he must focus on using it to his 
advantage. He’s right to feel aggrieved that the media isn’t giving him a fair 
hearing, but the Westminster bear pit isn’t fair. And right now, accepting the 
reality of the situation is the best chance Corbyn has of surviving it.
 