
The Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party has selected 
its first female candidates to compete for new roles as metropolitan mayors in 
England.

Sue Jeffrey, the leader of Redcar and Cleveland council, won a ballot of 
members in Tees Valley on Friday. In the West of England region, Lesley 
Mansell, a councillor and NHS worker in Bath, won the party nomination.

They hope to be elected on 4 May, the same day as Labour MPs Andy Burnham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/09/andy-burnham-selected-labours-candidate-manchester-mayor>
 and Steve Rotheram will be standing in Greater Manchester and the Liverpool 
city region respectively. In the West Midlands, Labour MEP Siôn Simon faces a 
tight race with Andy Street, whoquit as managing director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/01/john-lewis-boss-andy-street-abrupt-departure-challenging-times>
 of John Lewis in October to run as the Conservative candidate.

Elections were also supposed to take place in May to choose a mayor for the 
Sheffield city region. That was thrown into doubt before Christmas, whenthe 
high court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/the-guardian-view-on-english-local-identities-a-clash-of-cash-against-community>
 that those who drew up the region had failed to properly consult residents 
about the inclusion of Chesterfield.

Labour has been criticised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/23/local-government-blokey-andy-burnham-mayoralty-women>
 for not involving enough women in the devolution agenda, which has seen big 
city regions receiving extra money and power from the government in return for 
accepting elected mayors.

Why is local government so blokey?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/23/local-government-blokey-andy-burnham-mayoralty-women>
Tees Valley is a somewhat artificial construct that includes Middlesbrough, 
Stockton-on-Tees, Hartlepool, Darlington, and Redcar and Cleveland. The 
combined authority decided to separate itself from the rest of the north-east 
of England, which rejected its own devolution deal with the government last 
year.

Jeffrey, who has led the minority Labour administration in Redcar and 
Cleveland since 2015, beatfellow councillor Chris Barlow 
<http://www.egenda.stockton.gov.uk/aksstockton/users/public/admin/main.pl?op=MemberDetails&keyid=543>
, who represents the Billingham North ward. She will come up against Ben 
Houchen, the leader of the Conservative group on Stockton borough council.

Jeffrey said she was proud to be one of Labour’s first two female candidates. 
“It’s really important that we have many more women a) in senior positions in 
the Labour party overall, and b) concerned and involved with generating 
economic growth,” Jeffrey told the Guardian.

Local government <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> was 
still very male-dominated, she said, particularly in the area of regeneration 
and economic growth, with female councillors often looking after health and 
children’s services and more typically “female” areas. “The portfolio holders 
within council do tend to be split on fairly traditional gender lines,” she 
said.

The Guardian view on English local identities: a clash of cash against 
community | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/the-guardian-view-on-english-local-identities-a-clash-of-cash-against-community>
If the mayoral elections follow the pattern of parliamentary elections, Labour 
should easily win Tees Valley. The region currently has just one Conservative 
MP, James Wharton, who represents Stockton South. He was appointed minister for 
the “northern powerhouse” by George Osborne in the last parliament, but 
switched jobs under Theresa May and is now a junior minister at the Department 
for International Development.

The West of England only agreed its devolution deal 
<http://www.westofenglanddevolution.co.uk/> with the government in November, 
after one of its councils, North Somerset,pulled out 
<https://www.n-somerset.gov.uk/news/north-somerset-council-rejects-west-of-england-devolution-deal/>
. The elected mayor will now represent only Bristol, Bath and North-East 
Somerset, and South Gloucestershire.

Labour faces a tougher fight in the West of England, which has a diverse 
political make-up. Though Bristol’s current mayor,Marvin Rees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/23/bristol-mayor-marvin-rees-racism-inequality>
, belongs to Labour, there are several Tory MPs in the region, including Jacob 
Rees-Mogg in North-East Somerset, Ben Howlett in Bath, and Charlotte Leslie in 
Bristol North West.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, welcomed Mansell’s nomination. “Lesley is a 
passionate campaigner for social justice, employment and equal rights, and as a 
local councillor she understands the issues that matter to people and, most 
importantly, how to get things done. We are very proud that Lesley has been 
selected, and I look forward to her putting Labour’s case to the region’s 
voters in the coming months.”

 