
Senior Labour MPs have called on Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> to back a new two-tier 
system of controls on EU migration or risk seeing the party slide into 
irrelevance in the eyes of the British public.

In the latest sign of tension in the party over the issue, the MPs, backed by 
several former shadow cabinet members, argue that a “progressive, fair and 
managed” migration system would be in line withLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> values and address the concerns 
of millions of voters.

The demands come as Labour prepares to fight a vital byelection in Copeland, 
Cumbria, triggered by theresignation of its MP, Jamie Reed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/21/corbyn-critic-jamie-reed-quits-labour-mp-byelection-copeland>
, who won the seat with a majority over the Tories of only 2,564 at the last 
general election.

With concerns about immigration bound to feature strongly in the campaign, 
many high-ranking Labour figures believe both the Tories and Ukip will capture 
large numbers of Labour voters as a result ofCorbyn’s refusal to recognise the 
need for limits on free movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/08/corbyn-line-on-eu-immigration-risks-helping-ukip-warns-welsh-first-minister>
 as the country heads for Brexit.

If Labour were to lose Copeland to the Tories in the election, which is 
expected to be held in March, it would be the first time an incumbent governing 
party had won a seat from the opposition since 1982.

Writing for the Observer, the Labour MPs Stephen Kinnock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/stephen-kinnock> and Emma Reynolds insist 
that the “mixed messages” from Labour over immigration are proving “deeply 
corrosive” of voters’ trust. They insist that it is time to unite behind a 
credible approach that recognises the strength of feeling in the country about 
rising immigrant numbers, while protecting UK and European workers and the 
economy.

Announcing their blueprint for change – with support from senior figures, 
including the party’s former policy chief and MP for Dagenham, Jon Cruddas, and 
former shadow cabinet members Rachel Reeves and Caroline Flint – they say 
Labour should press Theresa May to put a two-tier system of controls at the 
heart ofBrexit  <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>
negotiations.

Tier one would include highly skilled individuals such as doctors, teachers 
and engineers, who would be admitted to take on specific jobs. EU students with 
a place at British universities would also be included in this tier.

Tier two would be made up of low-skilled and semi-skilled EU workers, whose 
numbers would be limited by sector-based quotas, negotiated between government, 
industry and trade unions. These sectors would include agriculture, food 
processing, retail, construction and hospitality.

Kinnock and Reynolds believe that the plan would be both economically sensible 
and politically wise, allowing the UK government to show flexibility inBrexit 
talks <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> – by accepting a 
measure of free movement – and as a result increase the chances of the other 27 
European Union nations granting substantial access to the single market in 
return.

“It is imperative that Mrs May changes direction in 2017,” they say. “Failure 
to do so would lead our country into a ‘hard Brexit’, inflicting huge damage on 
the economy, jobs and living standards across the country.”

A growing number of Labour politicians are now calling for some form of 
managed EU migration. Last week the former shadow business secretary,Chuka 
Umunna <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chuka-umunna>, launching a 
cross-party report on social integration, said a balance had to be struck 
between the views of Brexit hardliners and progressive politicians on the 
centre and centre left.

“If we seek to align ourselves with people approaching this immigration issue 
who say ‘shut the borders, all of the problems in our country are caused by 
immigrants’, that will simply be a betrayal of our values and we may as well 
pack up and go home,” he said.

“But equally, if we deny that population change poses a challenge to 
communities, then the communities we represent will feel that we have got our 
heads in the sand.”

Cruddas said the plans put forward by Kinnock and Reynolds were “just the sort 
of ideas we should be looking at”, while Flint, a former minister for Europe, 
added: “For years, Labour sidestepped public concern about immigration under 
successive leaders. It was just too uncomfortable. Now Labour has to get real.

“It is ridiculous that Labour, a party that has supported regulation of 
businesses and markets, would want no limits on an open-door EU labour market. 
Backing fair controls on immigration is entirely in keeping with Labour values. 
Labour has an opportunity to put forward a case for a preferential labour 
migration scheme – or risk being ignored during these crucial Brexit 
negotiations.”

Labour’s shadow Brexit secretary, Sir Keir Starmer, has said the number of 
foreign nationals coming to the UK “should be reduced”, as hasAndy Burnham, the 
former cabinet minister and now Labour’s candidate to become mayor of Manchester
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
. But Corbyn and his close ally, the shadow home secretary Diane Abbott, have 
refused to back any limits or quotas.
 