
Labour continues to struggle to build support among voters as aides try to 
revitalise Jeremy Corbyn’s leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/labour-plays-to-jeremy-corbyns-radicalism-in-video-message-for-2017https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/labour-plays-to-jeremy-corbyns-radicalism-in-video-message-for-2017https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/labour-plays-to-jeremy-corbyns-radicalism-in-video-message-for-2017>
 by capitalising on his radical credentials, according to the latest research 
for the Observer.

The first Opinium/Observer poll of 2017 shows that the party’s two percentage 
point rise in popularity in December has been followed by a one-point drop 
since the new year.


It suggests that if a general election were called now, the Tories would win 
38% of the vote, giving them a commanding lead over Labour, which is on 30%. 
Ukip and theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> were both up one point, 
on 14% and 7% respectively.

The poll showed the Conservatives remain by far the most trusted party to lead 
negotiations to leave the EU, on 30%, with support for Labour’s Brexit stance 
slipping one point to 13% asconfusion continues over the party’s message on 
immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
.

Almost half of UK adults think it is unlikely Britain will be able to stay in 
the European single market while stopping free movement of labour, Opinium 
found. Only 18% think it is likely, a percentage which is the same among leave 
and remain voters.

If the government has to choose between staying in the single market or ending 
free movement, 41% would opt for the latter, and 32% the former.

Just over half of adults agreed that having some restrictions on the overall 
number of EU immigrants will not damage UK businesses, but 40% also think 
businesses will suffer if they are unable to hire any migrant labour from the 
EU, while 32% disagree.

The battle lines were again drawn between Brexit supporters and opponents, 
with 53% of leave voters thinking British businesses will not suffer if the 
supply of EU labour is completely cut off and 66% of remain voters thinking it 
will.

Jeremy Corbyn decries 'social care crisis made in Downing Street'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-decries-social-care-crisis-made-in-downing-street>
Overall however, Brexit and immigration have slipped in perceived importance 
compared with health and the NHS, as the crisis in the healthcare system 
deepens. The proportion of respondents viewing theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> as the most crucial issue facing the 
country rose eight points to 61%, while immigration fell two points to 41% and 
Brexit one point to 36%.

Despite the Conservatives’ record on the NHS, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> retains her positive net 
approval rating, although it has slipped three points since last month to 11% 
overall.

This still leaves her head and shoulders above her rivals in opposing parties, 
all of whom registered negative net approval ratings, with Corbyn on -27%.

More bad poll news for Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> came in the form of a 
ComRes survey for the Sunday Mirror and the Independent, which revealed that 
43% of respondents thought the Tories would be better at managing the NHS this 
winter, compared with 31% who thought Labour would.

The poor showing for Labour came despite the fact that almost half of those 
polled – 47% – agreed that the Red Crosswas right to say the NHS was in a 
“humanitarian crisis” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
.

Opinium Research carried out an online survey of 2,007 UK adults aged 18+ from 
10-12 January 2017. Results have been weighted to representative criteria.

 