 Labour is facing the embarrassing prospect of being forced to scrap university 
tuition fees for Scottish students if it is to form a majority government in 
the new parliament.
With polls pointing firmly to a coalition, pressure is on Labour to make a 
policy climbdown or put a Lib-Lab alliance at risk

The Scottish Liberal Democrat leader, Jim Wallace, has indicated that a 
refusal could jeopardise his support in a coalition government.

If Labour does not make concessions but instead strikes a backroom deal with 
the Lib Dems a prospect that Mr Wallace strenuously rules out it is still all 
but certain to lose a vote on the issue in the first few months of the 
parliament.

All the parties except Labour have pledged to scrap tuition fees in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, but the Lib Dems yesterday gave the 
clearest indication yet that their abolition will be the price tag for the 
their entry into a coalition government.

If the fees are scrapped in Scotland, the government will have to defend them 
for students in England and Wales, where they amount to a Â£4,000 bill for a 
four-year degree course. Students from south of the border studying in Scotland 
would still have to pay, while Scottish students would also pay nothing at 
English universities.

The issue is likely to be the first stress point between the Westminster and 
Holyrood administrations, as MPs come under heavy fire from students over what 
they will undoubtedly see as a palpable unfairness.

With only three days to go before the first elections to a Scottish parliament 
in 300 years, a Sunday Times poll of polls yesterday gave Labour a 46% share of 
the first vote and 41% of the second, the SNP 31% and 32% shares, the Lib Dems 
9% and 11% and the Conservatives 10% and 11%.

An NOP poll for the newspaper predicts Labour will take 60 seats in the 
129-seat parliament, the SNP 42, the Lib Dems 14 and the Conservatives 13.

This would leave Labour dependent on Lib Dems support if it is to form for a 
majority administration. The Lib Dems favour a formal coalition rather than 
informal pacts, which is also understood to be the preferred choice of Downing 
Street.

But Mr Wallace has said: 'I'm not going to start horse-trading and get nothing 
in return.'

There was no room for negotiation on the fees issue, he said yesterday. 'I 
certainly will not concede anything to Labour on this, I want to see tuition 
fees go.'

The chancellor, Gordon Brown, dismissed the issue as economic ineptitude on 
the part of the Lib Dems. But the Scottish National Party also promises to 
force the issue in an autumn vote in the parliament.

It is also likely to be a test of Labour's vulnerability from its left wing.

The left has kept quiet on tuition fees during the campaign, but there are 
many in the party who would be prepared to defy the whips and force the 
government into a U-turn.
 