
Not so long ago, commentators, myself included, were debating the possible 
demise of Ukip. With the triumph of its signature cause – Brexit – it seemed 
redundant. Nigel Farage had resigned; the frontrunner to replace him,Steven 
Woolfe, was hospitalised after a fracas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/ukip-blames-mep-steven-woolfe-row-hookem-european-parliament-police>
; and the eventual successor,Diane James, lasted 18 days at the top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/21/diane-james-quits-ukip>. The 
party’s bankroller, Arron Banks, threatened to pull his backing. Farce? 
Meltdown? Apparently so, but maybe not. For Ukip is a force that caters for a 
political demand. There is a need that sustains even this crisis-ridden husk.

Like almost all of its European sister parties, Labour faces multiple 
existential crises, and Ukip is one of them. Not becausePaul Nuttall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/paul-nuttall> has a northern accent and 
will bring flat-capped northerners flocking into the fold, presumably with 
their whippets in tow, as some patronising commentary implies. It is because 
Ukip is drawing strength from a crisis all elements of Labour must take 
responsibility for.

Across Britain, Labour is on life support. In that discomfiting political 
situation, the party’s instinct is to fall back on the NHS. That’s 
understandable. The NHS is Labour’s crowning glory, showcasing the party’s 
founding principles of people before profit. Nuttall is on record calling for 
the dismantling of the NHS. “I would argue that the very existence of the NHS 
stifles competition,”he wrote in a blog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/oct/02/ukip-assault-on-nhs-extinction>
 congratulating Tory privatisation policies that, in a display of cowardice, he 
later deleted. “As long as the NHS is the sacred cow of British politics, the 
longer the British people will suffer with a second-rate health service. I 
believe that the NHS is a monolithic hangover from days gone by,” he declared 
in 2011, demanding “more free market is introduced into the health service”. He 
is thus an easy target.

Much of the left simply waits for a sea change in people’s worldview that 
never comes

The problem is the well-established pattern of Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> being ahead in the polls on the 
NHS, often substantially, and still losing elections. In the EU referendum, 
even John Major warned that the NHS would be “about as safe” with the rightwing 
Brexiteers “as a pet hamster would be with a hungry python”. Leave still won, 
cynically minimising its trust deficit on the issue by deceitfully pledging 
£350m a week extra for the NHS.

What Labour first needs to understand is which of its voters are defecting to 
Ukip. Ian Warren, the pollster who conducts focus groups of Labour-to-Ukip 
defectors, identifies two groups. One is blue-collar working households; 
relatively politically engaged; over 40; white; non-graduates; and from the 
Midlands, northern England or Wales. They are socially conservative on defence, 
social security and immigration.

The other group includes deprived, disaffected voters from similar 
communities. They’re typically under 40; either private renters or council 
tenants; often in insecure work; they are less likely to vote unless motivated 
to do so. Neither would ever vote Tory. Like Corbynistas, they generally prefer 
pre-Blair Labour to what happened next; but their social conservatism 
distinguishes them.

Identity trumps leftwing economic populism. “The only reason they’re staying 
with us is some sense of tribal loyalty which is being eroded with 
every passing day,” Warren says. Both groups feel the left treats them with 
contempt. “They see Labour as being cosmopolitan and distant from them, with 
nothing to say to their concerns, and looking down at them,” pollster James 
Morris says.

This sense of being demonised by a liberal metropolitan elite – a resentment 
the rightwing populism of our time exploits – is widespread. “They’re very 
sensitive that people like us will dismiss them,” says academic Rob Ford. “They 
don’t have status and standing with people they want to get a hearing from, and 
it angers them.”

To varying degrees, the left risks dismissing most working-class Britons as 
tabloid-brainwashed sheep or robots. Many of these natural Labour voters feel, 
however justly, that their traditional party now holds them in contempt, sneers 
at their concerns and values, and lives in a parallel universe.

If the left wants to convince them on key issues – on immigration for example 
– it at least needs to understand where people currently are. The desire to 
reduce immigration is not at the same level across British society. But there 
is a majority who want to reduce immigration in every group of British society.

A poll last year 
<http://cdn.yougov.com/cumulus_uploads/document/f4rr9eo24l/YG-Archive-Pol-Times-results-2502015-W.pdf>
 showed that, overall, 75% of Britons thought immigration was too high, 
compared with 18% who thought it was about right and 2% too low; 85% of 
over-60s thought it was too high, compared with 56% of 18 to 24s. Among Britons 
classified as middle-class it was 69%; among those labelled working-class, 81%. 
In multicultural London, it was 66%; in Scotland, 69%.

Among Liberal Democrat voters, 60%; among Labour voters, 65%. According to the 
2013 British Social Attitudes Survey 
<http://www.bsa.natcen.ac.uk/media/38108/immigration-bsa31.pdf>, 82% of those 
with migrant heritage whose parents were born in Britain wanted immigration 
reduced; and so did 60% of first- and second-generation migrants.Among remain 
voters, 56% want a cap on European migrants 
<http://neweconomics.org/polled-remain-voters-told-us/>.

Ukip leader Paul Nuttall is 'game changer' for Labour, says Frank Field
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/ukip-leader-paul-nuttall-is-game-changer-for-labour-says-frank-field>
Much of the left simply waits for a transformation in their worldview that 
never comes. Tell enough facts, goes the approach, and they’ll change their 
minds. Blame the media. Talk about theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>. Rinse and repeat. I know: I’ve done 
it myself. It doesn’t work.

Partly it’s about language. The populist right aims for the heart; the left 
often thinks it’s about the head. Warren calls for “industrial, blunt, honest 
language”, rather than the “clever, academic language” favoured by the left. 
Labour needs big public meetings on immigration on council estates at which 
local residents can offload their anger and at least feel listened to, he 
believes.

Labour has demanded a properly resourced Migrant Impact Fund, to help 
communities experiencing higher immigration, and measures to prevent 
undercutting of wages and terms and conditions. But without constant 
repetition, without easily understandable messages, none of this lands.

We need a programme, and a language, that chimes with the concerns of the 
overwhelming majority of society. Many who broadly share my politics will 
flinch at that sentence, seeing a capitulation to xenophobia. Stick with the 
“rinse and repeat” strategy, they will say. But all the while Ukip and Tory 
vultures circle.

Labour’s message of investment in left-behind communities has the potential to 
resonate among many Labour defectors to Ukip. But such messages and policies 
won’t work without Labour voices who can connect with disillusioned voters. 
That means more northern Labour MPs at the forefront, such as the north-east’s
Ian Lavery <http://www.parliament.uk/biographies/commons/ian-lavery/4139>, 
Yorkshire’sJon Trickett <http://www.jontrickett.org.uk/> and Salford’s Rebecca 
Long-Bailey <https://twitter.com/RLong_Bailey>. Rising Labour star Clive Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/clive-lewis> talks empathetically about 
concerns on immigration; his backstory – Midlands council estate, a soldier who 
served in Afghanistan – could resonate.

But time is not on our side. The polling is calamitous and an early election 
beckons. We need a strategy above and beyond “save the NHS”.
 