
Theresa May’s government has been accused of changing the rules on public 
appointments to make it easier in future for ministers to pick their political 
allies for senior jobs at the BBC and regulators such asOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>.

The new code on public appointments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/578498/governance_code_on_public_appointments_16_12_2016.pdf>
 will give ministers greater powers over who oversees a raft of agencies, 
watchdogs and advisory committees, while weakening the involvement of the
independent commissioner for public appointments 
<http://publicappointmentscommissioner.independent.gov.uk/>, who scrutinises 
the system.

Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> said the changes, which 
will come into force on 1 January, represent a “power grab” by ministers and 
risk returning to the days of patronage and cronyism in public life.

Ministers have always had the final say over appointments to senior public 
sector jobs, advised by a panel that shortlists “appointable” people. However, 
independent assessors,chosen by the commissioner 
<http://publicappointmentscommissioner.independent.gov.uk/wp-content/uploads/2012/02/Order-in-Council-April-2012.pdf>
 to oversee the most important competitions, will be abolished in favour of 
independent senior panel members picked by ministers.

Labour warns of return to cronyism amid public appointments review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/12/tom-watson-labour-cronyism-public-appointments-review>
The members will have to be independent of the departments and not currently 
politically active, but the commissioner will only have a consultative role.

Ministers will also be able to overrule the panel by choosing candidates not 
deemed to be appointable and have the right to dispense with an open 
competition without the permission of the commissioner, although they will have 
to consult with the watchdog and openly justify the decision.

Competitions under way, including searches for a chair of the BBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> board and chair of Ofsted, will 
continue to be regulated under the old regime, but it will apply to future 
competitions run for those posts and many others.

The government argues that the decision increases the accountability of 
ministers, but Labour’s Andrew Gwynne warned about the greater risk of them 
“appointing chums and donors to public office”.

“This Tory power grab is divisive and a worrying undermining of the role of 
the independent commissioner for public appointments,” he said.

The code was welcomed by Peter Riddell, the commissioner for public 
appointments, as an improvement on previous proposals set out by Sir Gerry 
Grimstone, a businessman who conducted a review for the government.

However, he warned in his annual report last autumn that he intended to 
highlight any abuses if ministers did not interpret the code in the spirit of 
making public appointments on merit.

In a statement about the code, Riddell said: “I have had constructive 
discussions with ministers and officials as they have developed the code over 
the past few months. They have not accepted every suggestion, but they have 
made a number of important changes, notably to reinsert fairness in the list of 
guiding principles and the commitment to consult me both about the appointment 
of senior independent panel members to assessment panels and about cases where 
exemptions are sought from holding competitions to make appointments.

“I believe that the real test for the new arrangements will be how they are 
interpreted by ministers. To preserve the balance between their right to be 
fully involved in the process and to take the key decisions, while ensuring 
that appointments are made on the basis of merit, with candidates being judged 
on a fair and equal basis.”

Asked about Labour’s criticism, Chris Skidmore, the minister for the 
constitution, defended the new code, saying it “rightly places ministers at the 
heart of the appointments process, given their accountability to parliament for 
public bodies”.

“The new code introduces greater transparency into the system and reiterates 
the role of a strong, independent regulator of the process through the 
commissioner for public appointments. I want to see a process that champions 
diversity and builds a democracy that works for everyone,” he said.

The proposals had been criticised in their consultation stage by the former 
commissioner for public appointments Sir David Normington and the parliamentary 
committee on standards in public life.

Before the publication of the new code, he warned that 20 years of progress on 
improving the public appointments process could be put at risk.

In July, the standards committee said: “The committee fears that the changes 
will remove some of the independent checks and balances of the public 
appointments process and may have the unintended effect of offering limited 
protection for ministers who wish to demonstrate they have appointed on merit 
alone.”

Since the original proposal, the code has been slightly altered to say the 
commissioner must be consulted about exemptions and the appointment of senior 
independent panel members, but the essence of the change remains.

It comes after a number of cases in recent years in which ministers have been 
criticised for appointing allies to senior public positions.

Under David Cameron, Philip Dilley, an engineering chief and former business 
adviser to the prime minister, was given the job ofchair of the Environment 
Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/14/sir-phillip-dilley-resignation-public-sector-chair-environment-agency>
 and David Prior, a former Tory MP and now minister, was appointed aschairman 
of the Care Quality Commission 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2012/dec/04/care-quality-commission-david-prior>
.There were also criticisms of some of Cameron’s appointments he made on his 
departure from No 10.

Last night, Lord Bew, chair of the committee on standards, told the Telegraph 
that the idea of putting political appointees through an interview process 
should be considered.

He said his committee was “very interested” in tightening up procedures for so 
that those entering the House of Lords have to go through a more rigorous tests 
of suitability.
 