
Labour has held Copeland in every general election since 1935 and 
Stoke-on-Trent <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent> Central 
since its creation in 1950. No governing party has won a byelection since 1982, 
and Theresa May is quickly cementing a reputation for poor leadership while her 
government presides over one of the worst crises the National Health Service 
has ever faced. Against this backdrop, there is no good reason why Labour 
shouldn’t be on course to win both byelections convincingly.

Stoke-on-Trent would be Ukip’s battleground of choice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/ukip-prospect-stoke-on-trent-voted-leave>
In many respects, both constituencies represent some of the biggest challenges 
facing “Brexit Britain”. A huge majority of voters in Cumbria and the Potteries 
chose to leave the European Union. The economic and technological forces of 
globalisation that have weakened the social bonds of communities like these 
have also shaken traditional party political bonds, too. This isn’t a challenge 
unique to the Labour party or to the UK: across the world centre-left parties 
have taken a hammering at the ballot box because they have struggled to respond 
to an industrial revolution that is sweeping the globe at an unprecedented 
pace. A failure to come up with answers to the biggest worries facing voters 
could leave Labour facing a battle on two fronts at the next general election: 
to keep its traditional heartlands, while reaching out to constituencies that 
have rejectedLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in favour of 
the Conservatives over successive general elections.

We have seen for the past six years the consequences of Tory government, but 
we are yet to match them in the polls. Given the scale of these challenges, 
this is not the time for people who want to see a Labour government leave the 
pitch.

In Stoke Labour faces a Brexit byelection battle royal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/14/byelection-stoke-on-trent-labour-ukip-tristram-hunt>
In spite of attempts by successive Tory leaders to rebrand their party as a 
“party of the workers”, committed to the “big society” and now the “shared 
society”, voters know that these woolly sentiments rarely translate into action 
under Conservative governments. It is a reflection of how unconvincing the 
Labour alternative has been during the past decade that people have looked to 
the Conservatives as the least worst option. Without credible alternatives to 
these testing economic, employment and social challenges, voters in the UK 
could follow those in the US and the European continent in abandoning 
mainstream politics altogether for the siren calls of the kind of ugly populism 
presented by the likes of Donald Trump andNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>.

Trump’s populist revolution against the political establishment has recreated 
one of America’s oldest and greatest political parties in his own image. Like 
him, we could play to people’s worst fears and instincts. We could blame 
foreigners for our problems and stoke anti-immigration sentiment. We could lead 
people to believe that Britain should become more protectionist and 
isolationist. We could be indifferent to autocratic countries like Russia 
bullying democratic countries along their borders. And, of course, we could 
bemoan the mainstream media and other bastions of liberal democracy as enemies 
of the people. But that is not a Labour response.

Labour was led to our second worst defeat in history in 2015, but we still 
managed to win the support of people in Copeland and Stoke-on-Trent. We 
shouldn’t be debating whether we can hold seats like these; we should be 
planning to win seats to a form a government.

This isn’t the time to walk away from politics. Those of us who want to see a 
genuine alternative to Trump and Farage have to roll our sleeves up and get 
stuck into the battle of ideas.

Wes Streeting is the Labour MP for Ilford North
 