
It may make compelling “slow television”, but slow travel this is not. As the 
bus whizzes along the A684, I’m willing the driver to slow down so I can better 
enjoy the view. The single-decker’s spotless picture windows and elevated seats 
deliver a fast-forwarding pano-shot of Wensleydale, its emerald curves broken 
up by solitary barns and drystone walls that snake up towards tree-softened 
valley slopes.

I’m taking a ride on the Wensleydale Flyer <http://www.dalesbus.org/856.html>, 
sister service to theNorthern Dalesman <http://www.dalesbus.org/832.html>, 
whose meanderings through Swaledale and Ribblesdale, recorded for the recent 
fly-on-the-dashboard BBC4 documentaryAll Aboard! The Country Bus 
<https://store.bbc.com/all-aboard-the-country-bus>, captured the hearts (and 
perhaps lowered the blood pressure) of nearly a million viewers. One of some 14 
interlinking routes that make up theDalesBus network 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/view/attractions/dalesbus-2045317> and open up the 
Yorkshire Dales to car-free travellers, the Flyer begins its weekly Sunday 
service at Hawes, the pretty, cobbled home of Wensleydale cheese, and travels 
40 miles along the valley to Northallerton, North Yorkshire’s county town.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64df936a9eabef75b582411cdfdf93add33634e6%2F0_328_1626_976%2F1626.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64df936a9eabef75b582411cdfdf93add33634e6%2F0_328_1626_976%2F1626.jpg>
 Locals and walkers rely on the Wensleydale Flyer for Sunday outings. 
Photograph: Friends of DalesBus 
I got on at the second stop, Bainbridge, a quiet village of yellowed limestone 
buildings. Its claim to fame is that it’s at the end of England’s shortest 
officially named river, the two-mile-long river Bain, whose tumblings soothed 
me to sleep the night before atLow Mill Guest House 
<http://www.lowmillguesthouse.co.uk>. The owners of this stylish boutique B&B, 
Neil and Jane McNair, are always delighted to see the Wensleydale Flyer trundle 
to a stop across the village green. Relative newcomers to this community – they 
were first-time visitors from London six years ago, when they fell in love with 
the disused but still-working water mill – they’ve thrown themselves behind the
campaign to save the bus 
<http://www.dailyecho.co.uk/news/14715262.Fundraising_campaign_launched_to_save_weekend_Dales_bus_service/>
 that connects it to its neighbours.

Like the Northern Dalesman, Ingleborough Pony 
<http://www.dalesbus.org/pony.html> and other much-loved services of the 
DalesBus network, the Wensleydale Flyer is managed by a volunteer-run social 
enterprise, which raises money from businesses, public bodies and charitable 
donations to keep the buses running (ticket sales do not cover its costs). 
Unless it can secure emergency funding – Neil and Jane have set up a
crowdfunding website <https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/Wensleydaleflier> 
– the Flyer will stop running at the beginning of December, and its community 
of regular walkers, workers and shoppers will have to spend their Sundays at 
home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62e7e43d63ad98654764fbb24328505fcc48360%2F0_66_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa62e7e43d63ad98654764fbb24328505fcc48360%2F0_66_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Low Mill Guest House, Wensleydale. Photograph: Simon Phillpotts 
Among the travellers on the bus today is Bernard, who works in a Hawes hotel, 
and always spends the Sundays when he is not working in Northallerton, where 
there’s a busy high street, as well as a hospital and mainline station. Hawes 
resident Ruth, originally from the village of Askrigg, no longer drives because 
of a shoulder injury and is travelling to meet a friend. Tim, a pensioner, has 
bus-hopped all the way from Lancashire to walk up Penhill, the Pennine ridge 
that dominates the southern edge of Wensleydale and commands views over 
Bishopdale and Coverdale. “I’ve been walking in the mountains all my life,” he 
says. “These buses make it possible for me to carry on.”
 Aysgarth Falls. Photograph: Chris Mellor/Getty Images/Lonely Planet Images 
Tim’s getting off at West Witton, where a Michelin-listed seafood restaurant (
The Wensleydale Heifer <http://www.wensleydaleheifer.co.uk>) would make for a 
tempting Sunday lunch. I could have taken the Flyer back to Hawes, where I 
arrived yesterday via the volunteer-supportedLittle White Bus 
<http://www.dalesbus.org/LWB.html> (Mon-Sat) from Garsdale, a stop on the 
Settle-Carlisle railway. From Hawes, I could have hired a bike fromStage 1 
Cycles <https://www.stage1cycles.co.uk> (£20 for half a day), whose modish 
Firebox cafe 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/view/food-and-drink/hawes/the-firebox-cafe-2041408> 
is a coffee-lover’s hotspot, and pedalled into the Snaizeholme valley to walk 
itsred squirrel trail 
<http://www.natureinthedales.org.uk/get-involved/places-to-see-wildlife/snaizeholme-red-squirrel-trail>
. Or pottered round Hawes’s galleries, boutiques and antiques shops before a 
stroll along the river Ure toHardraw Force <http://hardrawforce.com>, the 
30-metre, single-drop waterfall said to be the tallest in England.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e55fcc2e1e4905167effe8570a2e66dd36d947%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Last%20stop%20for%20the%20Wensleydale%20Flyer%20bus%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fwensleydale-flyer-sunday-bus-closure-walking-holidays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e55fcc2e1e4905167effe8570a2e66dd36d947%2F0_40_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Medieval Bolton Castle. Photograph: Alamy 
Instead, I’ve opted to travel to the village of Aysgarth, where the Ure’s 
descent over a series of wide, limestone tiers has been on the Wensleydale 
traveller’s to-do list since Wordsworth and Turner gushed over it. A 
five-minute walk from the bus stop,Aysgarth Falls 
<http://www.yorkshire.com/view/attractions/leyburn/aysgarth-falls-tourist-information-centre-1164903>
 are, indeed, mesmerising, but I don’t have time to linger: with four hours 
before the last bus back to Bainbridge, I’ve set my course forBolton Castle 
<http://www.boltoncastle.co.uk>, a medieval part-ruin lying a few fields away.

The easy-to-follow path crosses the defunct trackbed of the railway that once 
ran the length of this valley – a sobering reminder of the direction of travel 
for public transport in rural areas. (TheWensleydale Railway Association 
<http://www.wensleydalerail.com> hopes one day to restore it, but that’s 
another story.) It’s a steep pull up to the 14th-century castle, whose 
symmetrical towers have turned golden in the autumn sunshine. After soup and 
sandwiches in its baronial tea room, I round the castle to follow a public 
byway that stays high along this south-facing slope for several miles, soaking 
up constant views across the U-shaped valley towards the long, flat plateau of 
Penhill.
 Gayle, near Hawes, in the Yorkshire Dales national park. Photograph: Wayne 
Hutchinson/Getty Images 
After seven miles, four hours and half a pint of Black Sheep 
<http://www.blacksheepbrewery.com> shandy (at the Wheatsheaf 
<http://www.wheatsheafinwensleydale.co.uk> in Carperby), I’m back at the bus 
stop, where walkers Jackie, Roger and Jim are waiting over the road for thelast 
857 of the year <http://www.dalesbus.org/857.html> – the summer Sunday bus that 
will take them south through Wharfedale towards Leeds, Wakefield and Harrogate. 
“National parks were created so that people from cities and towns could get 
into the countryside,” says Jackie, a supporter ofFriends of DalesBus 
<http://www.friendsofdalesbus.org.uk>, the campaigning fundraising body that 
celebrates its 20th anniversary this year. “These buses mean everything to us: 
without them we’d have no way of getting here.”

 * The Wensleydale Flyer needs £6,000 to keep running until next Easter, while 
more sustainable long-term funding is sought.Full details on the JustGiving page
 <https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/Wensleydaleflier>

 * Low Mill Guest House <http://www.lowmillguesthouse.co.uk> is donating a 
pound from every booking to the campaign
 