
The panic and terror on Maria Schneider’s face in the infamous “get the butter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2007/jul/13/romance.marlonbrando>” scene in 
Last Tango in Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/film/last-tango-in-paris>, in 
which she is depicted being anally raped by Marlon Brando, is absolutely real, 
even if the rape is not. Those big cinematic heaves are not acting. “I was 
crying real tears,”Schneider once said 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-469646/I-felt-raped-Brando.html>. 
She was being humiliated in real life and on screen and she knew it. For years, 
she made public what happened during the making of that 1972 movie. Brando and 
the film’s director, Bernardo Bertolucci, conspired to shoot the scene without 
telling her what was going to happen.It wasn’t in the script 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/last-tango-in-paris-director-says-maria-schneider-butter-scene-not-consensual>
.

In 2013, in a video interview 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=021jNOEVytQ&feature=youtu.be>, Bertolucci said 
he felt guilty 
<http://variety.com/2016/film/news/last-tango-in-paris-rape-scene-consensual-bernardo-bertolucci-1201933117/>
 for not telling her about the butter, then appeared to casually shrug off this 
abuse by saying he did not regret his decision to shoot the scene. Last month, 
a Spanish organisation uploaded this edited clip of Bertolucci to draw 
attention to gendered violence. As a result, the clip is suddenly causing 
outrage, with many on social media, including big Hollywood names such as
Jessica Chastain <https://twitter.com/jes_chastain/status/804966641998168064>, 
Anna Kendrick andChris Evans 
<https://twitter.com/ChrisEvans/status/805091489814548480>, condemning this 
rape scene, directed without one of the actors’ consent.

Last Tango scandal shows toxic extent of male power in the film industry | 
Peter Bradshaw
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/04/last-tango-in-paris-scandal-brando-bertolucci-maria-schneider-peter-bradshaw>
Schneider died of cancer in 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/03/maria-schneider-dies-58>, and in 
an interview years after making the film, she said she, “should have called my 
agent or had my lawyer come to the set because you can’t force someone to do 
something that isn’t in the script, but at the time, I didn’t know that”. She 
was only 19. Brando who was 48 must have known this was deeply unethical. 
Bertolucci must also have known this - but they simply lived in a worldwhere 
men like them could 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2016/dec/04/last-tango-in-paris-scandal-brando-bertolucci-maria-schneider-peter-bradshaw>
, in the name of “art”, hurt and terrorise women. Bertolucci said in the 
interviewhe had no regrets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/hollywoods-rape-culture-our-bernardo-bertolucci-marlon-brando-maria-schneider>
 apparently.

Last Tango in Paris <https://www.theguardian.com/film/last-tango-in-paris> is 
a movie about male trauma, but it was Schneider who was left traumatised by it. 
In the years after the filming, she had a breakdown, made attempts at suicide 
and fell into drug addiction. She refused ever to do nude scenes again and 
couldn’t deal with the aftermath of the way she was treated and defined by that 
film. In her 40s she campaigned for better roles in the industry for women.

Bertolucci remains revered. “I think you have to be completely free,” he has 
said in interviews. “I didn’t want Maria to act her humiliation, her rage. I 
wanted Maria to feel, not to act, the rage and the humiliation. Then she hated 
me for life.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flast-tango-in-paris-sexual-abuse-broken-promise-of-sexual-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac03714d6b935c2c3c8a156bbed9cc8857250f8%2F0_301_2764_1924%2F2764.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Last%20Tango%E2%80%99s%20abuse%20reveals%20the%20broken%20promise%20of%20the%201970s%20sexual%20revolution%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flast-tango-in-paris-sexual-abuse-broken-promise-of-sexual-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Last%20Tango%E2%80%99s%20abuse%20reveals%20the%20broken%20promise%20of%20the%201970s%20sexual%20revolution%20%7C%20Suzanne%20Moore&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flast-tango-in-paris-sexual-abuse-broken-promise-of-sexual-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faac03714d6b935c2c3c8a156bbed9cc8857250f8%2F0_301_2764_1924%2F2764.jpg>
 ‘Last Tango was hailed as revolutionary.’ Photograph: Hulton Getty 
Consent is the key word in this story. Schneider was not raped, as some have 
been saying. But she was frightened and powerless to stop what happened on the 
set. Her statements show the confusion. She felt “a bit raped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/hollywoods-rape-culture-our-bernardo-bertolucci-marlon-brando-maria-schneider>
”. No one consoled her or apologised. And she couldn’t live with the 
consequences.

Last Tango was hailed as revolutionary. The great New Yorker film critic 
Pauline Kael said 
<https://www.criterion.com/current/posts/834-last-tango-in-paris> the film 
“altered the face of an art form” and described it as the most “powerfully 
erotic movie ever made”. It was based on a sexual fantasy of Bertolucci’s, with 
Brando’s character acting out the trauma of his wife’s suicide through 
emotionally and physically dominating a much younger woman. In the film, women 
are the props for male catharsis. Many critics also saw the film as liberating. 
But liberating for whom?

With its brilliant Francis Bacon credits, Parisian backdrop and Gato Barbieri 
soundtrack, the film was peak 1970s avant garde. Aspirational almost. At the 
time, Schneider was held up as a boho role model: bisexual and beautiful, with 
her flowers, hats and furs. She represented freedom. Like so many women in the 
1970s however, she was actually a victim of a sexual revolution played out 
largely for male pleasure. Young women were expected to desire free-wheeling 
sex: anonymous and dangerous in Last Tango; rewritten more kindly and from a 
female perspective by Erica Jong in her novel,Fear of Flying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/feb/26/fear-of-flying-by-erica-jong-read-the-first-chapter>
, in which she called this “the zipless fuck”.

The reality of the sexual revolution, as we now know, was often an abuse of 
power that left women reeling, not quite sure what happened or who was to 
blame. Confusion and humiliation was far too often the price you paid to be 
sexually liberated. In the context of the well documented abuse of young women 
by great directors fromAlfred Hitchcock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/nov/06/alfred-alfred-hitchcock-sexual-harassment-claims-tippi-hedren-the-birds>
 to Stanley Kubrick, we can see why Schneider’s plight was simply ignored, even 
though it devastated her.

Hollywood's rape culture is a reflection of our culture
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/hollywoods-rape-culture-our-bernardo-bertolucci-marlon-brando-maria-schneider>
When she spoke about it, nothing happened. Brando and Bertolucci are still 
considered untouchable artists.

But it can never be forgotten. Bertolucci now calls this “a ridiculous 
misunderstanding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/05/bernardo-bertolucci-last-tango-in-paris-response-maria-schneider>
”. But he sought to film the actual – not acted – pain of a 19-year-old woman. 
He did that. It was called art. It still is. He got away with it. This is truly 
disgusting. In his world, men act, women merely feel. “I wanted her reaction as 
a girl, not an actress,”said Bertolucci 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/dec/04/hollywoods-rape-culture-our-bernardo-bertolucci-marlon-brando-maria-schneider>
.

In the 1970s, consent was not a word or a concept I was aware of. But I fully 
understood violation when I saw it.

That violation was planned, then celebrated. It may be late in the day to talk 
about this, but at least we are now. If only we could have done so when 
Schneider was still alive; if only we could have let her know we could hear her 
voice beneath her sobbing.
 