
As the clock ticks down to Black Friday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/black-friday>, aggressive promotions on 
everything from 4K TVs to tablet computers and winter coats could be the last 
hurrah for shoppers before price hikes in 2017.

After bargain-hunting consumers went on the rampage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-fever-police-battle-shoppers>
 on Black Friday in 2014,fighting in the aisles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/28/black-friday-sales-police-attend-supermarkets-amid-scuffles>
 for cut-price widescreen televisions, last year it was a much tamer affair, as 
shoppers retreated to the safety ofseeking the best bargains online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/nov/27/mince-pies-not-mini-riots-cautious-shops-open-for-black-friday>
.

This year, there is likely to be more of a sense of going, going, gone on the 
high street’s hottest deals, because retailers across the board are signalling 
that the weakness of sterling willpush up prices in 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/15/after-marmite-bitter-taste-price-rises-new-year-2017-retail>
.

While just over half of businesses participating in Black Friday anticipate 
higher sales this year, fewer store chains are taking part, according to an 
industry poll by Barclays.

Black Friday: a shopper’s guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/black-friday-shoppers-guide-best-deals>
“This suggests that parts of the industry may be starting to resist what some 
see as an unwelcome discounting event in the run-up to the all-important 
Christmas trading period,” said Ian Gilmartin, Barclays’ head of retail and 
wholesale.

However, the Dixons Carphone chief executive, Sebastian James, remains 
bullish, confident that this Friday will be theretailer’s biggest trading day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/26/dixons-carphone-enjoys-strong-christmas-thanks-mobile-phones>
 for a fourth consecutive year, as it offers 3,500 products in the black tag 
sale event.

“It’s not profitable for other retailers, but it is for us,” James said. “We 
get these amazing deals from manufacturers because we buy so much. For 
customers, it is a great day and we can still make money doing it.”

The Currys PC World owner expects to shift truckloads of household 
electronics, ranging from 50in Samsung 4K TVs and Microsoft Surface Pro tablets 
to American-style fridges and Dyson cordless vacuum cleaners, as shoppers 
increasingly use Black Friday to upgrade their domestic appliances, alongside 
buying gifts.

A PricewaterhouseCoopers survey found that shoppers planning to bargain hunt 
this weekend had earmarked an average spend of £203, with electricals and 
technology top of their lists. This year’s hot gadgets include bean-to-cup 
coffee machines and high-pressure steam irons.

James said: “The difference between us and the supermarkets is we have offers 
running right through the range, [including on] a big OLED TV that would 
[normally] cost you £3,000. We’ll do a deal on that. We’re not just selling 
cheap Chinese tellies.”

Suppliers including HP and LG have devoted several weeks to producing stock 
for the event.

Black Friday warning as report finds only half of offers are the real deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/black-friday-uk-warning-report-half-offers-real-deal-pricing>
Looking further ahead, fashion retailer Next has said its clothing prices will 
rise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/03/next-expects-higher-profits-despite-tougher-trading-conditions>
 by up to 5%. On Tuesday, John Roberts, the chief executive of the company 
behind electrical goods website AO, confirmed that suppliers werestarting to 
charge more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/white-goods-set-to-soar-on-black-friday-shoppers-rush-beat-price-rises-brexit>
. Shoppers will feel the brunt of this in January, he said. Apple haspushed up 
the price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/28/brexit-apple-mac-customers-prices-rise-us-dollar-pound-sterling>
of every computer in its range, while Microsoft and Dell have also signalled 
that price hikes are on the way.


The Marmite standoff between Tesco and Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 exposed high levels oftension in price negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/17/marmite-is-the-first-sign-of-cost-of-brexit-for-food-producers>
. “We are having a lot of quite tense discussions about [price],” said James. 
“We should. It’s our job to make sure people get great prices. We’re lucky 
because we are very big and those discussions are often quite productive.

“All our products are made outside the UK and denominated in dollars or 
Chinese yuan. As a result, it is a mathematical certainty that we need more 
pounds to buy those same products, so it’s how we manage that.

“At every point in the range, prices inevitably are going to go up ... but 
you’ll still be able to get a telly that is a lot better than the last one you 
had.”

While more than 80% of British shoppers bought a gadget during the 2015 Black 
Friday sales period, retail analysts at Verdict predict that canny shoppers 
will also be on the lookout for clothing deals this year.

“We expect participation in this sector to grow this year, as retailers such 
as Next have forewarned of price increases,”said Verdict’s Zoe Mills. “There 
has been a lot of discussion about the impact of Brexit. I think shoppers are 
very aware that prices are going to rise and they see Black Friday as an 
opportunity to get something cheaper than in the new year.”
 