
Consumers scrambling for last minute Olympics tickets are being urged to steer 
clear of an apparently fraudulentwebsite <http://www.bookriogames2016.com/> 
selling them in breach of official restrictions, amid warnings that they are 
likely to be denied entry as well as losing their money.

The Rio 2016 Olympic Games <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> starts 
less than two weeks away on 5 August, and consumer group Which? has found a 
site selling tickets for a wide range of events – including the opening and 
closing ceremonies – despite not being an authorised ticket source.

The Book Rio Games site <http://www.bookriogames2016.com/> ranks higher in 
internet searches than official sites such as the Rio2016 site forfor 
international sales <http://%20https//www.rio2016.com/en/tickets> and the 
official UK resale siteCoSport <http://cosport.com/>. It claims to be “a secure 
and transparent platform for buying tickets for the Rio Olypmic (sic) Games” 
and even tells users “you’re protected with us”. But Which? warns purchasers 
that they risk not being allowed into any of the events and will not be 
eligible for a refund.

UK nationals can buy through both the Rio2016 and CoSport sites, although both 
have only very expensive tickets left for the opening ceremony, while the Book 
Rio Games site is claiming to have numerous tickets – up to £1436.65 per seat.

The official Rio 2016 Olympic Games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/olympic-games> terms and conditions state 
clearly: “Tickets may not be purchased or obtained from or through any source 
other than directly from an Authorised Ticket Source. Tickets purchased or 
obtained from or through sources other than directly from Authorised Ticket 
Sources … may be declared void, and may be seized or cancelled. In such a case, 
the Ticket Holder will be denied entry to the Session and the Purchaser will 
not be eligible for a refund.”

The site design, graphics and fonts resemble those of the official Rio 
Olympics ticket site, Which? notes, which could be an attempt to confuse 
consumers into thinking that it is the official site.

Which? could not find any evidence of online reviews – although the site 
claims to have “5 stars” – while it also warned of “consumer-unfriendly” terms 
and conditions. For example, the site “reserves the right to deliver tickets at 
any point between the time of purchase and the day of the event”, meaning some 
fans would have to travel to Rio before receiving their ticket, or the tickets 
may not turn up at all. The site also allows customers to buy as many as 20 
tickets, even though official rules only allow four tickets per customer.

As part of its investigation, researchers for Which? contacted the website 
www.bookriogames2016.com <http://www.bookriogames2016.com/> using the email 
address and phone number on the website, to ask why it is registered to a 
domain often associated with scams – “domain by proxy”, which allows owners to 
register the site while hiding their identity – and why it is selling tickets 
in breach of Rio 2016’s rules. Which? found the site was hosted in India, but 
got no reply to emails or phone calls, while the telephone number listed on the 
site has since been removed. Emails and calls from the Guardian were also not 
returned.

Which? is reporting its concerns about this site to the City of London police 
and Action Fraud, the UK’s national reporting centre for fraud and cyber crime. 
It is pointing anxious consumers in the direction of its Which? Consumer Rights 
site which has afree 7-step advice guide 
<http://www.which.co.uk/consumer-rights/advice/how-to-spot-a-fake-fraudulent-or-scam-website#never-pay-by-bank-transfer>
 on how to spot a fake, fraudulent or scam website.

“If you’re planning to buy a last minute ticket for the Olympic Games, make 
sure you buy them from an authorised ticket seller, otherwise you risk being 
turned away at the gates,” said Alex Neill, Which? director of policy and 
campaigns. “We’ve reported our concerns about this site to Action Fraud but 
more must be done both in the UK and internationally to ensure ticket 
restrictions are made clear to consumers.”

Action Fraud revealed this week it has received 47 reports relating to the 
Olympics, with a total reported loss of £299,935 – most involving ticketing 
fraud and lottery scams.
 