
Southern trains will be cancelled on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday in the 
latest strikes on the commuter rail network, as part of a long-runningdispute 
over driver-only services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-cancels-all-services-as-strike-continues-for-third-day>
.

Severe disruption is also expected on Thursday due to the knock-on effects of 
the walkout by members of the Aslef union, as well as a continuing overtime ban 
on a short-staffed network.

The strike is expected to cause more crowding and traffic problems in south 
London, a day after a 24-hourstrike on the underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-all-lines-hit-and-most-central-london-stations-closed-live-updates>
 service ended, as people seek alternative travel arrangements.

I work for Southern rail: this is why I am striking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2017/jan/07/southern-rail-train-driver-why-strikes-commuters>
Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> has advised the 
300,000 people who commute daily on its network to work from home and not 
travel if possible. The operator will lay on some bus services to link 
passengers in counties outside the capital with neighbouring train networks.

The walkout follows on from similar action by unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/drivers-strike-halts-all-southern-rail-services-for-third-day>
 in December. Anotherthree days of strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
 will follow from Tuesday 24 January.

No end to the row appears imminent, despite an apparent offer of talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/southern-rail-rmt-agrees-to-direct-talks-with-government>
 from the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, last week. It came after a 
report issuedby the rail regulator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/06/southern-rail-crisis-chris-grayling-backs-regulator-after-shambles-claim>
, the Office of Rail and Road, declared that Southern’s plans for more trains 
to operate without guards closing the doors was broadly “a safe method of 
working”, with the company promising to implement more safety improvements.

The leaders of Aslef and the RMT <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> 
union, which also has 12 driver members on strike, said they would be available 
for talks, but there is understood to have been no further approach to unions 
to set a date.

Unions argue that reducing the responsibilities of guards and putting more 
onus on drivers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
 is increasingly unsafe with longer, more crowded trains.

Rail chiefs or unions: can passengers trust either of them? | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>
However, the Rail Delivery Group, which represents train operators, said more 
than half of trains running in Britain, including the London Underground, 
operate with drivers closing the doors, and the practice would reduce the time 
that trains have to wait at stations.

Aslef and the RMT have agreed to oppose any further extension of driver-only 
operation, which could see strikes spread elsewhere in the country as more 
train companies change their fleets and working practices.

Mick Whelan, the Aslef general secretary, said the industry had changed since 
drivers agreed to the principle, which they now regretted. “We have always 
honoured agreements we have got, but trains are working later and longer. We 
have concerns; we don’t believe that driver-only operation was designed for 
12-car trains with 1,000 people on them,” he said.

On Monday, the strike by tube staff closed most stations and left many 
commuters stranded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-an-hour-long-journey-turned-into-a-three-hour-one>
 or having to crowd on to rail or bus services, which were also affected by 
resulting traffic.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&media=>
Gridlock on London streets as tube strike hits – timelapse aerial video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/09/gridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
About 2,500 British Airways crew will strike on Tuesday and Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/british-airways-cabin-crew-to-go-on-strike-next-week-in-pay-dispute>
, although the airline said only a small number of flights from Heathrow would 
be affected and all passengers booked to travel would reach their destinations.
 