
Donald Trump’s campaign has seized on embarrassing revelations of blurred 
lines between theClinton Foundation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/clinton-foundation> and the family’s 
business interests, as fresh WikiLeaks emails cause their biggest political 
stir yet.


The new disclosures detail the extent of what was dubbed “Bill Clinton Inc” by 
advisers who boasted of securing more than $100m for the former president when 
challenged about their own conflicts of interest.

One email <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/2346> discussing an 
internal investigation into whether the foundation’s charitable status was at 
risk reveals Chelsea Clinton warning that her father would be “horrified” to 
hear that comparisons were being made between his activities and “Tony Blair’s 
profit motivations”.

Now the affair threatens to cast a cloud over Hillary Clinton’s campaign as 
demands are made for the full internal audit to be made public rather than just 
the snapshots provided viaWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks>.

Clinton campaign fends off questions about WikiLeaks 'speech excerpts'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/clinton-campaign-fends-off-questions-about-wikileaks-speech-excerpts>
“The revelation that the Clinton Foundation undertook an in-depth 
investigation into whether they were violating IRS charity rules because of the 
money-making efforts of the Clintons is deeply concerning,” said Trump 
spokesman Jason Miller on Thursday. “In the matter of transparency, the 
Clintons must release all the internal documents related to the investigation 
of the Foundation, including interview notes and other supporting documentation 
as well as all initial and preliminary reports.”

WikiLeaks has been releasing embarrassing and sometimes revelatory emails from 
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and key 
figures in her party since July, giving an unprecedented insight into the 
workings of her campaign and foundation and raising hopes on the right that the 
group may publish something truly damaging before election day.

The Clinton campaign has largely shrugged off the apparent release of emails 
sent to its chairman John Podesta, pointing out that US intelligence believes 
the hacking was carried out by Russia in an attempt to manipulate the 
presidential election. It did not respond to a request for comment on the 
latest claims.

But the disclosures reveal undeniable concerns even within the family that 
those around the Clintons were seeking to profit from their political 
connections in inappropriate ways.

“It makes me very sad,” wrote Chelsea Clinton 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/12401>, who alleged, in one case, 
that British members of parliament had been called by advisers claiming to 
speak for her father but instead acting for commercial clients such as Dow 
Chemical. “[This] without my father’s knowledge, and inelegantly and 
ineffectually at best, and at worse ... now precipitating people in London [to] 
make comparisons between my father and Tony Blair’s profit motivations, which 
would horrify my father.”

WikiLeaks: Clinton avoided criticism of Wall Street in Goldman Sachs speeches
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
Nonetheless, attempts to blame Clinton advisers for exploiting their political 
ties provoked a fierce response from one who claimed the former president “and 
his family” also benefitted from “personal travel, hospitality and vacations” 
as a result of their string-pulling.

 “How then do we go through an exercise like this [the internal review] and 
WJC [William Jefferson Clinton] doesn’t as he is far more conflicted every 
single day in what he does? Why not apply the structure you set up for him to 
this situation?” wrote Doug Band, a former personal aide or “body man” to the 
former president who went on to set up a highly successful business consultancy 
called Teneo.

 “Oddly, WJC does not have to sign such a document even though he is 
personally paid by three [Clinton Global Initiative] sponsors, [and] gets many 
expensive gifts from them, some that are at home,” added Band, in reference to 
recommendations form the review.

In a report defending his role 
<http://www.politico.com/f/?id=00000158-048f-da25-a55e-efaf30b60000>, Band also 
points out that he and another close aide personally secured “$50m in 
for-profit activity” and “$66m in future contracts” for president Clinton, 
including an estimated $20m in paid speeches.

The report details how clients of Teneo such as Coca-Cola, Dow, UBS and BHP 
Billiton were encouraged to make donations to the Clinton Foundation in 
exchange for personal meetings with the former president, sometimes at the 
family homes in Washington and Chappaqua.

One email <https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/emailid/34258> also reveals 
how Podesta was persuaded to meet with BHP while he was a senior adviser to 
Barrack Obama, writing to Band: “For you, I’ll try.”

 Band acknowledged that both he and Teneo partner Declan Kelly – a former 
chairman of London public relations giant Financial Dynamics and US economic 
envoy to Northern Ireland – “appreciate the unorthodox nature of our roles”, 
but felt it was appropriate to steer clients into making donations to the 
Clinton Foundation.

“As the memo demonstrates, Teneo worked to encourage clients, where 
appropriate, to support the Clinton Foundation because of the good work that it 
does around the world,” said their company in a statement released to the 
Guardian. “It also clearly shows that Teneo never received any financial 
benefit or benefit of any kind from doing so.”

Nonetheless the law firm hired by the Foundation to review its relationships 
warned that some corporate donors “may have an expectation of quid pro quo 
benefits in return for gift”, according toone report 
<https://www.scribd.com/document/327532201/12727757-4> revealed by WikiLeaks. 

“Mr Band called the arrangement ‘unorthodox’, the rest of us call it outright 
corruption,” claimed Trump in a statement on Thursday. “If the Clintons were 
willing to play this fast and loose with their enterprise when they weren’t in 
the White House, just imagine what they will do if they are given the chance to 
control the Oval Office.”
 