
Comprehensive schools have improved our lives. The evidence that they are 
better 
<http://www.economist.com/news/britain/21704837-lifting-ban-new-selective-schools-would-damage-social-mobility-grammatical-error?fsrc=scn/tw/te/pe/ed/>
 for our children and for all of us is overwhelming. Which is why 60 
organisations, including the Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, 
Manufactures and Commerce, put their names to anopen letter 
<https://www.thersa.org/discover/publications-and-articles/rsa-blogs/2016/10/the-rsa-enters-the-grammar-school-debate>
 in October pleading for the ban on new grammar schools to remain. Why, then, 
in the face of overwhelming expert advice, do so many members of the public, 
some ministers, and theprime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 want to press ahead with more selective schools?

It is possible to select a subset of grammar schools and to suggest that the 
minority of children from poorer backgrounds who attend that small set do go on 
to get betterGCSE results 
<https://timdracup.wordpress.com/2016/10/14/do-grammar-schools-close-attainment-gaps/>
, but that does not provide evidence that the grammar school model is good in 
general. It also does not question the English orthodoxy that it is always 
better to get higher grades in exams. If all we needed was lots of people who 
were especially skilled at exam technique, it would be – but that is not what 
we lack as a country. We lack rounded adults with a wide range of skills who 
respect and understand each other’s abilities and contributions.

Introducing a grammar school into an area does not only harm schooling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/grammar-school-comprehensive-headteacher-higher-ability>
 in that immediate district but also inneighbouring areas 
<http://educationdatalab.org.uk/2016/08/grammar-schools-contaminate-comprehensive-schooling-areas/>
. Despite this, more people are in favour of creating new grammar schools (38%) 
than would be in favour of ending selection in those that still exist (23%). 
Among those who attended grammar schools themselves,61% 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/08/15/two-thirds-people-would-send-their-child-grammar-s/>
 would like to see more built. It’s the old who are most in favour of selection.

The argument for grammar schools is similar to the argument for leaving the 
EU. It is about people wanting something better than they currently have, and 
believing that a return to the past will be an improvement and that “experts” 
are not to be believed. However it is also an argument against carrying on as 
we are, and against the rising inequality of recent decades that has resulted 
in selection byhouse price 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/09/theresa-may-selection-already-selection-house-price/>
.

Co-operative schools: the antidote to academies | Warwick Mansell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/aug/15/cooperative-schools-antidote-academies-independent>
The majority of people in England do not want to defend 1970s comprehensive 
schooling, just as they don’t want to defend 1970s council housing, or having a 
health service treating elderly people as it did in the 1970s. People want 
something better than what is currently on offer. They are also not stupid 
enough to believe that their children will all pass the 11-plus – although 
unfortunately, a little likeAmericans voting for Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/trump-brexit-education-gap-tearing-politics-apart>
, the rise in individualism in the UK has harmed our collective thinking.

People do not want their child to have to attend a local comprehensive that is 
severely underfunded after years of cuts hidden behind the pretence of having “
ringfenced education <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37680090>”. They do 
not want their children to be assigned to the school in which almost all the 
teachers are very young because staff turnover is so high, and in which few 
children have middle-class parents – the school which those “in the know” tend 
to avoid.

People may also not want their precious child to be forced to attend an exam 
factory [pdf] <https://www.teachers.org.uk/files/exam-factories.pdf> in which 
every C and B that can be squeezed out of them will be squeezed out of them, in 
which not going to university is categorised as failure. It is not impossible 
that some parents (and probably more grandparents) see the return of grammar 
schools as an opportunity to have more secondary moderns for the bulk of 
children who are bored with being continually pushed along a tedious national 
curriculum, given so much homework, and treated as a “problem” for “the school”.

Just like Brexit, the choice currently on the table is between “business as 
usual” or “change”. Business as usual is now a complex competing set of 
schools, many of which are now academies. Business as usual already includes 
selection at age 16 because academies can and do refuse to accept pupils who do 
not score high enough GCSE grades across a wide range of subjects.

It is the market that decides what makes a child’s grades high enough for them 
to be able to stay in their academy at age 16. Children and their parents find 
out if they are winners on the day GCSE results are released. If their results 
are not good enough, they have just a few days to let the educational market in 
their town find alternative provision – unless their child was persuaded to 
jump earlier to a vocational“university” technical college 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/ofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession>
 at the age of 14, from which they are unlikely to go on to university.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24aade4ecd2764d64956bec20bb56f0e2e5b5380%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20back%20to%20the%20future%20with%20co-operative%20schools%20%E2%80%93%20and%20leave%20grammars%20in%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20back%20to%20the%20future%20with%20co-operative%20schools%20%E2%80%93%20and%20leave%20grammars%20in%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F24aade4ecd2764d64956bec20bb56f0e2e5b5380%2F0_0_6720_4032%2F6720.jpg>
 Pupils at Haywood Academy, a co-operative secondary school. Photograph: 
Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Different children need different challenges at different ages. Other 
countries understand this, but that does not mean having to be in very 
different schools from each other.

What has not been put on the table is any alternative to business as usual 
that is not just a return to the past. Exactly the same mistake was made when 
the electorate was given a remain or leave choice over EU membership.

The UK has historically made big changes to public service provision when it 
has been forced to do so. TheNHS was introduced in 1948 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/jul/05/nhs-national-health-service-beveridge-labour>
 partly because the middle class could no longer afford private doctors’ fees. 
Comprehensives were introduced across most of the country in the 70s partly 
because at a time of high economic equality the middle class could no longer 
afford to pay for private education if their children failed the 11-plus. We 
are facing another financial crisis today – not just as a result of a falling 
pound, but because of the long-term fallout of the 2008 financial crash.

Selective education is inefficient and hence expensive. Academy schools and 
chains are also expensive, prone toconcerns about corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/24/academy-chain-fees-griffin-accountability-trustees>
, and to the negative effects of short-term competition to increase grades. 
Children are served best in countries such as Finland where there is no 
equivalent of Ofsted, no league tables, and only a small random sample of 
pupils’ work is occasionally tested to monitorschool (not pupil)  
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/best-education-world-finland-what-uk-schools-can-learn-a7319056.html>
performance.

We are a long way from achieving anything like the success of the Finnish 
model of education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/20/grammar-schools-play-europe-top-education-system-finland-daycare>
, but how could we begin to move towards it, and could we do so while also 
saving money? I think we could.

‘Why would a Tory object?’: crusader for grammar schools is having his moment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/tory-grammar-schools-graham-brady-selection>
British school senior management teams are large and expensive. Do two 
neighbouring schools really need two separate senior management teams or could 
one team do a better job, with the ability to move teachers and eventually 
pupils between sites? If we were to remove competition between neighbouring 
schools, we could begin to reduce the stigma built up over decades that 
surrounds some of our local schools. That stigma began to be significant only 
with the widespread publication of school league tables in the 90s. If the 
state schools in a small town were combined underone governing body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/23/england-schools-extremists-europe-tests-excludes-elitism>
, then only the town as a whole would be ranked. And when catchments began to 
become less meaningful, the housing price differentials across a town should 
fall.

Eventually we should aim to fund our state schools as well as they are funded 
in Finland, per child, but that is a long-term aspiration. In the short term, 
unless we know what it is we want – new Finnish cooperation rather than old 
English competition – we stand little chance of getting there, and a good 
chance of moving back to the bad old days of selection.

You might think such cooperation can never happen. However, there are already 
800co-operative schools 
<http://www.consider-ed.org.uk/co-operative-schools-a-quiet-revolution/> in the 
UK. And they are beginning to organise regionally withmore plans in place 
<http://co-operativeschools.coop/development-regional-scs-network/> for 2017.

The first comprehensive school was up and running long before the 
comprehensive movement became mainstream. Thefirst co-operative schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/aug/15/cooperative-schools-antidote-academies-independent>
 are already here – now we need to explain again and again why cooperation 
trumps competition in education. Almost any fool can be taught to achieve an A* 
if enough resource is thrown at them. We need children who become adults who 
understand that there is so much more to learning than simply achieving grades 
in an exam.

This article is a shortened version of the Caroline Benn Memorial Lecture 
<https://socialisteducationalassociation.org/2016/10/03/danny-dorling-to-give-this-years-caroline-benn-memorial-lecture/>
, which Danny Dorling will give this eveningon 15 November at the House of 
Commons. The lecture is an annual event in memory of the comprehensive schools 
campaigner,who died in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2000/nov/24/guardianobituaries>.

You’ve heard of supermarkets and funeral parlours, but what is a Co-op school?


A co-operative school is a state school, primary or secondary, writes Susanna 
Rustin <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/susannarustin>, that has partly or 
fully opted out of local authority control and turned itself into a 
co-operative, with members and a commitment to the values of the co‑operative 
movement.

Co-operative schooling began in the north of England 
<https://www.co-op.ac.uk/our-work/schools-and-young-people/co-operative-schools/>
 in the 1830s, as one of the projects of the movement’s early supporters, be 
formally designated a cooperative in recent times was Reddish Vale High in 
Stockport in 2008.

There are now 811 co-operative schools, 139 of them secondaries. More than 700 
of these are foundation trust schools, with co-operative values – self-help, 
self-responsibility, democracy, equality, equity and solidarity – written into 
the constitutions of the charitable trusts that own their land and assets. Some 
trusts control only one school, but more include a secondary and a group of 
feeder primaries, or a group of local primaries that want to work together, 
such as theCoastal Alliance 
<http://www.swalecliffeprimary.org/swalecliffe-a-cooperative-trust-foundation-school/>
 foundation trust in Kent, formed earlier this year.

Some of the first co-operative schools sought more autonomy than is granted by 
trust status, and in 2010 the Department for Education approved a co-operative 
model for converter academies, including a values clause in their articles of 
association. Today 74 co-operative schools are academies, and Carl Ward, the 
Stoke-on-Trent headteacher who chairs theSchools Co-operative Society 
<http://co-operativeschools.coop/>, to which many of them belong, describes the 
past few years as a period of “immense growth”. Two Church of England primary 
schools have just joined the multi-academy trust he leads in Stoke,City 
Learning Trust <http://www.citylearningtrust.org/>, and become the first 
co-operative faith schools in the process.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf039a86b6cd58a24340dfe94e0448cb4749ecb1%2F177_325_3322_1994%2F3322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20back%20to%20the%20future%20with%20co-operative%20schools%20%E2%80%93%20and%20leave%20grammars%20in%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Let%E2%80%99s%20go%20back%20to%20the%20future%20with%20co-operative%20schools%20%E2%80%93%20and%20leave%20grammars%20in%20the%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fcooperative-schools-grammar-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbf039a86b6cd58a24340dfe94e0448cb4749ecb1%2F177_325_3322_1994%2F3322.jpg>
 Most people think of food rather than schools when they think of the Co-op. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
It is tempting to view the whole co-operative schools project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/aug/15/cooperative-schools-antidote-academies-independent>
, as promoted in the first instance by theCo-operative College 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/aug/15/cooperative-schools-antidote-academies-independent>
 – a Manchester-based charity, and not a college – as a rebellion against the 
market-oriented education policies of the past 30 years. But, says Ward, “at 
its heart it’s not political, it’s probably cultural”.

Back in 2008, David Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2008/aug/19/new.schools.educationpolicy> 
spoke with enthusiasm of creating a new generation of co-operative schools, and 
while some of the early foundation trusts were seen as a means offending off 
academisation 
<https://sw10014.wordpress.com/2016/04/02/co-operative-schools-an-answer-to-forced-academization/>
, there are now at least 12 co-operative multi-academy trusts – the 
government’s favoured model – running about 80 schools. One, theCo-operative 
Academies Trust <http://co-operative.academy/> with eight schools in the north 
of England, is sponsored by the Co-operative Group and shares its typeface with 
Co-op supermarkets and funeral directors.

Meanwhile, “school improvement”, meaning raising standards measured in exam 
results and league tables, has moved to front and centre of what theSchools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Co-operative Society does, with 
seven devolved regional organisations setting up their own school improvement 
teams.

Of course, schools that are formally designated co-ops do not have a monopoly 
on the ideas co-op schools have embraced. Rachel Snape is headteacher at the 
Spinney school in Cambridge, and explains that although the school has stayed 
with the local authority, “I feel we’ve got values, cooperation is one of 
those, and solidarity and unity and collaboration are others.”

Some question to what extent co-op schools really are co-ops. Steve Watson, a 
former maths teacher and now a Cambridge University lecturer, became interested 
in them because he thought they might support teachers’ professional 
development, one of his research areas. “Autonomy of schools tends to mean 
autonomy of headteachers,” he says. “Democratic member control – one member, 
one vote – is aco-operative principle 
<http://ica.coop/en/whats-co-op/co-operative-identity-values-principles>, and 
could be a way for teachers to have a greater say in how they are run.” But he 
believes the central accountability demanded in the current system, and 
emphasis on targets and measurement, make such ideas difficult to implement: 
“My view is that the schools are more co-operative in name than in the 
fundamental value of workplace democracy.”

Ward once met a headteacher in Italy who was elected by his staff, and agrees 
“we haven’t gone that far” in England. But he says he would have an open mind 
if he came across a proposal or pilot project, as “you have to be prepared to 
take risks to innovate”. He adds: “What most co-op schools try to do is treat 
their staff very fairly, and subscribe to levels of pay that unions agree on”.

At present the government is trying to move towards a skills-based system of 
school governance, appointing accountants and other professionals – though the 
education secretary, Justine Greening, recentlydropped a plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/14/justine-greening-drops-plan-to-scrap-parent-governors-in-schools>
 to remove altogether the right of parents to be represented on governing 
bodies. Ward believes the co-operative model, whereby pupils, staff, parents 
and the local community elect members of a forum that advises a school’s 
governing body, is the ideal compromise.

What’s more, co-op schools should benefit from help and advice from other 
co-operative business, since co-ops are “honour-bound” to support each other.
 