
First, a confession. Many years ago, I worked as a press officer for a small 
national wildlife charity. I found this quite a challenging job at the time, 
not least because the creatures whose declining fortunes I was promoting were 
frogs andtoads 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/uk-common-toad-numbers-down-two-thirds-in-30-years>
, and national news editors have far less interest in frogs and toads than you 
might imagine. For many years, while my peers in other wildlife charities 
garnered all sorts of front-page stories, I failed to make even a news in brief 
section with my stories.

But then it happened for me. There was one day, after many years trying, I hit 
gold. I had written a press release about someescapee North American bullfrogs 
breeding in the UK 
<http://www.froglife.org/amphibians-and-reptiles/american-bull-frog/> for the 
first time and there was interest in this story. Finally, after so long trying, 
I made a front page. It’s just that … well … I had made the front page of the 
British National party website. It was quite unsettling. To the BNP, these 
boggle-eyed unthinking expressions of amphibian diversity were a handy hook 
upon which they could hang their xenophobia.

Every life form alive today has a history someplace else, if you go far enough 
back

“Just a bit of fun,” I was told when I complained. I agreed with this 
statement at the time because frogs are fun, but I was less certain about the 
BNP being “fun”. Thank goodness, therefore, that white nationalism seems to 
have gone away now ...

I have been watchful for these strange outbursts of “xenozoophobia” in the 
media ever since, and I have not been let down. Grey squirrels, ring-necked 
parakeets, mink, eastern European demon shrimp, Spanish slugs – some papers 
can’t help but use creatures like these to carry forward their isolationist 
fantasies. We hear it reported that “the country is under attack 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/sciencetech/article-1310496/Killer-shrimp-spotted-UK-waters.html>
” from “armies” of these creatures, even though most are so tiny and 
nondescript that they would struggle normally to even hold our interest, let 
alone hold a rifle. Yet they are a menace to be feared, we’re told. A scourge. 
Though the conservation concern is real and can be incredibly serious, it is 
the language (and the nationalist rhetoric that it mimics) that I have always 
found troublesome: the reds (or should that be greys?) under the bed.

This week, I heard a new, more subtle form of xenozoophobia. On Friday I read 
that, as well as being armies of invaders, some non-native, invasive animals 
can also be considered “expats”, foreign zoological residents worthy of 
shipping home to native countries should governments deem it necessary. It’s 
true. The Times told me. “Send expat animals home, say scientists 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/send-expat-animals-home-say-scientists-zb2cj5ptc>
” its headline said, referring tointeresting research 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/fee.1449/abstract;jsessionid=5F444E9322ACB60E6DC837A48B603275.f04t02>
 which highlights the role that non-native populations may play in “buffering” 
population declines in their native species’ ranges. “A study has argued,” The 
Times writes, “… that it may be time to send them back where they came from …”

Send them back? Goodness, this is new ground. What novel rhetoric is this? 
But, you know, maybe the Times really is on to something. Perhaps we really 
should entertain the idea that animals be considered “expats” for a moment. 
Donkeys, for instance. We have thousands of donkeys in sanctuaries in this 
country. Perhaps it’s time we sent somepacking back to Africa 
<http://www.genomenewsnetwork.org/articles/2004/06/17/donkey.php> where they 
came from. Andthose grey squirrels 
<http://www.nottinghamshirewildlife.org/animal-facts/grey-squirrel>, eh? Look 
at the damage they have caused to our native reds. Isn’t it time those lazy 
Americans picked up the tab for the vital conservation work we undertake? And 
what about thoseRomans bringing those rabbits 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/1487787/Romans-introduced-the-rabbit.html>
 here, eh? Christ, let’s not start with them, the bloody elitist European 
bastards.

Raccoon, mongoose and cabbage among invasive species banned from UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/02/raccoon-mongoose-and-cabbage-among-invasive-species-banned-from-uk>
In fact, come to think of it, our wild places are overrun with European 
invaders. Those frogs and snakes and deer and otters and badgers and newts 
which selfishly made their way over here via the land bridge that linked us to 
Europe briefly after the last big Ice Age must be sent home. I for one, won’t 
be happy until it’s just me and true natives on these islands. British 
ecosystems for British wildlife. I want a land devoid of expats: me, an endemic 
micromoth, aScottish wildcat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/nov/23/scottish-wildcat-conservation-controversy>
 and aSkomer vole 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/wales/nature/sites/species/mammals/skomer_vole.shtml>. 
What an awful world that would be.

Quips like these in the popular press remind me of the fabled naturalist who 
holds a magnifying glass up to nature, only to describe their own reflection. 
And here, I believe, the words say more about the readers, than the science. 
There are no armies. There are no expats. There are only animals.

Deep down, many generations ago, we all come from worlds without arbitrary 
borders, where nations and concepts of repatriation mean nothing. Every life 
form alive today has a history someplace else, if you go far enough back. But 
let’s not consider that, right? It’s only a bit of fun, after all.
 