
I wholeheartedly agree that “children need plenty of self-directed outdoor 
play” (Screen-based lifestyle harms children’s health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/25/screen-based-lifestyle-harms-health-of-children>
, Letters, 26 December). Children spend most of their lives at home, so the 
design of residential neighbourhoods is particularly crucial. Our research into 
how residents use external spaces near their homes reveals that where children 
play out for longer, independently, there is more social use by the rest of the 
community. Yet policy and practice do not work with us to achieve well-designed 
places for people to live in this way. As an architectural practice we know 
this first hand, we battle against car parking, space standards and myriad 
other regulations. However our research underpins our conviction and we are now 
focusing on the benefits of designing for independent mobility and play as a 
positive way to start to tackle the issue. 

Give children safe places to be outside and meet friends, and they will spend 
hours building resilience and burning calories alongside all the other health 
and wellbeing outcomes we desire. Screens might come along too, just don’t tell 
the parents.
Dinah Bornat 
ZCD Architects and University of East London

Screen-based lifestyle harms children’s health | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/25/screen-based-lifestyle-harms-health-of-children>
• Your correspondent (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/28/nuance-needed-in-debate-about-technologys-role-in-childrens-development>
, 29 December) misses the point about our letter on children’s wellbeing. As a 
literacy specialist, I’d be worried if the under-sevens were spending as much 
time on solitary, sedentary “paper-based technology” as they spend today on the 
screen-based variety. However, there’s no danger of that, because they aren’t 
fluent readers or writers. Screen-based entertainment, on the other hand, is 
readily accessible from soon after birth, and steadily displacing activities 
that are vital for children’s physical, emotional, social and cognitive 
development.

A key factor in healthy all-round development during early childhood is 
active, creative, social play, with parents/carers and with other children. 
It’s particularly important that, from the age of two or three, children play 
outdoors with their peers, preferably in natural environments. This sort of 
activity is increasingly difficult for parents to provide, which helps explain 
their growing reliance on technological alternatives.

This is why our letter called for a kindergarten stage for children aged 3-7, 
focusing on social and emotional development and outdoor play, and for national 
guidelines on screen use for the under-12s. I helped to organise the letter 
because I believe both of these are now necessary if our children are to be 
adequately prepared not only for literacy, but for learning and life in general.
Sue Palmer
Author of Upstart: The Case for Raising the School Starting Age and Providing 
What the Under-Sevens Really Need

• Your correspondents ask for “the development of a coherent, well-funded 
approach to care and education from pre-birth to age seven”. Have they 
forgotten the Sure Start programme that was a significant element of the New 
Labour manifesto from 1997?

Based partly on the Reggio Emilia model in Italy and the pioneering work of 
organisations such as Learning Through Landscapes, those purpose-designed 
kindergartens were exemplary in recognising that the environment is central to 
the success of any early years programme, particularly one which is based on 
self-directed outdoor play.

For the system to work, as it does throughout Scandinavia, you need easy 
run-out-run-in play, and child-orientated external landscapes that are 
challenging and multidimensional (rather than flat, easy-to-supervise areas of 
dull asphalt), all within a secure enclosure.

Experts call for official guidelines on child screen use
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/25/experts-call-for-official-guidelines-on-child-screen-use>
We have really underestimated the benefits of investment in early-years 
education particularly for disadvantaged children, both in terms of the 
benefits for children themselves but also in payback for the public purse. 
Since 2008, many of the Sure Start children’s centres of that period have 
closed for lack of state funding, or have been given away to the private 
sector. Why not resurrect Sure Start rather than petitioning for yet another 
new early-years system, which, even if government were to agree, would take 
another generation to realise?
Mark Dudek
Author of Spaces for Young Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> (National Children’s Bureau)

• I was surprised to learn of neuroscientist Patricia Kuhl’s astonishment when 
the babies to whom she tried to teach Mandarin via video didn’t learn (Letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/28/nuance-needed-in-debate-about-technologys-role-in-childrens-development>
, 29 December) since it was well known when I was teaching child acquisition of 
language decades ago that babies require interaction with others to acquire 
language. But to deduce from this that screens are not only useless as learning 
tools but actually harmful seems a stretch. Living alone and being no DIY 
expert, I regularly turn to internet videos when I need to learn how do 
something practical.
Jill Wallis
Aston Clinton, Buckinghamshire

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 