
What’s going for it? Harringay was my introduction to London. It was an 
inauspicious start. I was hoping for Mayfair, or Islington, at a push. (What 
can I say? I was young and foolish.) I’d never livehere, past Finsbury Park? 
But here I lived in a £60-a-week room on Hermitage Road. It had a carpeted 
toilet mat around the loo. Still, Harringay won me over. It was the cabbages 
that did it; those, the running track at Finsbury Park and regular baklavas. 
Green Lanes, its high street, is lined with incredible Turkish grocers selling 
cabbages the size of rugby balls and sweet treats that kept me going during the 
gruelling times, like when our flatmate moved in (Charles couldn’t afford an 
actual room, so slept in the living room on a timeshare basis). How London has 
changed. Two decades on, I couldn’t afford Harringay. It’s up and come, too far 
for me, though you could have a try. Its town houses are “sought-after”; the 
word “artisan” has been spotted. But those cabbages are still there.

The case against Getting pricey. But isn’t everywhere in London?

Well connected? Trains: Turnpike Lane and Manor House are on the Piccadilly 
line, 15-25 mins to central London; Harringay Green Lanes is on theOverground 
Gospel Oak to Barking Line 
<https://tfl.gov.uk/status-updates/major-works-and-events/london-overground-closure>
, currently closed for work until February 2017; Harringay rail station runs to 
Moorgate (16 mins) or Welwyn Garden City (35 mins). Driving: you’re not far 
from the North Circular, but it’s at least 40 minutes into central London, the 
same to the M1, and 30 mins to the M25, all with the wind behind you.

Schools Primaries: Chestnuts <http://www.chestnutsprimary.com/>, St Mary’s 
Priory RC <http://www.stmarysrcn15.ik.org/contact-us.html>, North Harringay 
<http://www.northharringayprimaryschool.org.uk/> and South Harringay 
<http://southharringayschools.co.uk/> are all “good”, says Ofsted, with 
Woodberry Down <http://www.woodberrydown.hackney.sch.uk/> “outstanding”. 
Secondaries:Skinners’ Academy <http://www.skinnersacademy.org.uk/> and Park View
 <http://www.parkview.haringey.sch.uk/> are “good”.

Hang out at… The magnificent Salisbury pub 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Salisbury>; one of north London’s glories 
when it opened in 1899 and still glorious. You won’t want for Turkish grills.

Where to buy Harringay is quite small, hugging Green Lanes. The “Ladder” to 
the west is the estate agents’ prize, parallel streets of late Victorian and 
early Edwardian terraces. Terraces: five bedrooms, £900,000-£1m; four beds, 
£750,000-£950,000; three beds, £660,000-£875,000. Flats: three beds, 
£450,000-£650,000; two beds, £400,000-£575,000; one bed, £340,000-£480,000. 
Rentals: one-bed flat, £1,000-£1,400pcm; three-bed flat, £1,800-£2,600pcm.

Bargain of the week A three-bed terrace, needing updating, east of Green 
Lanes, £509,950 withpaulsimonsales.com 
<http://www.paulsimonsales.com/Property/Residential/for-sale/London/Conway-Road/PSAPSR160367.aspx>
.

Let’s move to… Worthing, West Sussex: don’t mention the B word
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/28/worthing-west-sussex-property-guide-lets-move-to>
From the streets




Kevin O’Sullivan “The area has a magic, slightly unkempt feel, and wonderful 
food from all parts.”

Alison Park “Yasar Halim <http://www.yasarhalim.com/> has fantastic produce.”

Linda Zubairi “Feels like a village, people really do know each other. You hit 
a pram every 100m!”

Hugh Flouch “Railway Fields <http://www.tcv.org.uk/railwayfields> and the New 
River Path <http://www.thameswater.co.uk/about-us/17250.htm?source=newriver> 
are hidden gems.”

• Live in Harringay? Join the debate below.

Do you live in Fishguard, Pembrokeshire? Do you have a favourite haunt or a 
pet hate? If so, emaillets.move@theguardian.com 
<mailto:lets.move@theguardian.com> by Tuesday 22 November.
 