
Claims by a pro-leave group that a “clean Brexit” – leaving the single market 
and customs union –could save Britain £450m a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/27/clean-brexit-could-save-uk-450m-a-week-claims-pro-leave-group>
 have been described as meaningless by the Liberal Democrats and a leading 
economist.

Change Britain, backed by the former cabinet minister Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>, Labour’s Gisela Stuart and 
the former Conservative chancellor Nigel Lawson, released research on Tuesday 
arguing that a clean break with the EU would be more beneficial to the economy 
than a soft Brexit.

The group is the successor organisation to Vote Leave, the successful 
referendum campaign to quit the EU, which claimed thatleaving could save £350m 
a week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/10/brexit-camp-abandons-350-million-pound-nhs-pledge>
 to go to the NHS, an assertion that was widely criticised.

In its research, Change Britain estimated that there would be £24bn of 
benefits overall from a clean Brexit, citing savings from ending EU budget 
contributions, forging bilateral trade deals with new countries and getting rid 
of some EU laws.

But the former chief economist at the Cabinet Office, Jonathan Portes, said 
the figure was adding together supposed savings that could not be compared. 
“Adding increased exports and reduced government expenditure is literally 
meaningless. The results mean nothing. It isn’t research, it’s junk,” he said.

Another problem with the calculation was counting the benefit of trade deals 
with countries such as South Korea that already have an agreement with the EU, 
Portes said.

“But to my mind that is second order. Anybody who adds together increased 
government revenue literally has no idea what they are doing … It’s no surprise 
people who backed the fictitious £350m figure also back this number,” he said.

Tim Farron <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tim-farron>, the Lib Dem 
leader, also rejected the numbers as “fantasy figures” that no one would 
believe after Vote Leave’s claims.

“Today’s claims are just the latest in a procession of lies pushed out by the 
usual suspects who are desperate for a hard Brexit that will rip Britain out of 
the single market,” he said.

“Leave campaigners spent weeks gallivanting around the UK in a big red bus 
with a promise of more money for our NHS emblazoned on the side; it was a clear 
promise to British public who were told that lie over and over again.

“It played on people’s legitimate fears about this government’s underfunding 
of the NHS. The lie that a leave vote would mean more money for the NHS each 
week was a disgracefully cynical ploy.

“To now present the public with an even bigger made-up number is shameless and 
these scaremongers should take a look at themselves in the mirror.”

Change Britain includes former remain supporters, but its founding members are 
largely made up of those involved in the Brexit campaign, including the Tory 
donor Peter Cruddas, the former CBI director general Digby Jones and David 
Owen, the former Labour foreign secretary who went on to help found the Social 
Democratic party.

Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the foreign 
secretary and a leading figure in Vote Leave, recorded a video supporting the 
group’s launch, although he is not formally affiliated.

The Change Britain research suggests many of those linked to Vote Leave do not 
repudiate the claim that leaving the EU would save £350m a week for the health 
service, despite it being criticised for failing to take into account the UK’s 
rebate, the possible budgetary costs of leaving and thelack of any indication 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check/2016/may/23/does-the-eu-really-cost-the-uk-350m-a-week>
 that this cash would go to the NHS.

The cabinet is split over the issue of how to approach Brexit, with some of 
the most hardline members, such as Liam Fox, the international trade secretary,
keen to leave the customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/01/liam-fox-pre-brexit-deal-setback-european-union>
, while others including Philip Hammond, the chancellor, push for an exit from 
the EU that leaves the UKas close to the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/12/philip-hammond-calls-for-post-brexit-transitional-deal>
 as possible.

Theresa May has not indicated which type of Brexit she wants to pursue other 
than to say issues such as the customs union arenot a “binary choice” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/24/theresa-may-hosts-brexit-summit-for-scottish-welsh-and-northern-irish-governments-politics-live>
 about staying in or out. The prime minister has also madecontrols on 
immigration a red line 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
 and said she wanted thebest possible trading relations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/britain-seeking-ambitious-brexit-trade-deal-to-benefit-uk-and-eu-says-pm>
 with EU nations.

Chloe Westley, a spokeswoman for Change Britain, responded to the criticism 
saying its research showed the £450m was “just the beginning”.

“There is a world of opportunity out there for us once we take back control,” 
she said. “Doomsayers like Tim Farron are not being straight with the British 
people. Staying in the EU’s single market and customs union means we cannot 
control our laws, borders, money and trade. Instead of trying to block the will 
of the people they should help us build a brighter future for Britain outside 
the EU.”
 