
Public libraries have had another bad year. They are like churches and local 
railways. People like having them around, and are angry if they close. But as 
for using them, well, there is so little time these days.

The latest Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy figures on 
library closures are dire. In the past five years 343 have gone. Librarian 
numbers are down by a quarter, with 8,000 jobs lost.Public usage has fallen by 
16% and spending by 14%. Book borrowing is plummeting, in some places by a half 
<http://www.cipfa.org/about-cipfa/press-office/latest-press-releases/spending-on-local-libraries-falls-by-%C2%A325m>
.

The admirable children’s laureate (and cartoonist) Chris Riddell said during 
the latest campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/05/authors-join-national-protest-against-library-closures>
 for libraries in November that, “if nurtured by government, they have the 
ability to transform lives. We must all raise our voices to defend them.”

But what sort of library are we defending? I’m not sure the fault in this lies 
with that easy target, the government, nor even in the once-gloomy fate of the 
book. Last week I was in my excellent local library and it was near empty. The 
adjacent Waterstones was bursting at the seams. I know it was Christmas, but 
something tells me there is a problem with libraries, not with books. When an 
institution needs a luvvie-march to survive, it looks doomed.

Public library loans show dramatic fall in last two years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/19/uk-public-library-loans-show-dramatic-fall-in-last-two-years>
I was a library addict. I grew up mooching along the shelves of my local 
branch, feeding on its fantasies of biography, travel and self-help. I was 
terrified alike of the bespectacled librarian and the tramp behind the Times. 
When I found vinyls and CDs could be borrowed for free, I was over the moon. 
But I felt as the Victorians did of library fiction. Should so much pleasure be 
offered “on the rates”?

The story of the library is the most exhilarating in modern culture. To the US 
historianMatthew Battles <http://www.goodreads.com/book/show/23316550-library> 
it is a metaphor for the land of opportunity, a place where, “lost in the 
stacks”, new Americans could “dream of personal success, unaided by unnamed 
others, a stage with a mirror for backdrop that reflects only the reader”. In 
Britain, the library was a grammar school without an 11-plus, a teach-yourself 
academy, a democracy of learning. The most exciting book on my shelf is Great 
Libraries of the World (the finest beingin Portugal’s Coimbra 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/books/what-to-read/the-most-spectacular-libraries-in-the-world/>
). One day I shall try to see them all.

Battle admits digitisation has changed everything. The public library is no 
longer a church sacred to knowledge. Its walls have been blasted open, its 
uniqueness gone. It cannot live in a romantic past, a place where books go to 
die. Nor need it. So much rubbish is said and written about the death of books. 
Five years ago, when Amazon ebook salesovertook those of paperback copies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/richard-adams-blog/2011/jan/28/amazon-kindle-ebook-paperback-sales>
, it was assumed the book was doomed. Print was yesterday, one more victim of 
the great digital wipeout.I have an entire file of obituaries of the book. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/books-ebook-publishers-paper>
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbooks-reshelved-new-york-public-library-timelapse-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%2052%2C000%20books%20reshelved%20in%20two%20minutes%20at%20New%20York%20public%20library%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbooks-reshelved-new-york-public-library-timelapse-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%2052%2C000%20books%20reshelved%20in%20two%20minutes%20at%20New%20York%20public%20library%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F27%2Fbooks-reshelved-new-york-public-library-timelapse-video&media=>
Watch 52,000 books reshelved in two minutes at New York public library – 
timelapse video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/video/2016/oct/27/books-reshelved-new-york-public-library-timelapse-video>
In the event, as with most over-hyped innovations, ebooks have found a sound 
place in the market, but hardly a prominent one.Waterstones last year stopped 
selling Kindles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/07/waterstones-kindle-stop-selling-most-stores-books-ebooks>
 and switched the shelf space to books. It saw a 5% rise in sales. After years 
on a plateau, physical book sales have begun to rise again, from £2.74bn in 
2014 to £2.76bn in 2015. Though the bookshop has suffered, the book has not.

But these are buyers, not borrowers. The library must rediscover its 
specialness. This must lie in exploiting the strength of the post-digital age, 
the “age of live”. This strength lies not in books as such, but in its readers, 
in their desire to congregate, share with each other, hear writers and 
experience books in the context of their community. Beyond the realm of the 
digital oligarchs, the big money now is in live. It is in plays, concerts, 
comedy, lectures, debates, gigs, quizzes, performance of every sort. London 
must have more live events today than ever in history. Who would have dreamed 
that retiring politicians would grow rich not on banking but on public 
speaking? The local library needs to become that place of congregation. It 
should combine coffee shop, book exchange, playgroup, art gallery, museum and 
performance. It must be the therapist of the mind. It must be what medieval 
churches once were.

Books are back. Only the technodazzled thought they would go away | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/books-ebook-publishers-paper>
Indeed the decline of libraries has a similar trajectory to that of churches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/save-ailing-churches-desanctified-secularised>
, thousands of which now lie actually or virtually unused in villages and towns 
across the land. They too have underused buildings and underused books. Like 
libraries, they must turn to communal nostalgia for support.

Libraries <https://www.theguardian.com/books/libraries> and churches have a 
shared metaphysic. They embody the cultural identity of a place as its archive, 
museum and collective memory. I remember once visiting Blickling church in 
Norfolk during a festival. Some inspired individual had asked every local 
organisation, from the Scouts to the lifeboat to the second-hand bookshop, to 
display its wares in an aisle bay. The place was packed. It was a virtual high 
street. There was even room in the chancel for choir practice.

Since redundant churches are prominent buildings, and most cannot be 
demolished, they offer the perfect venue for the new library as cultural hub. 
In some cases, churches are already being used as one-stop refuges for high 
streets in decline, from post offices and corner shops to nursery schools and 
clinics. But churches are best suited to be a community’s cultural exchange. 
Where deconsecrated, there is no reason to see them as places of sectarian 
religion. They should be for everyone.

Ailing libraries and churches should merge. They should be removed from their 
present owners and managers, and be vested in neighbourhood parish and town 
councils, as is common on the continent. These councils should have power to 
levy a local tax (with voluntary opt-out) for their support. There will be 
thrills and spills, but local responsibility is the only secure way forward – 
and it would raise money.

Ever since the days of Alexandria, the library has been the palace of the 
mind, the University of All. The internet has removed its monopoly on 
knowledge, but cannot replicate its sense of place, its joy of human 
congregation. The Victorian tycoonAndrew Carnegie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carnegie_library>, first great patron of public 
libraries in Britain and America, dreamed of one in every town and village. His 
vision awaits renaissance.
 