
When they gave him his send-off just two months ago, the House of Commons was 
warm and generous to David Cameron. A standing ovation on one side of the 
chamber,sustained applause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/david-cameron-parting-shots-at-labour-final-pmqs>
 on the other. But history won’t be anything like as kind.

MPs deliver damning verdict on David Cameron's Libya intervention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
Today’s report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
 from theforeign affairs select committee 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmselect/cmfaff/119/11905.htm#_idTextAnchor029>
 on the 2011 military intervention in Libya has taken another axe to his 
reputation. Coming just two days afterCameron’s announcement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/12/david-cameron-to-stand-down-as-mp-for-witney>
 that he will stand down as an MP – which brought a torrent of criticism for 
breaking an earlier promise to serve out his term – it shows just how roughly 
posterity is likely to treat him.

The committee piles on its condemnation, attacking the Libya operation at 
every stage: before, after and during. It says there was insufficient analysis 
of the intelligence in the lead-up to battle. That the mission changed once it 
began. And that next to nothing was done for Libya after the bombs had fallen. 
It’s a long, detailed endorsement of the verdict recently delivered by Barack 
Obama on the Libya adventure: that it was “a shitshow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/barack-obama-interview-middle-east-drone-strikes-atlantic>
”.

And the MPs of this Conservative-dominated committee are unsparing in who they 
blame. “Through his decision-making … former prime ministerDavid Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidcameron> was ultimately responsible 
for the failure to deliver a coherent Libya strategy.”

Cameron might well feel that dumping all the blame on him is a bit rich, 
considering thatalmost the entire House of Commons 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-12816279> backed him on his Libya 
decision. On the day,557 MPs 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201011/cmhansrd/cm110321/debtext/110321-0004.htm#1103223000001>
 voted for intervention. They include the man who is the lead author of today’s 
scathing report, foreign affairs committee chair Crispin Blunt, and almost all 
Labour MPs. True, Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell were among the 13 from all 
parties who voted no – unsurprising given that they tend to vote against any 
use of force anywhere, at any time, whatever the circumstances. But Corbyn ally 
Diane Abbott voted with Cameron and so did the shadow foreign secretary Emily 
Thornberry.

Doubtless, they were persuaded – as was I 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/22/case-for-intervention-still-strong>
 – by the need to repel what appeared to be an imminent threat from Muammar 
Gaddafi to slaughter the civilians of Benghazi. Blunt’s committee now says that 
threat was “overstated”. But it clearly didn’t strike him that way at the time, 
or else he – like those 556 other MPs – would not have voted yes.

The more incisive charge is that Cameron allowed the original mission to creep 
into an undeclared pursuit of regime change. The report says that if the 
primary purpose was “the urgent need to protect civilians in Benghazi, then 
this objective was achieved in March 2011 in less than 24 hours”. (Which is why 
some voices,myself among them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/29/libyan-srebrenica-time-stop-bombing?index=0>
, were calling for military action to stop so soon after it had begun.) But 
Cameron carried on, apparently determined to topple Gaddafi.

The Guardian view on Libya: a nation’s tragedy, a continent’s problem | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/the-guardian-view-on-libya-a-nations-tragedy-a-continents-problem>
Worse still is the lack of interest Cameron paid to Libya after the bombing 
was done. Sure, he was happy enough to pose for a liberators’ photo-op with 
Nicolas Sarkozy. But afterwards, nothing.Obama puts it kindly when he says 
Cameron became “distracted”. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/barack-obama-says-david-cameron-allowed-libya-to-become-a-s-show-a6923976.html>
 And so the PM did nothing as Libya slid into civil war, anarchy and mayhem – 
to the point that the country is noweasily branded “Somalia on the Mediterranean
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/libya-civil-war-future-dark-fate-government-sealed-uk-cameron>
”.

It all adds yet more colour to the sketch history is likely to draw of 
Cameron. That he was hopelessly short-termist, too often acting for the moment, 
doing what he needed to get out of an immediate hole but failing to think 
things through. Sometimes, in the day-to-day tumble of domestic politics, that 
approach did little harm and served him well. It made him agile. But when blood 
and lives were at stake, it was a fatal flaw.

Grave though the Libya <https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> case is, 
however, it will not be the one that defines him. That will always be Brexit, 
and Cameron’s decision to gamble with something as vital as Britain’s 
membership of the EU. But the same character flaws were present in both 
episodes: the recklessness, the lack of preparedness, the failure to weigh up 
all the possible consequences. The European calamity of 2015 will be Cameron’s 
lasting legacy. But the warning signs were there four years earlier.
 