
What if democracy doesn’t work? What if it never has and never will? What if 
government of the people, by the people, for the people is a fairytale? What if 
it functions as a justifying myth for liars and charlatans?

There are plenty of reasons to raise these questions. The lies, exaggerations 
and fearmongering on both sides of the Brexit non-debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/03/claims-brexit-could-save-nhs-dangerous-lie-ex-health-secretaries>
; thexenophobic fables that informed the Hungarian referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/03/hungarian-jews-concerned-about-toxic-referendum-discourse>
;Donald Trump’s ability to shake off almost any scandal and exposure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/series/lyin-trump-a-weekly-fact-check>; 
the election ofRodrigo Duterte in the Philippines, who gleefully compares 
himself to Hitler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/30/rodrigo-duterte-vows-to-kill-3-million-drug-addicts-and-likens-himself-to-hitler>
: are these isolated instances or do they reveal a systemic problem?

Democracy for Realists <http://press.princeton.edu/titles/10671.html>, 
published earlier this year by the social science professors Christopher Achen 
and Larry Bartels, argues that the “folk theory of democracy” – the idea that 
citizens make coherent and intelligible policy decisions, on which governments 
then act – bears no relationship to how it really works. Or could ever work.

Voters, they contend, can’t possibly live up to these expectations. Most are 
too busy with jobs and families and troubles of their own. When we do have time 
off, not many of us choose to spend it sifting competing claims about the 
fiscal implications of quantitative easing. Even when we do, we don’t behave as 
the theory suggests.

2.8 million voters punished Al Gore for the floods and droughts of 2000 
– ironic, given his position on climate change

Our folk theory of democracy is grounded in an Enlightenment notion of 
rational choice. This proposes that we make political decisions by seeking 
information, weighing the evidence and using it to choose good policies, then 
attempting to elect a government that will champion those policies. In doing 
so, we compete with other rational voters, and seek to reach the unpersuaded 
through reasoned debate.

In reality, the research summarised by Achen and Bartels suggests, most people 
possess almost no useful information about policies and their implications, 
have little desire to improve their state of knowledge, and have a deep 
aversion to political disagreement. We base our political decisions on who we 
are rather than what we think. In other words, we act politically – not as 
individual, rational beings but as members of social groups, expressing a 
social identity. We seek out the political parties that seem to correspond best 
to our culture, with little regard to whether their policies support our 
interests. We remain loyal to political parties long after they have ceased to 
serve us.

Of course, shifts do happen, sometimes as a result of extreme circumstances, 
sometimes because another party positions itself as a better guardian of a 
particular cultural identity. But they seldom involve a rational assessment of 
policy.

The idea that parties are guided by policy decisions made by voters also seems 
to be a myth; in reality, the parties make the policies and we fall into line. 
To minimise cognitive dissonance – the gulf between what we perceive and what 
we believe – we either adjust our views to those of our favoured party or avoid 
discovering what the party really stands for. This is how people end up voting 
against their interests.

We are suckers for language. When surveys asked Americans whether the federal 
government was spending too little on “assistance to the poor”, 65% agreed. But 
only 25% agreed that it was spending too little on “welfare”. In the approach 
to the 1991 Gulf war, nearly two-thirds of Americans said they were willing to 
“use military force”; less than 30% were willing to “go to war”.

Even the less ambitious notion of democracy – that it’s a means by which 
people punish or reward governments – turns out to be divorced from reality. We 
remember only the past few months of a government’s performance (a bias known 
as “duration neglect”) and are hopeless at correctly attributing blame. A great 
white shark that killed five people in July 1916 caused a 10% swing against 
Woodrow Wilson in the beach communities of New Jersey.In 2000, according to 
analysis by the authors 2.8 million voters punished the Democrats for the 
floods and droughts that struck that year. Al Gore, they say, lost Arizona, 
Louisiana, Nevada, Florida, New Hampshire, Tennessee and Missouri as a result – 
which is ironic given his position on climate change.

The obvious answer is better information and civic education. But this doesn’t 
work either. Moderately informed Republicans were more inclined than 
Republicans with the least information to believe that Bill Clinton oversaw an 
increase in the budget deficit (it declined massively). Why? Because, unlike 
the worst informed, they knew he was a Democrat. The tiny number of people with 
a very high level of political information tend to use it not to challenge 
their own opinions but to rationalise them. Political knowledge, Achen and 
Bartels argue, “enhances bias”.

Neoliberalism – the ideology at the root of all our problems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
Direct democracy – referendums and citizens’ initiatives – seems to produce 
even worse results. In theUS initiatives are repeatedly used by 
multimillion-dollar lobby groups to achieve results that state legislatures 
won’t grant them 
<http://www.sfgate.com/opinion/article/A-long-way-from-the-grassroots-3190565.php>
. They tend to replace taxes with user fees, stymie the redistribution of 
wealth and degrade public services. Whether representative or direct, democracy 
comes to be owned by the elites.

This is not to suggest that it has no virtues; just that those it does have 
are not those we principally ascribe to it. It allows governments to be changed 
without bloodshed, limits terms in office, and ensures that the results of 
elections are widely accepted. Sometimes public attribution of blame will 
coincide with reality, which is why you don’t get famines in democracies.

In these respects it beats dictatorship. But is this all it has to offer? A 
weakness of Democracy for Realists is that most of its examples are drawn from 
the US, and most of those are old. Had the authors examinedpopular education 
groups in Latin America 
<http://cdj.oxfordjournals.org/content/45/3/287.abstract>, participatory 
budgets in Brazil 
<https://mail.google.com/_/scs/mail-static/_/js/k=gmail.main.en_GB.K0_Ts-b4grI.O/m=m_i,t/am=OosHBMD_v-8PxjWMArLSVyrM-_7hm09lh3zg9d-JAFHIVsD_zf4fwK-BXrzFCg/rt=h/d=1/rs=AHGWq9C2QAG9OsuH779uXQgxa59_tU_h0w>
andNew York 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/04/19/nyregion/participatory-budgeting-opens-up-voting-to-the-disenfranchised-and-denied.html?_r=1>
, the fragmentation of traditional parties in Europe and the movement that 
culminated in Bernie Sanders’ near miss, they might have discerned more room 
for hope. This is not to suggest that the folk theory of democracy comes close 
to reality anywhere, but that the situation is not as hopeless as they propose.

Persistent, determined, well-organised groups can bring neglected issues to 
the fore and change political outcomes. But in doing so they cannot rely on 
what democracy ought to be. We must see it for what it is. And that means 
understanding what we are.

 * Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot. A fully linked version of this column will be 
published atmonbiot.com <http://www.monbiot.com>.

 * You can comment on this article and others on our Your Opinions thread here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/your-opinions-brexit-relish-southern-rail-chaos-and-the-decline-of-democracy>
.
 