
Driving down the hill the other day, I spotted a casualty on the road ahead, 
and knew by its size that it was abrown hare 
<http://www.wildlifetrusts.org/species/brown-hare>. Of all the creatures I find 
dead or injured on the roads, the brown hares are the ones that upset me the 
most, not least because when they are hurt their hare scream is penetrating and 
eerie.

This one was a crumpled heap of light and dark brown fur. Its elongated hind 
legs were broken, but the long, broad ears stuck out almost defiantly. The 
carcass would not last long with so many scavengers around and I expected that 
nighta fox would carry it off 
<https://www.britishwildlifecentre.co.uk/planyourvisit/animals/fox.html> to eat 
at leisure.

Coming back along the same road seven hours later, I was surprised by another 
roadkill specimen, a few metres from what was left of the brown hare. In all my 
40 years of driving in the Highlands, this is only the second time I had found 
a dead woodcock on the road.

Country diary: Lampeter: The hare's death-scream tells of a history soon over
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/feb/01/lampeter-hares-death-scream-history>
I wondered why it had been there at all during the day, as they are normally 
nocturnal or crepuscular. I stopped and took away the body to examine closer. I 
was particularly interested in the two pin feathers located at the carpel joint 
of the wings. These are short and stiff and highly prized by artists for fine 
work.

Scolopax rusticola is a bird that guards its secrets closely 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/w/woodcock/index.aspx>
. It is known that the adults pick up their young when danger threatens, but 
many people who have studied woodcock all their lives never see evidence of 
this.

Years ago, walking through woodland in the breeding season, I was privileged 
to see one rise up in front of me carrying a small chick between its legs. The 
adult landed about 20 metres away and deposited its offspring, then flew back 
towards me, picked up another young bird and flew back to the first one. I left 
them in peace with a feeling of intense satisfaction at having witnessed this 
for myself.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>



 