
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> has been accused of 
a strategy of “death by a thousand cuts” after announcing another 1,340 job 
losses.

The redundancies, which will affect staff in branches, are part of an ongoing 
programme of reductions by the bailed out bank’s chief executive, António 
Horta-Osório.

“We know the outlook for banks is tough due to record low interest rates, 
falling revenues and the changes in technology and customer behaviours. This 
‘death by a thousand cuts’ approach does nothing to give confidence to those 
who will be staying with the business, trying their best to meet customers’ 
needs and help to sustain the group for the future,” said Ged Nichols, general 
secretary of the union Accord.

Officials at Unite branded the job losses “horrific”. The latest cuts are part 
of the 9,000 reduction programmeannounced by Horta-Osório in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/28/lloyds-banking-group-axe-9000-jobs-200-branches>
, and will have an impact on staff who work in Lloyds, Halifax and Bank of 
Scotland.


The toll on jobs has been heavy at Lloyds since the 2008 rescue of HBOS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness>. 
That takeover led to 45,000 jobs cuts, which was followed by Horta-Osório’s 
9,000 cost cutting programme. He announcedanother 3,000 job cuts in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>
, in the immediate aftermath of the Brexit vote.

Unions hope the cuts announced on Wednesday can be achieved voluntarily. 
Nichols, who will be meeting Horta-Osório next month, said his members needed a 
vision of their future inside the bank.

“We’re deeply concerned that both the scale and the pace of job reductions are 
increasing,” said Nichols.

Rob MacGregor, Unite national officer said: “These announcements to staff 
across LloydsBanking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group are 
horrific news for staff. 1,340 job losses within this taxpayer-backed 
institution are wholly unacceptable.”

 The latest cuts come as the chancellor, Philip Hammond, prepares to sell the 
remaining 9% stake in Lloyds at a price below the 73.6p per share paid by 
taxpayers, taking 43% stake at the height of the banking crisis.

 Lloyds said: “This process involves taking difficult decisions, and we are 
committed to working through these changes in a careful and sensitive way. All 
affected employees have been briefed by their line manager today.” The bank 
said it would aim to avoid compulsory redundancies. It said it was creating 110 
new roles and argued the number of roles being lost was 1,230.

Last week Hammond said he was abandoning plans to offer shares to the public 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
 – the plan outlined by his predecessor, George Osborne – and pressing on with 
selling shares on the stock market to major City investors. The shares are 
trading at 53p although the Treasury has insisted that it will not make a loss 
on the latest sell off as it has raised about £16.9bn from previous sales.

Banks are finding it more difficult to make profits because of the low 
interest rate environment which narrows the gap between what they can charge 
borrowers and need to pay savers.
 