
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> has handed its 
chief executive an £8.5m pay deal and ignited its share price by announcing a 
special dividend – despite reporting a 7% fall in profits.

António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>’s pay was disclosed 
alongside 2015 financial results showing profits had been knocked to £1.6bn by 
a further £4bn charge for mis-selling payment protection insurance (PPI).

The bank, bailed out in 2008, has now incurred a total bill of £16bn for the 
long-running scandal which drove it to a fourth-quarter loss.

British bank annual results – interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2016/feb/23/british-bank-annual-results-interactive>
However, its shares jumped 13.5% to close at 70.6p after news of the full-year 
dividend of 2.25p a share plus a special dividend worth 0.5p per share. This 
means that the average investor, holding 6,000 shares, will receive £160.

The bank resumed dividends a year ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/27/lloyds-pays-antonio-horta-osorio-11m-resumes-dividend-after-six-years>
 for the first time since the 2008 crisis and the City had been concerned it 
would be unable to keep its promises on payouts. Its income rose just 1% during 
the year, while the bad debt charge was down 48%.

The government has been gradually cutting back its stake, from 43% to less 
than 10%, but despite Thursday’s rally the shares remain below the 73.6p break 
even price. Chancellor George Osborne is not expected to revive his plan to 
sell shares to the public - which he abandoned last monthblaming market 
turbulence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/28/george-osborne-postpones-sale-sell-off-last-publicly-owned-lloyds-bank-shares>
 - until after the EU referendum.

Horta-Osório’s £8.5m included an £800,000 bonus in shares, which he will only 
receive if the government sells off the rest of its stake or the shares remain 
above the taxpayer break-even price for 126 consecutive days. He received 
£11.5m the previous year.

The Portuguese banker, who took the helm in 2011 after a career at Santander, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/nov/03/santander-uk-chief-joins-lloyds-on-50m-pound-pay-packet>
 is also being handed a 6% rise in salary, taking it to £1.12m, while staff are 
getting 2%. He said the rise – part of which he was taking in shares – should 
be seen in the context of a 13% rise in salaries since he had taken charge.
Lloyds share price 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/02/lloyds_share_price/giv-271677M1BbBLetJAL/>
His total pay was reduced by £234,000  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jun/05/record-ppi-fine-for-lloyds-knocks-12-off-horta-osorio-bonus>
because of a £117m fine last year for mishandling compensation claims for PPI. 
Other senior colleagues also had their bonuses docked for previous years - the 
deferred awards had not been paid out yet.

Horta-Osório said he intended to stay to see through his current plan which 
runs to the end of 2017. He was also handed shares worth £3.6m in a long-term 
incentive plan, which could pay out in three years’ time. His 10-strong 
management team were handed shares worth £17m in the same scheme.

The total bonus pool was cut to £353m from £369m. Sixty-six staff received 
total pay of €1m (£800,000) or more.

UK bank pay and bonuses in the spotlight as results season starts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/21/uk-bank-pay-and-bonuses-in-the-spotlight-as-results-season-starts>
The bank and its chairman Lord Blackwell, who has expressed anti-EU views, 
would not be drawn on the consequences of a vote to leave the EU and would not 
consider the impact on the business until a board meeting on 14 April. 
Horta-Osório conceded that contingency planning had begun but refused to 
elaborate.

Sandy Chen, an analyst at broker Cenkos, was cautious. “In the near term, if 
Brexit uncertainty does translate into housing market uncertainty in terms of 
house prices and mortgage volumes, Lloyds would have the largest exposure to 
this.”

Horta-Osório was upbeat about the outlook for the UK economy, to which he 
regards the bank as “inextricably linked” although he said “black swan” events 
could always emerge.

The results were also hit by a £837m charge to cover other potential fines and 
compensation claims, including packaged bank accounts. Some £720m of the 
provision was related to products sold through the branch network. Legal 
warnings showed it continues to co-operate with the Serious Fraud Office over 
Libor rigging investigations.


Horta-Osório is in the midst of a three-year plan that involves cutting 9,000 
jobs, and closing 200 branches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/28/lloyds-banking-group-axe-9000-jobs-200-branches>
. The cuts come after 45,000 jobs were lost following the 2008 rescue takeover 
of HBOS.

He has now delayed his targets for returns to shareholders and for cutting 
costs by a year, blaming low interest rates and theeight percentage point 
corporation tax surcharge announced by Osborne in his July budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/08/biggest-banks-welcome-budget-reduction-in-bank-levy>
. The bank had previously expected interest rates to rise from 0.5% to 2.5% by 
2017 but now does not expect rates to go this high until 2019.

Even so, analysts at Haitong said: “The market should be reassured that the 
group has the capacity to generate a substantial amount of excess capital for 
shareholders.”

On the eve of the results Sir Victor Blank, who was the bank’s chairman at the 
time of the HBOS deal, defended the takeover during the 2008 crisis. Blank,who 
was forced to step down in 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/may/17/sir-victor-blank-lloyds>, was 
reportedby the Financial Times 
<https://next.ft.com/content/9a7322a2-db56-11e5-98fd-06d75973fe09> as saying: 
“The only people who would argue that they suffered – and they have – is 
shareholders. But if I’m right that the banking system would have collapsed and 
been nationalised [if we had walked away] then they should be grateful.”
 