
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> has taken another 
£1bn hit for payment protection insurance, in a move it hopes will cap its bill 
for the mis-selling scandal at £17bn.

The fallout has cost the industry has already reached £37bn and looks likely 
to rise further in the coming days when other high street banks could add to 
their existing provisions for mis-selling the insurance product.

George Culmer, Lloyds’ finance director, said the £1bn top-up should be the 
last “big” addition to the bank’s PPI bill and was driven by the decision by 
the Financial Conduct Authority toset a deadline of June 2019 – rather than 
spring 2018 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
– for claims.
 See the full visual 
Lloyds has incurred the largest single bill for the scandal as it also owns 
HBOS, which it took over during the 2008 banking crisis.

The charge for PPI was revealed as the bank reported its profits for the first 
nine of months of the year 
<http://www.lloydsbankinggroup.com/investors/financial-performance/>, which 
were 50% higher at £3.2bn despite the PPI charge. In the third quarter, 
however, profits were down 15% at £811m.

Listed among the charges taken by the bank was another provision of £150m for 
packaged accounts, where products such as travel insurance and roadside 
assistance policies are bundled up alongside current accounts.

The taxpayer still owns a 9% stake in Lloyds – down from 43% at the time of 
the financial crisis – and the slump in its shares has forced chancellor Philip 
Hammond toabandon a plan to sell shares to the public at the discount 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
. Instead Hammond has signalled that the remaining shares will be sold to City 
investors on the stock market.

The shares were the biggest fallers in the FTSE 100, down about 2.5%, but 
regained their losses as analysts digested the implications for the bank 
returning cash to shareholders next year. The shares are still well below the 
73.6p average price at which taxpayers bought them during the crisis.

António Horta-Osório, the chief executive, who in August apologised to staff 
for the hit to the bank’s reputationbecause of revelations about his private 
life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/24/lloyds-chief-antonio-horta-osorio-apologises-damage-caused-affair-allegations>
, said the sale of the remaining stake would not be his cue to leave.

“I am very happy at Lloyds. I … like the team here and I like the strategy,” 
said Horta-Osório, who took the helm in 2011 and immediately began the process 
of PPI payouts. Lloyds started witha £3.2bn provision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/may/05/lloyds-loss-payment-protection-costs>
, which at the time was thought to have been enough to tackle the compensation 
payouts.

He said: “The hard work undertaken in the last five years to transform and 
simplify the business has allowed the UK government to sell most of its stake 
in the group, returning £17bn including dividends on its original £20bn 
investment. We welcome the recent decision to recommence the sale of its 
shares.”


Since the rescue of HBOS approximately 45,000 jobs have been axed,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/lloyds-banking-group-accused-of-death-by-a-thousand-cuts-as-it-axes-1340-jobs>
and Horta-Osório would not be drawn on any further cost-cutting programmes as 
he said 60% of transactions with the bank could be conducted digitally.

Lloyds is the first major bank to report its third quarter results, which 
cover the period since the Brexit vote, and Horta-Osório played down the impact 
on consumers, saying: “We don’t see any change in consumer trends.”But, he 
said, with small business customers “there has been some impact on businesses 
holding back on investment”.

The bank also said its pension scheme had turned from a £430m surplus deficit 
of £740m as as a result of the plunge in bond yields caused by the low interest 
rate environment. Culmer said there was no need for immediate action to cut the 
deficit.

Analysts were watching for signals about the size of dividends to 
shareholders. Gary Greenwood, at Shore Capital, said there was potential for 
payouts.

“The real highlight is a much stronger than expected capital generation, which 
means that management has reiterated its guidance for the group to deliver 
full-year pre-dividend capital generation equivalent to 1.6% of risk-weighted 
assets – around £3.6bn or 5p per share – for the year as a whole,” he said.

Horta-Osório also reiterated remarks he made shortly after the EU referendum, 
hinting that Hammond should announce more spending on infrastructure in next 
month’s autumn statement.

“We strongly believe the economy requires a fiscal stimulus in terms of 
infrastructure and housebuilding. Interest rates have never been so low,” the 
Lloyds boss said.
 