
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group>, the UK’s biggest 
mortgage lender, has revealed a surge in activity by buy-to-let and second-home 
buyers in the run-up to tax changes in April.

António Horta-Osório 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/antonio-horta-osorio>, chief executive of 
the bailed-out bank, said mortgage activity had been strong in the run-up to 
the changes, which came into force on 1 April and require buy-to-let and 
second-home buyers to pay a 3% surcharge on stamp duty. He was speaking as the 
bank, which owns Halifax, reported its profits had almost halved in the first 
three months of the year.

Last month, the Council of Mortgage Lenders said there had been a 22% 
year-on-year rise in January in buy-to-let mortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/10/buy-to-let-mortgage-lending-rockets-ahead-of-stamp-duty-rise>
– although estate agents have warned they expect activity to slow down because 
of the EU referendum on 23 June. The London-focused chain Foxtons said on 
Wednesdayit expected a “reduced sales pipeline” in the coming three months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/27/foxtons-braced-revenue-slump-rise-in-buy-to-let-stamp-duty>
.

Horta-Osório said as the Bank of England had not increased interest rates from 
the record low of 0.5% he had started to pull back slightly from mortgage 
lending to focus on business lending.

The low interest rate environment means he is also accelerating a plan, 
outlined in late 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/oct/28/lloyds-banking-group-axe-9000-jobs-200-branches>
, to close around 200 branches – around 6% of the network – and axe a further 
9,000 roles, on top of the 45,000 lost since the rescue of HBOS in 2008.

The Lloyds finance director, George Culmer, said the bank was “ahead of plan 
on where we expected to be”.

Rather than the 46% fall in first quarter profits to £654m, Horta-Osório 
preferred to focus on the £2.1bn in underlying profits. “These results 
demonstrate the strength of our differentiated, simple, low-risk business model 
and reflect our ability to actively respond to the challenging operating 
environment,” he said.

The UK government has had to postpone a plan to sell most of its remaining 9% 
stake to retail investors because of the plunge in bank shares since the start 
of the year. The shares were trading at 67.9p, down 2%, shortly after the 
Lloyds results were published, below the 73p average price at which the state’s 
43% stake was bought during the 2008 crisis.

Sandy Chen, analyst at Cenkos, described the performance as “a bit flat, as in 
deflated”.

The fall in profits was caused by a controversial plan to buy back £3bn of 
debt, which is expected to reduce the bank’s costs annually. The buy-back cost 
£790m in the first quarter, while other items including £161m of restructuring 
charges and £115m for possible compensation claims also knocked profits. The 
bad debt charge was down 6% to £149m.

However, there was no new provision for payment protection insurance selling, 
a scandal which has so far cost the banking industry more than £30bn,and £16bn 
at Lloyds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
.
 