
Lloyds Banking Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lloyds-banking-group> is cutting 665 jobs 
and closing 49 branches as it continues to cut costs in an attempt to complete 
its return to the private sector.

To cushion the blow of further branch closures, the bank – bailed out in 2008 
– is launching a fleet of mobile vans intended to visit communities knocked by 
the disappearance of high street outlets.

But unions said the ongoing cuts to the 75,000-strong workforce risked having 
an impact on customers. The reductions are part of a three-year cost-cutting 
programme being implemented by the chief executive, António Horta-Osório, to 
cut 12,000 jobs and close 400 branches by the end of 2017.

So far, 9,435 job cuts have been announced and 261 branches earmarked for 
closure. About45,000 roles had already gone when Lloyds rescued HBOS during the 
2008 crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/18/marketturmoil.hbosbusiness>. 

Bank branch closures trigger high street alarm bells
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/21/bank-branch-closures-trigger-high-street-alarm-bells>
Rob MacGregor, Unite union’s national officer, said: “It is alarming that 
Lloyds are continuing this programme of job cuts and branch closures. Unite 
have expressed to the bank that these ongoing cuts hurts our members and 
inevitably impacts customers.”

Lloyds, which also operates the Halifax and Bank of Scotland brands, has 
argued that branch closures are necessary as their usehas fallen 15% year on 
year. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>

 The key high street players – Lloyds, Barclays, HSBC, Royal Bank of Scotland 
and Santander –have closed 1,7000 branches in the past five years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/21/bank-branch-closures-trigger-high-street-alarm-bells>
 and more are expected. As a result, 1,500 communities have been left without a 
bank on their high street.

Lloyds said it would put eight mobile branches on the road between March and 
April next year. Its Bank of Scotland brand already has eight mobile branches 
in Scotland. 

Other banks also have mobile branches, including Royal Bank of Scotland which 
said it had been operating in remote parts of Scotland for 70 years through its 
fleet which employs 80 people. As well as 22 RBS branches on the move, its 
NatWest arm in England and Wales has 15 mobile branches.


Lloyds said the decision to make cuts was difficult but they were needed 
because of “changing customer needs”. Compulsory redundancies would be a last 
resort. It said the number of jobs lost would be 520 as it was creating 145 new 
positions.

Branches were still important, the bank said. “As part of this, we have also 
announced today the introduction of a new mobile branch service for Lloyds bank 
to help ensure there is a continuity of branch banking services available in 
some of those areas affected by branch closures alongside other ways to access 
banking locally.”

Philip Hammond, the chancellor, has continued to sell off the government’s 
holding in Lloyds even though its shares have fallen below the 73.6p average 
price at which taxpayers bought a 43% stake during the 2008 crisis. Last month
the taxpayer shareholding fell below 9% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/taxpayer-stake-in-lloyds-banking-group-falls>
. Hammond is expectedto get rid of the remaining holding in the next 12 months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
.
 