 A woman told the Lockerbie trial yesterday how she found an instruction 
booklet for a radio cassette player in fields near her home around 70 miles 
away from the Scottish town.
Two men, who deny causing the jumbo jet disaster, are alleged to have caused a 
suitcase containing an umbrella, clothing and an improvised explosive device 
concealed within a radio cassette recorder to be placed on board Pan Am flight 
103.

The device allegedly detonated on board the aircraft on December 21 1988 
killing all 259 passengers and crew and 11 Lockerbie residents.

The hearing at Camp Zeist in the Netherlands was told how 64-year-old 
Gwendoline Horton, from Morpeth, Northumberland, scoured fields with her 
husband for debris after the plane was blown out of the sky above Lockerbie.

She said she found a document, about eight inches long by eight inches wide, 
with writing on it which referred to a radio cassette player. "We went out with 
the specific idea of collecting this stuff and my neighbour had said to hand it 
to the police."

A retired police constable, Brian Walton, of Northumbria police, told how Mrs 
Horton handed the item to him at his station in Alnwick.

He said: "It was pieces of an instruction handbook. It had tiny bits of 
singeing on some of the edges.

"At that time, the day after the crash or the following day, it didn't have 
the significance that it obviously might have now with hindsight."

Abdelbaset Ali Mohmed Al Megrahi, 48, and Al Amin Khalifa Fhimah, 44, have 
pleaded not guilty to three alternative charges of conspiracy to murder, 
murder, and a breach of the 1982 Aviation Security Act. They have lodged 
special defences of incrimination, blaming others for the atrocity.

The court was adjourned to allow the prosecution to consider a document from 
the defence which could allow the two sides to agree evidence relating to the 
recovery of debris and so speed up the trial.
 