
This wasn’t supposed to happen under Sadiq Khan 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/sadiq-khan-promise-no-strikes-london-tfl-tube-strike-january-2017-a7516851.html>
, but the first major tube strike under the new mayor shows that winning the 
battle over closing ticket offices and slashing jobs may have only been a 
pyrrhic victory for Transport for London.

Monday’s strike was an echo of January 2016’s walkouts, when Boris Johnson was 
in full flow. Then, 900 jobs were shed and ticket offices axed across the 
capital. Since then, most of the public appear to have accepted the closures, 
however controversial and unpopular they were in principle. The night tube, 
another reason for the 2016 strikes, has also started, accompanied by a slight 
rise in staff pay.

Tube strike: all lines hit and most central London stations closed – live 
updates
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/live/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-all-lines-hit-and-most-central-london-stations-closed-live-updates>
So why strike now? First, TfL promised a review of the original programme 
after a year and the incoming mayor promised to examines the cuts. An 
independent review for Khan byLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> 
Travelwatch found that customers were having issues finding help when needed, 
despite the promise of more visible staff on concourses.

It did not, however, call for ticket offices to be reopened. Nor does TfL 
believe they should reopen. It says there is no evidence that crime has 
increased nor that safety has been compromised in any way, as the unions argue.

The mandate for action in November’s ballot, in which 85% of RMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> members who voted were in favour of 
strikes – on a turnout of the 35% – shows that plenty of employees had 
nevertheless reached the end of their tether. Despite subsequent talks, the 
fact that the strike has gone ahead is testament to the dissatisfaction and 
anxiety many tube staff feel.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Gridlock%20on%20London%20streets%20as%20tube%20strike%20hits%20%E2%80%93%20timelapse%20aerial%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fgridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video&media=>
Gridlock on London streets as tube strike hits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2017/jan/09/gridlock-on-london-streets-as-tube-strike-hits-timelapse-aerial-video>
 Rotas that depend on overtime may have increased pay of some, but by the end 
of the year many felt stretched and worn out, with managers struggling to fill 
shifts even before an overtime ban kicked in. Increasingly, staff say they find 
themselves alone, without the support of colleagues, directing reams of 
frustrated passengers to ticket machines that don’t always function or dispense 
change to tourists with £50 notes.

Bringing staff out from behind a ticket office window may improve efficiency 
and their interaction with customers, as TfL argues, but the unions say it has 
left more staff soaking up abuse, and that some have been mugged for their 
TfL-issued iPads.

If senior management kept faith in the programme, leaked minutes showed that 
many middle managers objected, airing concerns over safety and other 
operational issues. With higher-paid staff having to fill in for those made 
redundant and a growing overtime bill, some believe the efficiency programme 
has started to look distinctly inefficient.

British unions must defend their right to strike – and become better at it | 
Andy Beckett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/british-unions-defend-right-to-strike>
The strike represents a blow for Khan, who had promised to end the frequent 
disruption for commuters by having a less confrontational attitude toward the 
unions than his predecessor. That may have cut some ice, particularly with the 
TSSA, which stayed in the room talking with TfL until Sunday. The RMT, however, 
unaffiliated to Labour, is not inclined to do him any favours.

Both unions have retained a mandate for ongoing action after Monday’s strike. 
The choreography of industrial relations may well see the RMT set more strike 
dates before serious talks resume. TSSA reps are due to meet on Wednesday, and 
may enter fresh talks from then.

On Monday morning, Khan was still trumpeting the comparatively few working 
days lost to transport strikes since he took over from Johnson at city hall. 
Confidence in his ability to prevent more strikes has taken a battering though. 
With TfL’s central government grant slashed until 2020, and other high-profile 
campaign pledges to freeze fares to deliver, Khan may have painted himself into 
a trickier corner than first appeared.
 