
London’s housing crisis is the single biggest barrier to prosperity, growth 
and fairness facing Londoners today. And the scourge of rough sleeping and 
homelessness – something many of us see on the streets of London every single 
day – is the sharpest end of thishousing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/jul/06/london-housing-crisis-mayor-and-big-business-in-furious-agreement>
.

Britain’s shame: the people who are homeless, even though they’re in work | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/20/working-homeless-britain-economy-minimum-wage-zero-hours>
Last year, more than 8,000 people slept rough in the capital at some point 
<http://www.streetsoflondon.org.uk/about-homelessness> – a 6% rise on the 
previous year, and more than double compared with eight years ago. The latest 
figures – released only a few weeks ago – also show that the number ofchildren 
who will be homeless and in temporary accommodation 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/homelessness-crisis-one-in-25-london-children-lives-in-temporary-accommodation-10151844.html>
 in London over the Christmas period will be well over 85,000.

I see this rise in rough sleeping and homelessness – in one of the wealthiest 
cities in the world – as a growing source of shame. And as Londoners, as a 
city, and as a country, I believe we have a moral duty to tackle it head-on.

Some people say that rough sleeping has always existed and always will – that 
there is nothing that can be done to stop it. That is simply not true. In the 
early 2000s, with a Labour government and a progressive mayor in City Hall 
working together, the number of people sleeping rough on London’s streets fell 
as low as a third of its current rate. Dreadful sights such as the so-called 
“cardboard city” at Waterloo were eradicated and everyone visiting or living in 
London could see the difference it made. We need the same relentless focus to 
do so again. We also need to build genuinely affordable homes to rent and buy. 
My newHomes for Londoners 
<http://www.sadiq.london/homes_for_londoners_manifesto> team has begun work on 
this. It will be a marathon, though, not a sprint.

There are many reasons why people end up sleeping rough, from mental health 
issues and problems with debt, to family break-ups, a gap in care services and 
drug addiction. This means that there is never going to be a silver bullet to 
solve the problem.

Some people say that rough sleeping has always existed and always will. That 
is simply not true

So I’m working with others on new, innovative and flexible solutions in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and coordinating action across the 
government, local boroughs, charities and the wider housing sector.

As part of this, I’ve recently announced that the new funding deal we’ve 
secured from the government to build more affordable homes will include£50m 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/press-releases/mayoral/sadiq-sets-out-plans-for-fund-to-help-homeless>
 to invest in accommodation for people moving from hostels to longer-term 
independent living. This will help to fund about 850 spaces, dedicated to 
helping homeless people currently in hostels or victims of domestic abuse in 
refuges.

On top of this investment, I will be spending at least £9m of Greater London 
Authority funding every year on rough sleeping services, with targeted 
responses to help specific groups. For example, women are particularly 
vulnerable to abuse when they sleep on the streets. Understandably, female 
rough sleepers often respond to dangers by remaining “invisible”, choosing 
places to sleep that are hidden from view and disguising the real difficulty of 
their situation.

As a result, many of these women, including those escaping domestic abuse, are 
significantly less likely than men to access the help and support they need. 
That’s why I’ve decided to provide extra funding for the Female Hidden Homeless 
Project in London, which will provide targeted help for many women who have 
been sleeping rough for far too long.

All of this work is vitally important – and will make a huge difference to 
many lives. But the truth is, if we are to solve the problem of rough sleeping, 
we can’t only look to help rough sleepers on the streets now – we have to work 
to stop people from becoming homeless in the first place. Prevention has to be 
front and centre of our approach. That’s why, a few months after becoming 
mayor, I launched theNo Nights Sleeping Rough 
<https://www.london.gov.uk/what-we-do/housing-and-land/homelessness/no-nights-sleeping-rough-taskforce>
 taskforce.

This new taskforce, which is chaired by my deputy mayor for housing, James 
Murray, is bringing together key players to help rough sleepers and to tackle 
the root causes of rough sleeping.

By bringing national government, homelessness charities, London councils, and 
other agencies together and forming a close partnership, I know we can make a 
real difference. This is already bearing fruit: working together, the taskforce 
has been successful in bidding for £4.3m for three new projects to help rough 
sleepers in the capital, and will continue to identify what new interventions 
are needed to tackle specific problems, lobbying the government for support 
where necessary.

London is the greatest city in the world. During my election campaign, I said 
time and again that we can’t just stand back and ignore the rise in rough 
sleeping and homelessness any longer. Of course it’s not going to be easy to 
tackle the problem and, just like the challenge of building the thousands of 
genuinely affordable homes London needs, I can’t promise to turn things around 
overnight. But at the start of this century, over a number of years, the City 
Hall administration dramatically reduced rough sleeping by working well with 
the government and others.

So I’m confident that we can do the same again – and that we can ensure fewer 
Londoners will have to face a night on the streets over Christmas in the years 
ahead.
 