
The average billionaire is married, is worth £1.79bn, and would never spend 
less than £10m on a property – unless it was for the staff, according to 
research published on Sunday.

There are more than 2,170 billionaires globally, with a combined net worth of 
£3.88tn, up from £1.85tn in 2009, according to the analysis by high-end estate 
agencyBeauchamp Estates <http://www.beauchamp.co.uk/> and Dataloft 
<http://www.dataloft.co.uk/>.

Of these, it said 60% were self-made billionaires, 20% had inherited wealth 
and the rest had a combination of part-inherited, part-made fortunes.

Alongside football clubs and fine art, property in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> was found to be high on the list of 
must-haves for those with many millions in the bank: the research found that 67 
billionaires were living in the city, making it the most popular of western 
Europe's capitals with the ultra-wealthy, ahead of Paris with 25 and Geneva 
with 18.
 Luxury London: indoor swimming pool. Photograph: Andy Scott/Beauchamp Estate 
The typical billionaire holds £50m or more in real estate and has four homes. 
A property portfolio would typically include a £22.3m mansion in London; an 
£18.6m holiday home on the French Riviera and a £12.1m estate in Tuscany, 
alongside another luxury pad, perhaps somewhere more far-flung .

The researchers claimed a billionaire would "never spend less than £10m on a 
London property (unless it is for a servant)". This property might be in 
Chelsea, but the neighbourhood is not favoured by billionaires themselves – 
instead they prefer a mansion in the "platinum triangle" formed by Mayfair, 
Knightsbridge and Belgravia.

With an average of 2.1 children each, billionaires were found to favour family 
homes – the bigger the better with six bedrooms as standard, and to rank 
state-of-the-art security above lifestyle facilities. Features like 
iris-recognition technology, his and hers panic rooms and bullet-proof doors 
are not unusual now in luxury developments in the capital.

Gary Hersham of Beauchamp Estates said: "We advise UHNWIs [ultra-high 
net-worth individual] buying homes in London and around the Mediterranean to 
set aside budgets of typically £50m to acquire the right properties.

"Most UHNWIs buying in western Europe see having an ultra-prime home in prime 
central London and on the French Riviera as 'must have" badges'."
 Beauchamp Estates table Photograph: Beauchamp Estates 
The research found that the world's wealthiest individuals hold an average of 
42% of their wealth (£750m) in private holdings; 35% (£626m) in publicly-held 
companies; 18% (£322m) in cash; 3% (£54m) in residential real estate and 2% 
(£35m) in luxury assets such as artwork, yachts and private jet travel.

The research is based on property data from Beachamps and Lonres 
<http://www.lonres.com/public/?URI=%2F> and information from a Wealth X 
<http://www.wealthx.com/home/>/UBS Bank <http://www.ubs.com/global/en.html> 
study of billionaires.
 