
Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> in London and the 
south-east are 57% more likely to get into universities ranked among the top 
third than their counterparts in the north, according to research by the 
children’s commissioner for England.


Launching a year-long investigation into why many children in the north get 
left behind, Anne Longfield said the under-performance of secondary schools in 
the north of England was of “huge concern”, with poorer pupils getting 
significantly worse GCSE results. “London and the south-east is racing ahead,” 
she said.

Longfield said she wanted to understand why the north-east had the best 
primary schools in the country, but the lowest adult employment rate: 71.1% 
compared with 78% in the south-east, according to September figures from the 
Office for National Statistics.
employment graph 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-05T17:05:32/embed.html>
Of primary schools in Redcar and Cleveland, 95% 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/ofsted-annual-report-201516-education-early-years-and-skills>
 are deemed “good” or “outstanding” by Ofsted. But the same local authority is 
in the bottom 20 of all 149 council areas in England when it comes to the 
progress a pupil makes from the end of primary school to the end of secondary 
school.

The north-east is far better at helping young people into apprenticeships, 
however: 20% of school leavers in Hartlepool become apprentices, compared with 
just 4% in London.

“We see that children start well but a gap emerges while they are at secondary 
school. That, coupled with the paucity of job prospects in some areas, seem to 
combine to really open up a gap that many children can’t get beyond,” said 
Longfield.

She said she would be exploring the idea of companies from more affluent areas 
offering work experience placements to students from poorer areas with higher 
levels of unemployment. Pupils in a school in Bradford recently complained to 
her that their work placement scheme had been scrapped because of cost cutting, 
the commissioner said.

Just 34% of disadvantaged children in the north of England overall get five 
GCSEs A*-C, including English and maths, compared with 48% of similar pupils in 
London.

Of the 20 worst performing local authorities in England for GCSE results, 12 
are in the north, with Knowsley and Blackpool at the bottom and Bradford, 
Middlesbrough, Kingston upon Hull and Manchester not far behind. Just one 
northern council area makes the top 20: Trafford in Greater Manchester.

Explaining the knock-on effect for the further education opportunities, 
Longfield said: “School leavers in London and the south-east are at least 57% 
more likely to go to a top-third university.”

Preliminary research carried out by Longfield’s team has found that the north 
of England’s education system is not uniformly poor. Children in the north-west 
performed better than their counterparts in London in verbal comprehension 
tests at 11, according to analysis of data collected as part of the Institute 
of Education’sMillennium Cohort Study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/dec/03/childs-cognitive-skills-linked-time-with-mother>
. North-west children also have among the lowest instances of mental illness in 
the country, though those in the north-east and Yorkshire fare less well.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flondon-south-east-children-top-universities-schools-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f99059f4a7990229018fdf5365a6bc1149cfbe6%2F0_242_5529_3317%2F5529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=London%20and%20south-east%20children%20far%20more%20likely%20to%20go%20to%20top%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flondon-south-east-children-top-universities-schools-north-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=London%20and%20south-east%20children%20far%20more%20likely%20to%20go%20to%20top%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Flondon-south-east-children-top-universities-schools-north-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5f99059f4a7990229018fdf5365a6bc1149cfbe6%2F0_242_5529_3317%2F5529.jpg>
 Anne Longfield, the children’s commissioner for England. Photograph: Richard 
Gardner/Rex/Shutterstock 
A succession of experts have expressed concerns about the north-south divide 
in education.Sir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, the outgoing chief 
inspector of schools,last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/483347/Ofsted_annual_report_education_and_skills.pdf>
 blamed poor teaching for the “troubling gap between the performance of 
secondary schools in the north and Midlands and secondary schools in the rest 
of the country”.

Last month Sir Nick Weller, who runs an academy chain with schools in the 
north, advised the government to pilot a new “teach north” scheme to attract 
and retain talented newly qualified teachers in disadvantaged schools in the 
region.

Schools in the north typically receive less funding per pupil than those in 
London despite having lower attainment and serving communities with greater 
disadvantage, Wellerreported 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/572190/NPSSR_Weller_2016.pdf>
 in A Northern Powerhouse Schools Strategy, commissioned by the Department for 
Education.

He singled out “monocultural disadvantage” as being “a particular problem in 
the north, whether this is white working-class children in former mining towns 
or Pakistani students in former mill towns, for example”.

Louise Casey's integration plan is behind the times
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/05/louise-caseys-integration-plan-is-behind-the-times>
“In some areas there is little that can be done about the monocultural makeup 
of schools. In others, however, two communities can live close by locally, but 
self-select separate schools for their different communities,” Weller wrote, 
adding: “Schools with high concentrations of monocultural disadvantage should 
consider how changing their admissions policy might encourage a more diverse 
mix of students, for example randomised selection from a city-wide or 
whole-town catchment.”

In her review into segregation in Britain released this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/05/casey-report-criticised-for-focus-on-uk-muslim-communities>
, Dame Louise Casey said radical change was needed to address monocultural 
schools, “not just in relation to admissions but also to the fundamentals of 
what is taught in schools to grow tolerant, resilient pupils, capable of 
reflective, critical thinking”.

She said she had been particularly struck by a survey of pupils in a non-faith 
secondary school with a high Asian population. Pupils had been asked to 
identify the percentage Asian population of Britain and their estimates ranged 
from 50% to 90% – the actual figure is 7% – presumably reflecting their 
experience in the local community, and a relative lack of knowledge about the 
country as a whole.

Longfield said she would try to assess how monocultural education affects 
children’s outcomes.

According to research by the thinktank Demos, seven of the 10 areas with the 
most disproportionately high levels of ethnic concentration in particular 
schools were in the north, with Blackburn with Darwen worst, along with 
Bradford, Rochdale, Kirklees, Oldham, Rotherham and Manchester.
 