
Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan> has dumped the 
“Boris bus”, a key part of the now foreign secretary’s legacy as London mayor, 
because it is too expensive to produce. The new generation of red double-decker 
Routemasters, with folding doors that allow passengers to hop on and off, was 
introduced by Johnson in 2012, to great fanfare.

Designer Thomas Heatherwick was credited with giving the new Routemaster a 
modern “London look”. After the bus was first introduced, he said it was a 
compliment that it had so quickly become “part of London’s landscape and 
personality”. Heatherwick also designed the cauldron for the opening of the 2012
London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Olympics as well as the 
so-called Garden Bridge, yet to be built across the river Thames.

At the time, the London mayor described the new bus, built by Northern Ireland 
company Wrightbus, as a “stunning piece of automotive architecture” 
representing the “very best in British design, engineering and manufacture”.

However, during the mayoral campaign last year, Khan suggested that as London 
mayor he would look at holding off on purchases of the new Routemaster as a way 
of making budget savings to help pay for a promisedfour-year public transport 
fares freeze 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/18/tfl-fares-to-be-frozen-for-four-years>
.

It has now been confirmed in Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London’s business plan that “new 
capital investment will be reduced significantly as we discontinue purchases of 
new Routemaster buses”.

The move will be a blow to Johnson, whose legacy as mayor now looks 
increasingly slim. In March, former Downing Street adviser Steve Hilton said 
that he struggled“to think of what his legacy is” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/13/prime-ministers-former-adviser-boris-mayoral-legacy>
. Hilton added: “The real legacy of moving London’s transport system forward, I 
think, happened with the previous mayor, with Ken Livingstone with the big 
moves – the introduction of the congestion charge and the Oyster card – and in 
those two areas of transport and promoting London it’s really difficult to 
think of something specific that you could [point] at as being Boris Johnson’s 
legacy.”

The new Routemaster, first raised as a possible project before the 2008 
electoral victory that put Johnson in City Hall, had been intended to combine 
cutting edge green technology with a revival of hallmark features of the 
original London Routemaster.

Its reintroduction, seven years after the original Routemaster had been 
withdrawn to be replaced by easy access low-floor buses, was also celebrated by 
many as a move to rid the capital of Livingstone’s unpopular “bendy” variety.

Johnson originally said he hoped there would be 2,000 Routemasters on London’s 
streets by 2020. Wrightbus, the Northern Ireland firm that makes them, warned 
earlier this year that its Routemaster production line would have to be shut 
down within months if no new orders were received. The original contract was to 
supply up to 1,000 buses.

He paid £354,000 per bus for an initial bulk consignment in 2012 of 600, and 
approximately £325,000 for an additional 200 in 2014. The new fleet was 
attacked at the time as an expensive vanity project and soon became the subject 
of a series of unfortunate stories, including the revelation that the batteries 
on a large number of them had failed. The hybrid diesel-electric technology is 
also now widely seen as having been superseded by electric battery technology. 
And in July last year, 300 London bus conductors were told they were to lose 
their jobs to make transport savings of £10m a year. The staff cuts mean that 
hopping on and off the buses is no longer an option.

Asked to comment on the move, a spokesman for Khan said TfL 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl> would instead be investing in a new 
generation of buses that would help to improve air quality.

Sadiq Khan takes Transport for London into new business territory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/dec/08/sadiq-khan-takes-transport-for-london-into-new-business-territory> 