
The government faces a huge cross-party revolt next week over controversial 
reforms of higher education that would make it easier for new colleges to award 
degrees, become universities and make profits from teaching students.

The Guardian view on the higher education white paper: the customer is always 
ripe – for fleecing | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-guardian-view-on-the-higher-education-white-paper-the-customer-is-always-ripe-for-fleecing>
Labour, the Liberal Democrats and crossbench peers in the House of Lords have 
joined forces in an attempt to scupper what they believe is an attempt at 
full-scale “marketisation” of the sector – a move they say would lower 
standards and damage the UK’s reputation for running many of the best 
universities in the world.

The peers – and university leaders – also say the reforms would destroy the 
cherished autonomy of UK universities and allow political interference by 
ministers into how they are run, teach courses and conduct research.

On Sunday, in a further blow to the higher education and research bill, Lord 
(Chris) Patten, the former Tory party chairman and now chancellor of Oxford 
University, described the reforms as “hamfisted”, coming at a time when 
universities were already facing massive challenges as a result of the Brexit 
vote and changes to immigration policy.

Referring to attempts to turn the sector into a marketplace, being championed 
by universities ministerJo Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-johnson>, Patten says ministers appear 
to have little regard for, or knowledge of, the university system.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Flords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b82974b924f15948bb9e0ad0a081fec2c423cd%2F43_264_5102_3061%2F5102.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lords%20revolt%20over%20plans%20for%20%E2%80%98free-market%E2%80%99%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Flords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lords%20revolt%20over%20plans%20for%20%E2%80%98free-market%E2%80%99%20universities&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Flords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F86b82974b924f15948bb9e0ad0a081fec2c423cd%2F43_264_5102_3061%2F5102.jpg>
 Former Tory party chairman Chris Patten says the reforms are hamfisted. 
Photograph: David Hartley/Rex/Shutterstock 
“To give the impression that one goal is to inject a shot of entrepreneurial 
vim, so that universities can replicate the energy and outlook of – who shall 
we say, [former BHS owner] Philip Green? – seems unlikely to convince those who 
work in and study at our universities that ministers understand and care much 
about what they are doing,” Patten writes in an article for theObserver.

The peers – who are likely to be joined by a number of Tories when the bill 
begins its committee stage in the Lords on Monday 9 January, have tabled 
amendments which they will force to a vote – demanding that universities remain 
“autonomous” bodies working for the public good, that they must remain free to 
criticise government wherever and whenever they see fit, and that they be 
barred from striving for profit.

The last time peers pushed for votes at committee stage in the Lords was the 
highly contentious and much amended Health and Social Care Act, which had a 
torrid passage through parliament in 2011-12.

Labour’s shadow higher education minister Lord Stevenson told the Observer: 
“This bill is an attempt from the government to run a market experiment through 
the bloodstream of our university system, and a classic case of understanding 
the cost of everything and the value of nothing.

“There is far more to higher education than financial transactions and bottom 
lines, including the ongoing contribution made to society and business through 
the application of new knowledge and expertise. Our amendment calls on 
ministers to recognise all of this and enshrine in law the principles of 
academic freedom and freedom of speech, alongside protecting the sector’s 
ability to act as society’s conscience.”

Ministers say the bill is designed to widen choice for students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/oct/18/higher-education-research-bill-needs-amended>
 and to deliver value for money in the age of tuition fees. They argue that it 
will “increase competition and choice in the higher education sector, raise 
standards and strengthen the United Kingdom’s capabilities in research and 
innovation”. New entrants will be encouraged “by making it easier for new 
high-quality providers to start up and achieve degree-awarding powers, and 
subsequently secure university status”.

So-called “new providers” will be able to acquire degree-awarding powers 
without having to build a track record by teaching another university’s degrees 
first. This will reduce the time taken to acquire the title of university.

The peers – and many university leaders – say this will risk lowering quality 
in the sector, and the reputation of the UK for excellence in higher education.

Government may give startup universities degree-awarding powers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/16/startup-universities-degree-awarding-powers-higher-education-white-paper>
Universities UK has cited the lower requirement for new entrants as a major 
worry. “In particular, the intention to significantly relax requirements before 
institutions are granted the power to award degrees, or are allowed to call 
themselves universities, may damage the reputation of the sector and increase 
risks to students,” it said in a submission on the bill.

Patten says the bill would also give a new body – the Office for Students – 
the power to strip Oxford and Cambridge or other universities of their ancient 
royal charters. “Worst of all is the power given to the Office for Students to 
revoke the acts of parliament or royal charters that have established our 
universities. How can it be right to allow institutions, some of very ancient 
standing, to be abolished with only weak parliamentary scrutiny? Did Thomas 
Cromwell write this part of the bill?”

Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute, said 
opposition to the bill also centred upon the creation of the Office for 
Students, and plans to link tuition fees to teaching quality and changes to 
research funding.

Hillman said the university sector felt it was under threat, but he maintained 
there was a need for some change. “The battle is nothing like as one-sided as 
it appears. Ministers have some inarguable points of their own. There has been 
a crying need for a new regulatory framework ever since tuition fees became the 
main means of funding university teaching. This has taken on extra urgency 
given the rapid increase in students at alternative providers. There has long 
been considerable disquiet over the workload of undergraduates at some of our 
most famous institutions, so shining a spotlight on the issue may enjoy public 
support.

“Ministers have proposed some bold reforms and parliamentarians are seeking to 
improve them. So long as Jo Johnson keeps his eyes on the big prize of a new 
legal framework and is willing to provide concessions when he loses the 
argument on side issues, the bill will become law.”

The Department for Education said: “We want more young people to have the 
opportunity to access a high-quality university education, and the measures 
proposed in the higher education and research bill are critical to making this 
possible.

“The bill does not take away the royal charters of any of our higher education 
institutions. What it does do is protect and enshrine the autonomy and academic 
freedom of these institutions in law. And it puts students at the heart of the 
system, with the Office for Students making universities rightly more 
accountable to their students so they get the best value for money.”
 