
“[Trading with] the Commonwealth is a no brainer,” says Lord Marland, chairman 
of the Commonwealth Enterprise and Investment Council (CWEIC). “[But] there’s 
no doubt the UK has withdrawn from a lot of the Commonwealth countries, because 
it hasn’t had the support of the government as it used to. We’re going to have 
to work quite hard at rebuilding the relationship with some of those countries 
and reap the benefits.”

Marland is speaking ahead of the CWEIC’s first trade ministers’ meeting 
<http://www.cweic.org/commonwealth-trade-ministers-meeting-to-be-held-in-london-in-march-2017/>
, scheduled for March 2017. The timing – just as Article 50 is scheduled to be 
invoked by Theresa May’s government – is entirely coincidental, he insists.

“We’re not going to be talking about Brexit,” he says. The workshops between 
trade ministers and chief executives of companies such as Tesco and the 
chairman of Rolls Royce will, instead, revolve around financial services, ease 
of doing business, technology and innovation, business and sustainability, 
creating an export economy and attracting investment. “It was planned before 
the EU referendum.”

Tony Abbott calls for 'absolutely free' trade between Australia and UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/tony-abbott-calls-for-absolutely-free-trade-between-australia-and-uk>
It has nevertheless been suggested by British officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/18/britain-and-new-zealand-agree-to-start-regular-trade-talks-in-wake-of-brexit>
 that the UK should strengthen ties with the Commonwealth after it leaves the 
European Union. The former prime minister of Australia, Tony Abbott in 
particular,recently called for Australia and the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/10/tony-abbott-calls-for-absolutely-free-trade-between-australia-and-uk>
 to scrap tariffs and quotas on goods traded between the two countries. “Brexit 
means that Britain is back,” he says in anew report by the Free Enterprise Group
 
<http://www.freeenterprise.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/01/FEG_Commonwealth-Trade_web-1.pdf>
 [pdf], co-authored by Braintree MP, James Cleverly.

Historically, the UK has had “a significant footprint” on these countries, 
says Marland, meaning the legal systems in countries such as Australia, New 
Zealand and Canada, are similar to that in the UK, there aren’t any language 
issues, and the flight connections are straightforward.

However, while he is supportive of more collaboration between the 52 
Commonwealth members, he does not believe a free trade agreement is necessary. 
In fact, he believes the focus on free trade agreements has become a “media 
obsession” that hides the real issue: not enough small businesses are exporting.


“Most businesses don’t think about exporting to a country on the basis that 
the UK has a free trade agreement,” he adds. “People are obsessed with free 
trade agreements. Ourbiggest trading partner is the US 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/balanceofpayments/articles/theuktradeandinvestmentrelationshipwiththeunitedstatesofamerica/2016>
 and we’ve never had a trade agreement with them.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flord-marland-people-are-obsessed-with-free-trade-agreements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4009efd61c03a8086b5c163bd7f6485b42388a%2F448_0_1473_1840%2F1473.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Lord%20Marland%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20are%20obsessed%20with%20free%20trade%20agreements%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flord-marland-people-are-obsessed-with-free-trade-agreements%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Lord%20Marland%3A%20%E2%80%98People%20are%20obsessed%20with%20free%20trade%20agreements%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Flord-marland-people-are-obsessed-with-free-trade-agreements%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe4009efd61c03a8086b5c163bd7f6485b42388a%2F448_0_1473_1840%2F1473.jpg>
 Lord Marland. 
Marland was a former trade envoy to David Cameron, and has had a long career 
in business, founding the Jardine Lloyd Thompson Group in 1997, and leading a 
consortium of investors who bought out the upmarket wellington brand Hunter 
Boots in 2006, moving production toChina, Serbia and Brazil 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/yourbusiness/8504598/Lord-Marland-hired-to-boost-trade-and-investment.html>
. He says the attitude of business owners has changed – today only 21% of UK 
SMEs export, according to themost recent figures 
<http://www.fsb.org.uk/docs/default-source/Publications/reports/fsb-destination-export-report-2016.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
 [pdf] from the Federation of Small Businesses.

“It is a totally different state of mind to when I first started in business. 
We thought of nothing about getting on an aeroplane and going to do a deal in 
the Middle East or America,” Marland says. “What happened was, we had the 
financial crisis. People either went bust or they started paying off any debt 
they had, generating cash, concentrating on downsizing their business to fit 
the economic environment they now faced.”

Predominantly a membership organisation to facilitate engagement between 
Commonwealth governments and private companies, the CWEIC has recently launched
CommonwealthFirst <http://www.commonwealthfirst.org/> to support British SMEs. 
Over the next three years, 100 small businesses will be chosen to become 
Commonwealth export champions and given training, mentoring and development 
support to win new business internationally.

The first group of winners 
<http://www.commonwealthfirst.org/export-champions/profiles/> included tonic 
water company Fever-Tree, fashion brand 8DIX, and Kano, which makes computer 
and coding kits. Twelve of the entrepreneurs travelled to a trade mission in 
India in November 2016, and there are future trips planned to Malaysia and 
Singapore.

German centre-left would make EU unity a priority in Brexit talks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/german-centre-left-would-make-eu-unity-a-priority-in-brexit-talks>
Pressed on what the ideal post-Brexit deal would look like for the UK – 
Marland haspreviously said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/05/whitehall-lacks-skills-for-hard-nosed-brexit-negotiation-says-former-trade-envoy-politics-live?page=with:block-586e0469e4b081b2b4eda443#block-586e0469e4b081b2b4eda443>
 that he fears “Whitehall as a whole has really not got the skill set to 
deliver a really hard-nosed negotiation” – he says: “I want the UK to get its 
mindset around the fact we’re in an incredibly strong position.

“We’re a massive market for [the Germans], as we are for the French. We have 
better tax regimes … we’ve got a very good skills base, we’ve got a great 
education system ... [and] from an intelligence base, we’re one of two global 
leaders.

“The UK government has to get itself organised, understand how to negotiate, 
and recognise that this is not some sort of rollover. We are a great country, 
it’s not by accident that we’re called Great Britain.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 