
My girlfriend ordered a double mattress from Argos, and in preparation for the 
delivery we arranged for our current one to be taken away. However, the new 
mattress did not show up. We were never contacted about this; instead we had to 
chase the firm by phone and social media. We were then told it would come the 
next day which, when you’ve no mattress, is not ideal. It said it could offer 
us a blow-up mattress that we would have to collect from the store.

It turns out that the problems arose because the Argos drivers had exceeded 
their quota of legal driving hours. On its Facebook and Twitter accounts there 
are many people in similar situations. Argos doesn’t respond. Meanwhile, the 
customer services department sounds like robots reading scripts rather than 
having any empathy.

Argos needs to stop taking money for services it can’t guarantee to provide 
and stop ignoring its customers.MB, Raynes Park, London

The new mattress was a gift, so the payment was made by your girlfriend’s 
mother. She had to call Argos to give you authorisation to deal with the 
matter. In the end you were so frustrated that you cancelled the order and 
tried to get your old mattress back, which would mean paying the council for a 
second time.

Argos has now made contact and agreed to reimburse any costs you incurred. The 
company has apologised and says it will also send you a goodwill gesture to 
make up for the poor service.

One word of advice, though: perhaps you shouldn’t dispose of your old mattress 
before you have taken delivery of the new one.

We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at
consumer.champions@theguardian.com <mailto:consumer.champions@theguardian.com> 
or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 
9GU. Please include a daytime phone number
 