
News that gymnast Louis Smith has been suspended by his governing body 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/louis-smith-banned-british-gymnastics-video-mocking-islam>
 for mocking Islam is so 2016. I don’t want to bang on about the auto‑satirical 
state we’re in, but this is basically the blasphemy law being revived by 
British Gymnastics. It’s certainly one in the eye for parliament, which 
abolished the offence of blasphemy in 2008 – but perhaps those outplayed 
politicians can now retaliate by arbitrarily changing the scoring system for 
the uneven bars.

By way of a recap, Smith and his fellow gymnast Luke Carson were filmed at a 
wedding shouting Allahu Akbar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/oct/10/olympic-gymnast-louis-smith-apology-luke-carson>
 and mimicking a prayer pose, and the video found its way to the Sun last 
month. Smith has since apologised profusely, and accrued the standard death 
threats and summons to appear on Loose Women. But following a high‑level 
inquiry into the incident at the Kettering nuptials, British Gymnastics has 
suspended him for two months. Announcing the decision on Tuesday, it declared 
solemnly: “As the custodians of the integrity and values of the sport, we have 
had no choice but to act responsibly.”

Louis Smith lands British Gymnastics ban after video appearing to mock Islam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/01/louis-smith-banned-british-gymnastics-video-mocking-islam>
Wait – the custodians of the integrity and values of gymnastics? What are 
those when they’re at home? Perhaps, like me, you imagined gymnastics to be 
much as other sports, even if you do hold almost similar reservations about 
sports with human judges as you do about sports in which you can drink a pint 
while playing.

Leaving those debates for another column (a column which I myself have written 
at least twice), sports are commonly agreed to be competitive physical 
activities. Capable of being inspiring, certainly, and frequently places where 
great spirit and whatnot is on display. But above all: sports. Not established 
value systems, and certainly not a forum for creating pseudo‑case law on free 
speech. To pretend otherwise is a dangerous category mistake.

But that is exactly what British Gymnastics seems to be doing. I haven’t been 
this troubled by insidious sport‑related behaviour since the pant-wetting 
petition to make the BBCremove Tyson Fury’s name from last year’s Sports 
Personality of the Year shortlist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2015/dec/08/tyson-fury-spoty-bbc-petition>
. That, at least, had the merit of being a petition, as opposed to the top‑down 
work of an authority that should know better.

Then again, perhaps it is all of a piece. The same type of people who don’t 
trust the public to vote for the right sublebrities in meaningless competitions 
also don’t trust the public to be able to come to its own conclusions about an 
obviously stupid twat likeLouis Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/louissmith>. As I say, he is evidently a 
stupid twat (you could tell on Strictly, innit – and I’m not even getting into 
the man-bun). Yet what is more satisfactory in a case where there is no 
reasonable evidence of incitement to violence: that grown-ups come to that 
judgment themselves? Or that British Gymnastics, of all post-parodic entities, 
enacts a de facto blasphemy law?

It goes without saying that there is an even higher authority for their 
actions – namely, UK Sport, the high‑performance agency whose rulebook states 
that athletes may be ineligible for funding if they are “derogatory about a 
person’s disability, gender, pregnancy or maternity, race, sexuality, marital 
status, beliefs or age (this is not an exhaustive list)”.

Isn’t it? Because once it put “beliefs” in, it pretty much covered any 
possible base. What if an athlete was of the belief that The Life of Brian was 
an excellent movie, or that Father Ted was hilarious? Naturally, something 
tells me mocking mass would be rather less frowned upon than mocking the call 
to prayer. But why on earth can’t athletes be derogatory about people’s beliefs?

Gianni Infantino and Fifa seem to have a new plan: to kill the World Cup | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2016/oct/19/gianni-infantino-fifa-world-cup-48-teams>
This is one of those debates where it sharpens the focus to consider the 
individuals lining up on each side. First out of the traps to condemn Smith was 
one Mohammed Shafiq of the Ramadan Foundation, who was prominently featured in 
the Sun’s coverage, denouncing Smith for his behaviour. “It’s outrageous 
somebody can mock any faith,” Shafiq declared – except, of course, that it 
isn’t. Indeed, the opposite is true. It would be outrageous if any faith 
couldn’t be mocked – and if any faith was so great, being mocked wouldn’t 
matter to them. Lest his point be misunderstood, however, Mr Shafiq took care 
to repeat it, declaring: “Our faith is not to be mocked.”

So who is Mohammed Shafiq? His most eye-catching claim to fame arguably came 
in 2014, after Maajid Nawaz – a Muslim who runs anti‑extremist thinktank the 
Quilliam Foundation – tweeted a cartoon featuring Jesus and Mohammed greeting 
each other in friendly fashion. Shafiq’s formal response was stark: he declared 
the Quilliam Foundation a defamer of the prophet (a charge which can provoke 
Islamists to kill) and added suchbillets doux as: “We will notify all Muslim 
organisations in the UK of his despicable behaviour and also notify all Islamic 
countries.” Well, you get the idea with that one. After a year of being needled 
about this by some, including theObserver’s estimable Nick Cohen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/25/liberal-democrats-t-shirt-jesus-muhammad-religion>
, Shafiq finally apologised, and claimed to have “learnt a huge lesson”. Not 
that huge a one, it seems, if he still regards lame-arse mockery of any faith 
as on the banned list.

As for British Gymnastics, it doesn’t appear to be anywhere near learning any 
useful lessons – but then, it takes its lead from the benighted fools at 
UK Sport, who bang on about the privilege of representing a country at the same 
time as cravenly denying that country’s essential freedoms. In many ways, it’s 
an old hypocrisy. Governing bodies have long come down like a ton of bricks on 
any athlete who gets political – yet I can scarcely think of anything more 
absurdly political than BritishGymnastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gymnastics> operating a blasphemy law.
 