
It seemed like a win-win for fans of the online “brain training” memory game 
Lumosity – as fun as Candy Crush (almost) but actually good for you: a mind gym 
to sharpen mental performance and, for older consumers, ward off senility.

Forget that. The shine has come off Lumosity with an announcement by federal 
investigators that the makers must pay $2m to settle a charge that it made 
fraudulent claims and “preyed on consumers’ fears”.

The company has also been handed a $50m penalty for harming consumers – but 
the fine is suspended because the company cannot afford to pay it, according to 
the Federal Trade Commission (FTC).

The FTC also issued a more general warning on Wednesday that it is on the 
lookout for companies cashing in on the popularity of mobile phone applications 
by developing dietary or medical apps with dubious claims of health benefits.

“We are seeing a trend in health-related mobile apps, such as those targeting 
ageing consumers with dietary supplements, cognitive training or services 
claiming to diagnose illnesses,” Michelle Rusk, an attorney with the FTC’s 
bureau of consumer protection, said Wednesday.

“Some are more fraudulent than others but we are watching very carefully and 
making a bigger effort to crack down on those who make claims but do not have 
the science to back them up,” she added.

Lumosity is the biggest name so far in a series of federal actions in the past 
year against companies that make apps claiming tobring users significant health 
benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/23/brain-games-memory-loss-open-letter>
.

On Tuesday, the FTC announced: “The creators and marketers of the Lumosity 
‘brain training’ program have agreed to settle FTC charges alleging that they 
deceived consumers with unfounded claims that Lumosity games can help users 
perform better at work and in school and reduce or delay cognitive impairment 
associated with age.”

The San Francisco-based company behind the game, Lumos Labs, agreed to the 
settlement rather than fight its case in a civil fraud trial in federal court in
California <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/california>.

“Lumosity preyed on consumers’ fears about age-related cognitive decline, 
suggesting their games could stave off memory loss, dementia and even 
Alzheimer’s disease. But Lumosity simply did not have the science to back up 
its ads,” Jessica Rich, director of the FTC’s bureau of consumer protection, 
said in a statement on Tuesday.

In a statement, Lumos Labs said: “Neither the action nor the settlement 
pertains to the rigor of our research or the quality of the products – it is a 
reflection of marketing language that has been discontinued. Our focus as a 
company has not and will not change: We remain committed to moving the science 
of cognitive training forward and contributing meaningfully to the field’s 
community and body of research.”

Investigators pointed out that the company advertised extensively on 
television and radio while also marketing the brand via emails, blogposts, 
social media and their website.

The company also drove traffic to its website by buying rights to strategic 
keywords linking their material to Google searches that included words related 
to memory, cognition, dementia and Alzheimer’s, according to the commission.

Lumosity’s website boasts that its games have reached 70 million users 
worldwide, who can access the online games via computer or mobile phone 
application.

Online brain-training: does it really work?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/apr/21/brain-training-online-neuroscience-elizabeth-day>
But the real number of users is believed to be closer to 1 million, with most 
of them in the US, the Guardian understands from its own inquiries.

Lumosity brags that it was listed as one of America’s “most promising” 
companies by Forbes and that one of its cofounders, Kunal Sarkar, was on 
Goldman Sachs’s 2014 list of “100 most intriguing entrepreneurs”.

“Enjoy brain training created by scientists and game designers ... enjoy daily 
work-outs that challenge five core cognitive abilities,” the website says of 
games with names such as Memory Matrix and Train of Thought.

But the government found that Lumos Labs could produce no evidence to suggest 
that Lumosity has any health powers or is anything other than an ordinary game.

Investigators found that the company claimed that “training” by playing 
Lumosity games could also reduce cognitive impairment associated with serious 
conditions including stroke, post-traumatic stress disorder, attention deficit 
hyperactivity disorder and even the side effects of chemotherapy.


As part of the court settlement, the company and individual defendants in the 
action, Lumos Labs co-founders Kunal Sarkar and Michael Scanlon, are ordered to 
have “competent and reliable scientific evidence” before making any future 
claims of Lumosity having any benefits for “real-world performance”.

Brain games exploit anxieties about memory loss for profit – scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2014/oct/23/brain-games-memory-loss-open-letter>
The FTC has reported that Lumosity has ceased making its prior claims in 
advertising. Its website has also been amended. It now includes this sentence: 
“Lumosity is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure or prevent any disease.”

The $2m settlement agreed by Lumos Labs will be used to reimburse consumers, 
particularly those with paid subscriptions to Lumosity.

In 2015, the FTC took action to stop companies from marketing apps that 
wrongly claimed to offer health benefits including improving eyesight, 
improving cognitive abilities in children, diagnosing cancer, and aiding 
memory, mood, and other brain functions with a dietary supplement.
 