
In 2013 I wrote an article 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/25/why-luqman-onikosi-remain-britain>
 in support of Luqman Onikosi, a young man from Nigeria I met while he was 
studying at Sussex University, where I was then teaching. Onikosi was facing 
deportation. He had been diagnosed with a life-threatening liver condition due 
to having contractedhepatitis B 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hepatitis-b>, an illness that had already 
seen the loss of two of his brothers back home. His condition, though 
debilitating, is manageable while he receives treatment. However, if deported 
to Nigeria, where such treatment is not available, it is almost certain he will 
meet the same fate as his brothers.

In 2012, with the help of his supporters across the UK, and from a lawyer 
working pro bono, Onikosi was able to submit a fresh leave-to-remain 
application on human rights grounds, and stay in the country for the time being.

Why is Britain sending Luqman Onikosi back to die in Nigeria? | Alana Lentin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jan/25/why-luqman-onikosi-remain-britain>
A few days ago, I received news that he is again being threatened with 
deportation. After he returned to Sussex to study for a master’s, the Home 
Office informed the university that his leave-to-remain application had been 
rejected. The university terminated his degree despite the fact that he was 
writing his dissertation at the time. Crucially, Onikosi did not find out about 
the status of his application. Only in late January 2016 did he eventually 
receive a letter – dated May 2015 – saying it had been rejected.

In my 2013 article I stressed the contributions Onikosi has made to British 
society through his unwavering activism and volunteer work. I also highlighted 
the UK government’s hypocritical treatment of international students who serve 
as cash cows only to be forced to leave the country at a moment’s notice as 
soon as they are no longer paying fees. However, most readers agreed that, 
while Onikosi’s situation was unfortunate, rules were rules.

I agree. It has become pointless, and in fact undermining, to argue against 
the injustices of contemporary border control using the language of individual 
human rights. While my heart aches for Onikosi, and for his family and friends, 
he himself has stressed time and again how his case is but one example of the 
failure of the immigration system.

Seen in historical perspective, the UK, like all western countries, was built 
on the colonisation and expropriation of the resources of the majority of the 
world. More recently, its wealth and infrastructure has been strengthened in 
huge measure by immigrant labour. International studentscontribute £2.8bn 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/international-students-support-70000-jobs-and-boost-london-economy-by-28-billion-10260407.html>
 a year to the economy of London alone.

A guide to the government's new rules for international students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/29/a-guide-to-the-governments-new-rules-for-international-students>
So to argue that people such as Onikosi or Ama Sumani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/mar/20/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices>
, a Ghanaian woman who died after being deported from the UK while undergoing 
treatment for terminal cancer, should be allowed to stay in the UK is pointless 
without placing their cases in the context of harsh border control policies. 
The border is now everywhere; no longer just at ports and airports. Checks of 
“compliance” with visa regulations are an everyday occurrence. Over the past 
few years, universities too have been forced by the governmentto effectively 
become border guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/mar/02/universities-border-police-academics>
 by monitoring international students’ attendance or stand accused of 
facilitating “illegal immigration”. Thankfully, Onikosi has been supported by a 
number of academics at Sussex, but this is at their own risk of violating the 
terms imposed on universities by the state. Border controls can succeed when 
everyone is forced to become complicit in enforcing them, even institutions of 
higher learning that trade on being bastions of freedom and the pursuit of 
knowledge.

If Onikosi is deported to Nigeria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nigeria>, 
this brilliant young man will most certainly die. And for those left in the UK, 
it will be another sign of the encroachment of the border into all areas of 
society.
 