
It’s Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> Eve, and 
you need to spruce up the house for tomorrow, but the shops are heaving and you 
don’t want to venture out. What to do? It’s time to get creative with whatever 
you can find in your house and garden.

Get set for Christmas dinner…

If your Christmas table is looking bare, raid your garden for greenery and 
make a centrepiece in minutes. Flower farmer and florist Georgie Newbery of
Common Farm Flowers <http://www.commonfarmflowers.com/> recommends using a 
bucket, jug or deep bowl (a cut-glass trifle bowl, say) rather than a vase. Use 
Blu-Tack to secure a candle or three (either stout church candles or dipped 
candles) in the base, and make a grid out of sticky tape across the top of the 
container to keep the candles and foliage upright. Fill the bowl with water, 
then pick a huge bunch of whatever’s looking good (Newbery suggestshazel catkins
 <http://treesforlife.org.uk/forest/species-profiles/hazel/>, flowering 
viburnums, ivy berries, willow stems, pittosporum andgriselinia 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/plants/details?plantid=889>); slot them into the grid 
of tape around the candles.

Make holly leaf place cards. Cut holly-shaped leaves in red and green card, 
fold in half lengthways, and write place names (ideally in a metallic pen) on 
the side that’s standing up.

Alternatively, create rosemary sprig placeholders. Cut card into squares; 
collect small sprigs of rosemary from the garden, leaving a twiggy end; attach 
this onto the top corner of each card using fancy tape; and write on guests’ 
names.

Scatter the table with the littlest pine cones you can find. Even better, dip 
them in gold paint.

Deck the halls... 

Fetch a branch from the garden; apple tree prunings and stems of Japanese 
quince work well, but anything will do. Place in a heavy, wide-based vase or 
pot and weigh down with as much ballast as you can to stop it toppling over. 
Cover in silver or white paint, or leave it natural, particularly if it is 
crusted with lichen. Hang with your most beautiful baubles. Alternatively, 
decorate a large houseplant: think swiss cheese plant (Monstera deliciosa 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/11192/Monstera-deliciosa-(F)/Details>), pothos 
vine or weeping fig (Ficus benjamina 
<https://www.rhs.org.uk/Plants/7197/Ficus-benjamina/Details>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhomes-last-minute-christmas-presents-decorations-make-your-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42276603d025c484da386030d6f0cdb18b3c8e63%2F234_392_1315_1732%2F1315.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Make%20your%20own%20last-minute%20Christmas%20presents%20and%20decorations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhomes-last-minute-christmas-presents-decorations-make-your-own%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Make%20your%20own%20last-minute%20Christmas%20presents%20and%20decorations&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2Fhomes-last-minute-christmas-presents-decorations-make-your-own%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F42276603d025c484da386030d6f0cdb18b3c8e63%2F234_392_1315_1732%2F1315.jpg>
 Illustration: Phil Hackett for the Guardian 
If you have a tree that’s looking rather bare, raid the bathroom cabinet for 
cotton wool balls. Set any relatives who are at a loose end to work – thread a 
needle with cotton, sew through the balls, and dot them round the tree. Hey 
presto, soft, fluffy snowballs. Alternatively, enlist children to help bake
gingerbread men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/02/ginger-biscuits-recipe-dan-lepard>
. Make a hole in the top before you bake them, then when they’re cool, ice in 
festive colours and thread leftover ribbon through to hang from the branches. 
Complete the homemade look with orange (or satsuma, or clementine) slice 
decorations. Cut an unpeeled fruit into round slices, bake on a low heat for a 
couple of hours to dry out, then thread some ribbon or twine through the top of 
each slice.

If you have a spare large, plain bauble, either plastic or glass, you can make 
a personalised decoration that can double as an impromptu gift. Dig out a paint 
set, and paint a child or adult’s hand all over with white acrylic paint – do 
this by the sink so they can wash their hands as soon as you are finished. Get 
them to grasp the bauble lightly but firmly from below so they make a hand 
print, with the palm covering the base and the fingers pointing towards the 
top. Once this is completely dry, use permanent markers to turn each finger 
into a jolly snowman: pebble smile, carrot nose, hat, scarf and so on. There 
are lots ofgood examples online 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=handprint+baubles&espv=2&biw=1524&bih=943&tbm=isch&tbo=u&source=univ&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwjDqo-w8t_QAhXJIcAKHSJBAXgQ7AkIRg>
, if you want a visual guide. This can also serve as a last-minute present for 
grandparents.

Dawn Isaac, author of 101 Things For Kids To Do Outside 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/101-things-for-kids-to-do-outside.html>, 
suggests raiding the garden for twigs to make star decorations; lash them 
together with twine, string or ribbons. Any pliable twig will do, but red or 
yellow dogwood stems or bright green willows look particularly eye-catching.

You can also make simple wreaths by bending some stems into a circle and 
binding them with twine, then adorning with fluffy clematis seedheads, dried 
chillies, pine cones and anything else you can lay your hands on.

If you have wire hanging baskets left over from summer, lash a couple together 
into a globe shape using wire or even cable ties. Wrap them in outdoor fairy 
lights and hang by the front door.

Pimp your presents 

If you need to add some glamour to a parcel, turn to nature. Evergreen foliage 
such as ivy, fern leaves, sprigs of conifer or eucalyptus or even your 
Christmas tree make simple, stylish adornments: bind them to presents with 
twine or ribbon. Try graphic designerTwan van Keulen 
<http://design-milk.com/falling-leaves-typography-by-twan-van-keulen/>’s trick 
of cutting letters from large leathery leaves using a craft knife. Use the 
letters to make up names to stick on to parcels.

Enlist children to help bake gingerbread men, then ice in festive colours and 
hang from the branches of your tree

Last-minute gifts for last-minute guests 

If you’ve forgotten a gift for a loved one and don’t fancy shops full of 
panicked present-buyers,Alys Fowler 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/alys-fowler> suggests putting together 
bouquets garnis of fresh herbs. Cut small sprigs of rosemary, a bay leaf or 
two, sage, parsley and thyme from the garden (or from pots in the kitchen) and 
tie tightly with kitchen string at the base. For a neater look, wrap a bay leaf 
around the base of the bunch, then wrap the string tightly around several times.

Alys also recommends digging up some bulbs that are just starting to poke 
their heads above the soil (snowdrops or early crocuses are ideal) and potting 
them into a pretty container small enough to perch on a windowsill: forced this 
way they should burst into flower for a little cheer before it all really 
happens outside. Happy Christmas!
 