
Converting primary schools into academies has failed to improve their results, 
according to a study by the London School of Economics – calling into question 
government policy that all stateschools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> in England should be pushed 
towards academy status 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/every-english-school-to-become-an-academy-ministers-to-announce>
.

The authors of the report looked at the results of primary schools that 
changed from being maintained by local authorities to being academies run by 
autonomous trusts, and found no improvement compared with similar schools that 
converted later.

The researchers also found that the more generous funding given to academies – 
to replace the services provided by local authorities – was largely diverted 
into administration costs rather than being spent in the classroom or on 
frontline services.

“The results cast doubt on whether further expansion of the academies 
programme will be beneficial to English education,” said Andrew Eyles of the
LSE’s centre for economic performance <http://cep.lse.ac.uk/> and one of the 
report’s authors.

“Given that the majority of secondary schools now have academy status, a push 
towards full ‘academisation’ will require the conversion of large numbers of 
primary schools.

Local authority schools outperform academies, research suggests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/25/local-authority-schools-outperform-academies-research-suggests>
“The evidence suggests primary schools have been unable to harness their 
freedoms as effectively as the disadvantaged secondary schools that thrived 
under the early sponsored academies programme,” Eyles said.

A spokesperson for the Department for Education responded: “The academy 
programme has given good schools the freedom to do what they know works best 
and helped to turn round underperforming schools that have previously 
languished under local authority control.

“Results in primary sponsored academies have been improving and we expect that 
trend to continue.”

The study used the national pupil database to examine the results of the 270 
primary schools that converted to academy status between 2010 and 2012, and 
compared test scores from 2007 to 2014 for key stage two with those of schools 
that converted much later in 2014 to 2016.

The researchers found that pupils who were enrolled in a school before it 
became an academy did no better in their key stage two tests – typically taken 
when they are 11 – than those sitting the same exams at comparable schools, 
irrespective of the Ofsted grade of the school before it converted.

Secret Teacher: becoming an academy destroyed my school
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/24/secret-teacher-becoming-academy-destroyed-school>
The researchers suggested a number of reasons why the conversion would have no 
effect. Among the reasons was that the schools that converted were already 
doing well and faced few of the obstacles seen in struggling secondary schools.

The authors also noted that the policies used to improve results by some state 
secondary academies, such as tougher discipline, were less effective options 
for primary schools.

Since 2010 primary schools have been eligible to become academies, with some 
voluntarily converting and others beingforced to do so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2011/dec/19/schools-forced-to-become-academies>
 because of poor Ofsted inspection reports.

With around 14,000 primary schools in England still maintained by local 
authorities, compared with 3,400 which have converted, the evidence may deter 
other schools from taking the plunge.
 