
Malcolm Turnbull is holding out hope the Trans-Pacific Partnership is not 
dead, saying Donald Trump’s choice for secretary of state,Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/paul-keating-castigates-rex-tillerson-over-comments-on-china>
, wants the deal to go ahead.

Australia’s prime minister says the Republican leadership in the US Congress 
is still in favour of the deal, too, and he has spoken directly to Trump about 
it.

But the shadow minister for trade, Jason Clare, has urged Turnbull not to 
waste parliament’s time by introducing legislation to implement the “dead 
agreement”, given the president-elect’s opposition to it.


The opposition leader, Bill Shorten 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/bill-shorten>, said the TPP was 
“dead in the water”.

What is the TPP and is it over? The Guardian briefing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/22/trans-pacific-partnership-guardian-briefing-tpp>
Speaking on ABC radio in Brisbane on Tuesday, Turnbull said for the second 
time this week that the 12-country TPP may still come into force. With just 
days to go before Trump’s inauguration, he said the TPP would benefit 
Australian agricultural producers and workers, and help the economy generally.

“What we’re talking about here is Australian jobs,” Turnbull said. “Labor in 
six years did no trade deals at all, and now Shorten … wants to go back to 
protectionism.”

He was reacting to comments from Shorten on Monday, when the Labor leader said 
the TPP was a “waste of time”.

“Why on earth Mr Turnbull wants to tee off his year on a trade treaty with 
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> who said that 
he’s not going to sign it is beyond me,” Shorten said. “This is just a classic 
distraction by a man who has no plan for Australian jobs.”

Days after Trump won the US election in November, he recorded a video message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/21/donald-trump-100-days-plans-video-trans-pacific-partnership-withdraw>
 saying on his first day in office he would issue a notification of intent to 
withdraw from the TPP, calling it “a potential disaster for our country”.


Instead he said he would “negotiate fair bilateral trade deals that bring jobs 
and industry back”. Hours before Trump’s video message, Japan’s prime minister,
Shinzo Abe <https://www.theguardian.com/world/shinzo-abe>, had warned the TPP 
would be “meaningless” without US participation.

After that video, Labor started calling on the Turnbull government to 
indefinitely delay consideration of the TPP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/13/labor-calls-for-australia-to-indefinitely-delay-on-tpp-unless-us-ratifies-it>
, saying it was doomed.

Australia and Japan to strengthen military ties
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/14/australia-and-japan-to-strengthen-military-ties>
Abe visited Turnbull in Australia at the weekend as part of a four-country 
trip designed to boost his country’s security and trade engagements in the 
region.

He met Turnbull on Saturday and both leaders emerged from the meeting with a 
renewed commitment to the TPP.

“On the economic front we agreed that we should demonstrate anew the 
importance of free trade,” Abe said on Saturday. “We confirmed that we would 
coordinate toward the early entry into force of the TPP and the prompt 
conclusion of the RCEP [Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership].”

When the former trade minister Andrew Robb signed the TPP in February 2016, he 
dismissed opponents of the deal as “the usual suspects”.

He also rejected calls for an independent cost-benefit analysis of the 
agreement after the World Bank estimated it could lift Australia’s economic 
outputby just 0.7% by 2030 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/tpp-trade-deal-will-grow-australias-economy-by-less-than-1-world-bank-reveals>
.
 