
A refugee jailed following an acute mental breakdown in the Manus Island 
detention centre has been released from prison, only for him to be found 
wandering the streets of thePapua New Guinea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/papua-new-guinea> town of Lorengau, 
half-naked, “hungry and homeless” according to fellow refugees, politicians and 
police.


The behaviour of Hamed, a refugee from Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> whose surname Guardian Australia has 
chosen not to publish, has grown increasingly erratic and bizarre, leading to 
conflicts with the Manussian population.


“He sometimes was naked and only wearing boxer shorts in the Lorengau streets 
and most of the time he was hungry and homeless,” Manus refugee Behrouz 
Boochani has reported. “The small children made fun of him and disturbed him. 
The refugees, local people and police beat him because he was mentally ill and 
he used to disturb people. Everyone would run away from him because of his 
behaviour.”


Hamed’s deteriorating mental health came to authorities’ attention as long ago 
as June,when he was found wandering the detention centre, distressed, naked and 
screaming incoherently 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/manus-refugee-having-breakdown-was-beaten-and-jailed-say-reports>
. He was put into “managed accommodation” where he was allegedly assaulted by, 
and assaulted, guards, before being put in the Lorengau jail for the first time.

It’s hard for me to leave Manus Island without justice: Behrouz Boochani on 
the US refugee deal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/13/its-hard-for-me-to-leave-manus-island-without-justice-behrouz-boochani-on-the-us-refugee-deal>
Leaked “psychological support” files from within the Manus Island 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/manus-island> detention centre 
refer consistently to Hamed’s “chaotic presentation” and report he was 
“agitated, aggressive, verbally abusive, pushing boundaries constantly, and has 
required police presence on numerous occasions”.

He has since been jailed several times after suffering severe mental episodes 
and behaving unpredictably or aggressively. Detention centre staff have told 
Guardian Australia Hamed is “a very sick man. He needs serious help”.

Manus MP Ron Knight, who arranged for Hamed to be released from prison so he 
could access mental health care, said he was receiving none.

“To be blunt, the guy is dangerous to all around him and he needs psychiatric 
help. There is none for him here.”

Knight said he approached the Australian High Commission in Port Moresby about 
Hamed being committed to a psychiatric facility.

“The response to me was basically that our authorities should handle it.”

A spokesman for Australia’s department of immigration and border protection 
said Hamed was housed at the East Lorengau refugee transit centre, and his care 
was the responsibility of PNG’s immigration authorities.

“Refugees have access to services, including mental health services, available 
at the Lorengau Hospital as well as clinic services provided by International
Health <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/health> and Medical Services 
(IHMS),” the spokesman said.

The department declined to comment on Hamed’s specific health care. PNG’s 
immigration and citizenship service did not return calls from Guardian 
Australia.


Since the PNG supreme court ruled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/apr/26/papua-new-guinea-court-rules-detention-asylum-seekers-manus-unconstitutional>
, nearly 10 months ago, that the Manus Island regional processing centre was “
illegal and unconstitutional 
<https://uploads.guim.co.uk/2016/04/26/PNG_SC_judgement.pdf>”, cosmetic changes 
to the detention regime have brought those in detention into greater contact 
with the Manussian population, which has led to rising tensions.


The men remain in detention, behind high metal fences, unable to move freely 
and with their communications monitored, but they are allowed to catch daily 
buses into Lorengau township, returning at night. Scores of men found to be 
refugees have been moved into the Australian-built and -run East Lorengau 
refugee transit centre – established as a temporary accommodation for refugees 
being resettled elsewhere – but which has become de facto long-term housing 
while Australia negotiates a resettlement plan with other countries.

Boochani, an Iranian refugee and journalist detained on Manus, said Australia 
was trying to shift responsibility for refugees to PNG.

“The refugees in Manus prison have been under systematic torture for a long 
time and they need medical treatment and specialist psychological treatment, 
but instead of protecting them Australia has released them in Lorengau town 
without any psychological treatment. It’s obvious that this situation will make 
trouble both for the refugees and the local people,” Boochani told Guardian 
Australia.

He said police on Manus were acutely conscious of the tension the presence of 
refugees was creating in Lorengau.

“The system puts people in conflict and this is a big problem at this moment. 
Hamed, as a refugee who is need of psychological care, is an example of how 
Australia does not care about what local people want or about refugees. Instead 
of providing medical treatment for him, Australia has abandoned him in Manus 
society where it makes trouble for locals, police, the court and refugees.


“After causing so much psychological harm they have left a man with a lot of 
mental problems in a strange society without any protection and put him in 
danger. They have left him hungry and homeless.”

Knight said he was concerned for the safety of the people of Manus as well as 
that of refugees now allowed out in the community.

He said neither the PNG nor Australian governments was willing to take 
responsibility for the welfare of refugees, who were being forced into the 
refugee transit centre without adequate support.


“I am continually facing a brick wall of silence from PNG and Australia who 
seem to be chucking the issues back and forth.

The judge who unmade Manus Island on why offshore detention has no future
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/24/the-judge-who-unmade-manus-island-on-why-offshore-detention-has-no-future>
“I have no option now but to make some connection with asylum seeker 
representatives and come to some common understanding on rules of conduct for 
both them and my people ... lay down some ground rules for common 
understanding. Failing that, I assure you, bloodshed will occur.”


In June, 14 refugees and asylum seekers in the detention centre complained 
formally about the treatment of Hamed to Broadspectrum, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/jun/15/manus-refugee-having-breakdown-was-beaten-and-jailed-say-reports>
 the company subcontracted by the Australian government to run the detention 
centre.

“We, the signatories to this complaint form want to know why you are not 
providing mental health support to Hamed ... and instead you have subjected him 
to ill-treatment and corporal punishment because he is not behaving normally 
due to his mental ailment.

“He is sick and he must be in hospital, not in public ... he doesn’t have any 
control over his actions.”
 