
The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has issued a 
rallying cry to policymakers across advanced economies to tackle the causes of 
a growing sense of “isolation and detachment” among people who feel left behind 
by globalisation.

Warning that the UK was suffering its “first lost decade since the 1860s”, 
Mark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> said that one of 
the reasons for the Brexit vote was a sense among people that they had lost 
control of their futures.

The governor also used his first big speech since Donald Trump swept to power 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 in the US to warn that open markets are under threat and that politicians must 
do more to share out the gains of global trade and the rise of technology.

Mark Carney: European economies face hit if cut off from City of London
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/mark-carney-european-economies-face-hit-if-cut-off-from-city-of-london>
Speaking against a backdrop of growing support for anti-establishment 
politicians, Carney repeatedly referred to people’s isolation, sense of 
insecurity and their frustrations with global trade and technology. Those 
forces had favoured the “superstar and the lucky”, he said. “But what of the 
frustrated and frightened?”

“From the rising spectre of global terrorism to intensifying geopolitical 
tensions and financial crises, for too long, for too many people, the world 
seems to be getting riskier,” he said ina lecture to Liverpool John Moores 
University 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/946.aspx>. 

He did not refer specifically toTrump’s use of a protectionist platform. But 
asked after the speech about the UK vote to leave the EU, he said people were 
driven to support Brexit by different reasons, including questions of 
sovereignty, economic concerns and a sense of losing control.

Following criticism of experts from some Brexit campaigners, such as Michael 
Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/mark-carney-michael-gove-criticism-thought-crime-bank-england>
, Carney acknowledged in his speech that voters deserved a more honest 
appraisal from economists when it came to the real impact of changes such as 
globalisation and the automation of jobs.

“The fundamental challenge is that, alongside its great benefits, every 
technological revolution mercilessly destroys jobs and livelihoods – and 
therefore identities – well before new ones emerge,” he said.

He noted the rise in living standards around the world in recent decades and 
said technological progress had lifted more than 1 billion people out of 
poverty. But he recognised those advances had not been felt equally.

“Despite such immense progress many citizens in advanced economies are facing 
heightened uncertainty, lamenting a loss of control and losing trust in the 
system. To them, measures of aggregate progress bear little relation to their 
own experience. Rather than a new golden era, globalisation is associated with 
low wages, insecure employment, stateless corporations and striking 
inequalities,” he said.

That climate had combined with the aftermath of a financial crisis that 
exposed how banks had been working in a “heads-I-win-tails-you-lose bubble”, he 
added.

“As a consequence of all of these developments, public support for open 
markets is under threat. Turning our backs on open markets would be a tragedy, 
but it is a possibility. It can only be averted by confronting the underlying 
reasons for this risk upfront.”

Carney also used his speech to defend the Bank in the wake of Theresa May’s 
remarks i 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
n October that there had been “some bad side-effects” from low interest rates 
and quantitative easing, which involves central banks pumping electronic money 
into the financial system.

He reiterated the Bank’s stance that monetary policy could not be held 
accountable for rising inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/mark-carney-political-attacks-on-central-banks-deflection-exercise>
 and insisted the policymakers would set rates with a view to keeping inflation 
in check while also being careful not to damage the jobs market as the Brexit 
process progresses.

The main focus of his last speech of an eventful year, was inequality and he 
described current times as “the first lost decade since the 1860s”.

Carney set out three priorities to tackle the sense of “isolation and 
detachment” felt by substantial proportions of people, including the Bank’s 
recurring plea for the government to play a role in shoring up the economy 
rather than leaving monetary policy to do all the heavy lifting.

“First economists must clearly acknowledge the challenges we face, including 
the realities of uneven gains from trade and technology,” he said.

“Second, we must grow our economy by rebalancing the mix of monetary policy, 
fiscal policy and structural reforms.

“Third, we need to move towards more inclusive growth where everyone has a 
stake in globalisation.”

Most potential solutions to the sense of disenchantment lay “outside the 
Bank’s remit,” Carney said.

Defending the Bank he said: “Monetary policy has been keeping the patient 
alive, creating the possibility of a lasting cure through fiscal and structural 
operations. It has averted depression and helped advanced economies live to 
fight another day, so that measures to restore vitality can be taken.”

“In the end, monetary policy isn’t a spectre but a friendly ghost.”


 