
The governor of the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has warned that 
the fight against climate change will be jeopardised unless companies with big 
carbon footprints come clean about their exposure to global warming risks.

Writing in today’s Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-information-investors-deliver-solutions>
, Mark Carney says a new set of guidelines drawn up over the past year should 
be implemented so that investors can allocate capital to those companies with 
the best ideas to hit thetarget of keeping the rise in global temperature to 
less than 2C <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>.

Carney, writing jointly with the former New York City mayor, Michael Bloomberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/04/mark-carney-unveils-global-taskforce-to-educate-business-on-climate-change>
, said citizens, consumers, businesses, governments and international 
organisations were all taking action in response to extreme weather events.

Michael Bloomberg and Mark Carney: How to make a profit from defeating climate 
change
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/bloomberg-carney-profit-from-climate-change-right-information-investors-deliver-solutions>
“The challenge is that investors currently don’t have the information to 
respond to these developments,” they said. “This must change if financial 
markets are going to do what they do best: allocate capital to manage risks and 
seize new opportunities. Without the necessary information, market adjustments 
to climate change will be incomplete, late and potentially destabilising.”


Bloomberg has been heading a taskforce into climate-related financial 
disclosures set up in December 2015 by theFinancial Stability Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/apr/04/financial-stability-board-g20>, 
an international body established by the G20 in the aftermath of the 2008-09 
crash with the aim of reducing risks in global markets.

Carney and Bloomberg said in their article that financial disclosure was 
“essential to a market-based solution to climate change”.

They add: “A properly functioning market will price in the risks associated 
with climate change and reward firms that mitigate them. As its impact becomes 
more commonplace and public policy responses more active, climate change has 
become a material risk that isn’t properly disclosed.”

Bloomberg’s taskforce will on Wednesday publish its recommendations for a 
voluntary disclosure code. It will cover four areas considered by Carney and 
Bloomberg to be vital to how businesses operate – governance, strategy, risk 
management and metrics.

The taskforce included representatives of banks such as Barclays, the world’s 
biggest mining company BHP Billiton, the Indian steelmaker Tata and the 
chemical company Dow. All members of the taskforce had signed up to the 
disclosure recommendations, Carney and Bloomberg said.

“We encourage others to participate in the consultation, to become early 
adopters thereafter, and to encourage firms in which they invest to also make 
the disclosures.”
 