
“The first lost decade since the 1860s”: that’s the chilling economic 
assessment of the UK from the Bank of England governor, Mark Carney. People are 
angry, Carney recognisedin a speech yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
, in a world that “amplifies the rewards of the superstar and the lucky … but 
what of the frustrated and the frightened?”

Mark Carney: we must tackle isolation and detachment caused by globalisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
The benefits of economic progress had been unevenly felt. A stagnation in 
wages with no precedent for a century and a half is set to continue.Younger 
people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/21/young-people-on-the-receiving-end-of-economic-injustice>
 have been disproportionately hit. Indeed, Carney’s speech underlines the fact 
that Britain, like much of the western world, is in the midst of a grave crisis.

A sense of optimism – that the years ahead will be better than those gone by – 
is very important to human beings. When it vanishes, when “tomorrow” becomes a 
byword for deepening insecurity, of fears yet unrealised, there are profound 
consequences. That has been the story of 2016: it’s what connectsDonald Trump’s 
triumph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/how-trump-won-us-election> to 
Brexit to thesurging French National Front 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/nation-state-marine-le-pen-global-mood-france-brexit-trump-front-national>
 and the Austrian far right’s rise and (thankful)near miss last weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/far-right-party-concedes-defeat-in-austrian-presidential-election>
.

This is a crisis of radical proportions, and as such it has only radical 
solutions. This is a critical point. The champions of the Blair-Clinton 
centrism of the 1990s – rather than addressing the reasons for their own 
terrible political plight – lash out at the new left for being impractical to 
the point of delusion. But the old politics, which was technocratic and 
managerial in its approach, simply has no answers to the scale of the problems 
we now face.

There’s the sheer scale of inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/25/housing-crisis-jobs-babies-inequality-growing-up-world-changed-young-people-capitalism-failures-adulthood>
 in the west, which wasn’t addressed when social democratic parties dominated 
western Europe from the mid-1990s onwards; the record stagnation inliving 
standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/05/uk-living-standards-fell-for-all-but-the-richest-under-coalition-analysis>
; theideologically charged cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-austerity-delusion>
 which have failed on their own terms across Europe. There’s the disappearance 
of secure, skilled jobs, and the failure to replace them, leaving entire 
communities behind – from the northeast of England to the rust belt of the 
United States. A younger generation that can expect a worse lot in life than 
their parents – without precedent for perhaps a century – because of everything 
from a housing crisis to a lack of secure jobs to the burden of debt. The 
failures of the private market, from the financial crisis to Britain’s deeply 
unpopular privatised utilities. A political elite who are widely regarded as 
being stooges of corporate interests (a sentiment Trump cynically exploited, 
until he himselfstuffed his own nascent administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
 with former Goldman Sachs employees). A technological revolution that – unlike 
those that came before – could destroy far more jobs than it creates, breeding 
even further insecurity in the workforce.

We should be striving to work less, not toiling until we drop | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/retirement-retiring-age-77-strive-work-less-progress-challenge-bleak-prospect>
We could go on. After the second world war, there was a concerted attempt by 
western governments to banish insecurity. But insecurity is once again one of 
the defining features of our age. That’s why it’s so frustrating – unforgivable 
even – when the new left doesn’t get its act together, when we fail to 
communicate in a way that is accessible and relates to people’s everyday needs, 
whensectarian groups try to hijack grassroots movements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/trotskyist-factions-seeking-to-take-over-momentum-member-claims>
, when we put proving our own purity ahead of reaching out to the unpersuaded.

The old Blair-Clinton project has no answers that match the scale of the 
crisis – but if the left doesn’t get its act together, then the populist right 
will continue to sweep the western world. Does the future belong to the Trumps, 
the Farages, the Le Pens? I don’t think so. But it’s up to the left to prove it 
doesn’t.
 