
What a surprise, the great British consumer did not retreat into a bunker 
after the vote for Brexit in June. He and she kept on eating, drinking and 
buying houses as if nothing of great significance had happened. “For 
households, the signs of an economic slowdown are notable by their absence,” 
admitted governor Mark Carney,struggling to explain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
 why the Bank of England’s forecast in August that short-term growth in the UK 
economy would come to a near standstill was wrong by an embarrassing margin.

Sympathy for the forecasters should be limited. It is true that referendums, 
especially ones that lead to the defenestration of a prime minister, don’t 
happen often. But, come on, it was hardly fanciful to think consumers might 
disregard, for a while, the dangers of an actual exit from the European Union 
if the event was pencilled in to happen only in 2019.

Real incomes are still rising (for now) and experience suggests UK consumers 
tend to stay on the dancefloor until the music stops. Such behaviour is 
possibly imprudent in the face of a 20% fall in the exchange rate but most 
Britons, unlike Bank officials, do not spend their days modelling inflationary 
pass-through effects.

Indeed, for homeowners with variable-rate mortgages, the first direct 
financial impact of the referendum was a small reduction in monthly payments 
after the quarter-point cut in Bank rate in August. Carney and co can take some 
small credit for a successful intervention but their short-term forecasting 
misjudgment remains severe. Wisely, the governor did not claim to have saved 
the nation from the gloom he predicted. The positives “are neither solely due, 
nor totally unrelated to” the Bank’s actions, was as far as he dared fudge it.

If Threadneedle Street couldn’t tell what lay around the next corner, should 
we trust its projections for 2017 and 2018? Actually, yes, we should. Those 
inflation models aren’t perfect but it’s not hard to predict what will happen 
when the pound is down by a fifth. Prices will rise. The Bank foresees a peak 
for inflation of 2.75% in mid-2018, which is lower than some in the City 
expect. But it will be quite enough to squeeze living standards. On that score, 
believe the Bank.

Pension Regulator’s patience finally snaps 

So much for “the light in the tunnel” that Sir Philip Green claimed to spot as 
long ago as June in his negotiations with the Pensions Regulator over the 
deficit in the BHS fund. He was still seeing rays of optimism inhis interview 
with ITV a few weeks ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/18/sir-philip-green-hints-bhs-pension-deal-close-in-bid-to-save-knighthood>
 but the regulator told him to check his vision. “We are yet to receive a 
comprehensive and credible written proposal and have made clear what we 
require,” it said, hinting that its patience was wearing thin.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarney-changes-his-tune-as-consumers-dance-on-until-the-music-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdeb168c1820269b0895557d8ee5656dd697fb29b%2F0_0_1446_868%2F1446.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carney%20changes%20his%20tune%20as%20consumers%20dance%20on%20until%20the%20music%20stops%20%7C%20Nils%20Pratley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarney-changes-his-tune-as-consumers-dance-on-until-the-music-stops%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carney%20changes%20his%20tune%20as%20consumers%20dance%20on%20until%20the%20music%20stops%20%7C%20Nils%20Pratley&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fnils-pratley-on-finance%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fcarney-changes-his-tune-as-consumers-dance-on-until-the-music-stops%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdeb168c1820269b0895557d8ee5656dd697fb29b%2F0_0_1446_868%2F1446.jpg>
 Sir Philip Green said he would ‘sort’ the pension deficit out in 2014. 
Photograph: Reuters Tv/Reuters 
Now it has snapped. The regulator has launched formal legal proceedings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/02/philip-green-may-be-forced-to-pay-money-into-bhs-pension-scheme>
 against Green (plus a company controlled by his wife, and also against Dominic 
Chappell, the former bankrupt whose outfit bought BHS for £1).

Green suggests he can’t understand the fuss. He says he’s put forward “a 
credible and substantial proposal, with evidence and bank confirmation of cash 
availability”. The Topshop tycoon seems to have misunderstood how the process 
works. It is not for him to decide what counts as credible and substantial – 
that’s the regulator’s role.

As far as we can tell, the dispute involves fundamental questions, like the 
size of the initial lump sum to cover the deficit. If so, the regulator is 
right to issue warning notices. Green first started talking about his plan to 
“sort” the deficit back in 2014 when he (or, rather, his Monaco-based wife) 
still ownedBHS <https://www.theguardian.com/business/bhs>. The farce has run 
too long already. It’s now time to discover if the regulator’s powers of 
compulsion are as strong as they ought to be.

FCA picks up baton dropped by CMA

The Competition and Markets Authority’s proposals to enliven the banking 
sector were feeble, almost everybody agrees (apart from the report’s authors, 
of course). Now, even the Financial Conduct Authority seems to have sided with 
the doubters. The City regulatorwill study whether it should impose a cap on 
overdraft fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/fca-banks-credit-overdraft-fees>
, an idea the CMA rejected in its summer report.

The two bodies perform different roles, so all sides can pretend politely that 
there is no fundamental disagreement. But, as the watchful Treasury select 
committee chair Andrew Tyrie says, it looks as if the FCA is picking up a baton 
dropped by the CMA. Indeed, the FCA’s inquiry could quickly become a wider 
review of where else the CMA failed. That would be very welcome.
 