
History repeats itself. That was the message from Mark Carney  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
as the governor of the Bank of Englandsought to draw some conclusions about the 
future of globalisation at the end of a turbulent year 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech946.pdf>
.

Carney’s argument was that the current lost decade is not the first. The 1860s 
had its own financial crisis:the run on Overend, Gurney & Co 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/quarterlybulletin/2016/q2/q2pre.pdf>
 was the last to befall a UK high street bank until thequeues formed outside 
Northern Rock in 2007 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/sep/14/money2>
. It was a time of rapid technological change and a prolonged period of falling 
real wages.

The mid-Victorian era was the first great era of open markets. Trade was 
liberalised, wages were allowed to find their own level, economic policy was 
dictated by the gold standard, and government intervention was minimal.

Mark Carney: we must tackle isolation and detachment caused by globalisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
The past 25 years have seen another great burst of liberalisation. Capital has 
been free to move around the world; once closed economies such as China and 
India have been opened up; tariffs have been cut. In the emerging world, 1 
billion people have been taken out of poverty but in many advanced economies 
globalisation has come to mean, according to Carney, “low wages, insecure 
employment, stateless corporations and striking inequalities”.

His solution to the problem is threefold: an acceptance by economists that not 
everybody has gained from trade and technology; a better mix of monetary 
policy, fiscal policy and structural reform to boost growth; and more inclusive 
growth.

In essence, this is the same conclusion that was reached in the earlier phase 
of globalisation when there was a fear that market forces had to be moderated 
to prevent capitalism from eating itself.

The good news is that this recognition led to real policy changes: an 
extension of the franchise, the growth of trade unions, the creation of welfare 
states, a move to more progressive tax policies, nationalisation of key sectors 
of the economy, and more activist demand management.

The bad news is that this process took about 100 years and was not completed 
until the end of the second world war. What’s more,Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>and Donald Trump’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> election victoryare proof 
that lessons have been unlearnt and the clock turned back.
 