
Mary Beard and Arron Banks have both ordered the liver. “If we couldn’t talk 
like this, then bloody hell – we’d have lost a lot,” declares the author of
SPQR: A History of Ancient Rome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/oct/18/spqr-by-mary-beard-review-rome>. 
“I’ve really enjoyed our conversation,” agrees the author ofThe Bad Boys of 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/21/all-out-war-tim-shipman-the-brexit-club-owen-bennett-bad-boys-of-brexit-arron-banks-review>
. “Arron and I have discovered that we can agree quite a lot on the symptoms of 
the current malaise,” summarises thehistory professor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/23/mary-beard-the-role-of-the-academic-is-to-make-everything-less-simple>
 after a morning spent with theBrexit financier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/27/arron-banks-the-millionaire-hoping-to-bankroll-uk-into-brexit>
. “We disagree a bit on the underlying diagnosis, and we certainly 
fundamentally disagree on the treatment.”

If this was the movies, Mary and Arron would be two cops forced to work 
together by their sarge. You know the formula: one plays by the rules, the 
other’s a loose cannon, a cowboy. Together they have to investigate a case – 
and maybe just learn something about themselves along the way. As seems in part 
to have happened with Mary and Arron – albeit in a Cambridge restaurant as 
opposed to the Los Angeles underbelly ofLethal Weapon 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZbFE2P3tASI>. We shall come to their various 
political accords shortly, as well as the areas on which they remain perhaps 
eternally divided. In the meantime, let’s slap the working title When In Rome 
on this one.

(Incidentally, I am here with them after Arron telephoned with an enticing 
invitation. To wit: “I’m going to Cambridge to have lunch withMary Beard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/mary-beard> after we had bit of an argument 
on Twitter. And I thought, because you seem to like writing about Ukip so much, 
you might want to come along and cover it.” One has to relish these moments of 
perspective. What self-respecting writer wouldn’t jump at the chance to play 
Boswell to Arron Banks’s Dr Johnson?)

As for the original argument 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4006182/You-don-t-monopoly-history-Millionaire-UKIP-donor-Arron-Banks-embroiled-row-Cambridge-classicist-Mary-Beard-claiming-Roman-Empire-destroyed-immigration.html>
 itself, hopefully you are sufficiently well adjusted for much of it to have 
passed you by. Twitter should be regarded as my mother regards London – a place 
where all sorts of very silly and probably rather ghastly things presumably do 
“happen”, but to which far too much attention has been paid by politicians and 
various other people who ought to know better.

Who said it, Arron Banks or Mary Beard?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/dec/06/who-said-it-arron-banks-or-mary-beard>
Still, by way of background: back in December, Arron announced that “the Roman 
empire was effectively destroyed by immigration”, only for Mary to cut in and 
advise, “I think you all need to do a bit more reading in Roman history before 
telling us what caused the fall of Rome. Facts guys!” “Yes,” shot back Arron, 
“sacking Rome nothing to do with the downfall (eyes to sky)”.And so on 
<https://twitter.com/Arron_banks/status/805508156143128576>.

A month later, I join them midway through their lunch. Has he had a chance to 
explain the fall of the Roman empire to you, Mary, or at least be offered a 
visiting chair? It must have been an honour to sit at his knee.

“I’ve been reliably informed,” chuckles Arron, “that the Roman empire didn’t 
fall till about the 1400s. I missed it by about 1400 years!”

“That’s it!” says Mary approvingly. “1453. Well done, Arron.” It also turns 
out the sack of Rome wasn’t oneBreaking Point poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
 short of a perfect EU cautionary tale. “Well, as someone once said, it was the 
most polite destruction of a city ever,” explains Mary. “They were there for 
about three days and moved on …”

Still, it’s not all going Mary’s way. “You’re facts-based,” argues Arron, 
“Your book is absolutely brilliant – a forensic demolition of all these myths 
of Rome, which actually happened to be all the myths I loved. I want Romulus to 
be true, I want the Shakespeare ‘Et tu Brute’ to be true … Crossing the Rubicon 
– you say in the book it’s not even clear where the Rubicon was! You took that 
away from me!”

“But I’ve given you so much more,” laughs Mary.

“Yes,” says Arron, “but you’re suffering from the same romantic blanking of 
the facts with the EU. The facts blatantly face you that the EU is not working: 
southern Europe is ablaze with a currency that’s just wiping it out, you’ve got 
awful people likeGeert Wilders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/geert-wilders-found-guilty-in-hate-speech-trial-but-no-sentence-imposed>
 in Holland,Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/08/marine-le-pen-says-no-free-education-for-children-of-illegal-immigrants>
 in France, and still the EU is showing no signs of changing. If not now, then 
when? Your vision of the EU is like mine of Rome – a dream. It’s what you want 
it to be, not what it is.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233ac2bd12c6006d8c67019123937589c6f4fb9d%2F0_0_5137_3083%2F5137.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mary%20Beard%20v%20Arron%20Banks%3A%20'Your%20vision%20of%20the%20EU%20is%20like%20mine%20of%20Rome%20%E2%80%93%20a%20dream'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mary%20Beard%20v%20Arron%20Banks%3A%20%27Your%20vision%20of%20the%20EU%20is%20like%20mine%20of%20Rome%20%E2%80%93%20a%20dream%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F233ac2bd12c6006d8c67019123937589c6f4fb9d%2F0_0_5137_3083%2F5137.jpg>
 On some things they warmly agree ... like Theresa May’s pending Brexit 
negotiation being a complete waste of time. Photograph: Alicia Canter for the 
Guardian 
It is fair to say that Mary is more of an idealist than Arron. She believes 
supranational collaboration is demonstrably essential; he thinks it leads only 
to corruption and the flow of money from the poor to elites. She ridicules his 
unshakeable belief that government is exactly analogous to business. Arron 
argues that “Trump has appointed the brightest cabinet of any American 
government almost ever.”

“How do you measure that?” asks Mary. “That just sounds like Cambridge talk – 
people sitting around the table and saying ‘that’s the cleverest man, that’s 
the wittiest man’”.

But Arron is probably at his most discomfiting on the gathering darkness of 
Europe’s economics. When he demands, “What has your liberal consensus got 
you?”, he explicitly isn’t against the gains of progressivism. But he believes 
the failure to underpin them with economics that felt like they benefited more 
than an elite means it is now all under threat. “You bought those rights on the 
never-never,” he says. “Well if we did,” insists Mary, “it was still a good 
deal.”

“I wish that Arron had put his enormous energy and charm into reforming the 
EU,” she reflects at one point, “because he could have done such a lot.”

I’m not entirely convinced Arron missed his calling – but he is sportingly 
relaxed about her constantly identifying his “lefty side”. Discussing his 
encounters during the referendum campaign, he says, “The Labour MPs were 
infinitely nicer, better people than the Tories, who were all – almost to a man 
– pretty miserable, horrible politicians.”

After they have warmly agreed to renationalise the railways and the energy 
companies, draw the House of Lords by lot because it works perfectly well for 
juries, scrap Trident, and counter the mania for solving every problem with 
legislation, Mary concedes that the philosophical borders of Banksland “lie in 
a slightly different place to where I’d previously thought”. And perhaps 
surprisingly, Arron concurs with her entirely that parliament made a huge 
mistake not factoring a second vote into the referendum process in the event of 
a vote to leave. “But they didn’t, because they never expected to lose.”Theresa 
May’s pending negotiation 
<https://www.ft.com/content/36e67512-c6c0-11e6-9043-7e34c07b46ef> is jointly 
judged a complete waste of time that will get no concessions. “I’m a bit bored 
of Brexit now,” remarks Arron.

Certainly, he is gravitating westward, ever closer to Donald Trump’s orbit. 
They have had their revolution in America, he explains, while he is still 
plotting ours. Brexit wasn’t it.

This week Arron hosts a huge party in Washington on the eve of the 
inauguration, to which he hopes all the big hitters will show up, and is keen 
to stress close and continuing ties with the incoming administration. “You saw 
the photo of us in Trump Tower right after he won. Boris didn’t even get into 
Trump Tower. Where was he?!”

All the president-elect's men: that golden Trump-Farage photo op
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/14/all-the-president-elects-men-donald-trump-nigel-farage-photo>
In the coffee shop opposite? Failing to get a booking at the Trump Grill? 
“Trump is actually so different to his public persona. We spent an hour with 
him and he was actually quite shy and modest. He was listening. Most of the 
politicians I’ve met are on transmit, not on receive. He was having a 
conversation. Then you put a TV camera on him and it’s like – boosh!”

Mary is unconvinced. “But his Twitter persona is non-negotiatory 
<http://news.sky.com/story/trump-hits-out-at-sleazebag-political-operatives-in-latest-tweets-10727062>
.”

“And that,” judges Arron, “is why he is going to be a great president.”

Like I said, there were one or two areas on which common ground between our 
two principals did not immediately suggest itself. Don’t even get Mary started 
onTrump’s pussy-grabbing tape 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, which she regards as several thousand orders of magnitude more telling than 
Arron does: “As Nigel said, you put two men in a locker room … well, they’re 
very silly, aren’t they?”

“My fantasy is going into a men’s loo,” muses Mary. “And listening to what 
they say.”

“Nothing happens in there!” hoots Arron. It’s totally silent!”

“I think that’s where they fix all the business,” she twinkles. “I think they 
go out of the meetings in my faculty, go to the loo, say they’re going for a 
slash, and then they come back and it’s all done.”

This feels like the moment for Arron to point out that his daughter is “a 
ferocious Remainer – and she’s got the whole political correctness thing going 
as well, and I get the thick end of it from time to time. The way I talk, the 
way I behave, the unfiltered nature …” (Furthermore, one of his daughters has a 
first in history from Exeter, which has led to various Beard-related lectures 
to her father.)

Even so, both think politicians must end their reliance on endlessly-repeated 
political platitudes or face futher rebellion. “It’s just complete nonsense,” 
says Arron. “The big society has now morphed intothe shared society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/the-shallowness-of-theresa-mays-shared-society>
 – what does any of it mean?”

“Fifty years ago people were happy to be talked down to,” says Mary. “And if 
there has been any success of the British education system, then it’s that 
people no longer feel that they’re going to be talked crap to by people who 
just happen to be in positions of power.”

“That’s completely true,” says Arron, who thinks that “politicians have taught 
poor people how to behave but not rich people”. Mary wouldn’t go that far. 
“People have become more rightly unsatisfiable,” she says. “My problem is what 
that impulse results in, and if it’s manipulated.”

Which brings her to the Breaking Point poster. “Was that the way to conduct 
the debate?”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb876b6534b1b1daf900917a6d6c51cc34651bbd4%2F0_0_3500_1842%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Mary%20Beard%20v%20Arron%20Banks%3A%20'Your%20vision%20of%20the%20EU%20is%20like%20mine%20of%20Rome%20%E2%80%93%20a%20dream'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Mary%20Beard%20v%20Arron%20Banks%3A%20%27Your%20vision%20of%20the%20EU%20is%20like%20mine%20of%20Rome%20%E2%80%93%20a%20dream%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fmary-beard-arron-banks-eu-ukip-twitter-rome%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb876b6534b1b1daf900917a6d6c51cc34651bbd4%2F0_0_3500_1842%2F3500.jpg>
 The Breaking Point poster ... ‘Was that the way to conduct the debate?’ asks 
Beard. Photograph: Philip Toscano/PA 
“We discussed it at length,” says Arron, who claims only 8% of the country 
were offended by it. “This was not done on the hoof. We played to win – we 
weren’t going to play Queensberry rules.”

“I prefer that argument to a lot of the other arguments,” Mary judges. “I 
think that sometimes there are too great consequences to winning, but at least 
that’s straight.”

He’s about to chip in, but she won’t let him. “Come on,” she pleads. “I’m 
about to concede something! As in Rome, it is always difficult to distinguish 
between invaders, economic migrants and refugees. And I think your Breaking 
Point poster was an interesting case. That poster is evidence – it will be in 
all the history books in 300 or 400 years time” – Arron looks rather pleased – 
“which of the three are these?”

“It’s not an invading army,” he says, “but they’re all young men and about 25 
years old. If I was them I’d do the same thing.”

“Yes, but refugees mostly are young men,” Mary points out. “We are sold the 
idea of a refugee as a tiny child sitting crying, as a way of raising money, 
but elderly ladies and kids largely can’t move. The demographic is mostly young 
men.”

“I don’t hold that against them because I would do the same thing,” says 
Arron. “But it’s how many people you can take in and maintain cohesion, without 
it breaking down society.”

“Clearly there is risk,” Mary replies. “Young men on the move – there will be 
some trouble. But I am prepared to take that risk. And that’s a moral choice.”

They could go on for hours – indeed, they have gone on for hours. At least 
they’re talking. “Yes! I’m trying to get Arron to change some of his ideas for 
this political movement. Although I gave him a terrible idea about currency. 
Ill-advised, because I’m sure I shall hear it coming up again. I did point out 
to him that one of the major problems in the 5th century BC was when good old 
democratic Athens has its empire, and what does it do? It imposes a single 
currency. Because currency is all about power and control.” A guilty giggle. 
For his part, Arron insists he is actively drawing on Mary’s brain for his 
future plans. Where they go, might others follow? Arron doesn’t see why not: “I 
always try to be good-tempered with people.”

“Yes,” agrees Mary, “but if you look at your supporters, they don’t follow 
those rules.”

“Nor do yours,” Arron reminds her.

Still, you’ve got to start somewhere. I haven’t checked this with Mary – or 
indeed Arron – but am given to understand that Rome wasn’t built in a day.
 