
Theresa May has weighed in on the government’s decision to approve four white 
men as Channel 4 board members,but reject a highly qualified minority ethnic 
woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/nov/29/bme-woman-blocked-from-channel-4-board-as-four-white-men-join>
, saying that the public appointments process “is about who is right for the 
job”.

The Labour MP David Lammy asked May during prime minister’s questions on 
Wednesday why Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, had decided not to approve 
all five candidates submitted for her approval by the broadcasting regulator
Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>.


“Does [the prime minister] think there isn’t a woman or a black person in the 
country worthy of being on the board ofChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/channel4>?” he said.


PMQs verdict: score draw, but Corbyn senses weakness on social care
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2016/nov/30/pmqs-verdict-score-draw-but-corbyn-senses-weakness-on-social-care>
May said that while she was not aware of the case she promised to “look into 
the issue” but defended the government’s public appointments process.


“In looking at public appointments a very careful process is undertaken to 
ensure that people who are appointed have the skillset and requirements needed 
to play the role that is being required,” she said. “This is always a question 
of the right person for job, and issues around the sort of question he has 
raised don’t come into it, it is about who is right for the job.”


Ofcom is responsible for finding, vetting and appointing Channel 4 
non-executive directors, with what is usually a simple rubber-stamping approval 
process by the culture secretary.


The broadcasting regulator put forward five candidates it said were all “high 
calibre” for the Channel 4 board, of which the minority ethnic woman was the 
only candidate rejected.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftheresa-may-defends-process-four-white-men-join-channel-4-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc9bbff83a345b658672b1987b6aae85780b41d%2F0_106_3424_2055%2F3424.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=May%20defends%20process%20that%20saw%20four%20white%20men%20join%20Channel%204%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftheresa-may-defends-process-four-white-men-join-channel-4-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=May%20defends%20process%20that%20saw%20four%20white%20men%20join%20Channel%204%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftheresa-may-defends-process-four-white-men-join-channel-4-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc9bbff83a345b658672b1987b6aae85780b41d%2F0_106_3424_2055%2F3424.jpg>
 David Lammy, the Labour MP. Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
It is highly unusual for the culture secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/15/culture-secretary-bbc-chair-charter-karen-bradley>
 to reject the appointment of a candidate put forward by Ofcom for a position 
on Channel 4’s board.


The decision by the Department for Culture, Media and Sport to appoint only 
the white male candidates came on the same day the government published its 
green paper on corporate governance, which highlighted the importance of 
“improving the diversity of boardrooms so that their composition better 
reflects the demographics of employees”.


Tories' corporate reform proposals a far cry from May's radical pledge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/29/tories-corporate-reform-proposals-a-far-cry-from-mays-radical-pledge>
Charles Gurassa, Channel 4’s new chairman, has publicly said he would like to 
see more minority ethnic and disabled non-executive directors on its board, 
citing concerns that it does not reflect its government-imposed diversity remit.


Ofcom originally advertised for four Channel 4 non-executive positions but is 
allowed to appoint more, and on the basis of the candidates who applied put 
five through to the government for approval.


“Non-executive members of the Channel 4 board are appointed by Ofcom with the 
approval of the secretary of state,” said a DCMS spokesman. “The secretary of 
state approved four candidates on the basis that they met the specific skills 
and experiences set out in Ofcom’s advertised job descriptions.”


The four new appointees are Simon Bax, the chairman of the Norwich-based 
newspaper groupArchant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/aug/14/archant-reports-first-increase-in-revenues-and-profits-in-eight-years>
 and a former top Pixar executive; the ex-BBC executive and British Library 
chiefRoly Keating <https://www.theguardian.com/media/rolykeating>; Paul Geddes, 
the chief executive of Direct Line; and Christopher Holmes, the former 
Paralympic swimmer, who runs his own consultancy.

 