
Four times on Tuesday Theresa May promised to make Britain great again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
, andeach one gave me goosebumps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/audio/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-in-full-audio>
 and flashbacks to covering the election of Donald Trump.

Making your country great 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/how-donald-trump-came-up-with-make-america-great-again/2017/01/17/fb6acf5e-dbf7-11e6-ad42-f3375f271c9c_story.html?utm_term=.a11b0b4c9798>
 is, of course, what all politicians aspire to do. But there was something 
eerily familiar about the seductive combination of nostalgia, bluster and 
exceptionalism that the prime minister employedin her Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/bravado-only-partially-masks-contradictions-in-theresa-mays-speech>
.

Related: Bravado only partially masks contradictions in Theresa May's speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/bravado-only-partially-masks-contradictions-in-theresa-mays-speech>

“I want Britain to be what we have the potential, talent and ambition to be,” 
she said. “A great, global trading nation that is respected around the world 
and strong, confident and united at home.”

Put aside, for a moment, the word “trade”, and you have the core of Trump’s 
stump speech 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2015/08/31/politics/donald-trump-stump-speech/index.html>
: make the world respect us, make us strong, make us think as one. Like her new 
Republican ally May is fed up with sniggering behind her back about the lack of 
a plan, and is demanding to be taken seriously.

But the Trump tropes did not end there. May also blames foreigners for holding 
Britain back from “rediscover[ing] its role as a great ... nation”. Without 
offering any evidence, she suggested that Britain’s stagnant export 
performancewas a result of its membership of the EU, that the strain on its 
public services and wagesshould be blamed on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/18/theresa-may-brexit-immigration-focus-catastropic-consequences>
 and that voters want control over borders to be her paramount political 
objective. The only thing missing was a wall.

Months on the US campaign trail taught me that the key word in Trump’s slogan 
“make America great again” is the last, and May also hinted at recapturing 
imperial glories. Though boasting of being more multicultural and racially 
diverse than Europe, only former British colonies were namechecked. Her boast 
that the Commonwealth is a reminder of “unique and proud global relationships” 
might be true, but it smacks of American-style yearning for lost power and 
influence.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Similarly, the speech was all about the destination, not the journey. What was 
billed as an introduction to Britain’s negotiating strategy was little more 
than a wishlist of its hopes and dreams. What other Europeans might have to say 
on the matter was as irrelevant as China’s response to a US trade war. But if 
Trump’s election proved one thing, it is that voters don’t seem to care about 
detail at the moment.

Quite the reverse, in fact. Amid almost universal media cheerleading for her 
speech in Britain, there was very little comment about her chilling warning to 
the press not to ask too many questions. “Every hyped-up media report is going 
to make it harder for us to get the right deal,” said May, warning that “those 
who urge us to reveal more ... will not be acting in the national interest”. An 
incoming US president who regards journalists as so unpatriotic that theyshould 
not even have a room in the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/white-house-press-briefings-talk-radio-bloggers-trump>
 could not have put it better himself.

Related: Gove is simply Trump’s cheerleader, glossing over inconsistencies and 
ignorance | Jonathan Freedland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/donald-trump-michael-gove-cheerleader-inconsistencies-ignorance-times-interview>

The mimicry is mutual, of course. There were lines you can expect to hear in 
Trump’s inauguration speech on Friday. “After all the division and discord, the 
country is coming together,” asserted the prime minister, again without 
evidence.

Perhaps the biggest rhetorical difference is their superficially distinct 
positions on trade. For the Brits, trade is a universally good thing. For 
Trump, trade deals are what has laid the country low. But pick beneath the
Orwellian doublethink <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doublethink>, and the 
positions are closer than they look. Britain is seeking to make itself a “more 
open global trading nation” by walking away from the world’s largest free trade 
agreement and shutting out foreigners; Trump wantsthe world to buy American 
goods, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
 so long as it doesn’t try to sell too much back the other way.

The Brits want to “have their cake and eat it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/uk-unlikely-to-stay-in-single-market-tory-document-suggests>
”. Trump exploits “post-truth politics”. We say tomato; they say potato. 
Politicians on both sides of the Atlantic are speaking the same language.
 