
Maybe the European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> is God’s way 
of teaching the British about Belgium. Specifically, it is a mechanism that 
forces UK politicians to confront the idea that Belgium matters. And not just 
Belgium but countries like it – the small countries.

Related: Prime minister vows to put final Brexit deal before parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>

This concept doesn’t come naturally to a nation that is neurotically worried 
about its greatness.Naming famous Belgians is a parlour game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/jan/04/whitehall.labour> for British 
foreign secretaries. Cultivating small-state alliances feels like something 
less ambitious countries do. The UK struggles to see itself in perspective 
because it is richer and more powerful than most countries, yet so much less 
influential than it used to be.

We are not alone in suffering from post-imperial angst, but we have tied 
ourselves in uniquely existential knots where relations with our European 
neighbours are concerned. Theresa May understands the deep cultural and 
psychological attraction of Brexit as a great unpicking – a disentanglement 
from continental ties, the benefits of which feel obscure to much of the public.

Therein lies the emotional cleverness of the prime minister’s formulation of a 
“clean Brexit”, aslaid out in her speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 on Tuesday. Pro-Europeans probe the agonising detail of the negotiations to 
come without recruiting any more of the public to share their pain. If 
anything, the balance of opinion is swinging the other way. The prime 
minister’s message was tailored to the large segment of voters, including many 
ex-remainers, who see the big in/out question as settled and say they want the 
job done without any more palaver.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
The effectiveness of May’s account of future relations with the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-mays-what-have-we-learned>
 – no “partial membership”, no messy overlaps with the past – is its 
simplicity. Her Europhile critics want to talk only about complexity, which is 
the least catchy tune in politics. May paints Britain with the crispness of its 
outline restored, its place in the world made clearer by the erasure of all 
those fiddly lines that connect London to Brussels and then to Paris, Berlin, 
Ljubljana, Tallinn and the rest. She offers liberation from the need to care 
about Belgians.

That obligation endures whether the prime minister wants it or not. Small 
states will have a say in the divorce contract terms that Britain signs with 
the EU. Their voice will be heard in the negotiations and in chambers where the 
deal must be ratified. It wasopposition in Belgium’s Wallonian regional 
parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/eu-canada-free-trade-deal-delayed-belgium-ceta>
 that nearly scuppered a Canada-EU free trade agreement last year.

No less important than pragmatic attention to small-state sensibilities is the 
strategic and moral duty that Britain owes to lesser powers. The EU has 
historically been good at inflating the influence of minor capitals, to the 
frustration of major ones. It has also allowed the most powerful economies – 
Germany, France and the UK – to throw their weight around, to the annoyance of 
lesser players. This voluntary national surrender of autonomy in some 
dimensions for greater influence in others is the essence of the European 
project, and it mystifies the kind of politician who wants international 
relations to be a league table of countries, with an obvious champion at the 
top.

When, earlier this week, Donald Trump described the EU dismissively as “a 
vehicle for Germany” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
 likely to lose more members after Brexit, he was aggravating diplomatic 
vandalism with historical ignorance. The apparatus of European integration 
first came into existence, and has been sustained in large part, by German 
atonement for its 20th-century crimes, expressed as willingness to subordinate 
a narrowly defined national interest for wider continental cooperation.

But Trump struggles with the concept of mutual arrangements that guarantee 
stability without yielding a fist-pumping victory or cash payout to one party. 
He craves the firm smack of a deal. He appears to find the idea of big 
countries lending power to smaller ones for the sake of anything so sissy as 
“shared values” contemptible. He sees Nato as a European tax on the US military.

May's speech imagined a place where Britain has freedom to choose its friends 
and decide its status in the world

It is one of the ways in which his instincts and those of Vladimir Putin are 
aligned. The Russian president also has no interest in a system of 
international relations based on rules and protocol.For Putin, the EU has 
always been an obstacle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/trump-putin-europe-rock-hard-place-exploit-eu-cracks-solidarity>
 to the pursuit of a divide-and-rule strategy within the former Soviet sphere 
of influence in the old Eastern bloc. He and Trump would both prefer a Europe 
of disparate and disorganised nation states, all potential clients of 
Washington and Moscow, without an organising principle of their own.

This is not May’s vision. In her speech she emphasised a hope that the EU 
succeed post-Brexit, and underlined her belief that the union should not 
unravel. That such a wish even has to be expressed testifies to a world in 
alarming flux.

The US is about to acquire a president who is relaxed about the dissolution of 
essential pillars of European security, when not actively undermining them. And 
this is the president whoseoffer of a trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/a-uk-trade-deal-with-trump-be-careful-what-you-wish-for>
 is meant to give Britain confidence that Brexit will work. Given Trump’s known 
views on trade and theaggressive protectionists whose company he keeps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines>
, it is safe to presume that the non-negotiable terms of that deal will be 
total vassalage to US corporate interests. It will require a surrender of 
economic sovereignty every bit as great as that involved in EU membership, with 
none of the accompanying diplomatic clout.

May’s speech on Tuesday was meant to be a beacon illuminating Britain’s future 
outside the EU. But, coming days before Trump’s inauguration, it should be read 
also as an unwitting requiem for the global order that is passing away. It 
imagined a place where the contours of power are neatly defined and stable, 
where Britain has freedom to choose its friends and decide its status in the 
world. Viewed from Trump Tower, Britain sits in the bottom half of the first 
division of world players: a leading G7 economy, a nuclear-armed security 
council member, but not a superpower. Our interests matter, but probably not 
that much more than Belgian interests currently matter in Whitehall.

It’s a question of perspective. For decades Britain has struggled to get a 
comfortable sense of its scale relative to the rest of the world. We are about 
to find out how big – or small – we really are.
 