
Being in or out of the EU customs union was “not a binary decision”, Theresa 
May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> said during a sometimes 
noisy prime minister’s questions dominated by the strategy for Brexit – or what 
her critics say is the lack of one.

May repeatedly insisted she and her ministers were devising a coherent plan 
for exiting the EU but would not share details before negotiations began.

After the SNP’s Angus Robertson asked about comments by the foreign secretary, 
Boris Johnson, that the UK would probably leave the EU customs union but retain 
some access to the single market, May said: “The right honourable gentleman 
doesn’t seem to understand that the customs union is not just a binary 
decision.”

Jeremy Corbyn, the Labour leader, focused his questions almost entirely on 
Brexit and argued that the government was “making a total shambles” of it.





In her replies, May repeatedly declined to give any details about a Brexit 
strategy, spiking her answers with barbed remarks.

Asked by Corbyn about Johnson’s reported remarks that the UK would probably 
leave the customs union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/britain-probably-leaving-eu-customs-union-says-boris-johnson>
, May only said: “We are preparing carefully for the formal negotiations. What 
we want to ensure is that we have the best possible trading deal with the 
European Union once we have left.”

Pressed again by the Labour leader, May said: “Yes we do have a plan. Our plan 
is to deliver the best possible deal in trading with theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.”


Corbyn turned to comments by Carlo Calenda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/16/pmqs-may-corbyn-brexit-uk-wants-brexit-deal-that-is-intellectually-impossible-says-eurozone-chief-politics-live?page=with:block-582c331ee4b090fc812816e6#block-582c331ee4b090fc812816e6>
, the Italian economic development minister, who said the UK’s Brexit approach 
seemed incoherent. The Labour leader said: “Isn’t the truth that the government 
is making a total shambles of Brexit, and nobody understands what her strategy 
actually is?”

May responded by saying that while EU nations would want “every detail” of 
Britain’s strategy, “if we were to do that, it would be the best possible way 
of ensuring we got the worst result for this country.”

The prime minister added: “From the confusion he’s got on his benches in 
relation to Brexit it’s yet another example with Labour – where they talk, we 
act. They posture; we deliver. We are getting on with the job; he is not up to 
the job.”

The insults continued. Corbyn cited a list of what he said were various 
government failings, including “a Brexit team with no plan for Brexit”. May 
rebutted the claims and added: “But what we certainly have got is a leader of 
the opposition who’s incapable of leading.”



Elsewhere, the prime minister declined to call on the media to respect the 
judiciary ahead of next month’s article 50 hearing in the supreme court.

“We believe, I believe, this government believes, in the independence of our 
judiciary,” she said. “And the judiciary will … come to their decision on the 
basis of the argument put before them. But we also believe that our democracy 
is underpinned by the freedom of our press.”


The SNP’s Tommy Shepherd, meanwhile, asked May what she might do if the US 
president-elect, Donald Trump, followed up on hispledge to restrict access to 
the US for Muslims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
.

May declined to criticise Trump, saying: “The special relationship we have 
with the United States is very important to both the United States and the 
United Kingdom. We will be continuing to build on that special relationship.

“That was very clear from the conversation I had with President-elect Trump 
shortly after his election. But we of course want to ensure the dignity of our 
citizens. It is up to the United States what rules they put in place in terms 
of entry across their borders. But we will be ensuring that those special 
relationship continues and continues in the interests of both the UK and the 
US.”
 