
It must be said that the Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn’s latest declaration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jeremy-corbyn-you-are-not-henry-viii-theresa-may-brexit-deal-commons-vote>
 – the accusation that Theresa May appears to be behaving in the manner of 
history’s most gouty tyrant, Henry VIII – is not without foundation. Her 
refusal to commit to putting a final Brexit deal to a vote in parliament does 
indeed have echoes of the overbearing Tudor (though followers of history may 
also note that Henry’s reformation parliament was thefirst to be made 
omnicompetent 
<http://www.parliament.uk/about/living-heritage/evolutionofparliament/originsofparliament/birthofparliament/overview/reformation/>
 and asserted the supreme sovereignty of parliament in making statute).

'You're not Henry VIII,' Jeremy Corbyn tells Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/jeremy-corbyn-you-are-not-henry-viii-theresa-may-brexit-deal-commons-vote>
The prime minister’s refusal to countenance a democratic debate before the 
triggering of article 50, and her determination to fight the supreme court 
decision all the way (which may result, pleasingly for those who relish the 
irony of unintended consequences, in the caseending up in the European court of 
justice 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/brexit-legal-challenge-supreme-court-high-court-european-court-of-justice-ultimate-authority-ruling-a7446716.html>
), certainly imply an unwillingness to share the reins of power. The failure of 
her disciples – most notably Liz Truss – to offer anything other than a
lacklustre defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/nov/05/barristers-urge-liz-truss-to-condemn-attacks-on-brexit-ruling-judges>
 of the judges that were so dangerously branded“enemies of the people” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 led many to infer an arrogant nonchalance towards the rule of law. 
Furthermore, one can certainly deduce in May shades of the advancement of 
personal gain under the guise of morality – Brexit is “the will of the people” 
we are told repeatedly, as though the 48% of us who voted against it – and 
those who abstained – no longer count.

The comparisons don’t end there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/theresa-may-henry-viii-leadership-style-compared>
. One of Henry’s first acts as king was to immediately execute members of the 
previous administration, and he was constantly postponing policy decisions. 
Perhaps most importantly, it bears noting that Henry himself will also have 
been in possession of some spectacularlyjazzy trousers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-sidesteps-question-about-995-pound-leather-trousers>
.

Nevertheless, it would be foolish to stretch the analogy too far. While Henry 
VIII was an obsessive annotator, all the British public have been privy to 
lately was the bleedingly obvious scrawling that wecannot have our cake and eat 
it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/greg-clark-minister-dismisses-having-cake-and-eating-it-brexit-notes>
. There’s also the fact that May’s reticence hints less at the caprices of an 
autocrat than at someone who hasn’t actually got a clue what they are doing 
half the time. Students of the art of bullshit may note the excuse of “keeping 
one’s cards close to one’s chest” for future reference.

As a remainer who has felt politically homeless for the last six months, it is 
gratifying to see Corbyn speaking out more bullishly against the current Brexit 
shambles – though I say this with the tentativeness of a Labour supporter who 
has become used to experiencing surging swells of political hope followed by 
the sluggish puncture-whistle of inevitable disappointment.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> should have spent the past few 
months nailing the Tories to the wall, and have instead largely let them get 
away with rank incompetence.

Mock Tudor? Comparing Theresa May's leadership style with Henry VIII's
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/28/theresa-may-henry-viii-leadership-style-compared>
The whole spectacle has been dispiriting to witness, and internal 
disagreements about Labour’s stance on immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/28/schisms-on-immigration-policy-threaten-the-future-of-the-labour-party>
 indicate that an uncertain opposition is far from over. Furthermore, Labour’s 
refusal to block the triggering of article 50 leaves voters still in search of 
a politician with the courage to come out and say, “Brexit is a terrible idea, 
let’s call the whole thing off” (the Lib Dems notwithstanding, although I don’t 
know anyone of my age group who would vote for them after the tuition fees 
betrayal).

Corbyn would do well to note that May is not the only one who shares traits 
with Henry VIII. There’s a decency there for all to see, but also hints of 
egotism and intransigence. The fact that his inner circle seem to have only 
just cottoned on to the need for a more aggressive opposition implies an 
inflexibility and unwillingness to listen to advice. And of course, there is the
drawing up of a list of the politically disloyal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/corbyns-team-mistakenly-issues-list-of-mps-who-undermined-leader>
 (Henry was famously paranoid, and surrounded by plotters).

But perhaps the most Tudor aspect of this whole Brexit debacle is the return 
to common parlance of the word “traitor”. The months since the referendum have 
seen us get to the point where editorials in rightwing tabloids are calling for 
remainers to belocked up in the Tower 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/daily-mail-express-brexit_uk_57fdfd14e4b08e08b93d2ad3>
. I’ll probably be hung, drawn and quartered for saying this, but there’s 
something fitting in the fact that politicians are looking backwards.
 