
Martin McGuinness has resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
 as deputy first minister of Northern Ireland. In doing so he has also, 
effectively, sacked the first minister,Arlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-arlene-foster-survives-no-confidence-vote-green-energy-scandal-sinn-fein>
 – for under the Good Friday agreement, neither post is filled without the 
other. What shocked reporters even more than the announcement yesterday 
afternoon, though, was the apparent sharp deterioration in McGuinness’s health; 
yet he was adamant that this did not feature in his decision, despite 
speculation he issuffering from a heart condition 
<http://www.irishtimes.com/news/politics/martin-mcguinness-declines-to-disclose-details-of-his-illness-1.2930719>
.

Key questions about Martin McGuinness's resignation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinnesss-resignation-key-questions-northern-ireland>
To underline the point that the political context has radically changed, he 
said that the party would not appoint a successor but would trigger an 
election. And after the election it would not cement a new partnership with the
Democratic Unionist party <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup> unless a 
range of issues were resolved. At heart, these amount to an acceptance that the 
DUP andSinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> must be equal 
partners.

But is McGuinness to be taken at his word when he says that health is not the 
issue here? The sceptic will wonder if, faced with the need to stand down, he 
sought to create the maximum impact and to damage Foster, who has beenresisting 
pressure from Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-first-minister-arlene-foster-urged-resign-fuel-subsidy-scheme>
 to stand aside.

Foster, as minister for the environment three years ago, hatched a scheme to 
promote renewable fuels through excessively generous subsidies. This is the
“cash for ash” scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinnesss-resignation-key-questions-northern-ireland>
, by which people actually get paid to waste energy. All parties agreed that 
there needed to be an inquiry into the huge financial overspend on this, and 
all but the DUP insisted that Foster stand aside until the inquiry reported. 
She refused.

Sinn Féin, which just a month ago seemed a businesslike partner of the DUP, 
now accuses the party of arrogance and trying to run Northern Ireland without 
conceding anything to republicans and other minorities. The DUP had, for 
instance, used a veto called a petition of concern that enabled them, with a 
minority share of the vote, to blocksame-sex marriage in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/18/northern-ireland-gay-community-democratic-unionst-party-marriage-equality-tactical-voting>
.

From Sinn Féin’s point of view, the stentorian attitude of Foster, refusing to 
stand aside, and the growing feeling among their own supporters that they have 
been weak and pushed around, has made it necessary for them to take a tough 
line. But there is a high price to be paid for bringing down Stormont and 
forcing the British to restore direct rule. An obvious one is that the inquiry 
into the lavishly funded heating scheme will not now take place. McGuinness may 
have scuppered the very thing he was demanding.

Another problem is that the running of Northern Ireland is handed back to a 
Tory government until a new deal is made

Another problem is that the running of Northern Ireland is handed back to a 
Tory government until a new deal is made, and that may take years, if it ever 
happens at all. And withBrexit negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/senior-tory-says-theresa-mays-clarification-of-brexit-position-is-overdue>
 coming soon, who will be in place to insist that Northern Ireland is a special 
case with itsland border with the EU? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/northern-ireland-republic-peace-brexit-border>

Nicola Sturgeon will be arguing for “differentiation” for Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nicola-sturgeon-make-scotlands-place-in-single-market-integral-to-talks>
. It now appears that the only voice defending Northern Ireland – a region 
that, like Scotland, also voted to remain – will be the Tory secretary of 
state, James Brokenshire.

Perhaps Sinn Féin is just providing a shock for the DUP, reminding them that 
each party’s share of power is in the gift of the other, something which the 
DUP had seemed to forget. In which case there will be tension for a week, until 
Brokenshire is ready to call an election, and then they will agree to appoint a 
deputy first minister on condition that the DUP replaces Foster. That’s a 
possible. Another is that Sinn Féin is content to enter a long political 
struggle to achieve a new constitutional arrangement that will not allow 
unionism to eclipse republicanism. After all, they have nearly half of the 11 
newsuper councils <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-30831198>, and 
run them by majority rule. The fact they are in the west of Northern Ireland 
with unionist councils to the east, provides almost a semblance of repartition.

Sinn Féin <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> is also growing in 
the Republic and has been concentrating most of its energies there. It could 
content itself that it has a bigger slice of political action on the island 
than unionists have, leave them a few councils to run and barely give them 
another thought. Or they may think that having disproved the viability of power 
sharing, by testing the unionists and proving them intransigent, they have 
cleared the way for the next stepping stone to Irish unity, joint sovereignty.

They may even think that the negotiations around Brexit and the danger of a 
restored hard border create the best possible context for reviving that 
constitutional question.

And what follows the departure of McGuinness? For now, the leading voice of 
Sinn Féin, north and south, isGerry Adams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gerryadams>. If Foster goes back to the 
negotiating table, that’s who she will be sitting across from. He will decide 
if the assembly is to be revived and he can block it if Foster insists on 
having her job back. And he is a much more dogmatic republican, with a record 
of drawing problems out rather than trying to solve them. Had he been the one 
to step down, this might all be easier to resolve.
 