
Jaume Camps has possibly the coolest job at SEAT. Or perhaps the hottest job. 
He’s in charge of organising the hard testing where the engineers carry out a 
raft of different and often very punishing tests that will ensure that a new 
Ateca will do everything its customer will want it to do, and that it will 
carry on doing so for many years. Safely and effectively.

“I’ve been in the testing department for 20 years,” says Camps, “and if you 
like driving and travel it’s the perfect job.” SEAT’s testing departments focus 
on five key areas: chassis; engine; body and trim; electrical; and whole 
vehicle. “We start our testing programme when the first prototype has been 
built. Eventually we’ll have about 40 prototypes and then some pre-production 
cars in addition. Those are cars that are built before the green button on the 
production line has been pressed.

How car designers satisfy your senses
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/inside-seat/2016/sep/26/how-car-designers-satisfy-your-senses>
“They’re virtually the same as the cars that go into showrooms, but perhaps 
with a few pieces of trim material that are not quite to the finished 
specification. We’ll also use some ‘mules’ for testing, which are existing 
production cars that will be fitted with new components for the new car. For 
example, the Ateca’s chassis could be tested in a Leon body.”


The Volkswagen Group is very hot on security, so much of the early testing 
will be done behind closed doors at the VW facility in Wolfsburg, Germany. 
Camps says: “We draw up a very comprehensive timetable at the beginning that 
shows where we need to be with each stage and each of the five departments. Our 
first task is durability testing; the last, crash testing.”


And here is where Camps and all the teams get their passports out. Testing is 
split into summer and winter sessions. “If the time of year is right, we can do 
our hot weather testing here in Spain, because in July it’s as hot here as 
anywhere. If the timing of the project doesn’t fall like this then we’ll go 
abroad to Arizona or Nevada in America, or perhaps to Africa.”


Computer simulation was in its infancy when Camps started in the department, 
“but now we can simulate hot conditions and their effect on engine cooling and 
on other components”.


However, Camps points out, “sometimes the results we see from computer 
simulations are not the same as those we see in actual driving conditions. 
Other factors that come up in the real world play a part that computer 
programmes don’t predict. That is why we continue using physical prototypes – 
to ensure our products are of the best quality.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeet-the-man-who-tests-cars-in-the-arctic-circle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14a8c8fcb09ca98fbb39237bc21c79d706d4990b%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20man%20who%20tests%20cars%20in%20the%20Arctic%20Circle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeet-the-man-who-tests-cars-in-the-arctic-circle%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20man%20who%20tests%20cars%20in%20the%20Arctic%20Circle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Finside-seat%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fmeet-the-man-who-tests-cars-in-the-arctic-circle%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F14a8c8fcb09ca98fbb39237bc21c79d706d4990b%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Tests are carried out in extreme conditions. Photograph: SEAT 
Suspension tuning is a perfect example. “We know from the computer simulations 
how the car should behave over bumpy surfaces, how its suspension reacts and 
how the geometry changes, but it’s only when we get out on to the road in 
prototypes that we can really understand how the car behaves. A computer cannot 
possibly simulate the hundreds of variables that exist in the real world.”


Winter testing involves a visit to Scandinavian testing facilities inside the 
Arctic Circle, with a punishing and thorough job list. “We test the cars’ 
heating systems, windscreen washers and headlamps, also the integrity of the 
body: do extreme low temperatures affect the trim and bodywork? The Ateca has a 
driving mode specifically tuned forsnow, so we test that very thoroughly. By 
the time we finished our cold climate durability testing we’d clocked up 30,000 
km (18,600 miles).”


No less challenging for the car, but probably more enjoyable for the 
engineers, is the hot weather testing. “We use a wide range of different 
driving conditions, right up to the most harsh roads. We test in very dusty 
conditions to make sure no dust enters the cabin, clogs radiators or 
air-conditioning systems. Because the Ateca is our first SUV, we’ve 
incorporated a host of new tests into our regular programme. For example, the 
Ateca is fitted with a hill-descent control, which requires extensive testing 
and refining. And, because the Ateca might be driven off road, we carry out 
tests to make sure that the underbody and systems that attach to it – exhaust 
system and driveshafts – are not vulnerable to rock or stone damage and that 
the underbody itself is strong enough.”


Since the Ateca is sold worldwide, the teams have to take into account a range 
of factors during testing. “For example, customers around the world have 
different tastes and desires. And, of course, the driving environments in these 
countries can throw up specific challenges.”


In the case of Mexico, where the roads are at extreme altitudes compared to 
European roads, testing was carried out to make sure the cars perform in these 
conditions.

“We once found something that needed to be improved when testing a previous 
model, where the automatic gearbox didn’t work properly at high altitude. The 
communication between the engine and automatic transmission gearbox wasn’t 
correct when using adaptive cruise control (ACC). But we solved the problem and 
have made sure it doesn’t happen with the Ateca.”

Camps says that they’ll have done a good 375,000 miles (600,000 km) with their 
test cars before they’re completely happy with the vehicle’s performance in all 
conditions. The job is becoming more complicated as modern cars continue to 
evolve.


“The obvious example is autonomous systems,” says Camps, “which are becoming 
more common and more advanced. They’re creating more work for the testing 
department. For example, ACC, in which the car’s speed is automatically 
adjusted to factor in traffic ahead, relies on a radar unit at the front of the 
car. We have to test this to make sure that the radar works in snow and in 
dusty environments.”


More complicated cars, more miles out on the road and, not to Camps’ 
displeasure, more stamps in his passport.

 