
Liviu Babitz opens his collar to reveal a small silicone gadget, the size of a 
matchbox, attached to his chest with two titanium bars that sit just under the 
skin. Most resembling a compact bike light, the North Sense that Babitz has 
attached is an artificial sense organ that delivers a short vibration every 
time the user faces North. Babitz and Scott Cohen, co-founder atCyborg Nest 
<http://www.cyborgnest.net/>, the company that created North Sense, are 
currently the only two using the product, which will soon be shipped out to 
clients who have pre-ordered it over the last few months.

“Around us is an entire universe we don’t perceive,” Cohen explains. “As we 
walk down the street there’s radiation, X-rays, infrared and ultraviolet, as 
well as the electromagnetic field of the planet. So we want to create new 
senses to become aware of our environment.” Although many people are 
experimenting with modifying their bodies using technology for medical or 
experimental purposes, Cyborg Nest are more interested in creating and 
extending human senses. Two of their other co-founders,Neil Harbisson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/may/06/neil-harbisson-worlds-first-cyborg-artist>
 and Moon Ribas, have both already installed superhuman senses – Harbisson, who 
is colourblind, has an ‘eyeborg’ that allows him to “hear” the light spectrum 
(including infrared and ultraviolet), while Ribas has a sensor in her elbow 
that vibrates when an earthquake occurs anywhere in the world.

Northness has always been important to humans as a way to navigate, giving us 
our most basic system of plotting the world. In fact, speakers of the 
Australian languageGuugu Yimithirr 
<http://anthroweb.ucsd.edu/~jhaviland/Publications/ETHOSw.Diags.pdf> explain 
all locations using cardinal points (rather than left and right). Knowing where 
north is has had great significance for humans across cultures, and yet it’s 
always been something that we discover, rather than sense directly.

Many animals, on the other hand, do have this capacity. Homing pigeons, as 
well as bats and fruit flies all possess magnetoreception, although what 
receptor they use to sense the magnetic pole is not clear. There’s even a 
possibility that humansalready have this sense 
<http://www.sciencealert.com/scientist-claims-he-s-discovered-a-magnetic-sixth-sense-in-humans>
, even if we don’t consciously use it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27d9374c3de695c74c3f7b0bbc1a2768ee60da2b%2F0_0_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20first%20humans%20to%20sense%20where%20north%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20first%20humans%20to%20sense%20where%20north%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F27d9374c3de695c74c3f7b0bbc1a2768ee60da2b%2F0_0_2880_1728%2F2880.jpg>
 Cyborg Nest are less interested in the practical, mundane uses of the North 
Sense than they are in how it will affect our enjoyment of reality. Photograph: 
fabiovh.co.uk/North Sense 
While it’s useful to know whether you’re heading in the right direction, its 
use as a navigational tool is limited, compared to, say, Google Maps. Cyborg 
Nest, however, do not intend the North Sense to be used solely as a tool. “It’s 
about the whole sensory experience that we are having as people,” Babitz 
explains. They are less interested in the practical, mundane uses of the North 
Sense than they are in how it will affect our enjoyment of reality, in the same 
way that now enjoy our other senses. “Biology is cruel in many ways: it gives 
us exactly what we need to survive and no more,” Cohen says. “The senses that 
were given to us for survival purposes aren’t used that way any more. I don’t 
use my eyes to scan the horizon for hordes of marauding invaders, I use my eyes 
to watch Netflix!”

“If we start to focus on building senses for cognitive enhancement, we’re 
creating tools that change the way we perceive our environment,” saysCarl H. 
Smith <https://www.ravensbourne.ac.uk/staff/carl-smith>, a senior lecturer at 
Ravensbourne in creative coding. “What’s really interesting about Cyborg Nest 
is their interest in how they can become technology, how they can adjust their 
own perception. Like changing the channel on your TV, we should be able to 
change the way we perceive.”

In other words, changing the nature of what we can perceive could change how 
we experience reality. There’s also the possibility of a domino effect, 
enhancing the way other senses work. “If, over time, we start using our sight 
less for orientation because we have another thing helping us, there could be 
some of the usage of the eye that could develop in another way or start being 
used for other reasons,” Babitz suggests.

Cyborg Nest is now taking pre-orders <http://www.cyborgnest.net/north-sense> 
for the North Sense, which is charged by a mini USB and entirely waterproof, 
giving the company a first taste of why its customers are interested in 
augmenting their senses in this way. “It’s the pioneers who are willing to do 
it,” Cohen says. “There are people who want the latest gadget before anyone 
else, who want to be on the bleeding edge of what’s next. We also seem to get 
into the world of people who do body modification: they want to know what’s 
next after you’ve been pierced and tattooed.”

In a similar way that tattoos were once the preserve of a radical few, Babitz 
and Cohen expect this form of tinkering with your body to become more widely 
accepted. Right now, the North Sense is an extreme choice, but will it be seen 
as such in a few years, as the stigma towards cyborgs (as Babitz and Cohen see 
themselves as being) wears off? After all, so many of us are already enhanced 
by technology, whether it’s simply wearing glasses, or implanting pacemakers, 
cybernetic prosthetics, or electromagnetic identification chips implanted 
inside the body to control the environment around us. Along this spectrum of 
modifying our bodies, where should the line between humans and cyborgs be drawn?

Cybernetics researcher Professor Kevin Warwick <http://www.kevinwarwick.com/>, 
deputy vice-chancellor at Coventry University, is avowedly in the latter camp: 
his work has involved experiments with inserting transmitters beneath his skin, 
where they interface directly with his nervous system, allowing him to control 
doors, lights, and later, a robot arm. “I do feel that it is pushing it 
somewhat to describe North Sense as turning you into a cyborg, but it’s not 
completely out of bounds, ” he says. “It is well removed from the case of 
enhancing a human’s brain functioning by directly introducing electronic 
signals into that person’s brain and enabling their brain signals to directly 
control technology, with feedback between the two, which I feel is more the 
expectation of what being a cyborg is about.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad0b79d1d123e9e2dcc4a77e0f6eaafb018da97%2F0_18_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Meet%20the%20first%20humans%20to%20sense%20where%20north%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Meet%20the%20first%20humans%20to%20sense%20where%20north%20is&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Ffirst-humans-sense-where-north-is-cyborg-gadget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcad0b79d1d123e9e2dcc4a77e0f6eaafb018da97%2F0_18_1200_1500%2F1200.jpg>
 Babitz (pictured) and Cohen expect this form of tinkering with your body to 
become more widely accepted. Photograph: North Sense 
To Warwick, it is significant that the sense sits outside the body, rather 
than being implanted: “Much research has been done to distinguish between the 
different effects caused if magnets are fitted externally to the person rather 
than being implanted. So maybe we can regard [the North Sense] as an 
entry-level cyborg device.”

This external placing is important to Cyborg Nest for one major reason: 
accessibility. It’s much easier for individuals to fit an exosense [a sense 
that sits outside the body] themselves, than it is to fit a sense under the 
skin. It’s also the reason for their choice of barbell piercings, widely used 
in piercing studios, to fit the sense. “In order to develop this as something 
lots of people around the world could do we didn’t want to say ‘you need to go 
see a doctor, who may or may not be able to do this’,” Cohen says. By contrast, 
licensed piercing studios are common around the world, and trained to modify 
people’s bodies to specification. It’s no coincidence that the four cyborg 
co-founders chose Steve Haworth, dubbed “The modfather” for his extensive 
contributions to the body modification community, as their fifth business 
partner.

The North Sense, as it is rolled out, will be experienced by not just one 
person (as in the case of Harbisson and Ribas) but by a whole community of 
willing participants, from a 58-year-old woman who rides wild horses in Spain, 
to an accountant in Chicago. “At the moment, there are no groups of people who 
have the same artificial senses,” says Babitz. “And you can’t build theories 
around the experience of just one brain. Now there will be a group of people 
with the same thing, so we can start understanding what this means in a wider 
context.”

It’s still unclear exactly what the long-term effects of always knowing where 
north is will be on Cohen, Babitz and the cyborgs-to-be waiting for their tech 
upgrade in the post. But despite evidence from Harbisson and Ribas that new 
senses take a long time to perceptually integrate, the pair are already feeling 
the effects of their new inputs. When I meet them in a London cafe, a week 
after the launch, both newbie magnetoreceptors turn themselves around before 
sitting down to figure out how they are positioned. Babitz sits facing 
south-west, Cohen south-east.

Indeed, their new sense has already created a new connection between them: for 
example, they’ve both been astonished by travelling on the tube: “You have a 
feeling most of the time that you’re going straight, but you’re sitting there 
and suddenly ... it buzzes,” Babitz says. “You’re not even going the direction 
you think you are,” Cohen adds. What the longer term effects on the 
participants will be isn’t yet clear, but at least they already know which way 
they’re headed.
 