
Australia was once home to giant reptiles, marsupials and birds (and some not 
so giant), but the extinction of this megafauna has been the subject of a 
debate that has persisted since the 19th century.

Despite great advances in the available scientific techniques for 
investigating the problem, answering the key question of how they became 
extinct has remained elusive.

Indeed, the same questions as those asked in the 19th century by scientists, 
such as the British comparative anatomistSir Richard Owen 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Richard-Owen> and the Prussian scientist 
and explorerLudwig Leichhardt 
<https://www.britannica.com/biography/Ludwig-Leichhardt>, remain: were people 
responsible for their demise or was it climate change?

Our new research, published in the latest Quaternary Science Reviews 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379116306011> journal, 
shows that early humans to Australian lived alongside some of the megafauna for 
many thousands of years before the animals became extinct.

The First Australians

Many researchers have previously argued the megafauna became extinct soon 
after the arrival of the First Australians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2001/may/10/highereducation.technology>.

Geologist who unearthed Mungo Man fights for 40,000-year-old remains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/25/geologist-fights-mungo-man-remains>
For example, it has been argued that perhaps firing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/1999/jan/08/timradford> of the landscape 
dramatically altered ancient Australia’s ecology. One species in particular, 
the giant flightless birdGenyornis newtoni 
<http://australianmuseum.net.au/genyornis-newtoni>, was investigated and shown 
to have succumbed to significant habitat change and directpredation 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2016-01-30/genyornis-giant-bird-extinction-mystery-points-to-first-people/7126882>
.

But the hypothesis for Genyornis’s extinction has come under significant 
criticism due to the emergence of counterevidence. Firstly the eggshells 
thought to be fromGenyornis are considered by leading palaeontologists to 
perhaps be from a much smallermegapode 
<https://theconversation.com/a-case-of-mistaken-identity-for-australias-extinct-big-bird-52856>
.

The evidence for firing of the landscape, as studied through the genomes of 
fire sensitive plants, shows no record of plants going through genetic 
bottlenecks as a result of significantfiring events 
<https://theconversation.com/did-fire-kill-off-australias-megafauna-19679>.

It seems Aboriginal populations may not have been that large until much later 
in prehistory. Our genomic research has revealed significant demographic 
changes did not occur until about10,000 years ago 
<https://theconversation.com/dna-reveals-a-new-history-of-the-first-australians-65344>
. The genomic evidence suggests for tens of thousands of years, Aboriginal 
populations were not that large.

More careful analysis of the record often reveals a very different picture.

A dating game

Critical to understanding when the megafauna became extinct is dating, and 
ideally, the application of multiple dating techniques will provide the finest 
resolution. If two different dating techniques arrive at similar dates, then 
this is a very good sign for the age of a species.

In recent years it has been suggested there are very few good dates for the 
extinction of megafauna. Some have argued it is possible many of the 45 or so 
megafauna species thought to have become extinct after 50,000 years ago may 
have in fact slipped into the extinction abyss tens of thousands of yearsbefore 
<http://newsroom.unsw.edu.au/news/science/climate-change-not-human-activity-led-megafauna-extinction>
 the First Australians arrived.

One way of testing the various extinction models is by looking for megafauna 
in landscapes that show continuous Aboriginal occupation over the past 50,000 
years. These landscapes should ideally also have conditions for the 
preservation of fossil bones.

Mungo Man is a physical reminder of the need for Indigenous recognition
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/25/mungo-man-physical-reminder-need-for-indigenous-recognition>
There are very few localities like this, but one exception in Australia is the 
Willandra Lakes <https://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/places/world/willandra>
 world heritage area in New South Wales.

If we can show that megafauna disappear soon after the arrival of the First 
Australians, then we have support for the rapid extinction model. If we show 
megafauna and people coexisted for many years, then we may have to seek other 
explanations for their demise.

In theory this sounds quite straightforward, but unfortunately it is far from 
the case. While there are megafauna fossils found across the Willandra 
landscape, many of these have eroded out of their original burial contexts.


We can get age estimates on these fossils using uranium series (U-series) 
dating, but they only represent minimum age estimates. If we can find fossils 
still encased within their original sediments, then we can date the age of the 
sand grains using a technique called optically stimulatedluminescence dating 
<http://archaeology.about.com/od/lterms/g/luminescence.htm> (OSL for short).

By dating the fossil directly with U-series we arrive at a minimum age 
estimate. By dating the sand grains a fossil is found in we arrive at the 
maximum age range.

Unfortunately carbon dating does not work within the Willandra for megafauna 
fossils as there never seems to be enough collagen left in the bone to obtain a 
carbon date.

A groundbreaking fossil find – in the museum

After much field work spread over a number of years we had very little luck in 
findingin situ fossils. We found numerous specimens, but these were often 
isolated bones sitting on eroded surfaces.

But one specimen found a few decades before our search did provide an 
excellent dating opportunity.

Zygomaturus trilobus was a large lumbering wombat-like marsupial, the size of 
a very large bull. We know very little about its ecology, and we know even less 
about when and how it became extinct.

A specimen of this extraordinary marsupial with its large flaring cheek bones 
(zygomatics) was excavated on two separate occasions in the 1980s, first by 
zoologist Jeanette Hope and later by archaeologists Harvey Johnston and Peter 
Clarke.

The upper jaw (maxilla) of the animal was sent to the Australian Museum in 
Sydney where it was kept encased in its original sediments. The lower jaw can 
be seen on display atMungo National Park 
<http://www.nationalparks.nsw.gov.au/visit-a-park/parks/Mungo-National-Park>.

Climate the catalyst for extinction?

By taking sediment samples for OSL dating and by dating the fossil directly 
with U-series dating we were able to show the specimen died sometime around 
33,000 years ago.

Aboriginal people arrived in the Willandra around 50,000 years ago 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v421/n6925/abs/nature01383.html>. It is 
always possible that earlier evidence for the First Australians in that 
landscape will be found in the future.

The Zygomaturus specimen shows people and megafauna coexisted for at least 
17,000 years. Indeed the species seems to have existed up to the period where 
the climate began to change dramatically, known as the last glacial cycle 
leading up to theLast Glacial Maximum 
<http://archaeology.about.com/od/lterms/g/last_glacial_ma.htm>.

Of course our date at 33,000 years ago does not represent the extinction date 
ofZygomaturus, just the latest dated remains of this iconic species.

Perhaps deteriorating climatic condition saw the Willandra Lakes become a 
refuge for both megafauna and people, as the surrounding plains held less 
water. This may have brought species such asZygomaturus and people into 
increased contact.

This single fossil has changed the nature of the megafauna extinction debate. 
We can now abandon the rapid/over kill hypothesis and start to untangle how 
climate may have played a role, or how changes in Aboriginal population numbers 
may have affected the ecology of the megafauna.


We should start to build an understanding of how these animals played a role 
in the ecology of ancient Australia. Were they, for example, critical in the 
management of certain habitats, just as the megafauna of Africa are today?

We know next to nothing of the ecology of most of these species.

It is possible that some species of megafauna coexisted for even longer, so 
much work remains to be done. There is still a great deal to learn about 
Australia’s ancient megafauna.

• Michael Westaway is a senior research fellow at the research centre for 
human evolution at Griffith University, Jon Olley is a professor of water 
science at Griffith University and Rainer Grun is a professor of 
archaegeochemistry Griffith University.This article was originally published on 
the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/aboriginal-australians-co-existed-with-the-megafauna-for-at-least-17-000-years-70589>
, part of theGuardian Comment Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/series/guardian-comment-network>
 