
Calls for a tax on meat and dairy products (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/07/tax-meat-and-dairy-to-cut-emissions-and-save-lives-study-urges>
, 8 November) are misguided and would increase, not decrease, overall emissions 
from agriculture. Instead we should improve production systems by taxing 
nitrogen fertiliser and pesticides, the underlying causes of environmental 
damage associated with food systems.

Something close to mass hysteria has developed in relation to cattle and other 
ruminants since the publication in 2006 of Livestock’s Long Shadow, by theFood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Agriculture Organisation. 
This report and its successor in 2013 are both flawed and misleading. They 
conflate the emissions from the destruction of virgin land in South America, 
the root cause of which is not chicken production, but our insatiable demand 
for vegetable oils, with the actual emissions from ruminants. They also failed 
to balance this by including emissions from the conversion of land to grow 
crops for human consumption, or the carbon sequestration associated with the 
planting of forests in parts of the world, such as the UK, that was taking 
place at the same time.

We do urgently need to reduce methane emissions, but fossil fuel extraction 
should be our primary focus because this puts new carbon into the atmosphere, 
whereas ruminants recycle existing atmospheric carbon and, under appropriate 
management, store large amounts of it in soils under grass.
Richard Young
Policy director, Sustainable Food Trust

• Curbing advertising of junk food (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/12/stop-junk-food-advertising-curb-childhood-obesity-experts>
, 12 November) to reduce childhood obesity is one needed measure, but it seems 
unlikely to be the most effective policy that could be employed to combat this 
urgent health crisis. Indeed, it appears to be a peripheral attempt to persuade 
the population to change their habits by removing temptation, hardly “tough” 
and at most superficial.

On a recent journey from Glasgow to Sheffield it was striking that no service 
station visited offered healthy food options. Pre-packaged, high-fat, 
high-sugar hits were dominant. If the government is serious about tacking 
obesity, perhaps a more direct approach is needed? State-funded healthy eating 
outlets in motorway services would provide a welcome alternative. School meals 
have been transformed and are to an extent subsidised catering for young 
people, perhaps Jamie Oliver’s next big challenge could make a real difference 
for us all?
John Wardle
Sheffield

• The Guardian’s Foodie traveller (Cook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/06/venice-moeche-soft-shell-crabs>
, 5 November) hosts Ben Tish advocating the eating of soft shell crabs. These, 
according to Mr Tish’s description, are killed by being “soaked in seasoned 
beaten egg” by which means they “eventually drown”. Mr Tish’s use of the word 
“eventually” indicates a period of pain and suffering. I do not like reading 
advocacies of animal cruelty, even towards crabs. I am not a militant 
vegetarian, just a normal member of the public.

If the Guardian wants readers to support the Guardian financially, as you do, 
and as I am thinking of doing, please consider the very many of your readers 
who do not like the idea of the Guardian promoting animal cruelty for food 
pleasure. Those days really should be over, and I invite you to reconsider the 
Guardian’s position on this matter.
Robin Leslie
London

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 