
The Metropolitan police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/metropolitan-police> 
has launched an investigation into historical sexual abuse claims involving 
London football clubs, becoming the 21st force across the country to have begun 
similar inquiries into teams in their areas.


Britain’s largest police force said specialist officers would look into 
allegations of “non-recent” crimes, but refused to say which clubs it was 
investigating.

“We take all the allegations we receive very seriously and they will be dealt 
with sensitively,” said DCS Ivan Balhatchet of the Met’s sexual offences, 
exploitation and child abuse command. “Anyone who has been a victim of sexual 
abuse, whatever the circumstances, or has any relevant information should 
contact their local police or the NSPCC.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Football%20sex%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Football%20sex%20abuse%20scandal%3A%20how%20the%20story%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffootball%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F08%2Ffootball-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video&media=>
Football sex abuse scandal: how the story unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/video/2016/dec/08/football-sex-abuse-scandal-how-the-story-unfolded-video>
According to police, more than 350 potential victims have come forward since 
the former Crewe defender Andy Woodward waived his right to anonymity to reveal 
in aninterview with the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/nov/16/andy-woodward> that he had 
been a ­victim of sexual abuse

Gary Johnson, the former player who was paid £50,000 by Chelsea not to go 
public with allegations that he was abused by their former chief scout Eddie 
Heath, has said that a personal apology from the club’s board, delivered in 
person on Wednesday, was “too little, too late”.

Johnson was a member of Chelsea’s first team from 1978 to 1981 after joining 
the club as an 11-year-old in 1970. The 57-year-old spoke out recently to say 
he was groomed from the age of 13 by Heath, who was chief scout from 1968 to 
1979 and is now dead. Chelsea’s insurers paid £50,000 in compensation, without 
liability, in return for a confidentiality clause.


Johnson told the BBC that the £50,000 he received was “not enough for the pain 
and suffering I’ve had”, adding: “It [the abuse] took away my childhood – I can 
never get that back.”


In Holyrood, Nicola Sturgeon resisted calls for the inquiry into historical 
child sexual abuse inScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to be 
widened to include football clubs, after the Scottish Labour leader, Kezia 
­Dugdale, pressed her during first minister’s ­questions about revelations of 
abuse in Scottish clubs.


The first minister said: “My view is we should allow that inquiry to get on 
with its job and we should allow the police to get on with their job of 
investigating allegations of abuse in football.”


Earlier, a former chief ­executive of the Scottish Football Association called 
for a separate inquiry as the revel­ations across the UK continued to mount. 
Gordon Smith told BBC Radio’s Good Morning Scotland that an investigation into 
how clubs and national bodies had responded to allegations was needed.


“There should be an inquiry, an inquiry into anybody who knew anything about 
this sort of thing,” he said. “If this was happening at a club, what action did 
they take? We’re now finding out some of the cases down in England where the 
club tried to hush the situation, even paid a player money to not say anything 
about it.”


The SFA has said it is part of a task force set up to coordinate complaints 
and information relating to child sexual abuse within football and that it is 
passing on all information it receives toPolice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Scotland.

Meanwhile, the Scottish Premiership club Patrick Thistle have admitted firing 
one of their employees in 1992 over abuse claims. The club disclosed that a 
former physiotherapist, named as John Hart, who died in 1995, was dismissed 
after the allegations came to light more than 20 years ago.

In a statement, the club denied any cover-up, stating: “The current board and 
management knew nothing of this until an internal investigation uncovered it in 
the last few days. As a result, the club informed the SFA and Police Scotland.”

This follows revelations concerning a former youth coach for Celtic, Hibernian 
and Falkirk football clubs, who was on Wednesday charged with a child sex 
offence and has been remanded in custody.


Jim McCafferty, who worked in football across the central belt of Scotland and 
in Ireland from the 1980s, was arrested in Belfast on Tuesday after presenting 
himself at a police station. He was charged with engaging in sexual activity 
with a child aged 13-16 between December 2011 and December 2014.


 