
Not everyone gets to have a moment named after them. If it happens, it’s 
probably a bad thing (helloGerald Ratner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/22/gerald-ratner-jewellery-total-crap-1992-archive>
, the self-deprecating jeweller). ButMichael Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jul/29/weather-forecasts-met-office>
 is pretty sanguine the morning his name has been splashed across the media – 
again – including on at least one front page.

It’s a “Michael Fish moment” we’re talking about’; in this case, the admission 
by the Bank of England thatits forecast of an economic hurricane after the 
Brexit vote had not come to pass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
.

Strictly speaking, a Michael Fish moment would be the other way round, with 
Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/24/bank-of-england-mark-carney-says-brexit-contingency-plans-under-way>
, the bank’s governor, confidently stating on 23 June 2016: “Earlier today, a 
woman rang the Bank of England and said she heard there was a downturn on the 
way … well, if you’re watching, don’t worry, there isn’t!” And then the worst 
recession in recorded history would have struck.

Chief economist of Bank of England admits errors in Brexit forecasting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors>
Either way, Fish isn’t fussed that his assurance that no hurricane was coming, 
hours before the big one hit in 1987, remains a euphemism for a bad forecast. 
“I don’t mind at all. To be honest, I’m amazed people still say it because 
anyone under the age of 35 would have no idea what the hell it’s about,” says 
the 72-year-old weatherman.

Fish can’t recall other “Michael Fish moments”, but there are plenty in 
newspaper archives. The phrase has been used to describe: the prediction by an 
Ipsos Mori pollster that John Kerry would become US president in 2004; a 2013
prediction that the games console market would stay strong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/gamesblog/2013/oct/07/game-links-press-start>
; and an assurance by the BBC’s Nick Robinson that there would be no Labour 
move against Gordon Brown, hours before such rumblings began.

The phrase has also become a way for experts to make guarded predictions. “At 
the risk of inviting a Michael Fish moment, that Armageddon scenario looks 
unlikely,” readsa piece published in 2006 on the prospect of a global economic 
crisis 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/comment/2938984/Business-comment.html>. To 
be charitable, it was still a couple of years away.

Fish and Ratner have much in common. The short-term gaffe fallout was heavy. 
In Ratner’s case, his description of his company’s own sherry decanters as 
“total crap” in a speech in 1991nearly wiped it out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/aug/22/gerald-ratner-jewellery-total-crap-1992-archive>
, and “doing a Ratner” is still synonymous with corporate cockups. “It took me 
seven years to get over my mistake,”Ratner wrote in 2009 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/newstopics/mps-expenses/6703425/Gerald-Ratner-If-I-can-regain-my-reputation-so-can-MPs.html>
. But he says the notoriety fuelled his subsequent success with an online 
jewellery business.

Fish says his moment hurt him at first. “But it has probably been a boost in 
the long run because it has kept my name in the public eye and I still get 
booked for public speaking,” he says. “I don’t make jokes about it but I do 
open up by calling myself Michael “Hurricane” Fish. It’s an honour, really. A 
strange honour, but I’ll take it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichael-fish-brexit-moment-hurricane-predictions-forecast-bank-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c5243fc1106b31dc03358c3dffad6ec5077757%2F0_0_2308_1665%2F2308.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Fish%20on%20his%20Brexit%20moment%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strange%20honour%2C%20but%20I%E2%80%99ll%20take%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichael-fish-brexit-moment-hurricane-predictions-forecast-bank-england%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Fish%20on%20his%20Brexit%20moment%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20a%20strange%20honour%2C%20but%20I%E2%80%99ll%20take%20it%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fshortcuts%2F2017%2Fjan%2F06%2Fmichael-fish-brexit-moment-hurricane-predictions-forecast-bank-england%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82c5243fc1106b31dc03358c3dffad6ec5077757%2F0_0_2308_1665%2F2308.jpg>
 Michael Fish during his infamous 1987 forecast that failed to predict a 
hurricane. Photograph: Picasa/BBC Weather  