
Hugh Muir: ‘This is the new Gove: hard edge, short memory’

Cometh the hour, cometh the assassin. On one level, this was the Michael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove> we are familiar with: nerdy, 
Pooterish. There was no blood, no sign of obvious trauma. And yet he was 
different. There was a harder edge, a swagger, the air of one who has the 
better of those who underestimated him. Gove the justice secretary, Gove the 
would-be leader of the country. Gove the serial killer. This will take some 
getting used to.

The old Gove told us that people were fed up of experts. This new, steely Gove 
eschewed that nonsense to lavish love and praise on the governor of the Bank of 
England, Mark Carney,and the “wise action” he has taken in past days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/interest-rate-cut-likely-brexit-bank-of-england-mark-carney>
.

The old Gove profited from, and perhaps piloted, the divisive leave campaign 
that has split the country. The new Gove told us he would create “a more 
welcoming and inclusive country”, rejecting “division and suspicion”. The 
referendum campaign exposed problems that run deep, he said, with a smile that 
said, “that was nothing to do with me”.

The old Gove was ejected from his job as education secretary after causing so 
much antagonism that even a Conservative prime minister had to move him on. 
This new Gove, in charge of the new script, hailed himself as the man “who 
changed our education system”.

The old Gove sat happily in a government that deregulated the City, allowing 
the 1% to enrich themselves as never before. This Gove railed against 
“insiders” who have “rigged” the system for their own lucrative benefit, 
portraying themselves as akin to Steve Jobs, all the while “behaving like David 
Brent”.

Brexit news live – Gove outlines Tory leadership plan saying: 'Whatever 
charisma is, I don't have it'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jul/01/brexit-live-michael-gove-to-set-out-his-vision-for-britain-as-conservatives-reel-from-boris-johnsons-exit>
The old Gove was cheerleader for the austerity government that has decimated 
local government and public sector entities. This Gove promised a “big and 
bold” vision for public services both “more humane and more caring”. He sat for 
years alongside Jeremy Hunt and Andrew Lansley as health services were 
squeezed. This Gove promised the NHS an extra £100m a week by 2020.

As a Cameronian big beast, he ticked the box on strategy that missed targets 
for housebuilding, thus exacerbating community tensions. This all-new Gove said 
he would be the man to reverse that deficiency. All said with a straight face 
layered, one supposed, above a wry and knowing smile.

Gove has clearly chosen to portray himself as the man with passion, set 
against the clinical efficiency of Theresa May. The start of his address was 
hesitant, but by the end, warmed up, he sought to animate: the putative leader 
as evangelist. But there were fewer supportive MPs on hand to cheer him on than 
he would have liked, for already there are those who view him as disloyal. 
‘Twas ever thus; the Tories respect the wielding of the knifebut revile the one 
who wields it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/michael-made-an-odd-assassin-but-then-boris-was-a-strange-caesar>
.

There are hurdles. and he knows it. If you are looking for charisma and 
glamour, I’m not your man he said – having dispatched Boris Johnson, the man 
who had both.

He is not widely liked, having unsettled educators and the judiciary on his 
path, being known as an abrasive figure. But he let us know that would not be a 
problem. He did for Dave, and then Boris – he is not here to be popular. The 
good assassin carries no regrets.

Martin Kettle: ‘A man who knows his colleagues don’t trust him’

With so much Conservative blood on his hands, Michael Gove now has a huge task 
in this Tory leadership election. But it is not insurmountable, if he is lucky. 
Above all, and most pressingly, he has to deal with the trust issue. He turned 
against his friend David Cameron over Europe, causing an irreparable personal 
breach. Then he turned against his friend Boris Johnson over the leadership, 
leaving him in the gutter.

These two actions mark Gove down as both extremely ruthless and massively 
ambitious for the top job. So the question he had to begin to answer in today’s 
speech was whether Gove’s other talents and attractions to Conservative MPs and 
members can outweigh the immense damage that he has done to his reputation for 
trust.

He pitched to the left of Andrea Leadsom – and Theresa May

Gove’s chosen approach was to position himself very firmly as the progressive 
Tory candidate, in a field that is defined by the Brexit vote. His insistence 
that the party must now be led by a leaver is self-evidently a positioning 
against Theresa May, who has been the instant beneficiary of Gove’s betrayal of 
Johnson.

But Gove also chose to launch his leadership bid with a very substantial 
social reform speech, with some significant pledges on subjects including the 
NHS and rental housing. This positions him not just to the left of Andrea 
Leadsom – the dark horse in this race, who is a more classic Thatcherite on 
economic issues – but also to the left of May, who said nothing specific about 
these issuesin her own highly competent launch yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
.

Of the candidates in this race, there is little doubt that Gove is the most 
socially progressive and intellectually liberal. There will also be major 
question marks about his competence as a minister – something that May’s team 
is sure to focus on. But the immediate question for Gove is whether he can now 
be trusted by his colleagues. After the last 48 hours, that’s still a hard 
sell. It will need all of his charm – and determination – to clinch the deal 
with his still stunned party.

Frances Ryan: ‘Still peddling emotion over fact’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmichael-gove-tory-leadership-speech-brexit-tory-blood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe17bb9ba0ff4dd043022abbbf4f2d368cb7f5801%2F0_0_3585_2150%2F3585.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Gove%E2%80%99s%20pitch%20for%20the%20Tory%20leadership%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20verdict%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir%2C%20Martin%20Kettle%2C%20Frances%20Ryan%20and%20Alan%20Travis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmichael-gove-tory-leadership-speech-brexit-tory-blood%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Gove%E2%80%99s%20pitch%20for%20the%20Tory%20leadership%3A%20our%20writers%E2%80%99%20verdict%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir%2C%20Martin%20Kettle%2C%20Frances%20Ryan%20and%20Alan%20Travis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F01%2Fmichael-gove-tory-leadership-speech-brexit-tory-blood%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe17bb9ba0ff4dd043022abbbf4f2d368cb7f5801%2F0_0_3585_2150%2F3585.jpg>
 Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/PA 
Michael Gove, the reluctant candidate: this is the character the leave 
campaigner’s team seem to have created in the past 24 hours, if only to deal 
with the awkward fact thathe’d previously repeatedly said  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/michael-gove-denial-categorial-not-equipped-to-be-pm-candidate>
he neither wanted this job nor would be good at it.

“What does your heart tell you?” “What was the right thing to do?” The answer 
apparently is “be in charge of all of you”. This wasn’t an elite holding on to 
power. This was “an end to politics as usual”.

It’s unclear how someone can be the candidate for change when (as Gove noted 
himself) they’ve been in government for six years, but still, Gove was giving 
it a go. For the good of the country, you understand. At times, it was as if 
Gove was not so much trying to run the nation (this “kind, beautiful, stubborn 
country”) as seduce it.

There were vague policy mentions (devolving power to the “frontline” of 
prisons, schools, and hospitals) but this was a speech of emotion. Like a 
national self-help session. Voting to leave the European Union showed that the 
“brave” electorate had “resolute and daring hopes”. Now is the time to “believe 
in ourselves”.

It beats believing in facts. As Gove told us of the “wise actions” that had 
been taken over the past six days, I admit I was struggling to pinpoint any of 
them. We are heading for permanent post-fact politics. Gove is determined, 
reluctantly, to lead us there.

Alan Travis: ‘A noticeable lack of support from Tory MPs’

Michael Gove made a clear plea in his speech that his political assassination 
of Boris Johnson should be regarded as a crime passionnel, justified by his 
overwhelming belief in the need to ensure that Britain should completely sever 
its relationship with the European Union.

He made clear that his Brexit Max vision will involve reducing immigration, 
ending completely free movement for EU citizens, and so losing all access to 
the EU single market. The biggest danger of this approach is the likely loss of 
London’s role as the global financial centre despite its key contribution to 
Britain’s economic growth. Gove made it clear he is prepared to see Paris and 
Frankfurt take over that role by launching an all-out attack on the financial 
sector and big business.

This was in sharp contrast to Theresa May’s pitch, where she stressed the 
importance of keeping open access to the EU single market for Britain’s service 
industries, and her belief that reform of the free movement rules means that 
could be achieved while at the same time bringing down immigration.

Theresa May launches Tory leadership bid with pledge to unite country
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
Gove also made an explicit promise to reduce immigration. This was something 
he did not do during the referendum campaign, instead talking only of 
“controlling it”, and suggesting it might even rise if closing the door on 
unskilled EU migration allowed more immigration from India and Pakistan. But he 
also conceded today that the “tens of thousands” target could not be achieved 
while Britain was in the EU.

While Gove tried but failed to regain lost ground on leave’s broken promises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/27/eu-referendum-reality-check-leave-campaign-promises>
 by making “jam tomorrow” spending pledges, such as £100m extra a week for the 
NHS by 2020, there was no mention of the specific “paint it on the side of a 
bus” promise of £350m a week for the NHS.

The fact that there were only three MPs present at Gove’s launch compared with 
the 60-plus already pledged to May shows that he has to make an explosive start 
out of the blocks to overcome her initial advantage. It looks as though the 
accusation of being a serial assassin – first deserting his friend, David 
Cameron, and then the midnight murder of Boris Johnson – may well prove crucial 
in the end.
 