
Out of once-familiar fear I glance up to check Doukghyll beck. As a child 
playing outside the village school I was once bowled over by this diminutive
Severn-type bore <http://www.severn-bore.co.uk/>, which can suddenly, but 
thankfully rarely, belch from the bowels of Doukghyll Cave. That day, the caves 
in the limestone rock were brimful after deluges on Penyghent crouching above; 
the “mountain lion” of Yorkshire’s Three Peaks country.

Back in our “Just William” days the beck was an alfresco lab for us school 
kids. How it all returns as I stand, wellie-shod, in mid-stream, stirring 
slippery beck-bottom stones with my trekking poles.

Silvery minnows flit away. Turning a rock over I spot a bullhead lurking like 
a giant tadpole with large gills 
<http://www.natureinthedales.org.uk/species/fish/bullhead>, only its tail 
flickering, under cover as I gently return the stone just so.

Cafe with a view – and a mugful of memories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/18/yorkshire-dales-three-peaks-climbing-caving-ribble>
Caddisfly grubs can be spotted churning up specks of gravel and sand as they 
build their protective housing. But where are thewhite-clawed crayfish 
<http://www.ydmt.org/programme-details-ribble-crayfish-project-14617> that 
preyed on them? We used to collect them in jam jars to study, then release 
them, but now they area species in need of protection 
<http://www.ydmt.org/programme-details-ribble-crayfish-project-14617>. Two 
small brown trout appear. No tickling them today, my previous dexterity long 
gone.

By the school on the bank above, and now 70-odd years older, the fiery 
autumnal horse chestnut tree 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/28/climbers-view-horse-chestnut-tree-country-diary>
 has sprinkled shiny brown conkers on the road, some still protected inside 
their partly split spiky shells, like Pokémon Go monsters grinning from ear to 
ear.

When I was a pupil at Horton-in-Ribblesdale primary school 
<http://www.horton-in-ribblesdale.n-yorks.sch.uk/> during the second world war, 
we worried about stray bombs. Now this seat of learning, which also functions 
as a dale-head village hub, is againunder threat 
<https://www.friendsofhortonschool.co.uk/>. 

North Yorkshire county council plans to close it next year 
<http://www.cravenherald.co.uk/news/14835652.Public_meeting_on_possible_closure_of_Horton_in_Ribblesdale_primary_school/>
, and the pupils will then be bussed to schools up to six miles away along 
narrow flood-prone roads. The governors have asked for more time to find a new 
head teacher. Otherwise, it will be farewell to the alma mater of countless 
Dales children, whose families worked on farms, in quarries and along the
Settle-Carlisle railway <http://www.visitcumbria.com/carlset/>, next to the end 
of the line. Quite literally.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>

• The picture caption was amended on 30 November 2016 to make clear which beck 
was illustrated.












 