
Vice-President-elect Mike Pence denied on Sunday that Donald Trump’s 
presidential campaign had anycontacts with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/michael-flynn-russia-ambassador-trump-dossier>
, insisting investigations into Russian hacking of political parties are “a 
distraction”.

Obama aide: Trump should 'reach out' to Democrats boycotting inauguration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/democrats-inauguration-boycott-john-lewis-trump>
Since the election, US intelligence agencies have publicly concluded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 that the Kremlin orchestrated a series of hacks intended to create chaos, 
defeat Hillary Clinton and help Trump win the White House.

After weeks of doubting such opinions, Trump this week said: “I think it was 
Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2017/jan/11/trump-dossier-russia-has-compromising-material-on-president-elect-live-updates?page=with:block-58765de5e4b0f10ba20b7107>
.” But he did not answer questions about alleged contacts between advisers and 
powerful Russians.

On Sunday, Pence denied there were any such contacts, telling Fox News Sunday: 
“Of course not. Why would there be any contacts between the campaign?”

On Friday the White House said it was aware of regular contact 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/michael-flynn-russia-ambassador-trump-dossier>
 between Trump’s pick for national security adviser, retired Lt Gen Michael 
Flynn, and the Russian ambassador to the US, Sergey Kislyak. Before the 
campaign, Flynnmet Putin 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/19/world/europe/austrias-far-right-signs-a-cooperation-pact-with-putins-party.html>
 and made occasional appearances on Russia Today, a Kremlin-funded media 
network.

Pence denied that Flynn spoke with Russia’s ambassador in December about 
sanctions on Russian officials.


“I talked to General Flynn yesterday, and the conversations that took place at 
that time were not in any way related to new US sanctions againstRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and the expulsion of diplomats,” 
Pence said.

He then argued that the intelligence agencies’ conclusions were politically 
motivated. “I joined this campaign in the summer,” he said, “and I can tell you 
that all the contact by the Trump campaign and the associates were with the 
American people.


“This is all a distraction, and it’s all part of a narrative to delegitimize 
the election. The American people see right through it.”

The president-elect’s transition team has, however, tried to distance itself 
from Carter Page, whom Trump called a foreign policy adviser during the 
campaign. Page haslongstanding business interests 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/08/world/europe/carter-page-donald-trump-moscow-russia.html?_r=0>
 in Russia, and visited Moscow in December.

The campaign has said less about Paul Manafort, Trump’s former campaign 
chairman who worked for allies of the Kremlin before joining the businessman’s 
presidential run, which he left followingreports 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/15/us/politics/paul-manafort-ukraine-donald-trump.html>
 that he had received vast sums for his work in Ukraine.

Some of the allegations about contacts were included in an unsubstantiated 
document,compiled by a former British intelligence officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 and published this week by BuzzFeed, which Pence called “salacious garbage”.

Pence insisted that Trump merely wanted to improve relations with Putin, whom 
the businessman has frequently praised and said he wants to work with.

A report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-to-hold-summit-with-vladimir-putin-within-weeks>
 in the British Sunday Times newspaper on Sunday cited a Trump transition team 
source and said plans were afoot for a summit in Reykjavik as Trump’s first 
foreign visit. A Kremlin spokesman said on Sunday no talks about such a visit 
had yet taken place.

Also on Sunday, the incoming White House chief of staff, Reince Priebus, 
refused to say what policy Trump would have toward Russia’s invasion of Crimea 
and eastern Ukraine and the continuing war it caused there.

Trump and Vladimir Putin to hold summit 'within weeks'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-to-hold-summit-with-vladimir-putin-within-weeks>
On Fox, Pence said: “I think the president-elect has made it very clear that 
we have a terrible relationship with Russia right now. What the president-elect 
is determined to do is explore the possibility of better relations.”

During the campaign, Pence occasionally denied 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/trump-said-mike-pence-claimed-did-not-229171>
 that Trump had made certain remarks even when the businessman was on video 
saying them. He denied Trump hadpromised 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/2016-presidential-debate-fact-check/2016/10/trump-has-broken-his-committment-to-release-his-tax-returns-229138>
 to release his tax returns, for instance, and that Trump hadsuggested 
<http://cnnpressroom.blogs.cnn.com/2016/03/29/full-rush-transcript-donald-trump-cnn-milwaukee-republican-presidential-town-hall/>
 Saudi Arabia and South Korea should developtheir own 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/27/us/politics/donald-trump-transcript.html?_r=0>
 nuclear weapons.

Also on Fox News Sunday, the CIA director, John Brennan, defended the 
intelligence agencies’ conclusions.

“Spontaneity is not something that protects national security interests,” 
Brennan said. “So therefore when [Trump] speaks or when he reacts, just make 
sure he understands that the implications and impact on the United States could 
be profound.

“It’s more than just about Mr Trump. It’s about the United States of America.”
 