
Believe hard enough, and you can get what you want. Or at any rate that’s the 
theory behind the fashionable cult of manifestation,as championed by Oprah 
<http://www.drwaynedyer.com/video/art-of-manifestation-oprah-winfrey/>; focus 
on your heart’s desire, tell yourself you’re going to get it, and it’s amazing 
what positive thinking can achieve. Only now this form of secular prayer seems 
to be catching on in Downing Street too.

This week Simon Stevens, head of NHS England, became the latest civil servant 
accused of failing to believe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
. He is said to be regarded by some within No 10 as “unenthusiastic”, 
insufficiently on board perhaps with thrilling efforts to solve the NHS crisis 
by claiming there isn’t one. Think positive, man! Best foot forward! LikeIvan 
Rogers, the departing ambassador to the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
 said to be too gloomy about Brexit, apparently Stevens just needs to jolly 
well buck his ideas up.

NHS England chief hits back at Theresa May on health service funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
To be fair, a certain cheery confidence may well prove useful in Brexit 
negotiations if Theresa May’s plan is basically to play chicken with the EU – 
convincing other member states that Britain is hellbent on extracting itself, 
regardless of the cost to itself or anyone else – and hope they blink first. 
That would require a display of gung-ho optimism and Rogers’ true feelings were 
perhaps too well known in Brussels for him to fake it.

And even our economic performance post-Brexit vote is, in some ways, linked to 
the power of self-belief. Part of the reason the predicted post-referendum 
crash hasn’t materialised may simply be that leavers still cheerfully expect 
Brexit to be a change for the better, and so see no reason to panic and stop 
spending.

But putting a brave face on what are still, for now, the theoretical risks of 
Brexit is one thing. Wishing away cancelled operations is another. The pressure 
on beds is too tangible now for that, the stuff of school-run conversations and 
everyday life even for people too busy to follow the news.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20and%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20at%20first%20PMQs%20of%202017%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftheresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video&media=>
Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn clash over NHS at first PMQs of 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/11/theresa-may-and-jeremy-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-at-first-pmqs-of-2017-video>
At the funeral of an old family friend last week, I was shocked to hear how 
quickly he had been bundled out of hospital after a stroke, despite being 
unable to speak or fend for himself. Yesterday, I bumped into another friend 
whose elderly mother needs an operation and has been told she can have it 
whenever a bed comes free – but nobody could say when that might be, so it’s 
hard for the family to make plans to look after her when she comes out.

The idea that the NHS isn’t coping is seeping into ordinary lives now, whether 
or not they heardthe surgeon on Thursday morning’s Today programme explaining 
that the crisis isn’t just affecting A&E 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b088scv6> – every day she wonders if there 
will be enough beds available for her to operate on even half the patients on 
her list. Perhaps she should try to see the sunny side too, of there being no 
room on the wards for people to recover.

But this is more than just a culture clash between natural Tiggers and 
suspicious Eeyores. The charge of pessimism is really just code for suggesting 
that Stevens isn’t really “one of us”; that like Rogers, he was David Cameron’s 
man and hasn’t adapted yet to regime change in No 10.

And here, perhaps, lies a grain of truth. Simon Stevens is unpartisan enough 
to have worked perfectly comfortably with everyone from Labour’s then health 
secretaryFrank Dobson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/26/frank-dobson-resigning-health-secretary-mayor-london-stupid>
 (who first hired him as a special adviser two decades ago) through the Lib 
Dems’Norman Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/may/20/norman-lamb-was-a-good-but-not-great-care-minister>
 to Cameron, who originallybrought him back in 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/23/simon-stevens-nhs-chief-private-past-uk>
 to run NHS England.

But Stevens has arguably overstepped the mark lately, not so much by making 
clear that the NHS got less cash than it wanted in the last spending round – 
although he has been unusually bold for a bureaucrat in contradicting ministers 
on this – as by suggesting that reform of benefits paid even to the richest 
pensionerscould provide a long-term source of funding for social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/18/this-is-nhs-chief-demands-political-consensus-funding-elderly-and-social-care>
. He may be right, but welfare reform is technically beyond his pay grade. For 
him to be openly discussing it hints at some frustration.

Our NHS trust is close to a tipping point – and we are not alone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2017/jan/11/our-nhs-trust-is-close-to-a-tipping-point-and-we-are-not-alone>
For Stevens is not just any old bureaucrat. He has an unusually shrewd grasp 
not just of policy but of politics, having started life as a hospital manager 
before turning Labour special adviser and architect (under Alan Milburn) of New 
Labour’s biggest NHS reforms. He endured tortuous negotiations with the 
Treasury in the early 00s over the national insurance rise that unleashed 
billions for the NHS – the lessons of which he has not forgotten – before 
moving into Downing Street to advise Tony Blair and then pursuing a successful 
private sector career. He took some persuading to come back and run theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, and friends say he did it only 
because he thought he could make a difference on something that matters.

Might he be struggling somewhat with taking orders from a new No 10 team whose 
understanding of the subject is inevitably less deep than his and which, unlike 
Cameron, is temperamentally opposed to just giving people their heads?Judging 
by his resignation email, Rogers clearly felt that way 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/04/quote-sir-ivan-rogers-resignation-eu-brexit-email-in-full>
. But that’s being a civil servant for you.

As the name suggests, it is the politicians who are the masters, for good or 
ill. The Whitehall machine works best when civil servants defer to elected 
politicians and their mandate from the public, while ministers defer in turn to 
officials’ specific expertise. It seizes up when the servants worry that their 
masters aren’t acting in the public interest. What happens next depends on 
whether the public believes that, too.

Nobody serious denies now that the NHS is being squeezed remorselessly by 
three separate forces: an ageing population, medical advances putting doctors 
under constant pressure to do more, and a threadbare social care system that 
stops existing patients leaving hospital and raises the risk of vulnerable 
people needing to come in. If nothing changes, winter crises will morph into 
year-round ones. That’s why Stevens has opposed cuts in social care, drily 
telling the health select committee this week that he had done so “
enthusiastically, I might add 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/11/pmqs-may-corbyn-nhs-simon-stevens-10-plays-down-reports-of-rift-with-nhs-chief-simon-stevens-politics-live>
”.

But he would be the first to concede that money alone can’t cure what ails the 
NHS, while no political party yet has a compelling prescription for what could. 
It’s disappointing that Labour has rejected a cross-party coalition to produce 
lasting answers. But it’s more worrying that Downing Street can’t even admit to 
the existence of a question.
 