
Ministers have no idea how schools in England will implement £3bn worth of 
cuts and have not communicated the scale and pace of savings required, 
Whitehall’s spending watchdog has found.

The National Audit Office said schools faced an 8% real-terms reduction in 
funding per pupil by 2019-20 and cost pressures could result in “significant 
risks” in making the necessary spending cuts.

A report released on Wednesday has found that although average funding per 
pupil will rise from £5,447 in 2015-16 to £5,519 in 2019-20 that amounts to a 
real-terms reduction once inflation is taken into account.

Headteachers and trusts have been braced for a new efficiency drive following 
previous funding announcements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/feb/02/conservatives-cut-school-funding-david-cameron-education-budget>
, but have expressed anger at the failure of the government to come up with a 
plan of implementation.

The NAO’s conclusions paint a picture of a Department for Education that has 
ordered and announced a major cuts programme but has not issued any 
instructions over how that might be carried out.


Sir Amyas Morse, the head of the NAO, said the DfE had not yet completed its 
work to help schools secure crucial procurement and workforce savings.

“Based on our experience in other parts of government, this approach involves 
significant risks that need to be actively managed.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> could make the “desirable” 
efficiencies that the department judges feasible or could make spending choices 
that put educational outcomes at risk,” he said.


“The department, therefore, needs effective oversight arrangements that give 
early warning of problems and it needs to be ready to intervene quickly where 
problems do arise.”

 Civil servants expect that schools will need to make efficiency savings of 
£1.3bn through better purchasing and save another £1.7bn by using staff more 
efficiently.

But crucially, DfE officials have not yet worked out how such savings can be 
made, according to the report.

 “[The DfE] has not yet completed its work to develop tools and advice to help 
schools secure crucial procurement and workforce savings. The definite part of 
the department’s approach is that real-terms funding per pupil will drop over 
the coming years; the uncertain part is how schools are able to respond based 
on their particular circumstances,” the report says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bdc0b65c90be9cf3c34aec5ae8d1abcd414e28%2F0_372_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ministers%20have%20failed%20to%20explain%20where%20schools%20will%20find%20savings%2C%20watchdog%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ministers%20have%20failed%20to%20explain%20where%20schools%20will%20find%20savings%2C%20watchdog%20says&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F23bdc0b65c90be9cf3c34aec5ae8d1abcd414e28%2F0_372_1240_744%2F1240.jpg>
 Sir Amyas Morse, the head of the NAO. Photograph: Anna Saverimuttu 
Photography/National Audit Office 
Auditors concluded that while the financial position of primary schools had 
been relatively stable, there were signs of financial challenges and potential 
funding problems in secondary schools.

The proportion of local authority-maintained secondary schools spending more 
than their income increased from 34% in 2010-11 to 59% in 2014-15, the report 
found. For secondary academies, the proportion spending more than their income 
rose from 39% in 2012-13 to 61% in 2014-15, it said.

Responding to the report, a DfE spokesman said through “careful management of 
the economy” the department had been able to protect the core schools budget in 
real terms.

“We are introducing a national fair funding formula so schools are funded 
according to their pupils’ needs, rather than by their postcode. This will give 
headteachers certainty over their future budgets, helping them make long-term 
plans and secure further efficiencies.

“We recognise the increasing cost pressures schools are facing and will 
continue to provide advice and support to help them,” he said.

Ann Lyons, headteacher at St John Fisher Catholic Primary School in London, 
said schools were at “breaking point”.

“We realise we have to do more with less money in reality,” she said. “We’ve 
been relatively well protected. But we’re now at the stage - we’re at breaking 
point.”

Lyons added: Like many schools we’re facing these cuts, we’re worried. 

It means we’re struggling to maintain the services we’ve been able to offer. 
We’re cutting activities. We’re a school increasing in size. We can’t increase 
the staffing in line with the increase in pupil numbers.”

 Russell Hobby, the general secretary of school leaders’ union NAHT, said the 
report echoed concerns from school leaders. “Schools budgets are being pushed 
beyond breaking point. Whilst school business managers are very adept at 
managing tight budgets, it is clear that schools cannot make these savings 
without reducing their biggest cost, which is staffing. To do this puts the 
quality of education at risk.”

Kevin Courtney, the general secretary at the National Union of Teachers, said 
the government’s policy of cutting per-pupil funding in real terms was putting 
education at risk.

“Already class sizes are going up, teacher and support staff jobs are being 
lost and curriculum choices are being narrowed. Pupil numbers continue to grow, 
but the teacher recruitment and retention crisis intensifies as the government 
continues to attack teacher pay and conditions.

“Something has to give – the government must reverse its cuts and invest in 
our schools, for the sake of our social and economic future,” he said.

The report comes as pressure mounts on Justine Greening, the education 
secretary, to publish a second consultation on the national funding formula for 
schools. Officials said on Tuesday evening they believed it could be released 
over the next two days.
 