
Persistent misconduct and an aggressive sales culture has cost the UK’s banks 
and building societies £53bn in fines, compensation and legal fees over the 
past 15 years.


According to research published on Monday <http://newcityagenda.co.uk/?p=626> 
the cost of thepayment protection insurance (PPI) misselling scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/payment-protection-insurance> has reached 
£37.3bn – about four times the cost of the 2012 London Olympics.

The New City Agenda thinktank, which published the research, said the second 
most costly scandal –misselling of interest rate swaps 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/jan/31/high-street-banks-small-business-mis-selling-scandal>
 – had cost £4.8bn.

John McFall, the former Labour MP who used to chair the Treasury select 
committee, said: “The profitability of UK retail banks has been imperilled by 
persistent misconduct and an aggressive sales-based culture. This has made 
every citizen poorer through our pension funds and our ownership of the 
bailed-out banks.”
UK banks' provisions 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1QyY3yJTs6Na_-sIhBBGhyYmeoPhYvSZE9JY1PB12EyY>
 UK banks’ provisions. 
McFall, one of the co-founders of the thinktank, called on shareholders to 
take a lead in forcing banks to change their culture. “They should demand 
public and transparent assessments of the progress each individual bank is 
making. Where senior executives preside over misconduct, shareholders must 
ensure that they are held accountable and demand significant clawback of 
bonuses,” said McFall, who sits in the House of Lords.

The report builds upon the thinktank’s warning in November 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/26/banking-toxic-culture-generation-clean-up-thinktank>
 that the culture of banking would take a generation to clean up after 
calculating that the UK’s banks had incurred £38.5bn in fines and redress for 
mistreatment of customers in the previous 15 years.


The report focuses on the retail market so does not include the scandals that 
have hit the investment banking industry for rigging Libor or foreign exchange 
markets. It describes the fastest growing retail scandal as thesale of packaged 
bank accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/29/packaged-bank-accounts-good-deal-ppi-scandal-misselling>
, where customers are sold insurance and other products alongside their current 
accounts. So far it has cost the banks £850m.

Lloyds Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group – still 
about 9%-owned by the taxpayer – has incurred the largest bill of the high 
street banks for misconduct in the five years between 2010 and 2014. It has put 
aside £14bn to cover its errors and paid £2.1bn in bonuses over the same period.
Lloyds' misconduct costs 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-11T10:44:23.html>  
Lloyds’ misconduct costs. 
The bank – bailed out with £20bn in 2008 as it took over HBOS – has paid out 
£500m to shareholders, although it was banned from making dividend payments for 
part of this period.

New City Agenda’s report said that excluding the misconduct costs, the major 
retail banks would be profitable. “This makes it even more important for 
shareholders to engage and monitor the progress made by banks in changing their 
cultures,” it said.

Measuring culture in banks has proved to be contentious. A Banking Standards 
Board was set up amid the Libor rigging scandal in an attempt to monitor 
culture in the industry. Its annual report published in March showed that it 
has not yet published any formal standards for banks.

The Financial Conduct Authority last year faced criticism for dropping a 
formal review of culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/banking-culture-review-john-mcdonnell-urges-george-osborne>
 but last week said it continued to regard monitoring cultures as one of its 
key roles.

 Last year, the ratings agency Standard & Poor’s warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/apr/27/uk-big-four-banks-barclays-hsbc-rbs-lloyds-conduct-ligitation-charges>
 that the big four banks faced another £19bn of conduct and litigation charges 
by the end of 2016 – on top of £42bn incurred in the five years to 2014.

 