
A social media scandal erupted in a small Mississippi town on Friday night, 
ahead of theMartin Luther King 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/martin-luther-king> Day federal holiday.

Arizona Republicans move to ban social justice courses and events at schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/13/arizona-schools-social-justice-courses-ban-bill>
In a since-deleted tweet, the city of Biloxi said some municipal offices would 
be closed on Monday “in observance of Great Americans Day, a state-named 
holiday”.

Residents, shocked that the city had changed the name of the federal holiday 
designated in honor of civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr to celebrate 
“Great Americans”, quickly voiced their complaints.
Caren Collins [PB] (@carencollins88) 
@wfaachannel8 <https://twitter.com/wfaachannel8> @CityofBiloxi 
<https://twitter.com/CityofBiloxi> I'm ashamed that that's where I live
 <https://twitter.com/carencollins88/status/820104620085248000> January 14, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/carencollins88/status/820104620085248000> Annie 
(@futuristicplans) 
@CityofBiloxi <https://twitter.com/CityofBiloxi> Umm... this Biloxi resident 
celebrates MLK Day.
 <https://twitter.com/futuristicplans/status/820061622177824768> January 14, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/futuristicplans/status/820061622177824768> 
The city was quick to say that it did recognize Martin Luther King Day and had 
posteddetails of the celebrations planned in honor of King 
<https://www.biloxi.ms.us/mlk-events-take-center-stage-this-weekend/>.

The incident, however, highlighted an awkward truth about Mississippi’s Martin 
Luther King Jr Day: that it is also Robert E Lee Day.

Lee was a leading commander of the military forces of the Confederacy, which 
fought in defense of slavery in the civil war from 1861 to 1865.

Arkansas and Alabama also jointly celebrate Martin Luther King Day and Robert 
E Lee Day, despiteannual protests. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jan/17/martin-luther-king-robert-e-lee-confederate-holiday>

People pushed for a holiday commemorating King immediately after he was 
assassinated in 1968. Congress eventually recognized their efforts, and the 
third Monday of January was first observed in King’s honor as a federal holiday 
in 1986.

But some states and municipalities were slow to recognize the federal 
distinction: New Hampshire wasthe last state to officially observe the day, in 
2000. 
<http://nhpr.org/post/nhs-martin-luther-king-jr-day-didnt-happen-without-fight> 

The same year, Virginia stopped its annual recognition of Lee-Jackson-King 
Day, which celebrated Lee and King as well as Confederate general Stonewall 
Jackson.

Biloxi city officials found themselves beginning the Martin Luther King Day 
weekend of 2017 with a social media backlash.

Mayor Andrew “FoFo” Gilich said that when workers return on Tuesday, the city 
council should move to update its laws to reflect the federal name of the 
holiday.

Selma to Montgomery: Martin Luther King and the march for freedom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/from-the-archive-blog/2015/mar/20/selma-montgomery-freedom-march-martin-luther-king-1965>
“In my opinion,” he said, “that is the appropriate step to take, for the 
holiday to have the same name as the federal holiday.”

He continued: “We’ve always celebrated this day as Dr Martin Luther King Jr 
Day.”

Biloxi’s local newspaper, the Sun Herald, 
<http://www.sunherald.com/news/local/counties/harrison-county/article126542544.html>
 said there was no evidence of “Great Americans Day” in media databases 
covering the past 20 years or in the Mississippi secretary of state’s office.

Under pressure to explain the social media posts, Biloxi public affairs 
manager Vincent Creel found that the city had created the “Great Americans” 
designation in a 1985 city council meeting.

“For whatever reason, the state couldn’t bring itself to just say ‘Martin 
Luther King Jr Day’,”Creel told the Huffington Post 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/great-americans-day-biloxi-martin-luther-king-jr-day_us_5879723ee4b09281d0eb06c8>
, in reference to the state’s inclusion of Lee in the holiday.

“Somewhere along the lines, that evolved into ‘Great Americans Day’, 
unfortunately. And yes, I did say ‘unfortunately’.”
 