
Legspinner Mitchell Swepson’s aggressive approach secured him selection in an 
Australian Test squad carrying hope rather than expectation on the looming 
Indian tour.

The 23-year-old Queenslander is among four specialist spinners included in a 
16-man squad also featuring allrounder Glenn Maxwell and brothers Shaun and 
Mitchell Marsh.

One-day cricket the victim of the mid-summer sporting pile-up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/13/one-day-cricket-the-victim-of-the-mid-summer-sporting-pile-up>
Swepson, who has played 14 first-class games, joins Nathan Lyon, Steven 
O’Keefe and Ashton Agar in the squad for the four-Test series starting 23 
February in Pune.

“He is an exciting young legspinner, gives the ball a very good rip, he’s a 
wicket-taking legspinner,” Australia’s interim chairman of selectors Trevor 
Hohns said.

“At the end of the day, you have got to take wickets to win Test matches and 
given the opportunity we feel that he could play a part over there.”

Swepson got the nod ahead of limited-overs legspinner Adam Zampa. “We thought 
we would go for a more attacking legspinner more so than a defensive 
legspinner,” Hohns said.

Agar played his two previous Tests in July 2013 while Maxwell played the last 
of his three Tests in October 2014. “I was hoping for a long time that it 
wasn’t going to be my last Test,” Maxwell said.

Matthew Wade has retained his wicketkeeping spot, as has opening bat Matthew 
Renshaw for a tour which Hohns said would be tough.

“We have a squad here that can perform well enough in those conditions to give 
a good account of itself,” Hohns said. “We know it’s very difficult over there. 
No country in the last 10 years probably has performed all that well over there 
or succeeded.

“Somehow, some way, someone has to turn the tide. And we’re hoping that we can 
do that. If we perform well, hopefully some success will come our way. We 
expect all of the young players chosen, and there is a few of them in there, to 
benefit immensely from the experience.”

Hohns said Shaun Marsh’s versatility to bat anywhere in the order assured his 
return while Mitchell Marsh’s superior bowling was preferred to fellow 
allrounder Hilton Cartwright, who played Australia’s last Test match.

Only three fast bowlers – Mitchell Starc, Josh Hazlewood and Jackson Bird – 
were included.

Hohns said Wade’s retention as wicketkeeper, ahead of NSW gloveman Peter 
Nevill, was multi-faceted. “We know he can bat,” he said of Wade. “The thing 
with Matthew is, since his inclusion in the Test side, we feel his 
wicketkeeping has improved immensely.

“Plus we don’t necessarily see it, but what he adds to the team environment 
and what he does behind the scenes is immeasurable.”
 