
If this series were summed up in a single noise, it would have to be the 
strange cackle-cry Marcus lets out in the penultimate episode. He’s admitted 
that it was he who set in motion the contract killings of Isabella, Elisabeth, 
Niclas, Robin and Harwe. While Rolf listens in bland horror, wearing yet 
another absurdly big-necked jumper, Marcus grapples with a plethora of 
emotions. And that’s when he emits this rollercoaster of a noise – just strange 
enough to keep you listening, and yet comically overdone; all you can do is 
buckle up for the ride. That, I realised, as the series came to its frenzied 
yet feeble conclusion, is what Modus has been – a jarring ride with just enough 
hairpins to keep you entertained.

If only the acting had been less hammy, the plot less daft and the American 
accents less rubbish, it could have been great. But as it is, it will have to 
settle for being the strange black sheep sibling of the Scandi-noir family.

So, as the series drew to a close we got to the crux of the killings, and the 
killer: one Richard Forrester, or, as Inger would have us think, Satan, the 
fallen angel whose tattooed black wings signify his evil. He’s a supremacist 
who’s been known, according to his FBI file, to be homophobic, related to his 
religious beliefs, and to have been in psychiatric treatment as a teen. Oh, and 
he’s also an outdoorsman … which of course means Ingver connects him to the 
burnt-out car and caravan that’s been discovered in the woods.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41311950944503fdff5d92313bcd3e8b900403ee%2F0_26_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F41311950944503fdff5d92313bcd3e8b900403ee%2F0_26_3543_2126%2F3543.jpg>
 The Ings close in on the caravan killer. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 
2015/Johan Paulin 
Richard’s aunt, the woman hanging up laundry in the pastel American world we 
catch another glimpse of this week, was married to Jacob Lindstrum, the 
inflammatory preacher who we saw die in a raid by the Feds. His file also 
confirms what we already knew about the killer formerly known as Caravan Man: 
he’s prone to violent outbursts, especially when his meticulous plans go out of 
the window. Which is why, as the Ings close in on him and he struggles to 
complete his task, we see him rapidly unravelling, desperately trying to cling 
to the course.

They identify him by finally tracking down Fanny – the painter girl living in 
the tunnels with the last victim, Hawre – who had scratched the killer’s face 
in a fight. Inger’s description of the altercation is worth noting: “He comes 
from a conservative background in which gender roles have remained fixed. He 
underestimated her, her strength and her will to live.” Sure enough, she still 
has his DNA under her fingernails.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a01f8005b9ed1975198987607a2abe5d65cd99%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94a01f8005b9ed1975198987607a2abe5d65cd99%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
 Inger tries to track down Fanny, the painter girl living in the tunnels who 
scratched the killer’s face. Photograph: Johan Paulin/BBC/© Miso Film 2015 
But back a few steps first: Marcus unwittingly contracted this man to start 
this Scandinavian killing spree. Why? Well, in a roundabout way because Niclas 
Rosén was his half brother. Niclas had apparently only found out he was the 
illegitimate son of bad egg shipping magnate Lars Olaf Ståhl recently, when his 
mother spilled the beans before she died. And although things were hunky dory 
for a while between Marcus and his new sibling, it didn’t last. Niclas’ mother 
had told him he was the sole heir to the Ståhl fortune, if only he could locate 
the fancy law firm that had the will. (Cue a scene in a law firm where the 
lawyers who had only just found said will in the lawyer’s grandpa’s things, 
where it had been gathering dust, shred it on hearing of Marcus’ death to avoid 
looking incompetent). So Marcus’ father was, we learn, just evil enough, and 
just unhappy enough with his son’s “lifestyle” as a gay man to bequeath 
everything to “the bastard”. One of the cruel ironies that makes Marcus so 
emotionally confounded he emits The Noise: Lars had not known Niclas was gay 
too.

Anyway, as he did his Christmas shopping, Marcus got in touch with a man who 
suggested a solution to stop this new half-brother from taking everything away 
from him. Only problem: the solution seems to have been for an extremist 
anti-gay group based in Texas to send an unhinged discharged US marine to kill 
six gay people in Sweden, rather than just targeting the one Marcus intended. I 
would say these things happen, but …

And so to this week’s big mystery: who was to be the final victim, the +1? Was 
it Marcus? He ruled himself out when he killed himself – in a beautifully shot 
scene, where Scandinavia’s classic lack of curtains came into its 
blood-spattered own. And while there was some confusion, even from people 
within the organisation doing the killing, as to whether that counted, our 
killer was adamant it didn’t: “different score” he snarled.

And so to a tense 20 or so minutes where we thought poor little Stina and/or 
Linnea were in trouble, though when you think about the score that needs 
settling – to kill one more gay person – that never made any sense. But with 
Linnea now in cahoots with Stina, unsafe in the knowledge that her sister 
witnessed a murder and knows who the culprit is, and with the pair unable to 
get in touch with their mum, Inger, as she grapples with dying phone batteries, 
an intense work schedule, a steamy new love affair – finally! – and a jealous 
ex-husband (who has a penchant for odd necklines; did you notice this week’s 
side-zipped funnel-necked number?), there was just enough to make you think the 
killer might be after Stina.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663eb3298eb5a919fd189c89f5d1274812371656%2F0_76_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F663eb3298eb5a919fd189c89f5d1274812371656%2F0_76_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Inger grapples with dying phone batteries, an intense work schedule and a 
steamy new affair. Photograph: BBC/© Miso Film 2015/Johan Paulin 
So the girls make their way under cover of dark back through the woods, intent 
on getting home to their mother. Meanwhile the killer is struggling to control 
his impulses again and, in a fit of rage, has just strangled Marianne, 
catalysed by her pressuring him to return home ASAP, leaving the task -1 
victim. “Why don’t you just shut the fuck uupppppp?!”, he screams at her. We 
see him driving away from the scene in a rage, through forested landscape. And 
as a pair of headlights dawn on Stina and Linnea by the side of the road … is 
it him?!

Thank goodness not. And, despite some trickery to make you think the 
stern-looking woman who picks the girls up might be also evil, likely in 
cahoots with 5+1, she’s actually just playing along with a game to see who 
could keep a stern face longer. Phew. But with the girls now safely ensconced 
back with granny, who is the killer’s final victim?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66a3934990414a7e47cfa87f53014a26cb55cd78%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66a3934990414a7e47cfa87f53014a26cb55cd78%2F0_0_3543_2362%2F3543.jpg>
 Sophie and Noah watch Patricia set out to a concert – while the killer lies in 
wait for her. Photograph: Johan Paulin/BBC/© Miso Film 2015 
He’s been doing a lot of sussing out of a particular bridge. And a lot of 
looking through his binoculars at Patricia and Sophie, the lesbian couple who 
are co-parents to Noah, along with Marcus and Rolf. He brings out his tool kit 
in full daylight and takes a headlamp bulb out of a car outside their house. 
But it’s not till later that it becomes clear who he’s after. As Patricia sets 
out to a concert, the killer readies himself under the bridge. As she heads on 
to it the killer, recognising the car with only one working headlamp, speeds 
towards her, on the wrong side of the road, presumably hoping she will swerve 
and plunge to her death.

But wait – the killer’s been left reeling from a phone call. Inger got his 
number with the help of Karen in the US, and calls him just as he’s about to 
drive fast and furiously at (the pregnant) Patricia. She thanked him for his 
“moment of goodness” in saving Stina from the truck, and talked about how he 
sensed Stina’s difference (he himself, we learn, had an autistic child). And so 
the killer swerves at the last minute, his better self apparently shining 
through after Inger’s pep talk.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6c0cf65b3ee6669520f43dbd4cb4d7129a072c0%2F0_73_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer!&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Modus%20recap%3A%20episodes%20seven%20and%20eight%20%E2%80%93%20down%20with%20the%20caravan%20killer%21&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fmodus-recap-episodes-seven-and-eight-down-with-the-caravan-killer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6c0cf65b3ee6669520f43dbd4cb4d7129a072c0%2F0_73_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The killer has come for her instead! Caravan Man is after Inger. Photograph: 
Johan Paulin/BBC/© Miso Film 2015 
Given what happens next, though, Inger should have kept her thoughts to 
herself. She’s looking over her case files at home when Stina’s police car toy 
rolls across the floor. The killer has come for her instead! But, here he goes 
underestimating women again … Inger screams, gouges at his eyes, whacks him 
with a pan and eventually stabs him multiple times. There’s a very brash, 
unsubtle satisfaction, having been fed so many lines about how he’s used to 
women submitting out of fear, to seeing him beaten this way.

And so we have it, a bit of an emergency brake to a very bumpy ride. And we 
watch as he’s wheeled off on a stretcher, apparently miraculously still alive, 
leaving Inger and Ingvar a well-earned moment to share a look of love, lit up 
by blue flashing ambulance lights.
 