
A Tory government making our country more unjust; a harsh chaotic Brexit that 
threatens devastating consequences for jobs, living standards and the economy; 
a resurgent populist right, headed by president-elect Donald Trump, sweeping 
the western world.

These are the things I want to write about, not the internal woes of the 
left. The left has had something of a reputation for turning infighting into 
an art form, immortalised bythat People’s Front of Judea sketch in Monty 
Python’s Life of Brian <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WboggjN_G-4>. But an 
emergent crisis in Britain’s left is so serious that, sadly, it cannot be 
ignored.

Trotskyist factions seeking to take over Momentum, member claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/trotskyist-factions-seeking-to-take-over-momentum-member-claims>
Momentum – the grassroots movement set up in the aftermath of Jeremy Corbyn’s 
leadership victory – is currently facing a takeover bid by Trotskyist 
sectarians. If they succeed,Momentum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/momentum> will be destroyed. The most 
prominent sectarian figures are embittered veterans of struggles from the 1970s 
and 80s, people who have only experienced defeat, and who won’t let an 
unexpected opportunity afforded by the seismic political developments of the 
last two years slip through their fingers. This is their last chance.

They jump from organisation to organisation, and are adept at manipulating 
internal structures for their own advantage: sitting out long boring meetings, 
coordinating interventions, playing victim when it suits. They’re not 
interested in say, door-to-door campaigning, but rather in debating their 
obscure pet issues with long-winded interventions at meetings on a Thursday 
evening.

Their opponents are younger, idealistic, campaign-oriented and pluralistic, 
lacking Machiavellian strategic ability – all of which the sectarians exploit. 
The sectarians smear their opponents as rightwingers, Stalinists, bureaucrats, 
as having ulterior and sinister motives (this article will be dismissed as the 
work of a rightwing establishment careerist in the service of a Guardian 
conspiracy to destroy the left). Everything goes wrong, they believe, not 
because of their own almost farcical strategic ineptitude, but because of the 
betrayal of others. Momentum offers hope to young people who have long been 
demoralised by politics. Those wrecking Momentum – if they succeed – could 
destroy that hope, and that is unforgivable.

When Corbyn stood, few believed he could win: the function of his candidacy 
was to shift the terms of debate leftward

Momentum was originally set up by a grouping led by Jon Lansman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/01/momentum-co-founder-jon-lansman-challenge-labour-deputy-tom-watson>
 – a veteran Labour leftist – to harness the energy behind the Jeremy Corbyn 
leadership campaign. When Corbyn originally stood, few believed he could win: 
the function of his candidacy was to shift the terms of political debate 
leftward and galvanise a grassroots movement. But he did, so Momentum sought to 
turn the excitement behind the Corbyn surge into a community-directed movement, 
organising the sorts of people who find the traditional, bureaucratic 
structures of the Labour party alienating. A pluralistic movement that would 
run local campaigns and start ambitious community initiatives, such as food 
banks, for instance. The highlight of Labour’s otherwise drab party conference 
this year was Momentum’s the World Transformed, a series of events that won 
accolades even from hostile media commentators. When it came to Corbyn, many of 
us were more interested in the wave than the surfer. Momentum was a key part of 
the wave.

But the sectarian groups had other ideas. If you’re a British Trotskyist, the 
last few years have been miserable. The biggest cuts for generations, the 
longest period of falling wages since the 19th century, huge demonstrations and 
strikes: but the Trotskyist groups haven’t benefited at all. Their memberships 
have stagnated or even fallen. They offer no appeal, even at a time of social 
and political upheaval. They spend years finger-wagging about how the Labour 
party is dead, denouncing any leftwinger who says otherwise, and then suddenly 
there is a massive upsurge of the left. Where? In the Labour party. Take the 
barrister Nick Wrack, one of the sectarian leaders. Last year he stood for the 
catchily named Trade Union and Socialist Coalition in Camberwell and Peckham, 
and secured 0.6% of the vote. There’s no life for the left in the Labour party,
he told me in 2014 <https://twitter.com/NickWrack/status/444602010180939776>
.“Time for [a] new party that stands for socialism,”he lectured me before the 
general election <https://twitter.com/NickWrack/status/592612345513390080>. I 
was right to call for more working-class representation, he tells me, “but it 
won’t come from Labour,”he tells me, after Labour’s defeat 
<https://twitter.com/NickWrack/status/601516310737084417>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmomentum-hope-saved-saboteurs-sectarian-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ec0c402356f360d16eee2cbe46abad65dbd80a%2F524_698_4319_2592%2F4319.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Momentum%20is%20a%20beacon%20of%20hope.%20It%20must%20be%20saved%20from%20the%20saboteurs%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmomentum-hope-saved-saboteurs-sectarian-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Momentum%20is%20a%20beacon%20of%20hope.%20It%20must%20be%20saved%20from%20the%20saboteurs%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fmomentum-hope-saved-saboteurs-sectarian-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F80ec0c402356f360d16eee2cbe46abad65dbd80a%2F524_698_4319_2592%2F4319.jpg>
 ‘Momentum was originally set up by a grouping led by Jon Lansman – a veteran 
Labour leftist – to harness the energy behind the Jeremy Corbyn leadership 
campaign.’ Photograph: Brayan Lopez/Rex/Shutterstock 
The younger Momentum protagonists aligned to Lansman – who himself has gone on 
a political journey away from top-down structures – are known as 
“movementists”: those who dislike hierarchies and who are attracted by social 
movements.

Their proposal for Momentum was this: rather than Momentum’s direction being 
decided by delegates sent by local groups, it should be decided democratically 
online. Direct democracy:all of Momentum’s 21,000 members get an equal say 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/jimwaterson/momentum-wracked-infighting?bftwuk&utm_term=.wiQdpmYPKW#.di73avOjDA>
. Yet such a movement would destroy the influence of the sectarians. Yes, they 
can dominate sparsely attended boring branch meetings on rainy evenings and 
secure the election of delegates. But they represent a tiny proportion of the 
membership. The more the members are empowered, the more the sectarians are 
disempowered.

The proposal was debated at Momentum’s national committee, events well 
described by committee member Laura Catriona Murray 
<https://medium.com/@lauracatrionamurray/momentum-vs-inertia-e525c8f9e217#.yuf7igg1b>
 and others: a fraught meeting where, other than Lansman, the split was broadly 
on generational lines. Some older sectariansused aggressive tactics against the 
younger movementists 
<https://medium.com/@lauracatrionamurray/momentum-vs-inertia-e525c8f9e217#.do156mc3y>
, reducing at least one to tears. But they won – by one vote – defeating direct 
democracy.

If Momentum’s plight is baffling, consider it like this. You have a birthday 
party and you have to invite all your workmates, and that includes Jim: you’re 
a nice inclusive person, and it’ll only cause a scene if you don’t. But Jim is 
a problem. Jim turns up to your party with a couple of obnoxious friends and 
they start taking it over, aggressively ranting and raving about their pet 
subjects. People start to trickle away from the party, including the new ones 
you wanted to befriend: they won’t come next time you invite them. You tell Jim 
you’re not asking him and his friends to leave, but could they calm down a bit 
and let others speak and stop being so domineering? Jim gets angry. They’re 
just having their say! What’s your problem with them! Don’t you allow free 
speech at your party?

Momentum loses momentum as members condemn founder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/momentum-loses-momentum-as-members-condemn-founder>
Unlike Jim, the sectarians are highly disciplined, highly organised, and 
highly experienced. The interests of their own sects are far more important 
than any movement. Only their sect, they believe, has the correct politics: 
everybody else’s are fatally flawed. They have no faith in the Labour party. 
Momentum, for them, is an embryonic political party. The prize is Momentum’s 
contact data, containing the details of tens of thousands of people. At an 
opportune time, they will walk away fromLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> and found a new party, which will 
get 300 votes in a byelection. They will triumphantly hail these as 300 votes 
for socialism.

These sectarians must be stopped. They are throttling the enthusiasm and 
excitement of the young people who have been inspired in the last 18 months. 
One man is uniquely placed to save Momentum from the sectarians who would 
throttle the enthusiasm and excitement of the young people who have been 
inspired in the last 18 months. That’s Jeremy Corbyn. An intervention by him 
would stop Momentum being taken over, allowing its rebirth as an open, 
campaign-focused movement. Without that, the sectarians will win. They must be 
stopped in their tracks. So much hope, so much optimism. We can’t let it end in 
rancour and betrayal.
 