
A US company has secured funding to become the first private entity to travel 
to the moon, with a planned 2017 voyage that will be an international milestone 
in space exploration.

Moon Express, a Florida-based firm, said it had raised 
<http://spacenews.com/moon-express-fully-funded-for-google-lunar-x-prize-bid/> 
$20m in financing, which will allow it to send a robotic spacecraft to the 
moon’s surface later this year.

US startup Moon Express approved to make 2017 lunar mission
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/03/us-startup-moon-express-2017-lunar-mission>
The funding is a major step in the company’s efforts to become the world’s 
first private enterprise to travel outside the Earth’s orbit.

Last year, Moon Express gained historic approvals from the US government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/03/us-startup-moon-express-2017-lunar-mission>
 after submitting a request for its voyage to the Federal Aviation 
Administration. An outer space treaty, which was adopted by the United Nations 
and regulates exploration of the celestial world,requires 
<https://www.faa.gov/news/fact_sheets/news_story.cfm?newsId=20595> governments 
to authorize and supervise “non-governmental entities” seeking to travel in 
outer space.

“We now have all the resources in place to shoot for the Moon,” Bob Richards, 
Moon Express’s CEO,said in a statement 
<http://www.theverge.com/2017/1/13/14263076/moon-express-funding-20-million-google-lunar-x-prize>
 announcing the funding achievements. “Our goal is to expand Earth’s social and 
economic sphere to the Moon, our largely unexplored eighth continent, and 
enable a new era of low cost lunar exploration and development for students, 
scientists, space agencies and commercial interests.”

Moon Express has said it aims to mine the moon for minerals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/06/space-mining-moon-asteroids-tech-companies>
, and the tech entrepreneur Naveen Jain, its co-founder and chairman, has said 
he hopes to lower the costs of space travel and help pave the way for the 
colonization of the moon, and eventually ofMars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/06/space-mining-moon-asteroids-tech-companies>
.

“The sky is not the limit for Moon Express – it is the launchpad,” Jain said 
in anearlier statement 
<http://www.moonexpress.com/files/moon-express-press-kit.pdf> after his firm 
gained federal approvals. “This breakthrough ruling is another giant leap for 
humanity. Space travel is our only path forward to ensure our survival and 
create a limitless future for our children.”

The more immediate goal of the company, which formed in 2010, is to bring 
resources, metals and moon rocks back to Earth, Jain said. He alsostated 
<http://www.moonexpress.com/files/moon-express-press-kit.pdf> that in 15 years, 
he believes the moon will be an important part of the Earth’s economy and 
“potentially our second home”.

The company has said it believes the moon can “produce resources essential to 
humanity’s future on Earth and in space”.

Moon Express is one of 16 teams <http://lunar.xprize.org/teams> that have 
competed for funding as part ofGoogle’s Lunar X Prize initiative 
<http://lunar.xprize.org/teams/moon-express>, which launched in 2007 to 
incentivize private firms to develop technology and plans for planetary 
exploration.

The US, China and the former Soviet Union are the only countries that have 
landed spacecraft on the moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/dec/14/china-moon-probe-lands-safely>.

Moon Express, which said it has raised a total of more than $45m 
<https://techcrunch.com/2017/01/13/moon-express-raises-20-million-in-series-b-1-fully-funds-trip-to-the-moon/>
 from individuals and venture funds, is one of numerous companies that has 
specific plans in the works for exploration.

A firm called Deep Space Industries <http://deepspaceindustries.com/> is 
seeking to launch anautonomous spacecraft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/06/space-mining-moon-asteroids-tech-companies>
 this year that can extract materials from asteroids. Planetary Resources, a 
company supported by Google’s Larry Page and Eric Schmidt, is also building 
technologydedicated to asteroid mining 
<http://www.planetaryresources.com/technology/#technology-overview> with the 
goal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/06/space-mining-moon-asteroids-tech-companies>
 of a 2020 commercialmission 
<http://www.planetaryresources.com/2016/11/planetary-resources-and-the-government-of-luxembourg-announce-e25-million-investment-and-cooperation-agreement/>
.

Last year, the US government advanced the process to establish rules for space 
launches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/10/moon-private-space-travel-us-regulations>
 in compliance with international treaties afterLuxembourg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/feb/03/luxembourg-aims-to-be-big-player-in-possible-asteroid-mining>
 and the United Arab Emirates pushed forward with similar efforts.

Motley Fool, a financial services site, has estimated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/06/space-mining-moon-asteroids-tech-companies>
 that the mineral wealth of the moon may bequadrillions of dollars 
<http://www.fool.com/investing/general/2014/03/10/whats-the-moon-worth.aspx>. 
 