
Approximately 17,000 more children attend inadequate free schools and 
academies than attend inadequate local authority schools, theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party has said.

Labour drew attention to recent Ofsted figures showing that 16,984 more 
children are in academies and free schools deemed to be inadequate, before 
education secretaryNicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicky-morgan> gives a speech in which she 
is expected to address poor standards in council-maintained schools.

The data found that 3.9% (104,652) of children attending free schools and 
academies are at institutions judged inadequate by Ofsted – the lowest 
inspection rating a school can be given– compared to 1.8% (87,668) of those 
attending maintained schools.

The education and adoption bill 
<http://services.parliament.uk/bills/2015-16/educationandadoption.html>, which 
wasfirst published in June  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/03/education-bill-loopholes-academies-schools>
and is currently making its way through the House of Lords, limits the ability 
of council-maintained schools rated as inadequate by Ofsted to resist being 
turned into academies, enabling the Department for Education (DfE) to replace 
their management and impose sponsors more quickly.

The government plans to open 500 new free schools in this parliament and Nicky 
Morgan has made it clear she favours the academy and free school model to local 
authority oversight,saying that they give parents greater choice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/pm-we-will-not-waver-in-free-schools-pledge>
 and force other schools to “up their game”.

The shadow education secretary, Lucy Powell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lucy-powell>, said the government was 
taking standards backwards and “focusing obsessively on school structures at 
the expense of what matters most in our classrooms – the quality of teaching”.

She criticised the government’s education and adoption bill for failing to 
contain any measures for tackling underperformance in academies and free 
schools, despitefigures showing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/monthly-management-information-ofsteds-school-inspections-outcomes#history>
 that 18.24% of these schools have been judged to require improvement or be 
inadequate by Ofsted.

“I want a relentless focus on standards in all schools and nothing is more 
important to raising standards and improving social mobility than having 
excellent teachers in our schools,” said Powell.

“Yet while David Cameron continues to be fixated on whether a school is an 
academy or not, he is continuing to ignore the serious challenges facing our 
education system, such as the chronic shortages of teachers up and down the 
country.”

Giving his speech at the Conservative party’s autumn conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2015/oct/07/david-cameron-speech-at-tory-conference-what-he-said-and-what-he-meant>
, David Cameron said he wanted to see every school become an academy and to end 
local authority control of schools.

“Headteachers are growing in confidence as they throw off the shackles of 
local council control, raising the aspirations of children, parents, 
communities,” he said. This movement is sweeping across our country. So my next 
ambition is this. Five hundred new free schools. Every school an academy and 
yes – local authorities running schools as a thing of the past.”
 