
The chancellor will deploy more than £1bn to boost broadband speeds for up 2m 
homes and businesses as part of an infrastructure plan to be outlined in the 
autumn statement.

Living in a broadband ‘not-spot’? Try using the church spire to get a signal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/12/slow-broadband-church-signal-fast-internet>
Responding to calls from business for the government to back the digital 
economy,Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> 
will back a £400m digitalinfrastructure fund, which the Treasury expects will 
be matched by private sector investors.

He will also offer local authorities the chance to bid for a slice of a £740m 
fund to trial superfast 5G mobile networks, linking them to fibre-optic systems 
to provide greater wireless capacity.

The move follows announcements that £1.3bn will be released for maintenance 
and improvements to the road network 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38041466> and £2bn for extra science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-to-promise-2bn-a-year-for-scientific-research>
, and research and development spending.

Hammond is concerned that Britain is falling behind in the race to install the 
latest fibre-optic networks that allow TV box sets and large data files to be 
downloaded quickly.

South Korea, Japan and China have moved more quickly than most other developed 
countries to introduce fast broadband and mobile networks. Last year South 
Korea claimed it would lead the world in 5G, making it a destination for 
business investment and digital businesses. In September China asked telecoms 
providers to bid to install 5G networks in major cities after a year-long trial.

The Treasury wants businesses to be “well placed to exploit the opportunities 
arising from 5G and future digital services,” according to a source. It expects 
smaller broadband operators to borrow from the digital infrastructure fund to 
compete withBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup>, Virgin and Sky 
for customers who need faster connection speeds and capacity.

Families will find they can download a series of Game of Thrones in one minute 
once they are connected to a 5G network, the source said. “Full-fibre is the 
future of broadband, helping people to share digital content faster with 
friends and family, stream Ultra-HD TV without buffering, and use virtual 
reality to change how we engage with the world.

“It’s also more reliable and secure than traditional copper internet cables, 
so businesses and consumers will always have internet access when they need 
it,” they said.

Britain already has one of the most comprehensive digital networks among 
developed world economies,according to the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development 
<http://www.keepeek.com/Digital-Asset-Management/oecd/science-and-technology/oecd-digital-economy-outlook-2015_9789264232440-en#.WDM0-jYqqUk#page51>
 (OECD), but it also ranks as one of the most expensive for consumers and 
businesses to use.

More businesses are connected in Spain, France, the Netherlands and Germany 
than the UK, according to OECD figures, though it is not known whether the cost 
of a monthly connection is a deterrent.

The CBI listed a digital infrastructure fund on its list of demands for the 
autumn statement and is expected to welcome the government’s move. Hammond will 
say that the funding could increase to nearer £1.5bn over the life of the 
project, which runs until 2021, once private sector funds are included.
 