
More than 2.3 million families are living in fuel poverty in England – the 
equivalent of 10% of households, according to government statistics.

Almost 60,000 households in Birmingham alone cannot afford to heat their 
homes. The figures from the Department for Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy show the West Midlands city is worst affected, with Leeds, Cornwall,
Manchester <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/manchester> and Liverpool also in 
the top five local authorities where households face “eat or heat” choices in 
winter.

However, rural areas of England are proportionally the worst affected, with 
more than 20% of households on the Isles of Scilly classifiedas fuel poor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2011/jul/15/fuel-poverty-killer-too-little>
. Other badly affected areas include Eden in Cumbria, Richmondshire and Ryedale 
in North Yorkshire, and West Devon.

Fuel poverty <https://www.theguardian.com/society/fuel-poverty> is calculated 
by gauging if a household’s income would fall below the official poverty line 
after spending the actual amount needed to heat the home. The average fuel 
poverty gap of these households – that is, the amount needed to escape fuel 
poverty – is £371 a year, the latest figures indicate, with those in privately 
rented properties hit hardest.

About 20% of households renting from a private landlord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/02/thousands-of-tenants-suffering-abuse-from-private-landlords>
 are classified as fuel poor and single parents with dependent children are at 
the highest risk, with almost 25% in fuel poverty.

Clive Lewis, the shadow business secretary, said the figures showed the Tories 
had to take action to tackle the tariffs of thebig six energy companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/14/greg-clark-to-meet-big-six-energy-firms-over-profiteering-report>
.

“Under the Tories’ lack of an energy plan, Britain is facing an energy bill 
crisis, with over 2 million families who can’t afford their energy bills,” said 
the Labour MP.

“The government must act now on the monopoly of the big six in the energy 
market and tackle the scandal of fuel poverty. A Labour government will deliver
clean energy <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/renewableenergy> and curb 
energy bill rises for households.”

This month, the business department said it would publish an energy supplier 
league table to instantly show consumers where they could save money on fuel 
bills. Customers should have the ability to access their energy usage data 
quickly and easily from their energy companies, the government said, to allow 
them to use price comparison sites toswitch tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/05/switch-energy-supplier-save-fixed-rate-tariffs-end>
.

Announcing the measures, the business secretary, Greg Clark, said: “Millions 
of people across Britain continue to pay too much for their energy. The 
measures announced are a positive step to help more people benefit from 
increased choice and competition.

“As the government has made clear, where markets are not working for consumers 
– in energy or otherwise – we are prepared to act.”
 