
The number of mortgages being approved fell in August, figures show, in the 
latest sign that the housing market has cooled since the Brexit vote.

The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> said mortgage 
approvals, seen by economists as one of the early indicators of housing market 
activity, had dropped to the lowest level since November 2014.

There were 60,058 mortgages approved for house purchase last month, down from 
60,925 in July and slightly fewer than the 60,150 forecast by economists in a 
Reuters poll.

However, the figures also showed unsecured borrowing by consumers, such as on 
credit cards, continuing to grow, echoing other signs that British households 
have so farlargely shrugged off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/15/uk-consumers-keep-up-summer-spending-retail-sales->
 the EU referendum result and not allowed any worries they have about the 
economy tocurb their spending 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/31/uk-consumer-confidence-rebounds-post-brexit-vote-figures>
. Consumer credit rose by £1.57bn in August, beating economists’ expectations 
of a £1.4bn increase.

Scott Bowman from consultancy Capital Economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> said: “August’s UK money and 
credit figures suggest that the housing market continues to cool, but appetite 
for debt hasn’t taken much of a hit.”

However, he pointed to other indicators, which suggest that confidence is 
returning to the housing market after an initial post-Brexit vote wobble. The
latest monthly report 
<http://www.rics.org/Global/8._WEB_%20August_2016_RICS_UK_Residential_Market_Survey_tt.pdf>
 from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors showed that for the first 
time since April, surveyors expect house prices to increase over the next three 
months.


Contrasting that report with the decline in mortgage approvals, Bowman said: 
“The Rics survey measure of new buyer enquiries picked up sharply in August, 
implying [that] this trend won’t last too much longer.”

Martin Beck, a senior economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said the decrease 
in approvals in August would not have been entirely down to the Brexit vote.

“Stripping out the extent to which this is a consequence of post-EU referendum 
uncertainty, as opposed to other factors, including tax rises on buy-to-let 
properties earlier this year and ever more expensive housing, is problematic,” 
he said.


The Bank’s data chimed with figures from the British Bankers’ Association 
earlier this week, which showed that the number of homebuyer mortgages approved 
by UK banks wasdown by 20% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/26/mortgage-approvals-fall-by-fifth-british-bankers-association-bba>
 year on year in August, but consumers’ appetite for unsecured borrowing 
remained strong.


Howard Archer, an economist at consultancy IHS Global Insight, said the latest 
figures showed that “consumers were clearly prepared to continue borrowing and 
spending in August,” but warned that households may soon begin to feel the 
pressure from rising inflation and the jobs market weakening.

“We suspect that the fundamentals for consumers will become less favourable 
over the coming months, with purchasing power likely diminishing and the labour 
market softening,” Archer said. “On the one hand, this may make people more 
cautious over borrowing, but on the other hand, it may increase the need for 
some people to borrow.”

 