
Britain’s high street banks risk a confrontation with Mark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> unless they pass on the Bank 
of England’s interest ratecut to millions to borrowers.

Faced with a warning from the Bank’s governor to pass on the reduction, two 
bailed-out banks – Lloyds Banking Group and Royal Bank of Scotland – were among 
those still mulling over their response on Thursdayto the new interest rate of 
0.25% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
.

With mortgage rates already low and saving rates at rock bottom levels, banks 
have said they face a hit to profits as the gap between what they can pay 
savers and charge borrowers narrows. Lloyds, 9%-owned by taxpayers, has said it 
will take a £100m knock to profits. HSBC expects a $200m (£150m) reduction in 
its annual profits.

RBS will face questions about its response to the Bank of England’s demand 
that lower rates feed through to customers when it reports its results on 
Friday. Its shares fell 0.7% to 192p, while Lloyds declined by 2% to 51p, 
although Barclays rose slightly to 148p.

Carney, speaking as the Bank announced a package of measures to fend off a 
post-Brexit vote slowdown, said: “The banks have no excuse, with today’s 
announcement, not to pass on the cut in bank rate.” He told lenders to write to 
customers to tell them that their borrowing rates would be falling, adding that 
the Bank had deliberately tailored its response to Brexit to ensure their 
profitability would not be impaired.

Lenders were quick to acknowledge that customers with products contractually 
linked to the base rate would enjoy lower rates. But those products which 
allowed some discretion – largely standard variable rates (SVRs) – were being 
reviewed by many lenders.

Carney conceded that the cut, after more than seven years of already low 
interest rates, put savers in a very difficult position. None of the big banks 
moved on savings rates after the announcement, although they are likely to be 
under review.

Pensioners were also facing a hit as Hymans Robertson, a pensions consultancy, 
said the rate cut meant a £70bn increase in the amount company schemes needed 
to meet their commitments to scheme members, to a new total of £2.4tn. This has 
pushed up the aggregate UK company scheme deficit to £945bn, the worst it has 
ever been.

 NatWest, owned by RBS, was still deciding whether to cut the 4% SVR paid by 
17% of its mortgage customers. “We are currently reviewing whether we will make 
any changes to variable-rate products and will provide an update in the near 
future,” NatWest said.


Lloyds – whose chief executive, António Horta-Osório, had warned last week 
that “additional monetary measures will have only a marginal impact” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/lloyds-bank-to-axe-3000-jobs-and-close-200-branches>
 – said: ““The 0.25% reduction will form part of the ongoing rate reviews 
across our product ranges. All variable rate products that track the Bank of 
England base rate will be reduced by 0.25% from September.” About a third of 
its 3 million mortgage customers are on the loans still under review, paying a 
rate of 3.99%.

Some lenders were quick to act, although many of them were starting from a 
higher level than those still pondering. Spanish-owned Santander will cut its 
SVR by the full amount in September, bringing it down to 4.49%, and 4.74% for 
former Alliance & Leicester customers.

Nationwide Building Society, which had initially said it was reviewing its 
approach to its SVR, later confirmed that it would pass on the cut in full from 
1 September.

Across the market, about 50% of mortgages taken out since 2004 have fixed-rate 
loans, but 30% – approximately 2.3m loans – are either on a lender’s sSVR or a 
discounted mortgage pegged to it.


Bank of England cuts interest rates to 0.25% and expands QE
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
Other lenders also appeared to be reticent about cutting their SVR, including 
HSBC and UK Asset Resolution, the state-owned body which runs some Northern 
Rock and Bradford & Bingley home loans.

The decision by lenders to pass on cuts to SVRs is likely to depend on how the 
new term funding scheme – intended to give banks cheap access to up to £100bn 
of cash – operates. Lloyds had used a predecessor scheme widely, and analysts 
expected it to use the new arrangement.

Nationwide and Lloyds have some customers on old SVRs pegged to the base rate, 
which will automatically fall. But the vast majority of SVRs can be set at 
lenders’ discretion and do not have to move in line with the base rate. 
Previously,some have resisted passing on any or all of the drop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2009/jan/09/interest-rates-cut>.

• This article was amended on 5 August 2016. An earlier version referred to 
Northern Rock Asset Management where UK Asset Resolution was meant.
 