
The number of homebuyer mortgages approved by UK banks was down by a fifth 
year-on-year in August, but consumers’ appetite for unsecured borrowing 
remained strong, latest figures show.

Seasonally adjusted data from the British Bankers’ Association shows that 
36,997 loans were approved for house purchases during the month, the lowest 
figure since January 2015 and 21% down on August 2015’s total. Remortgaging 
numbers also slipped, with 23,940 loans approved for those switching lenders.

Figures for gross mortgage lending, which show the value of loans advanced to 
borrowers and do not take into account repayments, showed a 1% increase since 
August 2015, at £12.4bn.

Related: I finally own my first house – so why do I have buyer’s remorse? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/26/i-finally-own-my-first-house-so-why-do-i-have-buyers-remorse>

The loans may have been applied for some weeks before they were approved, and 
reflect a period soon after the EU referendum.

The BBA’s chief economist, Dr Rebecca Harding, said the figures pointed to a 
softer housing market in August. “The data was collected before the Bank of 
England reduced interest rates to 0.25%, and so give an indication of some of 
the underlying pressures that the MPC [monetary policy committee] was 
responding to when it made this decision,” she said.

“Mortgage borrowing is growing at a slower pace than it has for the past few 
months reflecting both the slowdown in housing market growth after the April 
spike and broader trends in the sector.”

The BBA said that away from mortgages, consumer credit had continued to grow 
at a rate of more than 6%. Borrowing through personal loans and overdrafts 
increased by £343m during the month, while credit card borrowing was up by 
£136m.

“Given the low interest rate environment and high levels of confidence during 
the summer, the strong credit growth can be interpreted as strong consumer 
sentiment,” Harding said.


Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, said demand from 
homebuyers continued to weaken, despite a steady fall in mortgage rates since 
the start of the year.

“Admittedly, it is too soon to see the full impact of the MPC’s interest rate 
cut on mortgage approvals, given the time it takes for loan applications to be 
approved.

“Still, a small majority of surveyors reported that new buyer enquiries fell 
in August, according to Rics – the fifth consecutive month of declining demand. 
Meanwhile, the outlook for stagnation in households’ real incomes next year, as 
inflation picks up and hiring slows sharply, points to a prolonged period of 
weakness in mortgage lending ahead.”

Separate figures from the National Association of Estate Agents, meanwhile, 
showed that the stock of properties for sale picked up in August, increasing to 
41 per branch. This was the highest level since March, although some way off 
the average of 54 homes seen then.


The NAEA said three-quarters of properties sold for less than the original 
asking price during the month, down slightly from 79% in July.

The BBA also reported a rise in deposits into savings and bank accounts since 
the start of the year. It said personal deposits grew by £27bn in the first 
eight months of the year, compared with £15bn in the same period of 2015.
 