
Q I am writing in utter despair and I am hoping you can help. My partner owns 
a house that he has always rented out. He now needs to sell this property so we 
can buy our first house together as we are currently renting. He also needs to 
clear a debt of £50,000 from a messy divorce.

My partner bought his rental property in 1998 for £100,000; it has recently 
been valued at £370,000. He remortgaged the house to pay for a property with 
his ex-wife, which she was given as part of the divorce settlement. As a 
result, when he sells the rental property there will be a mortgage of £125,000 
left for him to pay off.


Here comes my nightmare: I have tried to work out how much capital gains tax 
(CGT) he will have to pay and it’s roughly £65,000 if we include the £125,000 
mortgage (that his ex has gained from not us). Can this be right? How is this 
possible? Is there anything we can do? If we pay £65,000 in tax on top of the 
£50,000 court debt we will be left with very little to purchase a house for us 
and children.EM

A I’m not sure that most people would regard having £130,000 (that’s the 
£370,000 valuation minus £125,000 minus £50,000 minus £65,000) to put towards 
the purchase of a house as “very little” although I can see that it might not 
be enough to buy a house outright without a mortgage. That £130,000 figure also 
assumes that your CGT calculation is correct, which I’m slightly doubtful 
about, not least because you mention including the mortgage in the CGT sums – 
you don’t need to do this.


You do, however, need to factor in buying and selling costs such as legal 
fees, stamp duty, estate agents’ fees and the cost of capital improvements to 
the property if there were any. This works in your favour because it reduces 
the taxable capital gain.

Stamp duty on a property costing £100,000 was definitely 1% of the whole sum 
in 1998, so £1,000. But guessing at the other costs – for example, £2,000 for 
two lots of legal fees and estate agents’ fees of, say, £6,000 and no 
improvement costs – the gain would be £261,000. Knocking off your partner’s 
annual CGT exempt amount of £11,100 from this (in the 2016-17 tax year) would 
bring the gain down to £249,900. Admittedly, this isn’t small but would result 
in a tax bill of £44,982 for a basic-rate taxpayer and £69,972 for a 
higher-rate taxpayer.


An alternative to selling the rental property and avoid triggering a CGT bill 
would be to remortgage it to raise the funds to pay the £50,000 court debt and 
provide you with a cash deposit to put towards a home for you, your partner and 
your children. Assuming your partner could increase the mortgage to 75% of the 
value of the property, this would give you both just over £100,000 for your new 
home. But you would also probably need a residential mortgage to buy it. 
Whether the figures work for your lenders is down to them. Your partner’s 
accountant (if he has one) might also like to take a look at them.

 