
Mortgage approvals at Britain’s banks tumbled in July to their lowest level 
this year as people delayed making major financial decisions in the weeks after 
the Brexit vote.

Banks approved 37,662 mortgages for house purchases last month, down from 
39,763 in June and 19% lower than in July 2015, the British Bankers’ 
Association said.


But robust credit growth, especially higher credit card debt, added to signs 
that the decision to quit the European Union had little impact on consumers’ 
appetite for smaller purchases.

Scotland's North Sea oil revenues collapse - business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/aug/24/german-economy-grows-by-04-in-second-quarter-business-live>
Net credit card lending rose in July by £291m – a 20% increase on the same 
month a year ago. The jump in short-term borrowing came after a similar £283m 
increase in June.

Warnings that Britain’s vote to leave the EU on 23 June could tip the economy 
into recession have so far been contradicted by surveys showing a more muted 
impact on the economy.

Data from manufacturers, Britain’s biggest housebuilder and UK supermarkets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/23/uk-economic-surveys-defy-brexit-fears>
 earlier this week pointed to the UK avoiding a recession in the second half of 
the year.

Some economists have argued that while business and consumer confidence, which 
fell in July, was bolstered by the Bank of England cutting interest rates and 
increasing quantitive easing, a reluctance to make investment decision, 
including buying a home, could harm the economy in the coming months.

Rebecca Harding, the BBA’s chief economist, said the growing use of credit 
cards before and after the vote showed that short-term borrowing figures were 
keeping high street tills ringing, but gave little clue as to the mood of bank 
customers.

“Consumer credit has been growing considerably faster at an annualised rate of 
6% than real earnings growth of 2.4% for some months now. This arguably 
underpinned the growth in retail sales that we saw in July and suggests, 
year-on-year growth in consumer credit appears reasonably correlated with 
year-on-year growth in retail sales,” she said.

“The housing market may be giving us a clearer picture of trends. Net mortgage 
lending continued to rise annually at 3% in July. This figure is identical to 
the annual increase in June. However, mortgage approvals for house purchases 
were 19% lower in July than a year earlier.”

Coupled with a 1% monthly increase in the value of loans, “the pressures in 
the housing market at the moment are actually quite weak”, she added.

Howard Archer, chief UK economist at IHS Global Insight, said: “We suspect 
that the fundamentals for consumers will become less favourable over the coming 
months with purchasing power likely diminishing and the labour market 
softening.”


The BBA figures do not include lending by mutually owned building societies, 
which accounts for around a third of mortgages.

Figures published on Tuesday by HM Revenue & Customs 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/monthly-property-transactions-completed-in-the-uk-with-value-40000-or-above>
 showed almost as many homes were sold in July as in June, suggesting buyers 
were not spooked at the outcome of the Brexit vote.
 