
The MP Michelle Thomson has been reported to Scottish prosecutors after a 
police investigation into alleged mortgage fraud.

Police Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> said on Tuesday that 
a report had been submitted to the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service 
(Copfs).

The solicitor Christopher Hales, who is being investigated by Police Scotland, 
was struck off by the Scottish Solicitors’ Discipline Tribunal in 2014 in 
connection with several transactions carried out by a property company in which 
Thomson was a partner from 2010 to 2011.

Last year, prosecutors instructed police to carry out an investigation into 
“alleged irregularities” relating to property deals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/06/michelle-thomson-snp-mp-property-deals-investigated-police>
 in those years.

Thomson, who withdrew herself from the Scottish National party whip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/snp-business-spokeswoman-leaves-party-after-mortgage-allegations>
 at Westminster, suspending her party membership, after details of the 
investigation emerged, has denied any wrongdoing.

A Copfs spokesman said: “The procurator fiscal has received a report 
concerning four men aged 48, 56, 59 and 59, and one woman aged 51, in relation 
to alleged incidents between 16 June 2010 and 26 July 2011.

“The report remains under the consideration of the procurator fiscal.”

It is understood that one of the men reported is Hales. The Law Society was 
heavily criticised last year after it emerged that it took four years for it to 
hand over evidence of the suspicious deals, which led to him being struck off.

The Crown Office ordered a police criminal investigation within six days of 
receiving the Hales dossier in July 2015, suggesting that it was deeply alarmed 
by the case.

Although the subsequent criminal investigation was launched in September 2015, 
Thomson was not contacted by the police until the autumn of 2016.

A spokeswoman for Thomson, who is the MP for Edinburgh West, said: “Michelle 
Thomson voluntarily attended an interview with Police Scotland on 13 October to 
assist in the continuing investigation into Christopher Hales.

“No charges were brought and, as is standard under Scottish legal procedure, a 
report has been submitted to the Crown Office. She looks forward to a 
conclusion on this matter at the earliest opportunity.”

In September, it was reported that the SNP’s national executive was 
considering a unanimous request from the party’s Westminster group to reinstate 
Thomson. The group of 54 SNP MPs argued that Thomson had been “denied natural 
justice” and remained “a very loyal and extremely hard-working member of 
parliament, while lacking the professional support available to others”.

Last week, Thomson moved colleagues to tears in the Commons chamber 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/08/mp-michelle-thomson-says-she-was-raped-aged-14>
 when she revealed harrowing details of her rape at the age of 14 and its 
subsequent impact on her life during a debate on the UN’s International Day for 
the Elimination of Violence Against Women.

The Speaker, John Bercow, told Thomson her testimony had “left an indelible 
impression” on the house after she described how she was attacked in a wooded 
area by someone she knew as she walked home from a youth event, butconcluded: 
“I’m not a victim, I’m a survivor.” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/dec/08/mp-michelle-thomson-commons-raped-child-video>
 