
The Bank of England’s policy of near zero interest rates since the 2008 
financial crash is to come under scrutiny by MPs in a far-reaching probe that 
could lead to calls for changes to the central bank’s remit, it was announced 
on Thursday.

The influential Treasury select committee said it would also examine the 
damage to the Bank’s reputation from attacks on governor Mark Carney by senior 
politicians.

The review comes after Theresa May’s comments at the Tory conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/oct/31/mark-carney-theresa-may-bank-of-england-tory-conference>
 that low interest rates and the £435bn programme of purchasing government 
bonds,known as quantitative easing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/05/quantitative-easing-explained>
, had “bad side-effects”, sparking concerns that ministers wanted to bring the 
central bank back under Treasury control.

May said she was concerned that “just managing” families were suffering from 
policies devised in Threadneedle Street that increased inequality.

Bank of England leaves UK interest rates on hold at 0.25%
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/bank-of-england-uk-interest-rates-slowdown-growth>
Newspaper articles and comments that followed by former ministers and 
pro-Brexit campaigners Michael Gove and Nigel Lawson, and the Eurosceptic 
former Conservative party leader William Hague,appeared to be part of a 
co-ordinated assault 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/21/criticising-mark-carney-tory-hobby-bank-england-governor>
 on Carney and prompted the bank governor to say last month that politicians 
had embarkedon a “massive blame-deflection exercise” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/15/mark-carney-political-attacks-on-central-banks-deflection-exercise>
.

Most economic forecasts predict that the UK’s slowing economy will force the 
Bank to stick with its current policies of rock-bottom ratesfor another year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/15/uk-interest-rates-2017-article-50-brexit>
, angering powerful lobby groups of pensioners that have complained about 
receiving meagre returns on their savings.


Andrew Tyrie, the Tory MP who chairs the committee, said he also wanted to 
investigate the “unintended consequences” of maintaining the bank’s base rate 
at 0.25% and how much it had increased the incentive for households to put 
extra money aside.


Seven years of government bond purchases by the bank, which amount to £435bn, 
will also be questioned by MPs. Tyrie said the committee wanted to consider the 
stimulating effect on the economy of extending the bond buying programme to 
corporate bonds.

“Interest rates are stuck near zero, the Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> has used 
increasingly unconventional forms of quantitative easing, and inflation has 
been below the 2% target for three years,” he said.


“The efficacy of monetary policy or otherwise, its unintended consequences, 
and its prospects, need careful examination.”


Tyrie said he was concerned about the series of attacks on the Bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/19/bank-of-england-rebuts-may-and-hagues-attacks-on-quantitative-easing>
 and wanted to consider further safeguards to protect its independence

He said: “The Treasury committee will continue to act as a safeguard on the 
operational independence of the Bank. The Treasury indemnity, which underpins 
parts of the Bank’s monetary policy, could all too easily encourage the 
Treasury, or politicians, to put undue pressure on the Bank.”

The review is likely to dismay Carney, who has assured Tyrie and MPs on the 
committee on several occasions that the monetary policy committee, which he 
chairs, has considered all the consequences of its actions and followed the 
only path open to it.

Some thinktanks urged Carney to raise interest rates in 2014 once the UK 
economy began to recover strongly from the banking crash. But a succession of 
shocks, including the recent Brexit vote result, have persuaded Carney and the 
nine-strong MPC to reject these calls and inject further funds to stimulate the 
economy.


In August, following a panicky reaction to the Brexit vote by businesses and 
consumers, the Bank cut the base rate from 0.5% and added another £60bn to its 
quantitative easing programme.


Threadneedle Street has come under fire from pensioner groups and savers who 
argue that it has favoured borrowers over savers by keeping interest rates low.


The committee said it wants to test how much savers have found themselves 
pumping even greater funds into their pensions and savings plans to make up for 
the lost interest, possibly depressing consumer spending and business 
investment as a result.

Deputy governor Ben Broadbent said the bank’s analysis showed that while 
savers had experienced lower interest rates since 2008, the value of their 
assets had been protected by the bank’s policies.

Broadbent said a long spell of ultra-low interest rates had not caused a rise 
in inequality in the UK, explaining in his speech that, given most income came 
from wages and not assets, low rates had not encouraged a rise in income 
inequality. Furthermore, in the case of assets, there was little effect on 
inequality from loose monetary policy, he said.

• This article was amended on 23 December 2016. An earlier version said 
incorrectly that William Hague was a pro-Brexit campaigner; although a 
Eurosceptic, he supported a remain vote in the EU referendum.
 