
Ticket touts are bracing for an inquiry by HM Revenue & Customs into their tax 
affairs, after MPs announced a full-blown investigation into the controversial 
industry.

The Department for Culture, Media and Sport select committee said it had heard 
“disturbing” evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
 about the close relationship between touts and ticket resale websites during 
an evidence session this week.

The committee said it believed a fuller investigation into the whole area of 
ticketing was needed. “The committee intends to write to the secretary of state 
urging her to study the submitted evidence regarding the under-reporting of 
income by known touts, and to raise this withHMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> as an area which warrants their 
investigation.”

It said evidence from security consultant Reg Walker, who said touts’ company 
accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
often did not match up to the sales they made via secondary websites such as 
StubHub and Viagogo, suggested a tax inquiry was also needed.

Ticketing websites 'acting like old-fashioned fences', say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
A spokesman for FanFair Alliance, which campaigns against ticketing abuse, 
said: “This is fantastic news for all UK music fans and those who have 
campaigned so long for action.


“The dysfunctional market and bad practices of the big four secondary 
ticketing websites were laid bare before members of the culture, media and 
sport committee. We anticipate that a fuller investigation of this market will 
lead to much-needed reform.

“The FanFair Alliance fully supports further actions into the fraudulent 
activities of online ticket touts and the industrial abuse of this market, as 
well as an amendment to the digital economy bill to ban the misuse of bots.”


How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
The committee initially intended to look into touts’ use of automated software 
known as “bots” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
 to harvest tickets at the expense of genuine fans, in order to make a profit 
by reselling them at a mark-up.


But it said the evidence session, which included allegations that ticket firms 
werecolluding with touts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/bands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts>
, had convinced committee members that a broader investigation was needed.


“The evidence session … has shed a light on much more far-ranging and 
disturbing factors in the market, including clear indications of too close 
relationships between those selling tickets on the primary market and sellers 
on the secondary market,” said the committee.

“Witnesses’ failure to give satisfactory answers to the committee’s questions 
about where companies’ main profits are made, the possibility of even Chinese 
walls between parts of the same company, and the willingness of the ticket 
selling companies to even try to identify, let alone bar, large-scale ticket 
touts and fraudulent sellers have led us to conclude that a fuller 
investigation of the whole area of ticketing is needed.”

Bands and fans declare war on online ticket touts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/bands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts>
Karen Bradley, the culture secretary, plans to chair a round table discussion 
about ticket abuse this month, while the Competition and Markets Authority 
(CMA) is due to conclude its investigation into whether ticket touts are 
breaking consumer protection laws.


In the meantime, the committee will recommend the use of bots be banned, weeks 
after member Nigel Adams, MP for Selby and Ainsty in North Yorkshire, proposed 
that touts who used themshould face prison sentences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/19/touts-using-bots-buy-tickets-face-jail>
.

The committee said it would decide how to proceed after the CMA’s report had 
been published.
 