
An influential group of MPs has urged the government to take immediate action 
to stop touts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
 using specialist software to buy large numbers of tickets to resell for a 
profit.

The call from the cross-party culture, media and sport committee follows an 
evidence session last week 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/culture-media-and-sport-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/inquiry1/>
 when it heard about the activities of touts who offer tickets to events on 
resale websites.

That prompted the MPs to call for an inquiry into the tax affairs of secondary 
ticket selling companies,saying they had heard worrying evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/mps-call-for-inquiry-into-ticket-touts-and-resale-websites>
 about the close relationship between touts and ticket resale websites.

 The chair of committee, the Conservative MP Damian Collins, has written to 
the culture secretary 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/culture-media-and-sport-committee/ticket-abuse/written/43603.pdf>
, Karen Bradley, to call for an immediate end to the use of so-calledbots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/30/how-bots-ruined-everything-from-drake-to-diets>
 to “harvest” tickets as soon as they are placed on open sale.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fculture-committee-urge-government-swift-action-stop-ticket-touts-software-bots-resale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee6d6f10d43478fcb6af7e18d83b32da6e5bc98f%2F969_64_1305_783%2F1305.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=MPs%20urge%20government%20to%20take%20swift%20action%20to%20stop%20ticket%20touts%20using%20'bots'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fculture-committee-urge-government-swift-action-stop-ticket-touts-software-bots-resale%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=MPs%20urge%20government%20to%20take%20swift%20action%20to%20stop%20ticket%20touts%20using%20%27bots%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fculture-committee-urge-government-swift-action-stop-ticket-touts-software-bots-resale%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee6d6f10d43478fcb6af7e18d83b32da6e5bc98f%2F969_64_1305_783%2F1305.jpg>
 MP Damian Collins, whose committee is to table an amendment to the digital 
economy bill Photograph: Eamonn M. McCormack/Getty Images 
The MPs are to table an amendment to the digital economy bill 
<https://services.parliament.uk/bills/2016-17/digitaleconomy.html>, currently 
making its way through parliament, which would make it illegal to use software 
to buy up large numbers of tickets.

The use of bots “appears to be a significant problem”, Collins wrote in the 
letter, while urging Bradley to more closely examine the ticket reselling 
industry.

Ticketing websites 'acting like old-fashioned fences', say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
He said the evidence session had “shed a light on much more far-ranging and 
disturbing factors in the ticketing markets, including clear indications of too 
close relationships between those selling tickets on the primary market and 
sellers on the secondary market”.

While secondary ticket sales websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
 such as StubHub and Viagogo operate legally, organisations representing fans 
have warned that they are a conduit for touts to resell significant numbers of 
tickets at a profit, making it harder for individuals to acquire them at cost 
price.

Collins said the answers given to the committee last week from ticket sellers 
and resellers “went from complacent to evasive” and gave no confidence that 
they were seeking to tackle large-scale touting.

He said: “We are writing to the secretary of state to ask her to begin to look 
more closely at this issue but also as a first step that there seems to be a 
lot of consensus on amending the digital economy bill to ban the technology 
that harvests tickets on a large scale before genuine fans ever get a look in.”

The evidence session heard strong evidence indicating there was a significant 
level of under-reporting of income by known touts trading on secondary sites, 
Collins said, adding that this should be investigated by tax authorities.

A spokeswoman for the Department of Culture, Media and Sport said the 
government had commissioned areport into consumer protection over secondary 
ticketing 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/independent-secondary-ticketing-review-published-today>
 and planned to respond to this. “We understand fan frustration on ticketing 
bots and the culture secretary is to hold meetings with stakeholders to discuss 
their impact on the secondary market and consider this issue further,” she said.
 