
The banking sector is to face fresh scrutiny from MPs, who are embarking on a 
new inquiry to examine rules put in place after the financial crisis in 2008 to 
prevent further billion-pound taxpayer bailouts.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
said the public had a right to know if they were protected from a repeat of the 
financial crisis, when £65bn was pumped intoRoyal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> and Lloyds 
Banking Group.

“The public was forced to foot the bill – and a large one – when the banks got 
into trouble during the crisis. They are still footing the bill now, with the 
profitable disposal of RBS looking like an ever more distant prospect,” said 
Tyrie.

UK banks get two more years to meet capital rules
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/uk-banks-get-two-more-years-to-meet-capital-rules>
Last month, RBS failed the Bank of England’s stress test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
 – an annual health check of the sector introduced after the crisis – in a move 
exacerbating the problems facing Philip Hammond in reducing the taxpayer stake 
below 73%. The chancellorsaid in October that a sale of any more shares in RBS 
was not practical 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/07/philip-hammond-drops-plan-to-sell-cut-price-lloyds-shares-to-public>
 after his predecessorGeorge Osborne sold off a 5% stake at a £1bn loss in 
August 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/04/rbs-sell-off-george-osborne-defends-1bn-loss>
.

As he launched a call for evidence by 5 March 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/treasury-committee/inquiries1/parliament-2015/capital-inquiry-16-17/>
, Tyrie said: “Eight years on from the crisis, a great deal of effort has gone 
into ending ‘too big to fail’.”


Among regulator efforts to make banks safer were new rules to force them to 
hold more capital, to outline how they could be broken up in the event of 
collapse, and the ringfencing requirement devised by Sir John Vickers to 
protect high street operations from investment banking businesses.

The financial crisis showed that banks were not holding enough capital to 
cushion them against the risks they were running. When they needed more funds, 
it was taxpayers, not investors, who footed the bill.

“The public have a right to know whether they are now adequately protected,” 
said Tyrie. “Ringfencing and resolution regimes are intended to ensure that the 
failure of large banks can be managed in an orderly way, without relying on 
public support. It is vital to establish how robust they are.”

Tyrie also chaired the parliamentary commission on banking standards, which 
was instigated after the Libor-rigging scandal and looked at the way taxpayers 
stepped into rescue ailing banks. “As the parliamentary commission on banking 
standards concluded, the assumption that failing banks would receive public 
support was part of a toxic cocktail of misaligned incentives which contributed 
to the financial crisis,” he said.

The EU has also implemented rules that require bondholders to take losses in 
collapsing banks before taxpayers can pump in funds. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/monte-dei-paschi-bank-cash-call-bailout>

Among the questions posed by the Treasury select committee in its terms of 
reference, is the impact of Brexit, if any, on the UK’s regime for handling 
troubled banks and how far advanced are UK banks in meeting current rules. The 
Vickers rules, for instance, need to be implemented by the start of 2019.

The British Bankers’ Association backed the latest inquiry. “The UK taxpayer 
should never again have to foot the bill when a financial institution finds 
itself in difficulty. The BBA therefore welcomes the Treasury committee’s 
inquiry into capital and resolution and looks forward to contributing to it,” a 
spokesperson for the lobby group said.
 