
More than 60 MPs have written to Theresa May asking that the government 
immediately ratify the Istanbul convention, an international agreement aimed at 
ending violence against women.


The letter, organised by the Labour MP Seema Malhotra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/seema-malhotra>, comes as her fellow MPs 
on Thursday debate a Commons motion to mark the International Day for the 
Elimination of Violence against Women and Girls.

A new tally of violence against women in England and Wales disclosed this week 
foundthat more than 900 women had been killed by men 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/07/men-killed-900-women-six-years-england-wales-figures-show>
 over a six-year period, most by their current or former partners.

The letter to May notes that when she was home secretary she promised to 
tackle domestic violence and establish a cross-departmental strategy on 
tackling violence against women and girls, and that her government spoke out 
about such matters.


“But, as we are sure you will agree, words are not enough,” it continues, 
adding that violence against women perpetrated by a partner or acquaintance 
increased rapidly between 2009 and 2014, as did reports of child sexual abuse 
and domestic violence.

“Funding for staff who provide individual and tailored support for victims of 
violence to rebuild their lives and seek prosecution of their abusers is being 
cut,” the 65 MPs say. “We believe that by their actions (and failures to act), 
your ministers are failing to deliver on your commitment to tackling sexual 
abuse and violence. We are therefore asking you to take leadership on these 
issues immediately.”

The letter says that of “particular importance” is the failure to ratify the 
Istanbul convention. The UK signed up to the measure in 2012, but has not yet 
ratified it.

Whatever she says, Theresa May has failed victims of domestic violence | Sarah 
Champion
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/theresa-may-domestic-violence-women>
The convention, which originates from the Council of Europe 
<http://www.coe.int/en/web/istanbul-convention/home>, says it is “the 
obligation of the state” to tackle violence against women. Previously, the 
government has explained the delay by saying it was looking into how the 
convention might affect jurisdictions.

“This historic international treaty sets legally binding standards for 
preventing and tackling domestic abuse,” the MPs’ letter says. “Crucially, the 
convention prevents further cuts to domestic violence refuges and gives all 
survivors of domestic abuse the right to access the specialist services which 
they need to live in safety and rebuild their lives.”


It concludes: “Your ministers have uttered warm words about their commitment 
to passing the Istanbul convention, but until we see government time set aside 
in the parliamentary calendar, it remains nothing more than a piece of paper, 
and the UK will be failing in its obligations to tackle and eliminate violence 
against women and girls.”

In a parallel move on Thursday, the Scottish National party MP Eilidh 
Whiteford launched a private member’s bill calling on the government to ratify 
the convention.

Whiteford said: “We’ve been waiting over four and a half years for the UK 
government to ratify the Istanbul convention. It is no longer a valid excuse to 
say there is not enough parliamentary time to take forward the necessary 
changes to domestic legislation.”


Her bill is intended to set out a clear timetable to bring forward the 
required legislation.

Women <https://www.womensaid.org.uk/>’s Aid <https://www.womensaid.org.uk/> 
federations across England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland havewritten an 
open letter to all MPs 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/womens-aid-federations-join-forces-call-government-ratify-istanbul-convention/>
 asking them to attend Whiteford’s convention debate on 16 December.

Last week, the Scottish government’s communities secretary, Angela Constance, 
called on the UK government to act over the convention, writing to the home 
secretary, Amber Rudd, asking for a “clear timetable” for ratification.


 