
Muhammad Ali <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/muhammad-ali>, who has died 
aged 74, was acclaimed by many as the greatest world heavyweight boxing 
champion the world has ever seen. He was certainly the most charismatic boxer. 
His courage inside and outside the ring and his verbal taunting of opponents 
were legendary, as were his commitment to justice and his efforts for the sick 
and underprivileged.

Three times world champion, Ali harnessed his fame in the ring to causes 
outside it. He was a convert to Islam and the personification of Black Pride. 
He anticipated the anti-Vietnam war movement of the 1960s by refusing to join 
the armed forces.

He made goodwill missions to Afghanistan and North Korea, delivered medical 
supplies to an embargoed Cuba, and travelled to Iraq to secure the release of 
15 US hostages shortly before the first Gulf war. Repellent though he found 
many aspects of US foreign policy –and repellent as the establishment found him 
when in 1967 it banned him from the ring for three years for refusing the draft 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2013/apr/29/muhammad-ali-refuses-to-fight-in-vietnam-war-1967>
 – the nation embraced Ali as time passed, realising his unique ambassadorial 
value. In 2005, he received his country’s highest civilian honour, the 
presidential medal of freedom, from George W Bush, an incumbent whose views he 
must have detested.


But it all stemmed from boxing. His matchless magnificence, the 
self-proclaimed “greatness”, was invented early as a cheery prizefighter’s 
publicity stunt. It was a greatness that was to balloon and achieve 
near-universal acceptance as he became acknowledged as a beacon not only for 
downtrodden African Americans but for global Islam as well, not to mention the 
anti-war movement or poverty in developing countries. In the middle of press 
conferences, reporters would earnestly ask him about solving the Palestine 
problem, or if he could have a quiet word with Moscow about President Ronald 
Reagan’s star wars programme. Ali was a rebel with a cause – lots of them.

Muhammad Ali dies, aged 74
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-dies> 
He played the sovereign to the hilt. He played the victim. He played the 
clown. He played the camera. But, above all, he played the sport. He was the 
best heavyweight boxer there had ever been since the Marquess of Queensberry 
set down his rules in 1867, undeniably the best since Kid Cain KO’ed Sugar Ray 
Abel. First as Cassius Clay, then as Ali, this remarkable boxer totally reset 
the marks, utterly changed all inviolate techniques and tenets. Four years 
after winning thelight-heavyweight gold medal at the 1960 Olympic games 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/london-2012-olympics-blog/2012/mar/07/stunning-olympic-moments-cassius-clay>
 in Rome,he won the undisputed professional world heavyweight championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2014/feb/23/muhammad-ali-sonny-liston>, 
taking on all comers. He was to regain the title twice, an achievement that 
remains unmatched. His career in the professional ring spanned an astonishing 
21 years. Of 61 contests,he lost only five 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/08/joe-frazier-muhammad-ali-1971>, 
four of them whenhe was long past his majestic best 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/07/boxing.features>. Thirty-seven 
victories were knockouts.

Ali’s fabled predecessors in his kingdom were Jack Johnson, Jack Dempsey, Gene 
Tunney, Joe Louis and Rocky Marciano. Johnson was a puncher-boxer and dandy; 
Dempsey an uncomplicated hitter; Tunney had grace and nerve and fast feet; 
Louis’s fast hands punched in a blur of combinations, and he had a killer 
instinct as well as chivalry; Marciano had relentless oomph and steam-hammer 
cruelty. Ali had every single one of all those qualities in abundance, as well 
as timing, intelligence, wit and an extraordinary courage which, in the end, 
becursed his wellbeing. Yet, through the final third of the 20th century, 
rheumy-eyed, scarred and bent-nosed ancients would shake their heads at his 
virtuosities, sigh, and insist that the big, bold champions of their far 
tougher olden days would have ambushed, cornered, speared and most damnably 
done for the swankpot in no time. But as the fearless Ali strutted on, 
inventing new ways, new scenes, new angles, new endings, those croaking 
pronouncements of veterans petered out. No one believed them any more, not when 
Ali was in his prime, in his pomp.

He was born the eldest son of Cassius and Odessa Clay in Louisville, Kentucky, 
and named Cassius Marcellus after his father. His mother was listed on the 
birth certificate as a household domestic, his father as a signwriter. The 
family lived on Grand Avenue in the segregated city’s black west end. In the 
Kentucky state census rolls, all four of his grandparents were described as 
“free coloureds”. One of Odessa’s grandfathers, Tom Moorehead, was the son of a 
white man called Moorehead and the partner of a slave named simply as Dinah. 
Odessa’s other grandfather was a white Irishman, Abe O’Grady, born in County 
Clare, who married a “freed slave woman, name unknown”.

Muhammad Ali: the 20 best moments that made him The Greatest | Sean Ingle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-death-20-best-moments>
It was a small but happy family (there was soon a second son, Rudolph), in 
which penury was taken for granted. The brothers were both good boys, the 
neighbours recalled, unfailing attendees of the Baptist Sunday school. Odessa 
was a serene and saintly homemaker, though her husband was a rascally 
tale-teller and liked to drink. This led to occasional court appearances. He 
paid the fines and, as a self-imposed additional penance, painted religious 
murals for various Baptist chapels around the city. The two boys would 
sometimes help. “Louisville was more peaceful, less dangerous then,” Rudolph 
recalled many years later, “except if we strayed off-limits, then white boys 
would threaten: ‘Hey, nigger, get back to your own.’”

Young Cassius was no scholar, and by the end of his schooling, only an 
occasional attendee. He could scarcely read or write when he graduated from 
Central high school in 1960, and ranked 376th in the graduation class of 391. 
Long before then, however, his abundant energies had been devoted to boxing.

When he was 12, in October 1954, his cherished bicycle was stolen. The white 
policeman, Joe Martin, to whom he reported the theft, happened to be the 
organiser of a boys’ boxing club in the basement of the city’s Columbia 
auditorium. He never got his bike back, but it was a life-changing encounter. 
Encouraged also by a black trainer, Fred Stoner, within two months the spindly, 
sassy youngster weighing 90lb had won (on a split decision) his first official 
three-minute, three-round amateur bout against another rookie, Ron O’Keefe. 
Over the next six years he contested a further 107 junior bouts, won two 
national Golden Gloves titles and two national Amateur Athletic Union titles, 
and was chosen for the US team for the 1960 Olympics. He leapt to such glamour 
with relish – and a nerveless, original skill – and in the final of the 178lb 
(light-heavyweight) division, the 18-year-old defeated – and bewildered and 
perplexed – the three-times European champion Zbigniew Pietrzykowski, of Poland.

Muhammad Ali – 25 of the best photographs of the legendary boxer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2014/oct/30/muhammad-ali-25-best-photographs-cassius-clay-legendary-boxer>
These were the first Olympics to be televised live around the world. And the 
world took notice. I did, for sure, and remember thinking: “This madcap kid 
doesn’t even hold up his guard. He just dances and sways – and punches in 
lightning flashes.” I still recall Neil Allen’s prescient report in the Times: 
“The American has given the impression of being so much a showman that we have 
waited throughout the tournament for someone to wake him up with a solid punch. 
Nobody has, and in the final last night Clay, like some loosely strung 
marionette, put his punches together in combination clusters and pummelled the 
Pole about the ring. Only great courage kept the triple European champion on 
his feet. We still have not seen whether the new gold medallist can take a 
punch but I expect him to be among the professionals next year so we shall know 
his worth soon enough.”

And so it came to pass. In 1960 a consortium of old-money Kentucky businessmen 
were ready to launch the young Olympian’s paid career – with a $10,000 down 
payment and a guaranteed $333 a month against ring earnings (the latter was 
split 50/50 for the first two years, then 60/40 for the next four of the 
six-year contract). It was a good, fair deal, and three days after signing, on 
29 October 1960, Clay made his debut as a pro and defeated in six one-sided 
rounds Tunney Hunsaker, a former chief police officer, in Louisville’s packed 
Freedom Hall. Hunsaker lived off the history of it till his death 40 years 
later. The consortium hired a canny veteran, Archie Moore, as Clay’s trainer, 
but the two never got on and instead he went south to Florida, to Angelo 
Dundee’s celebrated Fifth Street gym in Miami. The skilled and caring Dundee 
was to be at Ali’s side and in his corner for the next 21 years.

As his fleet and rangy physique bulked up, his looks and build now matched his 
charm and cheek. The artist LeRoy Neiman observed: “Suddenly he resembles a 
piece of classical sculpture with no flaw or imperfection, his features and 
limbs flawless and perfectly proportioned.” The engaging nature, too, began to 
resonate as Clay cut a swathe through the well-selected heavyweights’ Second 
Division and he allowed his ego full rein on self-promotion. Imitating the 
white, vaudeville television love-to-hate wrestler Gorgeous George, his 
forecasts bragged the precise round he was going to win, sometimes combining 
such box-office larks with couplets of doggerel. One was: “I’ll Just Say 
‘Boo!’/He’ll Go in Two” (Lamar Clark, KO 2); another was “Ol’ Mitt Likes 
t’Mix/He falls in Six” (Alex Miteff, KO 6). In 1963, Clay returned to Europe 
for his first foreign professional fightagainst Henry Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2011/may/02/sir-henry-cooper-five-memorable-fights-pictures>
 (“London’s a Jive/’Enery Lasts Five”), and although he was floored for the 
first time, he duly stopped Cooper in the fifth – as he had predicted.

Spring 1964 was momentous for Clay in several ways. Dundee, daringly, deemed 
him ready for Sonny Liston, the world heavyweight champion. Liston smiled for 
once. The boxing fraternity chortled. This, or so the knowing forecast went, 
would be the end of a half-diverting saga of an appealing loudmouth. We would 
hear of him no more, for Liston and his ogre status made both an art and 
science out of first, intimidation, then sadistically inflicted pain. Hadn’t 
Liston not long before humiliatingly laid to waste, twice inside six minutes, 
the former Olympic champion Floyd Patterson?

Liston was presumed invincible and the greenhorn, fresh-faced challenger was 
an unprecedented 8-1 underdog – odds that lengthened when, at the weigh-in, 
Clay’s apparent hysterics had doctors pronouncing him traumatised by fear. Come 
the bell, the upstart nervelessly played it cool, almost a laughingly gay 
matador, his speed of hand and foot totally nullifying Liston’s wicked jab, the 
key to his armoury. Dismantled brick by brick and tile by tile, Liston aged 10 
years in less than 20 minutes and retired on his stool before the start of the 
seventh (the round in which the challenger had predicted “the ol’ bear would be 
trapped and wrap’t”). On 25 February 1964, Clay was crowned world heavyweight 
champion for the first time. In the rematch in May 1965, Liston keeled over in 
a fainting funk inside a round.

Two days after his first defeat of Liston, Clay announced his conversion to 
Islam, and on 6 March, he changed his name to Muhammad Ali. Liston later 
complained that the Black Muslims, a separatist sect, had threatened him in an 
attempt to throw the fight. Old ham boxing writers were happy to believe him, 
and so were America’s rightwing rednecks. Such a charge was at least given 
credence as the newly renamed boxer was a minister in the Nation of Islam, and 
the group’s self-proclaimed “messenger”, Elijah Muhammad, had, to all intents, 
become the boxer’s manager. (Ali was to convert to orthodox Islam in 1975.)

The US of the mid-1960s was a nation seething with racial undercurrents. 
(Malcolm X was assassinated in 1965 and Martin Luther King three years later.) 
The rest of the world was comparatively oblivious to all of this, and while to 
a large, white tranche of the US, Ali became public enemy No 1, his televised 
contests with Liston had girdled the globe so, even by then, whatever name he 
chose, his sporting legend was assured.

However, for all his brilliance in the ring – hands as fast and deadly as a 
cobra’s strike, feet in a riverdance blur never before seen in a heavyweight – 
America’s inevitable white backlash to his religious defiance bit back with 
merciless retribution. This change of mood among white Americans coincided with 
Ali’s second US army call-up to serve in Vietnam. Although he had already 
failed in 1964 the draft’s preliminary intelligence tests in literacy and 
numeracy (placed at just 16 in an elementary attainment level of 30) – “I said 
I was the greatest, not the smartest” – fresh calls for his induction came in 
1966.

Establishment outrage reached spittingly aggressive proportions when Ali, 
pleading deferment on religious grounds, told reporters: “I ain’t got no 
quarrel with them Vietcong … no Vietcong ever called me ‘nigger’.” Within an 
hour, outraged, all US boxing bodies suspended his licence and stripped him of 
his title. In June 1967, a court confirmed the ban unanimously. Ali was 
prevented from boxing until 1970 – that is, between the ages of 25 and 28, 
which undoubtedly should have been the pinnacle and prime of his athletic 
resplendence. His really “greatest” years were arguably stolen. (The conviction 
for refusing to join the armed services was reversed in June 1971 by the US 
supreme court.)

When the three-year ban expired, he returned to the ring, in October 1970, 
with a three-round stoppage of Jerry Quarry in Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2010/oct/27/muhammad-ali-jerry-quarry-october-1970>
, Georgia, although observers could already detect a glimmer of unease about 
his work. He knew the ravishing speed and the split-second timing of his 
punches were fractionally out of kilter. He never reclaimed the full package; 
lost property, stolen property. I was pleased, at least, to have witnessed his 
pre-ban splendours – say, against Cleveland Williams at Houston in November 
1966, or Zora Folley in New York in March 1967.

Nor, after the ban, it must be said, was Ali’s passing, nasty and vindictive 
side ever again in evidence, such as when he bullyingly and hurtfully “carried” 
the hapless, injured Patterson in 1965, or malevolently taunted to painful 
humiliation for the full 15 rounds Ernie Terrell, who had addressed Ali as Clay 
at the weigh-in at Houston in 1967. Those were not pretty sights.

If the two fights with Liston, epic in their theatricality and outcome, had 
begun to compile the legend, then the three contests with the uncomplicated, 
brooding warrior Joe Frazier, in 1971, 1974 and 1975, clinched the immortal 
deal. Here was an unmissably dramatic, defining, second act. Only six months 
after the exile’s return against Quarry, Ali squared up to the remorselessly 
committed hitter “Smokin’ Joe” to challenge for his own usurped title. After a 
thunderously pulsating, draining 14 rounds it was dead-level. In the last, a 
fearsome Frazier hook crunched into Ali’s jaw, broke it, and dumped him on the 
canvas, sprawling on his back.Frazier deservedly won the decision 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2011/nov/08/joe-frazier-muhammad-ali-1971> – 
but the fact that Ali somehow gathered himself to his feet and attempted to 
fight back not only had the fans round the world swooning at the heroism, but 
it gave notice of the added, and unconsidered, ingredient that would embrace 
Ali for the rest of his life.

Should we call it adversity? Well, here is sheer, dauntless, leonine courage. 
Worldwide love of, and tributes to Ali today are not so much for his 
astonishing, upfront, youthful and winning talents, but for his bravery at 
heaving himself from the canvas that New York night in 1971.

Ali avenged that defeat by Frazier with a points victory in the return contest 
in the same New York ring three years later. In 1975, the last payday was 
generous enough for the two ageing fighters to meet for a third time in Quezon 
City, in the Philippines – “the Thrilla in Manila”. The venom and pain of it 
was excruciating. To all intents, it was a requiem for both men’s illustrious 
prizefighting. It ended withAli collapsing but, by minutes, the winner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2011/nov/12/from-the-vault-frazier-ali> 
because Frazier was mercifully retired by his cornermen at the end of the 14th 
and penultimate round. They had nearly beaten each other to death. The doyen of 
British sportswriters, Hugh McIlvanney, was at the ringside: “There was nothing 
morbid or sadistic about the thrill that their performances sent through the 
blood. What we felt was awe at the spectacle of two extraordinary men setting 
new limits for themselves, pushing back the boundaries of their courage, their 
physical and psychological capacity.”

A year before what should have been, by every doctor’s recommendation, the 
(sort of) triumphant last hurrah in the Philippines, Ali’s global ambassadorial 
obsessions saw him stripped for battle in the even more unlikely setting of 
Kinshasa (then Zaire, now the Democratic Republic of the Congo). The posters 
for this contest dubbed it “the Rumble in the Jungle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/oct/30/from-the-vault-poetry-rumble-in-jungle>
”. It was probably the seminal boxing match of all time, the dramatic unities 
perfectly in place: perceived goodie v baddie, impossible odds, totally 
unforeseen outcome.

Muhammad Ali dead at 74 - live reactions to the death of a sporting icon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/live/2016/jun/04/muhammad-ali-dead-age-74-live-updates>
The 25-year-old George Foreman was cast as the behemoth beast, but boxing had 
not seen a hitter of such concussive, one-punch power, demonstrated in Jamaica 
when he took the title from Frazier. Ali might possibly have had an answer in 
his prime, but not now, not at a fading, spent-force 32 years old. But as well 
as his wilful courage, in this (what we thought) would be the last chapter of 
his glories, we came also to marvel at the brazenness. For seven sweltering 
rounds, against all prognoses, Ali allowed Foreman, the brutish, one-blow 
Goliath, actually to punch himself out on his arms, as Ali himself lay on the 
ropes, head back as if out of a bedroom window to check if the cat was on the 
roof. Ali called it his “rope-a-dope” trick – and the world caught its breath 
when finally he came off the ropes, feinted with his left and, with a single 
right hander, felled the bewildered Foreman.

Unaccountably champ again, Ali went on boxing. He had easily enough of a 
fortune left, however generous he was with it, and in the ring he was now being 
hit with increasing regularity and hurt. In February 1978, he lost the title to 
the workaday Leon Spinksand regained it once again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2008/sep/11/boxing> that September – 
but tiredly, for now the feet were flat, the reflexes dull, the senses dimmed. 
His speech was slurring badly.

He retired, came back, retired again and was just short of his 39th birthday 
when he allowed himself to challengethe giant he-man Larry Holmes in October 
1980 <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2007/jan/07/boxing.features>. He was 
calamitously, cringingly, beaten up over 10 rounds by a mercifully unvenomous 
Holmes – but badly beaten up he still was. It was not till December 1981 – just 
five weeks off 40 – that sense and his friends coaxed him from the ring and 
quietly led him away after a last humbling fromTrevor Berbick in the Bahamas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/gallery/2011/dec/11/boxing-muhammad-ali>.

Ali’s health nosedived almost at once. Soon he was seen scarcely able to talk 
or walk, his speech descending into inaudible mumbles, the once stimulating 
“Ali shuffle” becoming a harrowing shamble. It was pitifully obvious that 
Parkinson’s disease was severely debilitating his brain and limbs. Yet the 
soulful, mischievous brown eyes still spoke eloquently of his wit and charm. 
With pride, difficulty and a dignified, if silent, eloquence, he lit the torch 
to open the 1996Olympic games in Atlanta 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2012/jan/16/muhammad-ali-70th-birthday>
. Thousands wept as he did so.

At the turn of the millennium, Ali was voted, far and wide and undisputed in 
umpteen countries, man of the century, sportsman of the century, and 
personality of the century. In 2005 he opened a museum built in his honour in 
Louisville. And in 2011 he made rare public appearance the funeral of his 
former opponent, Frazier. At the opening ceremony of the 2012 Olympic Games in 
London, he seemed extremely frail and was only able to walk a few steps. 
However, he received a rapturous reception from the 80,000-strong crowd.

Ali is survived by his fourth wife, Lonnie; and by two sons and seven 
daughters.

• Muhammad Ali, boxer, born 17 January 1942; died 3 June 2016

• Frank Keating died in 2013
 