
At 5.42pm on June 2 1994, RAF Chinook Zulu Delta 576 took off from RAF 
Aldergrove near Belfast. On board were four special forces aircrew and 25 
senior members of theNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> intelligence community, bound 
for a security conference near Inverness.

They never made it. Eighteen minutes into the flight, the helicopter hit the 
cloud-covered Mull of Kintyre, killing all 29 passengers and crew. It was the 
RAF's worst peacetime accident.

Evidence uncovered by Computer Weekly magazine now casts doubt on the MoD's 
insistence that the two pilots were to blame. Flight lieutenants Jonathan 
Tapper, 28, and Rick Cook, 30, were both experienced special forces pilots with 
exemplary records. Flt Lt Tapper, the captain, had a total of 3,165 military 
flying hours. Flt Lt Cook, who was at the controls, had 2,867 hours.

Care failure


With no evidence of a technical malfunction discovered by accident 
investigators, an RAF board of inquiry found them guilty of "gross negligence". 
They had "wrongly continued to fly towards the high ground" and failed to 
observe minimum care in bad weather when they flew into the isolated Scottish 
hillside.

But the latest investigation shows that by continuing to blame the pilots, the 
MoD has failed the RAF's own test in accident investigations, which states that 
"only in cases in which there is absolutely no doubt whatsoever should deceased 
aircrew be found negligent".

The new evidence focuses on an innovative computer engine control system which 
was being fitted to the RAF's Chinooks in the early 1990s. Because it had the 
ability to take the engines down to idle or accelerate them to maximum speed, 
the system was known as full authority digital engine control, or Fadec.

From the start of the upgrade there were problems. Warning lights would come 
on, which forced crews to embark on a series of distracting checks often only 
to discover that there was no apparent problem. Sometimes engines would run 
down, on other occasions they would run up, in danger of going out of control, 
when the computer system pumped in too much fuel. A common feature of the 
problems was that they left no physical trace.

Nevertheless, in November 1993 the Chinook Mk2 was cleared for operational 
service. The MoD believed that none of these problems jeopardised the safety of 
the aircraft, although there was a weight restriction so that if Fadec shut 
down one engine, the helicopter could still fly on the other.

It was only after Chinook ZD576 hit the Mull of Kintyre seven months later 
that the full extent of concerns about the Fadec system started to emerge.

At 5.55pm on the day of the crash, ZD576 was seen by an amateur yachtsman 
flying below cloud two to three nautical miles from the Mull of Kintyre 
lighthouse. It was flying in a straight line at level altitude about 
200ft-300ft above sea level. Visibility was good.

The top of the Mull was shrouded in cloud but the crew had not planned to fly 
over it anyway. Flt Lt Tapper indicated on the navigation computer that they 
had seen their first waypoint, the lighthouse, and entered the second waypoint, 
Corran, about 90 miles away. That would require a slight left turn, which would 
let them continue round the Mull at low level.

But the helicopter never made the turn. Soon after Flt Lt Tapper entered the 
new waypoint, ZD576 crashed into the hillside, bounced, broke up in flames and 
landed again about 300 metres from the initial impact.

Based on findings by the civil air accidents investigation branch, called in 
to conduct the technical inquiry into the crash, four members of an RAF board 
of inquiry acknowledged that even though there was no evidence of a technical 
malfunction, "an unforeseen malfunction of the type being experienced on the 
Chinook Mk2, which would not necessarily have left any physical evidence, 
remained a possibility and could not be discounted".

But two senior officers charged with reviewing the report and deciding on the 
findings, Air Chief Marshal Sir William Wratten and Air Vice Marshal John Day, 
disagreed with their colleagues and pronounced the pilots guilty of gross 
negligence. Sir William said of Flt Lt Tapper: "I cannot categorise his failure 
as an error of judgment: this would suggest that he made an honest mistake. To 
the contrary, he did not exercise appropriate care and judgment."

The MoD also dismissed the judgment of a Scottish fatal accident inquiry, 
under Sheriff Sir Stephen Young, which ruled there was no proof the pilots were 
to blame.

But the pilots' families and aviation experts believe evidence which has 
emerged since shows the helicopter was just as likely to have suffered a 
temporary "overspeed", forcing it to climb into the cloud and on to the Mull as 
the pilots fought to bring down the engine speed. This may have been compounded 
by other problems, which would have prevented the helicopter from making a 
planned left turn around the Mull.

Documents unearthed by Computer Weekly back up this theory and confirm 
suspicions that the MoD has attempted to cover up evidence which suggested the 
Chinook had suffered serious technical problems.

At the time of the crash the MoD was taking legal action in the US against the 
engine manufacturers Textron-Lycoming, over an incident during ground testing 
of a modified Chinook at Boeing's plant in Wilmington, Pennsylvania, in 1989. 
The aircraft was almost destroyed by an engine overspeed which occurred when 
the two independent sensors Fadec uses to detect engine speed were in effect 
knocked out. The MoD blamed a flaw in the design of the software which meant 
Fadec wrongly interpreted this as a total loss of power, causing it to pump too 
much fuel into rotors which were actually functioning normally.

Investigators not told


The MoD did not tell the AAIB investigators about the litigation, despite its 
relevance to their inquiry. The fault code displayed by Fadec after the 1989 
incident was E5. The same code was subsequently found on one of the crashed 
Chinook's computers.

In March last year, the then armed forces minister, John Reid, appeared before 
the Commons defence select committee looking into the 1994 crash. The 
committee's report was a great success for the MoD, concluding on the basis of 
the evidence that there were no "fundamental flaws" in the design of the 
helicopter or its components.

But the magazine's investigation has established that the information Dr Reid 
gave to the committee was inaccurate. There is no suggestion he deliberately 
misled the committee, but the quality of the briefings he received is called 
into question. The MoD dismisses allegations that officials knowingly misled 
parliament.

Asked why the MoD had withheld details of the US legal action, Dr Reid told 
them: "It was not - I repeat it was not - on account of the failure of the 
software... We sued them for negligence in their testing procedures. We did not 
sue them because of a failure of the Fadec software. This is one of the 
misconceptions that has unfortunately been allowed to flourish."

He repeated this line when explaining why the Scottish fatal accident inquiry 
had not been told about the case against the engine manufacturers.

But a copy of the government's official claim against Textron-Lycoming and a 
letter from the engine manufacturer's insurers denying the claim, both obtained 
by Computer Weekly, reveal that the MoD's case was based almost entirely on the 
faulty design of the Fadec system.

The government claimed that the system was not airworthy, that the software 
was not adequately documented and that the almost total reliance on unproven 
software for engine and aircraft safety constituted a flawed design system.

The case went to arbitration, and in November 1995, Textron-Lycoming paid the 
MoD more than $3m (Â£1.8m) in compensation.

But as recently as May 15 this year, British ministers were still insisting to 
MPs that the 1989 incident had been caused by faulty testing.

Both before and after the crash the MoD's military aircraft testing 
establishment at Boscombe Down in Wiltshire had expressed grave concerns about 
the Fadec system. On June 1, the day before the accident, it suspended flight 
trials of the upgraded Chinook after a series of unexplained Fadec-related 
malfunctions. Two days later, an internal memo criticised the software as 
"unverifiable and therefore unsuited for its intended purpose".

Before the committee, Dr Reid was disparaging about Boscombe Down's concerns. 
But evidence has come to light revealing that concern about Fadec went much 
higher than the test pilots.

In a previously unseen memo, dated April 29 1994, the assistant director of 
helicopter projects, a Captain Brougham, the MoD official appointed project 
manager for the Chinook, urged his superiors to "understand and take full 
account of" Boscombe Down's views to ensure that in future negotiations with 
the manufacturers the MoD would be able to secure the "satisfaction of all 
safety case issues".

The memo also raised concerns about misleading comparisons between different 
Fadec systems, calling into question another key element of the MoD's defence 
of the Chinook programme: the positive experience of other countries which use 
it. For example, Dr Reid told the select committee last year that the US was 
"perfectly happy. They have a huge fleet of Chinooks and they are applying the 
standards of Nasa." The RAF's version of Fadec, however, was different from 
those used by other countries.

'Series of problems'


The magazine has obtained a second memo from Captain Brougham, dated January 
11 1995, in which he referred to a "series of problems" with the Chinooks, 
"many of which were traced eventually back to software design and systems 
integrations problems... " The period in which these incidents occurred, 
Captain Brougham wrote, was between February and July 1994 - the same period as 
the crash. There is no suggestion that Dr Reid was aware of the existence of 
either of these memos.

Doubts about the RAF's verdict have been fuelled by the maintenance history of 
ZD576 itself. Dr Reid told MPs last year that between May 1993 and April 1994, 
Mk2 Chinooks had experienced five faults during 950 hours of flying.

RAF maintenance reports seen by Computer Weekly reveal that in the eight weeks 
from the end of March 1994 there were six incidents involving ZD576. Five of 
them were Fadec-related, including one "ENG FAIL" warning, and one in which a 
part came loose in the vital flying control assembly.

Dr Reid told MPs he had the power to reopen the inquiry if new information 
came forward, suggesting that the RAF had reached the wrong decision. The 
families of Jonathan Tapper and Rick Cook will be calling on ministers to do 
exactly that.

Trials and errors


1984: The ministry of defence begins process to upgrade Chinook helicopter 
fleet, installing a computer system called Fadec to control the engines.

January, 1989: RAF Chinook almost destroyed during ground testing of new 
engine computer system when rotors run up out of control. Engine manufacturers 
later pay $3m in compensation to MoD.

November, 1993: The upgraded Mk2 Chinook given permission for operational 
service.

June 1, 1994: The MoD's military aircraft testing establishment at Boscombe 
Down in Wiltshire suspends flight trials on Mk2 Chinooks after a series of 
unexplained malfunctions in the engine computer system.

June 2, 1994: RAF Chinook ZD576 crashes into the Mull of Kintyre, killing four 
aircrew and 25 members of the Northern Ireland security services.

June 3, 1994 : Internal memo from Boscombe Down criticises engine software 
after number of errors found.

April, 1995: RAF board of inquiry finds the pilots were guilty of "gross 
negligence" in flying their Chinook into bad weather on the Mull.

March, 1996: Scottish fatal accident inquiry under sheriff Sir Stephen Young 
rules that the two pilots should not be blamed. The finding is dismissed by the 
MoD.

November, 1997: Defence secretary George Robertson rules out the possibility 
of a new inquiry after details of the legal action regarding the 1989 incident 
are revealed.

March, 1998: Armed forces minister John Reid tells Commons defence select 
committee that there was no evidence that a technical malfunction caused the 
1994 crash. He says the 1989 crash was caused by inadequate testing methods 
rather than design flaws in the software.

May, 1998: Defence select committee agrees that there were no "fundamental 
flaws" in the upgraded Chinook or its components.

September, 1998: MoD again refuses to hold a new inquiry after two Chinook 
experts reveal that the crashed helicopter had suffered technical problems 
before the accident.

May, 1999: Tony Collins, executive editor of Computer Weekly, publishes 
results of a long-running investigation into the 1994 crash, casting new doubt 
on the RAF's verdict blaming the pilots.
 