
I am leading a double life. My shameful secret is that I have published three 
novels before the end of my PhD. But I wouldn’t be talking about it if I 
couldn’t do so anonymously.

Bomb threats, breakdowns and bongs: the life of a university security guard
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/15/bomb-threats-breakdowns-and-bongs-the-life-of-a-university-security-guard>
Academia is full of people who produce literature, from critically-acclaimed 
poetry to intellectual novels. Creative Writing departments are on the rise all 
over the country – their doctoral students deliver carefully thought-through 
social commentaries, intellectually rigorous plays, or poetry that exudes an 
academic ethos.

That’s not what I’m talking about. I write bodice-rippers. Paperback romance 
novels that seek to titillate and entertain (both me and the reader). I create 
what is commonly referred to as pulp fiction.


I was very lucky to have a mentor from the start, a friend far more 
established in their academic career who also has a sideline in crime novels. 
They advised me in no uncertain terms to keep the two absolutely separate. I 
should not breathe a word about my novel-writing until I had a permanent 
position. This is the advice that I would, unhappily, give to anyone doing the 
same thing.


The intellectual snobbery inherent in academia stacks the odds against the 
producer of genre fiction, and makes secrecy compulsory. I could count on the 
fingers of one hand the people I have told, and only after years of knowing 
them.


Colleagues in the arts react with a strange mixture of nervous supportiveness 
and embarrassed indifference. If I bring up the subject (in private 
conversations off-campus, naturally), the conversation is swiftly curtailed. I 
don’t know if this is to do with the sex – perhaps they’re embarrassed on my 
behalf – or some other reason. I’m afraid to ask.

I'm not LMAO at ridiculous emails from my students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/05/im-not-lmao-at-ridiculous-emails-from-my-students>
But my older friends, who are scientists, have been effusive in their 
enthusiasm. They promptly read my output and are eager to chat about it. It’s 
nice to be reminded that the usual reaction to someone getting a novel 
published is happiness on their behalf, rather than five minutes of awkward 
conversation about how at least you’ll get some money off it, and aren’t books 
like that terribly funny anyway.

Obviously, I don’t consider these paperback romances a part of my research 
output; nor would I want it to be common knowledge in the wider academic 
community that this is something that I do, and enjoy.

I’m never going to be as proud of these books as I am of my academic work. But 
there’s something ironic about the fact that thousands more people have read 
these novels than will ever read my thesis or the academic articles that I’ve 
published under my real name as a scholar in my field.


A previous Academics Anonymous post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/05/im-a-serious-academic-not-a-professional-instagrammer>
 decried the “selfie epidemic” and insisted that to popularise anything is to 
devalue it. I can well imagine the dim view someone of that ilk would take of 
me and my work. Certainly, the books would damage my credentials as a serious 
academic – especially since they draw heavily on my area of study and expertise.


But for all the frivolity of popular fiction, I believe that writing them has 
made me a better scholar. I have deconstructed my own ideas about the people 
who produce, read and write genre fiction. I’m better able to spot arguments 
based on nothing more than intellectual snobbery. I’m certainly less inhibited 
about my out-of-work reading, choosing things that I enjoy, rather than 
thinking that my down time ought to be spent reading something “improving”.


I've finally admitted that I'm a dyslexic academic – and I'm terrified
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/19/ive-finally-admitted-that-im-a-dyslexic-academic-and-im-terrified>
Ultimately, though, I’m glad I’ve done it. I enjoy writing them. I like having 
a life that is separate from academia, and seeing my writing appreciated in 
another way. The books have been a moderate success and so, unlike most of my 
fellow PhD students, I have been relatively financially secure. But I also work 
hard at it: maintaining social media interactions with readers, liaising with 
the publisher, keeping two halves of my life separate.

My success is my dirty little secret. There must be other academics who 
support themselves in this way, although I have never met them. Or perhaps I 
have – but they would never, ever dare to bring it up.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 