
There are many reasons why I feel I must review my exposure to, and deployment 
of, social media in 2017. Not the least of these is all those long 
pronouncements that people insist on handing down on why 2016 was a bastard of 
a year. These windy sermons are written in the style of the Gettysburg address 
and can cover anything from the denouement of so many celebrities to the bad 
attitude of a rogue check-out assistant at Tesco. People who seemingly have no 
problem with the UK government’s immigration policies or who think we should be 
cracking down hard on benefit cheats while ignoring corporate tax avoidance 
nevertheless insist on telling the rest of us why Donald Trump and Brexit have 
made 2016 such a disastrous year.

And while I can only sympathise with the families of George Michael, David 
Bowie and Prince for their sad losses in 2016, I dislike how their deaths, in 
the eyes of otherwise sane people, renders the year a bad one. For those 
ordinary people who had to mourn the deaths of their own loved ones, the death 
of a distant A-lister doesn’t make the year any worse. The year 2016 was a 
momentous one, but it wasn’t significantly better or worse than most other 
years.

I predict that 2017 will be just as momentous as 2016 and that quite a lot of 
famous people will die during its course. Don’t hold me, though, to any of the 
following predictions about how the year will unfold.

In February, following a long campaign by the Humanist Society in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/scotland>, the SNP government will pass a 
law making it an offence for parents to compel their children to walk past 
churches without offering them at least two other route options. A Scottish 
government spokeswoman says: “Scotland is a diverse and inclusive country but 
we can’t have impressionable young minds exposed to ideas about unconditional 
love and turning the other cheek to your enemies.” Patrick Harvie, a 
co-convener of Scotland’s Green party welcomes the move and reveals that plans 
are well advanced to force broadcasters to provide a warning before screening 
any programmes that depict Christian worship.

This March, a proposal will be unveiled that is expected to lead to a 
long-awaited revolution in Scottish football. From now on, no person will be 
admitted to a Scottish Football Association (SFA) coaching course until he can 
first demonstrate that he can walk and talk at the same time. This is expected 
to disqualify about 90% of Scottish football’s youth coaches and ensure that 
the international team can begin the task of reducing the gap between ourselves 
and the likes of Benin and Mali. An SFA spokesman says: “Passing the ball 
quickly to members of your own team has long been recognised as a fundamental 
principle of the modern game and we feel thatScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> is now ready to embrace this concept.”

Passing quickly to your own team has long been a fundamental principle ... we 
feel Scotland is now ready to embrace this

After Scotland’s local government elections in May 2017, not a single council 
will remain under Labour’s control. In Glasgow, they will come in third behind 
the Tories. Kezia Dugdale, the Labour leader in Scotland, says: “In retrospect, 
the decision to hand out free union jack mugs to the party faithful bearing the 
slogan ‘Socialism Is for Losers’ might have upset our core vote in 
working-class areas.”

June will be a quiet month, but it will end with the news that Nigel Farage 
has been successful in his application to become a bellhop at Trump Tower after 
his intense lobbying of the newly installed US president. “I feel I can be just 
as effective a lickspittle in US/UK relations as Tony Blair and Margaret 
Thatcher were,” he says.

The summer will see the revelation of an explosive email exchange between the 
offices of two senior SNP strategists. “Look, [name redacted], I want 
independence for Scotland as much as the next chiel, but almost 200 special 
advisers aren’t far away from collecting their pensions. Independence could see 
us booted out of government and the chaps losing out on some entitlements. NS 
advice is just to keep hiding behind Brexit.”

What can it all mean?

The nation will be in mourning in September after Edinburgh loses its status 
as a Unesco world heritage site. The development comes after Edinburgh city 
council plans to erect a giant concrete wheelie bin at the east end of Princes 
Street, which will entirely overshadow Calton Hill. “We feel that this conveys 
a message about Edinburgh’s commitment to the environment. The concrete will be 
sculpted in a Greek, neoclassical style, in keeping with other buildings on 
Calton Hill,” a spokesman explains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpredictions-for-2017-inscotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F814db917792e3cb084f6697cab12005c856c3902%2F0_189_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20fellow%20Scots%2C%20I%20have%20seen%20the%20future%2C%20so%20read%20on%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpredictions-for-2017-inscotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20fellow%20Scots%2C%20I%20have%20seen%20the%20future%2C%20so%20read%20on%E2%80%A6%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fpredictions-for-2017-inscotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F814db917792e3cb084f6697cab12005c856c3902%2F0_189_5197_3118%2F5197.jpg>
 Could the view of Edinburgh’s Calton Hill become obscured by an enormous 
concrete-sculpted wheelie bin? Photograph: Slow Images/Getty Images 
In November, it’s revealed that a senior figure in Scottish Labour has opted 
not to accept a seat in the Lords. The figure, whose name is known to the 
Observer, is believed to be in hiding in a safe house after he tells shocked 
party executive members of his decision. Lord Foulkes of Cumnock says: “We feel 
this sets a bad precedent for the party. The House of Lords has been a 
traditional escape route for failed Scottish Labour politicians.”

Theresa May’s festive initiative to provide help for homeless people at 
Christmas has been welcomed by Ruth Davidson leader of the Scottish Tories. 
Following the news of a steep rise in the number of people sleeping rough in 
the UK, Mrs May has made a nationwide appeal for people not to throw out their 
cardboard gift boxes this Christmas, suggesting that homeless people could make 
use of them. Ms Davidson says: “People are sleeping rough because they are 
scared stiff of a second independence referendum, but this initiative from the 
Compassionate party will provide warmth and comfort to many.

“I’m donating the cardboard box that my new American fridge-freezer arrived 
in,” she adds, saying this could “easily sleep a family of four”.
 