
I started talking about the US election at school in September, particularly 
in assemblies, because children were asking about it. They were worried about 
the things they were hearing. My primary school is in the Saltley area of 
Birmingham and 98% of our children follow the Islamic faith.

How to teach ... political campaigning
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/mar/16/how-to-teach-political-campaigning>
The children are very confident in our ethos, which states that there are No 
Outsiders here 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/15/islam-gay-teacher-muslim-school-birmingham>
– we are all insiders. It doesn’t matter if you are black or white, Hindu, 
Christian, Muslim or Jewish, whether you are gay or lesbian or transgender or 
have a disability, whatever gender you are or identify as, you are welcome in 
our school. TheNo Outsiders scheme <http://%20http//www.equalitiesprimary.com/> 
uses picture books to promote the idea that we are all different but we all get 
on and, crucially, we all belong.

I lead year group assemblies every week where we use images from around the 
world to explore humanitarian deeds. We remark on how fantastic it is that the 
people in these stories don’t care about faith or race or where you come from; 
they care about helping and working with people. Which works very well until 
you have a potential world leader promoting the opposite ethos and getting lots 
of attention for it.

Talking Trump

In September, children started asking me about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>. “He hates Muslims,” one 
child said. “He’s going to stop Muslims going to America.”

I couldn’t leave these worries hanging in the air, so I decided to address 
them. I looked for specific images that showed the US in a positive, 
multi-cultural light and started my assemblies by discussing them.

One image showed a man walking up and down an aircraft, holding and comforting 
a baby. The man was white and the baby was black. The man had seen the mother 
with an unsettled baby and offered to help.

About us, without us: engaging young school students in politics is tough
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jul/03/about-us-without-us-engaging-young-school-students-in-politics-is-tough>
“Why did he offer to help?” I asked the children. “Do you think he cares that 
the baby has different skin to his own? What does this show us about people in 
America?”

Another image showed a black man helping an elderly white woman cross the 
street. Someone had tweeted “This is the real America.” I asked the children to 
talk about what they could learn from the man in the picture.

A white man on the subway giving his shirt to a black homeless man; a Muslim 
woman inviting an anti-Muslim protestor into a mosque; a waiter in a restaurant 
helping a man with no hands to eat his dinner and chatting for half an hour; 
the US 2016 Olympic team including the first US Olympian to wear a hijab.

We had some great discussions and repeatedly concluded that we are not alone, 
that many Americans do agree with us and that we have to keep spreading our 
message.

The morning after

Then Donald Trump won. This confused the children because it suggested that 
the US did not share our ethos. It suggested that its citizens did not want to 
live with people who are different. I struggled to find an appropriate response 
on the morning of the result; I had a year 5 assembly at 10am and wanted to 
find a positive angle to focus on.

I found an image of Fabio Alvarado, a 91-year-old from El Salvador who was 
granted US citizenship on the day of the election. In the photo he is elated, 
outside a courthouse in California, as he goes to vote. We talked about how 
Fabio felt about having been accepted as a citizen of the US. I asked them to 
imagine a world where nobody travelled or met new people.

How to bring economics and politics to life in the classroom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2012/nov/28/teaching-ideas-economics-politics-citizenship>
I asked the children about what had happened in the US overnight. They knew 
Trump had won. I had to reinforce their hope. I told them: “We are not naive, 
we know that not everyone agrees with us. There are some people in the world 
who think that people who have a different skin colour or follow a different 
faith cannot get along.

“But we know from our own experience that that is not the case; look at us 
here with different skin, different families, different faiths. Lots of people 
in America do agree with us and they didn’t vote for Trump. So our job now is 
to make sure our message gets out there. We can talk to people. If they are 
scared of difference, we can show them our school and we can change their 
minds.”

We are preparing our children for life in modern Britain – they will meet 
people who hold different views and they will need to find ways to work with 
those people.

After the assembly, one child told me that they would like to talk to Donald 
Trump to tell him about No Outsiders and try to change his mind about Muslims. 
I feel a literacy letter-writing lesson coming on…

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 