
As I write, 30 house sparrows are scrapping over the feeder outside my kitchen 
door. There are great tits in the smoke bush over the back fence to the end of 
my garden – I haven’t seen them come in yet, but I have seen a blue tit, a 
robin and a goldfinch, so there’s a good chance the great tits are coming in 
too. It will be a while before my garden is mature enough to provide shelter 
for these species, but the fact that they’re tentatively popping in for a 
sunflower heart now and then is a Big Deal.

This time last year I was still removing decking and weed-suppressant 
membrane, creating huge piles of stones which I would later use to make paths 
and edge my pond. On the last Saturday before Christmas I used some of the 
decking to make a planter, in which I added used compost, kitchen waste and 
manure, and created a sad display of hellebores,Japanese anemones 
<http://www.plantlife.org.uk/wild_plants/plant_species/herb-robert> and herb 
robert <http://www.plantlife.org.uk/wild_plants/plant_species/herb-robert> – a 
combination of plants I’d brought with me from my previous garden and those I’d 
found growing against the odds in lumps of moss in the decking. All my friends 
were at Christmas parties, proudly displaying their silly jumpers on Facebook, 
I was in the garden keeping the woodlice company.

At times, over the last year, I felt I’d bitten off more than I could chew. 
Every piece of decking had to be taken through the flat, the long pieces 
carried through the front window. I gathered stones into buckets by hand, 
moving them from one place to the next as I started to dig the soil and bury 
the roots of plants, of promise. Recently I looked back at photos of the garden 
over the last year; in April it was still a huge muddy mess.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmy-wildlife-garden-one-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff968a7581787cd4f13202fca05ef77bb0f796955%2F0_118_800_480%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=My%20wildlife%20garden%3A%20one%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmy-wildlife-garden-one-year-on%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=My%20wildlife%20garden%3A%20one%20year%20on&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2Fgardening-blog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fmy-wildlife-garden-one-year-on%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff968a7581787cd4f13202fca05ef77bb0f796955%2F0_118_800_480%2F800.jpg>
 Trellis added to the top of walls adds height and offers more space for 
climbing roses and clematis to grow. Photograph: Kate Bradbury 
Now I have a lawn (or a semblance of one – half of it is brown because I laid 
the turf too late), I have herbaceous borders ready to burst into life again 
next year, cuttings of this and that finally bulking up, seedlings of hardy 
annuals ready to fill spaces. I have native shrubs to attract moths and 
butterflies, which I hope will lay the eggs of the bottom of the food chain for 
other animals to come and eat. I’ve erected trellis to add height to the walls 
and provide more space for my climbing roses and clematis to grow.

I’ve counted 15 species of bee, red and blue damselflies, the common darter 
dragonfly, three or four species of moth and just five of butterfly (it has 
been aterrible year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/10/record-low-number-of-uk-butterflies-a-shock-and-a-mystery>
 for them). I’ve found other creatures such as froghopper, the broad centurion 
fly and whirligig beetle – all common species, but they were absent before I 
took the decking up. There are still millions of woodlice.

It’s incredible how quickly plants grow and the wildlife finds them. And I 
have every confidence there will be more growth, and more wildlife, in 2017. 
Once the climbers have grown into the trellis, the birds will no longer have to 
take shelter in neighbouring gardens when they come to mine to feed, so I 
should expect to see more bird life.
 ‘The borders are full, the habitats created. It just needs a healthy dose of 
sunshine and some time.’ Photograph: Kate Bradbury 
Three leafcutter bees attempted to nest this year but failed – I don’t know 
why. But between them they laid one egg, which turned into a grub and is now a 
healthy cocoon housing a fully grown bee. It’s probably a female – they tend to 
be laid first, at the back of the nest, where they’re safer. Could she start a 
new generation of leafcutters in my garden? I’m keeping her safe in her bee 
hotel in my shed, along with the wool carder and red mason bee cocoons. Here 
they are kept dry, away from rain as well as predators. I’ll put them out again 
in spring and cross everything for a warm, sunny summer.

My pond still hasn’t filled up, but it doesn’t matter. On mild days I still 
see pond snails and whirligig beetles on the surface; common darter nymphs no 
doubt prowl the bottom. I’ll be lucky to get frogspawn, but you never know 
what’s out there.

I hope the house sparrows will stop ignoring the nest boxes I put up for them, 
to have them raising young in my garden would be a dream.

So it’s done, the borders are full, the habitats created. It just needs a 
healthy dose of sunshine and some time. As a gardener I will continue to prune, 
to shape, to help things along and weed things out where necessary - play God, 
if you like. But I will also take cuttings and collect seed to pass on to 
friends and neighbours. Anything to keep the plants growing, to keep the 
momentum going, to keep greening these grey, lifeless patches of Britain.

 *  Kate Bradbury gardens on a small patch of land in Brighton. She is the 
author ofThe Wildlife Gardener 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/wildlife-gardener.html>. Read the previous 
posts in this serieshere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/gardening-blog/2016/jul/01/build-it-and-they-will-come-how-i-created-a-wildlife-garden-from-scratch>
.  