
National Australia Bank and Westpac have increased interest rates for 
borrowers as they seek to safeguard profit margins.

Despite the Reserve Bank of Australia cutting the cash rate to the all-time 
low of 1.5% in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/02/reserve-bank-slashes-australias-cash-rate-to-record-low-of-15>
, NAB said on Monday it would increase its variable rates on new and existing 
residential investor home loans by 0.15% from 12 December. This means the 
bank’s rate for investors climbs to 5.55%.

Interest rates are at record lows. Don't expect them to go any lower | Greg 
Jericho
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/oct/20/interest-rates-are-at-record-lows-dont-expect-them-to-go-any-lower>
Westpac will increase rates on its interest-only mortgages by 0.08% to 5.41%. 
Its rate for investors with interest-only products will rise by 0.08% to 5.68% 
while its equity access loan rate will rise by 0.15% to 5.80%.

Defending the increases, NAB’s chief operating officer, Antony Cahill, said 
the bank “did not make the changes lightly” but was forced to do so by the 
“increasingly challenging environment”.

“Net interest margins – the difference between what we pay to borrow funds to 
lend to our customers and what our customers pay – are down, particularly in 
home lending, and they remain under pressure,” he said.

“A low-rate environment poses considerable challenges to all lenders, and we 
must respond to what is happening in the economy and the market. In doing so, 
we have to consider a range of factors including the ongoing need to hold 
longer-term stable sources of funding, continued elevated funding costs, 
regulatory requirements and the competitive pressures at play.”
Lindsay David (@linzcom) 
Cost of debt is rising in oz. A 0.15% rise equals $1,200 for an $800k loan
https://t.co/ax5xVX6xr4 <https://t.co/ax5xVX6xr4>
 <https://twitter.com/linzcom/status/805604941658091520> December 5, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/linzcom/status/805604941658091520> 
“The pricing of interest-only home loans must reflect prudent lending 
practices in a dynamic and complex home loan market,” Westpac consumer bank 
chief executive George Frazis said.

Australia’s four big banks have long complained about rising funding costs and 
have pushed up rates for investors in the wake of a crackdown by regulators on 
the amount of money going into loans for housing investment.

When the RBA cut the cash rate to 1.5% in August, the Commonwealth Bank did 
not pass on the full cut to borrowers, with itschief executive, Ian Narev, 
arguing <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/aug/10/commonwealth-bank-chief-says-not-passing-on-full-interest-rate-cut-helps-savers>
 that it wanted to protect savers.

The RBA board is expected to keep the cash rate on hold when it meets for its 
monthly policy meeting on Tuesday.

JP Morgan’s chief economist, Sally Auld, said there was widespread consensus 
the rate would not change and Citi economists said weaker-than-expected 
economic data prints – including the official wage price index, capital 
expenditure and employment figures, as well as the weaker Australian dollar – 
would keep the RBA on the sidelines.

The Citi economists’ note warned that a soft labour market into the new year 
could trigger another interest rate cut in the first half of 2017.

But Monday’s moves by NAB and Westpac may reflect the views of some experts  
<http://www.mortgagebusiness.com.au/breaking-news/10577-i-would-be-looking-to-exit-the-market-joye>
that banks’ wholesale borrowing costs are set to rise over the coming years as 
the current rate-cutting cycle comes to an end and Donald Trump’s US election 
victory ushers in a more inflationary era.

The US Federal Reserve’s monetary policy committee is expected to increase 
rates at its meeting next week and the post-election spike in US bond yields 
also points to more rate rises as monetary policy tightens in 2017.
 