
Unlike neighbouring South Africa, Namibia is under the radar for most people, 
making it the perfect place to get stuck into a real adventure. From clambering 
up giant sheer-faced monoliths to racing down the oldest sand dunes in the 
world, face-first, there’s lot’s to do in this corner of southern Africa.

Extreme climbing on Spitzkoppe 
<http://www.spitzkoppe.com/index.php/site/page?view=climbing> 
Maybe you go climbing every Tuesday, but do you climb up towering peaks of 
120m-year-old granite? Thought not. Welcome to extreme climbing Namibia, on the 
Spitzkoppe, the Namib desert’s answer to the Matterhorn. At 1,728 metres, it’s 
not Namibia’s tallest, but the difficulty levels here will probably make you 
wish you’d pushed yourself on Tuesdays, instead of slacking off for an early 
pint. Try the “Beyond suntan lotion” route, and ascend to the top holding on to 
barely anything, for the ultimate reward.

Eight Californian adventures inspired by The Grand Tour – gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/the-grand-tour-amazon/gallery/2016/nov/18/eight-californian-adventures-inspired-by-the-grand-tour-gallery>
Kitesurfing  <http://www.namibiakite.com/index.php?id=23>on the Skeleton Coast 
<http://www.namibiakite.com/index.php?id=23> 
If you’re not familiar with kitesurfing, it’s a bit like windsurfing, but 
instead of being attached to a sail, you’re trailing behind a huge kite that is 
harnessing all the power of a strong sea wind to help you glide across the 
water like Neptune. Kitesurfing is much easier to pick up, so even if you have 
never flown a kite before, you can probably get going quite quickly. And, 
Namibia’s Skeleton Coast provides such good conditions for both varieties that 
a time trial event is held there annually, near the town of Lüderitz. If it’s 
good enough for the pros …

Descend into the Dragon’s Breath cave 
<http://www.namibiatourism.com.na/blog/Exploring-Namibia-s-Caves> 
Want a line to impress people? How about: “I once abseiled into the Dragon’s 
Breath cave near Tsumeb, Namibia, and saw the largest non-subglacial 
underground lake in the world.” Well, if you have previous when it comes to 
caving – this could be your chance. The aforementioned lake is so deep, even 
experts can’t say how far down it plummets. But one thing they do know is that 
it has its own species of catfish. Other, less-intensive caves are available, 
but where’s the fun in that?

Paragliding safari <http://www.namibgliding.com/paragliding-safaris/index.php> 
The same forces that make Namibia great for kitesurfing also make it ideal for 
paragliders. Why not add a safari experience into the mix? Fly over some of the 
highest sand dunes in the world, before touching down in Damaraland to see 
wildlife in its natural habitat, while most people are still trailing behind in 
their jeeps.

Lie-down sandboarding <http://www.namibiatourism.com.na/page/dune-sandboarding>
 <http://www.namibiatourism.com.na/page/dune-sandboarding>Swap your passe 
snowboard for a sandboard and head to Dune 7, the highest in the Namib desert, 
where you can board down to the bottom, reaching speeds of 50mph. Do it on your 
front, face-first, for the ultimate thrill of racing down steep dunes at high 
speed. Just remember to keep your mouth closed.

Extreme running <http://www.namibiatourism.com.na/page/endurance> 
If you’re lazy, don’t read on. Namibia is famous for an extreme version of 
running that can make you tired just thinking about it. There are plenty of 
events through the year, some stupidly long, some shorter, and some that 
incorporate cycling, too. All involve roughly the same thing: a mad, long dash 
through the desert under the blazing African sun, designed to push your 
endurance to its exhausted limits. Don’t wear a novelty suit. Do drink lots of 
water.
 