
‘WHO,” Lord Beaverbrook would furiously demand when his Daily Express hit yet 
another cow on the line, “WHO IS IN CHARGE OF THE CLATTERING TRAIN?” Everyone 
quickly denied being in charge of the clattering train, and the engine driver, 
or editor as we say, was winkled out of hiding to shed some light on the 
question of the cow.

For months, nobody has been driving The Archers, and it shows. In September, 
Sean O’Connor, our exciting editor,left to sprinkle his fairy dust on EastEnders
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/may/07/archers-editor-sean-oconnor-helen-is-the-victim-but-she-shouldnt-have-stabbed-him>
. Helen had been foundnot guilty of attempted murder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/sep/11/the-archers-verdict-on-helen-tichener-aired>
. Ambridge was emotionally a wrung-out rag. His work here was done.Huw 
Kennair-Jones got the job 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/13/the-archers-helen-titchner-huw-kennair-jones-bbc-radio-4>
, but did not take over as editor until this week. From now on, we should feel 
the imprint of his personality – whatever that may be. Brace yourself.

In the meantime, it has been peaceful in Ambridge to the point of paralysis. 
Johnny grew a beard … Neil had a close shave … (Why did we complain that life 
in Ambridge was too exciting? We are suffering for it now.) Ed’s ram had a torn 
scrotum … Ruth called Jill a spectre at the feast, which is a bit steep even 
for a mother-in-law. Everyone had a really grim, low-grade, grumbly Christmas – 
though, admittedly, not as grim as the Fairbrother geese, the Grundy turkeys or 
Pip Archer’s cows. (“I expect a nice fat cheque from the abattoir.”)

Toby Fairbrother, Pip Archer’s boyfriend, is, if nothing else, predictable. He 
can be relied on to let you down. Toby skedaddled to Brighton, and who would 
blame him, leaving Lynda Snell’s panto, Mother Goose, a goose short. (“Lynda is 
in tears!” “I wondered where she was,” said Kenton heartlessly.)

The very word Brighton seems to bring Ambridge out in goosebumps. It suggests 
several shades of shame. Pip bristled, but I think I can set her mind at rest. 
Toby has recentlygone into the home-brewed gin business 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/06/nancy-banks-smith-on-the-archers-the-tipplers-of-ambridge-eye-up-the-homemade-gin>
. All he lacks is customers. I think he may have found a discriminating market 
in Brighton, because I happen to have a Ronald Searle cartoon of four 
gym-slipped St Trinian’s schoolgirls having a midnight feast. One is 
complaining bitterly: “Oh my God! She’s put water with it again!” St Trinian’s 
is widely thought to be Roedean.

• A month in Ambridge returns on 1 February.
 