
Natalie Portman <https://www.theguardian.com/film/natalie-portman>, whose 
performance as Jackie Kennedy in a forthcoming film has many tipping her for 
repeat Oscar glory, has reignited the Hollywood gender pay gap controversy in a 
new interview.

Speaking to Marie Claire UK 
<http://www.marieclaire.co.uk/entertainment/february-issue-natalie-portman-464332>
, Portman, 35, said her co-star in 2011 romcomNo Strings Attached 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2011/feb/24/no-strings-attached-review>, was 
paid considerably more than her. “Ashton Kutcher was paid three times as much 
as me on No Strings Attached,” she told the magazine, ascribing the disparity 
to an inflated asking price for Kutcher, based on his projected worth.

“I knew and I went along with it because there’s this thing with ‘quotes’ in 
Hollywood,” she continued. “His [quote] was three times higher than mine, so 
they said he should get three times more. I wasn’t as pissed as I should have 
been. I mean, we get paid a lot, so it’s hard to complain, but the disparity is 
crazy.”

Portman continued: “Compared to men, in most professions, women make 80 cents 
to the dollar. In Hollywood, we are making 30 cents to the dollar.”


The real Hollywood scandal: why Jennifer Lawrence, Angelina Jolie and other 
female stars get ripped off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jul/28/american-hustle-how-hollywood-rips-off-women-actors-sexism>
Portman’s sentiments about regretting her complicity in the deal echo those of 
Jennifer Lawrence.It was leaked emails revealing details of Lawrence’s raw deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2014/dec/12/sony-email-hack-jennifer-lawrence-paid-less-american-hustle>
 in the movie American Hustle that first triggered a fresh wave of outrage over 
pay disparity in 2015.

Writing in October for Lena Dunham’s Lenny newsletter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/oct/13/jennifer-lawrence-hollywood-gender-pay-gap>
, Lawrence placed some blame on herself for failing to demand a fair wage. “I 
got mad at myself,” she wrote. “I failed as a negotiator because I gave up 
early … I would be lying if I didn’t say there was an element of wanting to be 
liked that influenced my decision to close the deal without a real fight. I 
didn’t want to seem ‘difficult’ or ‘spoiled’.”

Lawrence’s successful negotiation of a $20m payday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/jun/17/jennifer-lawrence-to-be-paid-8m-more-than-chris-pratt-for-passengers>
 (£16.5m), compared to co-star Chris Pratt’s $12m, for their recent film 
Passengers, had been seen as a sign of improvement.

Other actors who disclosed details of unfair pay over the past 18 months 
include Jessica Chastain, Scarlett Johansson and Sienna Miller. Kate Winslet 
faced somebacklash 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/05/kate-winslet-gender-pay-gap-vulgar-comments-misinterpreted>
 after suggesting such discussions were “vulgar” given the context of the huge 
sums involved.
 