
A national anti-hate crime campaign backed by the government is to be launched 
on Thursday in response to the rise in incidents after the EU referendum.

Home Office figures showed the number of racially or religiously aggravated 
offences leapt 41% in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/hate-crimes-eu-referendum-home-office-figures-confirm>
, compared with the same month last year, prompting fears that the Brexit vote 
had fuelled intolerance.

As a result, more than 20 community organisations, representing different 
races, religions, and people with disabilities have joined forces to try to 
promote what its members say are true British values and give the lie to those 
who would target minorities. The campaign has cross-party support as well as 
backing from the prime minister.


Theresa May said: “Hate crime has absolutely no place in Britain and I’m 
delighted to see people and groups from all communities coming together to 
support the #BetterThanThat campaign.

“As I said on the steps of Downing Street, my mission is to make Britain a 
country that works for everyone and for that to happen hate crime of any kind, 
directed against any community, race or religion, will not be tolerated.”

There were 5,468 racially or religiously aggravated offences recorded by the 
police in July. Other minorities also reported a spike, withthe number of 
homophobic attacks doubling in the three months after the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/08/homophobic-attacks-double-after-brexit-vote>
, accordingtoGalop <http://www.galop.org.uk/>, a LGBT anti-violence charity.

High-profile incidents included the murder of Polish national Arkadiusz Jóźwik 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/30/five-teenage-boys-arrested-after-man-dies-following-attack-in-essex>
 in August, which was being investigated as a possible hate crime, anda series 
of packages containing white powder and racist messages sent to the Muslim peer 
Lord Ahmed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/08/police-record-3000-hate-incidents-weeks-around-referendum>
 and other people. However, most offences were mainly harassment and threats of 
a racist nature

Xenophobic graffiti appeared on the doors of the Polish Social and Cultural 
Association (POSK) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/27/brexit-polish-centre-london-reeling-after-graffiti-attack>
 in Hammersmith, westLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, just three 
days after the vote.

Its chairwoman, Joanna Mludzinska, saidthe #BetterThanThat campaign hoped to 
channel the outpouring of support PSOK received after the attack, which saw the 
centre inundated with flowers, cards and letters.

“These people [carrying out the attacks] should be made to feel they are in 
the minority,” she said. “They are wrong and most people don’t think like they 
do and don’t support them, which I firmly believe through the responses I had.”

#BetterThanThat was initiated by the Polish Cultural Institute, which drew in 
other groups including Kick it Out, the Board of Deputies of British Jews and 
Tell MAMA, which monitors attacks against Muslims.

The campaign will be launched at parliament by Conservative MP Sir Eric 
Pickles, Labour MP Rosena Allin-Khan and Liberal Democrat MP Tom Brake, along 
with the communities minister Lord Bourne.

Brake said the campaign was about promoting positive British values. “Being 
proud to be British is fine but traditional values are tolerance and freedom of 
speech,” he said. “This is about drawing out the positives of being British.”

Although, it was not an issue that the campaign would seek to address, Brake 
said he believedsecuringthe status of EU citizens in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/theresa-may-defends-refusal-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-uk>
 would be a positive move in tackling hate crime, a position endorsed by 
Mludzinska.

She said: “If the government came out with a very definitive statement to say 
these people are not going to be removed from the country, they contribute, 
they pay their taxes, there’s no reason they should go ‘home’, maybe that would 
be a strong message to people, whether they like it or not.”
 