
Tempting as it may be, it would be wrong to claim that with each generation 
humans are becoming more stupid. As scientists are often so keen to point out, 
it is a bit more complicated than that.

A study from Iceland is the latest to raise the prospect of a downwards spiral 
into imbecility. The research from deCODE, a genetics firm in Reykjavik, finds 
that groups of genes that predispose people to spend more years in education 
became a little rarer in the country from 1910 to 1975.


The scientists used a database of more than 100,000 Icelanders to see how 
dozens ofgene variants that affect educational attainment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/may/11/genes-that-influence-how-long-you-stay-in-education-uncovered-by-study>
 appeared in the population over time. They found a shallow decline over the 65 
year period, implying a downturn in the natural inclination to rack up 
qualifications.


But the genes involved in education affected fertility too. Those who carried 
more “education genes”tended to have fewer children than others 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2014/oct/25/women-wealth-childcare-family-babies-study>
. This led the scientists to propose that the genes had become rarer in the 
population because, for all their qualifications, better educated people had 
contributed less than others to the Icelandic gene pool.


Spending longer in education and the career opportunities that provides is not 
the sole reason that better educated people tend to start families later and 
have fewer children, the study suggests. Many people who carried lots of genes 
for prolonged education left the system early and yet still had fewer children 
that the others. “It isn’t the case that education, or the career opportunities 
it provides, prevents you from having more children,” said Kari Stefansson, who 
led the study. “If you are genetically predisposed to have a lot of education, 
you are also predisposed to have fewer children.”

But the effect is very small. Writing in the Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences <http://www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1612113114> the 
researchers estimate that it corresponds to a drop in IQ of about 0.04 points 
per decade. If all the genes that contribute to education were included, they 
add, that figure might rise to 0.3 points per decade. Nevertheless, Stefansson 
believes that if the trend continued for centuries, the impact could be serious.


“The cumulative effect over time means this is going to have a dramatic effect 
on the genetic predisposition to educational attainment, and unless something 
comes along to counteract that, it could have a profound effect on educational 
attainment in our society,” he said.


But, as other scientists point out, genetics has only a minor influence on 
education. “There are a number of studies saying we are getting dumb and 
dumber, but the effects are really weak,” saidMelinda Mills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/jun/03/genetics-plays-role-in-deciding-at-what-age-women-have-first-child-says-study>
, professor of sociology at Oxford University. “The education we have, when we 
have children and how many, is largely socially and environmentally determined. 
It overrides the genetic effect. Over the years, we’ve had an expansion in 
education and women can now have three to four more years of education than 
they did in 1910.”


“There is definitely a genetic overlap between higher educational attainment, 
having children later and having fewer children. But whether you can say that 
results in changes over time, and in evolution, I’m not so sure,” Mills added. 
“To have natural selection and evolution you need something to be happening in 
a consistent manner over many generations.”

Jonathan Beauchamp, an economist at Harvard University, reported in 2016 
<http://www.pnas.org/content/113/28/7774.short> that natural selection was 
acting, very gently, against genetic variants for education in an American 
population. But he said predicting future trends was “problematic”, because 
no-one knows what changes in culture and society the future will bring.

Stefansson concedes that changes in education can swamp any genetic effects, 
writing that IQ scores rose by nearly 14 points between 1932 and 1978, as 
technological and socioeconomic changes boosted education on a mass scale. 
“There are all kinds of things in the environment that may prevent this decline 
having all that much impact on the true education that people receive,” he said.


Ewan Birney, director of the European Bioinformatics Institute in Cambridge, 
said he feared the study could be misinterpreted as saying that education was 
determined by genetics, so those who struggled at school could not be helped by 
improved teaching. “This is not right, and I cannot emphasise this enough,” he 
said.

Robert Plomin, a behavioural geneticist at King’s College London said that the 
paper was a demonstration of how polygenic scores – which measure a person’s 
genetic strengths and weaknesses – are at the frontline of the DNA revolution. 
“They have already changed science and will soon affect the clinic and 
society,” he said.

“Although the effect of the polygenic score for educational attainment on 
fertility is weak and needs replication in populations other than Iceland, this 
study is a harbinger for the new directions in research that will be possible 
as bigger and better polygenic scores come online,” Plomin added
 