
What greater indictment of a system could there be than an epidemic of mental 
illness? Yet plagues of anxiety, stress, depression, social phobia, eating 
disorders, self-harm and loneliness nowstrike people down all over the world 
<http://ije.oxfordjournals.org/content/early/2014/03/19/ije.dyu038.full>. The 
latest,catastrophic figures for children’s mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/quarter-of-a-million-children-receiving-mental-health-care-in-england>
 in England reflect a global crisis.

Children's mental health in crisis – readers share their stories
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/03/childrens-mental-health-in-crisis-readers-share-their-stories>
There are plenty of secondary reasons for this distress, but it seems to me 
that the underlying cause is everywhere the same: human beings, the ultrasocial 
mammals, whose brains are wired to respond to other people, are being peeled 
apart. Economic and technological change play a major role, but so does 
ideology. Though our wellbeing is inextricably linked to the lives of others, 
everywhere we are told that we will prosper throughcompetitive self-interest 
and extreme individualism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
.

In Britain, men who have spent their entire lives in quadrangles – at school, 
at college, at the bar, in parliament – instruct us to stand on our own two 
feet. The education system becomes more brutally competitive by the year. 
Employment is a fight to the near-death with a multitude of other desperate 
people chasing ever fewer jobs. The modern overseers of the poor ascribe 
individual blame to economic circumstance.Endless competitions on television 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/11/honey-g-x-factor-blackface-novelty-rapper-post-brexit-uk>
 feed impossible aspirations as real opportunities contract.

Consumerism fills the social void. But far from curing the disease of 
isolation, it intensifies social comparison to the point at which, having 
consumed all else, we start to prey upon ourselves.Social media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/social-media> brings us together and drives 
us apart, allowing us precisely to quantify our social standing, and to see 
that other people have more friends and followers than we do.

As Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett has brilliantly documented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/thinner-retouching-girls-image-manipulation-women>
, girls and young women routinely alter the photos they post to make themselves 
look smoother and slimmer. Some phones, using their “beauty” settings, do it 
for you without asking; now you can become your own thinspiration. Welcome to 
the post-Hobbesian dystopia: a war of everyone against themselves.

Social media brings us together and drives us apart, allowing us precisely to 
quantify our social standing

Is it any wonder, in these lonely inner worlds, in which touching has been 
replaced by retouching, that young women are drowning in mental distress? A
recent survey in England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/29/self-harm-ptsd-and-mental-illness-soaring-among-young-women-in-england-survey>
 suggests that one in four women between 16 and 24 have harmed themselves, and 
one in eight now suffer frompost-traumatic stress disorder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/what-is-post-traumatic-stress-disorder>
. Anxiety, depression, phobias or obsessive compulsive disorder affect 26% of 
women in this age group. This is what a public health crisis looks like.

If social rupture is not treated as seriously as broken limbs, it is because 
we cannot see it. But neuroscientists can. A series offascinating papers 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/ejsp.837/abstract> suggest that 
social pain and physical pain areprocessed by the same neural circuits 
<http://www.scn.ucla.edu/pdf/Eisenberger,Jarcho,Lieberman,Naliboff(2006).pdf>. 
This might explain why, in many languages, it is hard to describe the impact of 
breaking social bonds without thewords we use to denote physical pain and injury
 <http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0031938416305583?via=sd>. In 
both humans and other social mammals,social contact reduces physical pain 
<http://www.scn.ucla.edu/pdf/RT424X_C07-1.pdf>. This is why we hug our children 
when they hurt themselves: affection is a powerful analgesic. Opioids relieve 
both physical agony and the distress of separation. Perhaps this explains the
link between social isolation and drug addiction <http://chasingthescream.com/>.

Experiments summarised in the journal Physiology & Behaviour 
<http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0031938416305583?via=sd> last 
month suggest that, given a choice of physical pain or isolation, social 
mammals will choose the former. Capuchin monkeys starved of both food and 
contact for 22 hours will rejoin their companions before eating. Children who 
experience emotional neglect,according to some findings 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/cd.23219811106/abstract>, suffer 
worse mental health consequences than children suffering both emotional neglect 
and physical abuse: hideous as it is, violence involves attention and contact. 
Self-harm is often used as an attempt to alleviate distress: another indication 
that physical pain is not as bad as emotional pain. As the prison system knows 
only too well, one of the most effective forms of torture is solitary 
confinement.

Self-harm the 'biggest killer of people in their early 20s' in the UK
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/09/self-harm-the-biggest-killer-of-people-in-their-early-20s-in-the-uk>
It is not hard to see what the evolutionary reasons for social pain might be. 
Survival among social mammals is greatly enhanced when they are strongly bonded 
with the rest of the pack. It is the isolated and marginalised animals that are 
most likely to be picked off by predators, or to starve. Just as physical pain 
protects us from physical injury, emotional pain protects us from social 
injury. It drives us to reconnect. But many people find this almost impossible.

It’s unsurprising that social isolation is strongly associated with 
depression, suicide, anxiety, insomnia, fear and the perception of threat. It’s 
more surprising to discover the range of physical illnesses it causes or 
exacerbates.Dementia 
<https://static1.squarespace.com/static/531897cde4b0fa5080a9b19e/t/555601d9e4b0849a888ed857/1431699929973/toward-a-neurology-of-loneliness.pdf>
, high blood pressure,heart disease, strokes, lowered resistance to viruses 
<http://heart.bmj.com/content/early/2016/03/15/heartjnl-2015-308790>, even 
accidents are more common among chronically lonely people. Loneliness has a 
comparable impact on physical health tosmoking 15 cigarettes a day 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosmedicine/article?id=10.1371/journal.pmed.1000316>
: it appears toraise the risk of early death by 26% 
<https://cresh.org.uk/2016/07/28/loneliness-is-an-issue-of-inequality/>. This 
is partly because it enhances production of the stress hormonecortisol 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/07/cortisol-levels-in-childrens-hair-may-reveal-future-mental-health-risk>
, which suppresses the immune system.

Studies in both animals and humans suggest a reason for comfort eating 
<http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/370/1669/20140114>: isolation 
reduces impulse control, leading to obesity. Asthose at the bottom of the 
socioeconomic ladder 
<https://healthyenvironmentsresearch.files.wordpress.com/2016/07/niedzwiedz2016_prevmed_postprint1.pdf>
 are themost likely 
<http://assets.aarp.org/rgcenter/general/loneliness_2010.pdf> to suffer from 
loneliness, might this provide one of the explanations for the strong link 
between low economic status and obesity?

Anyone can see that something far more important than most of the issues we 
fret about has gone wrong. So why are we engaging in this world-eating, 
self-consuming frenzy of environmental destruction and social dislocation, if 
all it produces is unbearable pain? Should this question not burn the lips of 
everyone in public life?

There are some wonderful charities doing what they can to fight this tide, 
some of which I am going to be working withas part of my loneliness project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/oct/03/loneliness-george-monbiot-ewan-mclennan-songs-tour>
. But for every person they reach, several others are swept past.

10 reasons people are lonely? It’s more complicated than that | Sue Bourne
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/04/10-reasons-people-lonely-the-age-of-loneliness>
This does not require a policy response. It requires something much bigger: 
the reappraisal of an entire worldview. Of all the fantasies human beings 
entertain, the idea that we can go it alone is the most absurd and perhaps the 
most dangerous. We stand together or we fall apart.
 