
The events that led to Donald Trump’s election started in England in 1975. At 
a meeting a few months after Margaret Thatcher became leader of the 
Conservative party, one of her colleagues, or so the story goes, was explaining 
what he saw as the core beliefs of conservatism. She snapped open her handbag, 
pulled out a dog-eared book, andslammed it on the table 
<https://www.aei.org/publication/margaret-thatcher-was-a-powerful-voice-for-free-enterprise-and-liberty/>
. “This is what we believe,” she said. A political revolution that would sweep 
the world had begun.

The book was The Constitution of Liberty by Frederick Hayek 
<http://press.uchicago.edu/ucp/books/book/chicago/C/bo9253956.html>. Its 
publication, in 1960, marked the transition from an honest, if extreme, 
philosophy to an outright racket.The philosophy was called neoliberalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
. It saw competition as the defining characteristic of human relations. The 
market would discover a natural hierarchy of winners and losers, creating a 
more efficient system than could ever be devised through planning or by design. 
Anything that impeded this process, such as significant tax, regulation, trade 
union activity or state provision, was counter-productive. Unrestricted 
entrepreneurs would create the wealth that would trickle down to everyone.

This, at any rate, is how it was originally conceived. But by the time Hayek 
came to write The Constitution of Liberty, the network of lobbyists and 
thinkers he had founded was being lavishly funded by multimillionaires who saw 
the doctrine as a means of defending themselves against democracy. Not every 
aspect of the neoliberal programme advanced their interests. Hayek, it seems, 
set out to close the gap.

He begins the book by advancing the narrowest possible conception of liberty: 
an absence of coercion. He rejects such notions as political freedom, universal 
rights, human equality and the distribution of wealth, all of which, by 
restricting the behaviour of the wealthy and powerful, intrude on the absolute 
freedom from coercion he demands.

Democracy, by contrast, “is not an ultimate or absolute value”. In fact, 
liberty depends on preventing the majority from exercising choice over the 
direction that politics and society might take.

He justifies this position by creating a heroic narrative of extreme wealth. 
He conflates the economic elite, spending their money in new ways, with 
philosophical and scientific pioneers. Just as the political philosopher should 
be free to think the unthinkable, so the very rich should be free to do the 
undoable, without constraint by public interest or public opinion.

The ultra rich are “scouts”, “experimenting with new styles of living”, who 
blaze the trails that the rest of society will follow. The progress of society 
depends on the liberty of these “independents” to gain as much money as they 
want and spend it how they wish. All that is good and useful, therefore, arises 
from inequality. There should be no connection between merit and reward, no 
distinction made between earned and unearned income, and no limit to the rents 
they can charge.

Inherited wealth is more socially useful than earned wealth: “the idle rich”, 
who don’t have to work for their money, can devote themselves to influencing 
“fields of thought and opinion, of tastes and beliefs”. Even when they seem to 
be spending money on nothing but “aimless display”, they are in fact acting as 
society’s vanguard.

Hayek softened his opposition to monopolies and hardened his opposition to 
trade unions. He lambasted progressive taxation and attempts by the state to 
raise the general welfare of citizens. He insisted that there is “an 
overwhelming case against a free health service for all” and dismissed the 
conservation of natural resources. It should come as no surprise to those who 
follow such matters thathe was awarded the Nobel prize for economics 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/economic-sciences/laureates/1974/press.html>
.

By the time Thatcher slammed his book on the table, a lively network of 
thinktanks, lobbyists and academics promoting Hayek’s doctrines had been 
established on both sides of the Atlantic,abundantly financed by some of the 
world’s richest people and businesses 
<http://press.princeton.edu/titles/9827.html>, including DuPont, General 
Electric, the Coors brewing company, Charles Koch, Richard Mellon Scaife, 
Lawrence Fertig, the William Volker Fund and the Earhart Foundation. Using 
psychology and linguistics to brilliant effect, the thinkers these people 
sponsored found the words and arguments required to turn Hayek’s anthem to the 
elite into a plausible political programme.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fneoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9743d47492b73cc81f1f51d2d57e7f43c6dc0dc3%2F0_299_3546_2127%2F3546.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Neoliberalism%3A%20the%20deep%20story%20that%20lies%20beneath%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20triumph%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fneoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Neoliberalism%3A%20the%20deep%20story%20that%20lies%20beneath%20Donald%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20triumph%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fneoliberalsim-donald-trump-george-monbiot%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9743d47492b73cc81f1f51d2d57e7f43c6dc0dc3%2F0_299_3546_2127%2F3546.jpg>
 The ideologies Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan espoused were just two 
facets of neoliberalism. Photograph: Bettmann/Bettmann Archive 
Thatcherism and Reaganism were not ideologies in their own right: they were 
just two faces of neoliberalism. Their massive tax cuts for the rich, crushing 
of trade unions, reduction in public housing, deregulation, privatisation, 
outsourcing and competition in public services were all proposed by Hayek and 
his disciples. But the real triumph of this network was not its capture of the 
right, but its colonisation of parties that once stood for everything Hayek 
detested.

Bill Clinton and Tony Blair did not possess a narrative of their own. Rather 
than develop a new political story, they thought it was sufficient totriangulate
 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Behind_the_Oval_Office.html?id=D9gaU8uaWIAC&redir_esc=y>
. In other words, they extracted a few elements of what their parties had once 
believed, mixed them with elements of what their opponents believed, and 
developed from this unlikely combination a “third way”.

It was inevitable that the blazing, insurrectionary confidence of 
neoliberalism would exert a stronger gravitational pull than the dying star of 
social democracy. Hayek’s triumph could be witnessed everywhere from Blair’s 
expansion of the private finance initiative toClinton’s repeal of the 
Glass-Steagal Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/19/wall-street-deregulation-clinton-advisers-obama>
, which had regulated the financial sector. For all his grace and touch, Barack 
Obama, who didn’t possess a narrative either (except “hope”), was slowly reeled 
in by those who owned the means of persuasion.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20will%20be%20the%20first%20actions%20Trump%20takes%20as%20president%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Ffirst-actions-trump-president-video&media=>
What will be the first actions Trump takes as president? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/first-actions-trump-president-video>
As I warned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 in April, the result is first disempowerment then disenfranchisement. If the 
dominant ideology stops governments from changing social outcomes, they can no 
longer respond to the needs of the electorate. Politics becomes irrelevant to 
people’s lives; debate is reduced to the jabber of a remote elite. The 
disenfranchised turn instead to a virulent anti-politics in which facts and 
arguments are replaced by slogans, symbols and sensation. The man who sank 
Hillary Clinton’s bid for the presidency was not Donald Trump. It was her 
husband.

The paradoxical result is that the backlash against neoliberalism’s crushing 
of political choice has elevated just the kind of man that Hayek worshipped. 
Trump, who has no coherent politics, is not a classic neoliberal. But he is the 
perfect representation of Hayek’s “independent”; the beneficiary of inherited 
wealth, unconstrained by common morality, whose gross predilections strike a 
new path that others may follow. The neoliberal thinktankers are now swarming 
round this hollow man, this empty vessel waiting to be filled by those who know 
what they want. The likely result is the demolition of our remaining decencies,
beginning with the agreement to limit global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
.

Those who tell the stories run the world. Politics has failed through a lack 
of competing narratives. The key task now is to tell a new story of what it is 
to be a human in the 21st century. It must be as appealing to some who have 
voted for Trump and Ukip as it is to the supporters of Clinton, Bernie Sanders 
or Jeremy Corbyn.

A few of us have been working on this, and can discern what may be the 
beginning of a story. It’s too early to say much yet, but at its core is the 
recognition that – as modern psychology and neuroscience make abundantly clear 
– human beings, by comparison with any other animals, are bothremarkably social 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/neoliberalism-creating-loneliness-wrenching-society-apart>
 andremarkably unselfish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/14/selfish-proof-ego-humans-inherently-good>
. The atomisation and self-interested behaviour neoliberalism promotes run 
counter to much of what comprises human nature.

Hayek told us who we are, and he was wrong. Our first step is to reclaim our 
humanity.


 