
In the silent hours of a cold winter evening, I’m one of thousands of students 
around the country struggling with the same internal question: should I watch 
another episode?


Realising I have a problem, I’ve been trying to stop watching Netflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> on the weekends. It’s easy to 
distract myself on Friday and Saturday by going out with friends or reading. 
But come Sunday, I can’t resist any longer. I start a marathon that ends up 
lasting five hours.

Related: Why Netflix won't block VPN users – it has too many of them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/jan/09/why-netflix-wont-block-vpn-users>

Binge-watching is not frowned-upon in quite the same way as tobacco and 
alcohol binges. Media outlets even condone the culture: BuzzFeed posts articles 
like “18 binge-worthy shows that have very single episode on Netflix 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/andyneuenschwander/18-great-shows-you-can-watch-literally-every-episode-of-on-n?utm_term=.njAlpJE6E#.jhoOvd6M6>
.” The Guardian runsStream On 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/series/stream-on>, an entire series 
devoted to online shows. So how am I expected to break such a deeply-ingrained 
habit?

It is 12:06am.

After calculating the amount of sleep needed to make an early morning lecture, 
I find myself turning back toThe Crown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-crown>, my newest Netflix 
obsession.

“It’s addictive,” declares Gina Marie Enriquez, 21, an American student at 
Paris Diderot University.

She binged on four whole seasons of Downton Abbey in just five days, blaming 
it all on that infamous countdown clock: a fatal Netflix feature that 
automatically starts the next episode after 15 seconds – so once you’ve 
rearranged the pillows or checked the time, chances are the next instalment is 
already playing. Once it’s started, only the strongest willed can stop it. “How 
can I resist?” she asks helplessly.

 The Crown: binge-worthy watching. Photograph: Robert Viglasky/AP 
It is now 1am. 

I’ve reached a gripping cliff-hanger in The Crown – the inconsiderate kind 
that turns a blind eye to that fact that I’ve got a 9am lecture. As I 
contemplate whether to continue or log off, the countdown clock hits five 
seconds. Four. Three. Two. I succumb to the pressure and sacrifice another hour 
of precious sleep.

To escape from the pressures of university life, the modern student can all to 
often be found Netflix and chilling – in the sad, literal sense – curled up 
alone around a laptop in their room. But is binge-watching actually an 
addiction?

Not according to Dr Sally Marlow, public engagement fellow in the addictions 
department of King’s College London. “Everyone is familiar with these 
self-indulgent behaviours. We have friends that eat too much, or have an extra 
pint at the pub, but these are not necessarily addictions,” she says.

“It is easy to say: ‘I am addicted to chocolate’ or: ‘I am addicted to 
Netflix,’ but that most certainly does not mean it is true.”

I can torment myself with thoughts of disappointing addiction research and the 
problems of modern-day culture. But the fact is, it’s 1:54am and I have to be 
up in less than six hours.


That dangerous countdown timer is about to start ticking again. Just one 
episode left to complete The Crown. Overheated and overworked, my laptop’s fan 
is wheezing like a heavy smoker – yet its only vice was enabling my binge and 
it deserves a long break.

Related: University league tables 2017 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ng-interactive/2016/may/23/university-league-tables-2017>

I know that if I carry on, I may not wake up in time. I close the lid of my 
laptop and turn over, praying for sleep.

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 