
The Netherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands> will block any 
EU trade deal with the UK unless it signs up to tough tax avoidance regulations 
preventing it from becoming an attractive offshore haven for multinationals and 
the rich, the deputy prime minister of the country has said.

Lodewijk Asscher, who was recently elected leader of the Dutch Labour party 
(PvdA), which is currently a partner in the ruling coalition government, has 
written to socialist leaders across the continent stipulating his party’s red 
lines in coming talks.

Labour MPs back call for party to set Brexit red lines
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/14/labour-mps-back-call-for-party-to-set-brexit-red-lines>
On Sunday, Theresa May suggested the UK would leave the single market when it 
leaves the EU in 2019, but seek to agree a trade deal with the remaining EU 
member states on triggering article 50 negotiations on the terms of Britain’s 
exit.

The vision of a low-tax Britain that enforces fewer regulations in terms of 
workers’ rights on businesses has been a motivating force for a number of high 
profile Brexit supporters.

In a letter seen by the Guardian, however, Asscher writes that it is in the 
interests of both the UK and the remaining 27 EU member states that May’s 
government is prevented from creating a low-tax neoliberal outpost.

In a sign of the complexity of the trade negotiations to come, he writes: “If 
you and I pay taxes, so should the large enterprises. Let’s fight the race to 
the bottom for profits taxation together which threatens to come into existence 
if it is up to the Conservative UK government.

“This will affect all Europeans, as it deteriorates our support for our social 
security system and leaves ordinary people to bear the costs. This is why I 
propose to come to a new trade agreement with Great Britain, but only if we can 
agree firmly upon tackling tax avoidance and stopping the fiscal race to the 
bottom.”

Asscher was elected as the Dutch Labour party leader in December. He has been 
deputy prime minister in the country’s “purple coalition” government with the 
centre-right People’s Party for Freedom and Democracy, led since 2012 by the 
Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte.

During that period, the Labour party’s polling under the leadership of 
Diederik Samsom plummeted from 25% to as little as 10% of the vote, with its 
working-class voter base splintering to Geert Wilders’s anti-immigrant Party 
for Freedom (PVV), or the hard-left.

When he was elected to replace Samsom ahead of a general election in the 
Netherlands in March, Asscher vowed to listen and act on the concerns of those 
who had left his party in droves.

In his letter to all of the leaders of the left-of-centre grouping in the 
European parliament, known as the European Socialists, Asscher also calls for 
parties of the left to respond to the rise of xenophobic politics, which he 
claims is gaining the upper hand, with a form of “progressive patriotism”.

He calls on socialist parties to reject any suspicion of those who voice 
patriotic sentiments and vows to use the Brexit negotiations to seek reform of 
the EU’s current rules around freedom of movement.

His call comes after the British Labour party leader, Jeremy Corbyn, walked 
into a row about his party’s policy on the contentious issue earlier in the 
week. Corbyn appeared to suggest that he would accept the current immigration 
arrangements in return for the UK retaining access to the single market.

Why I, a Brit, am standing to be president of the European parliament | Jean 
Lambert
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/13/jean-lambert-president-european-parliament-brexit-eu-human-rights>
Corbyn’s comments came hours before a speech on Tuesday in which he said he 
was was not wedded to the continued retention of the principle of freedom of 
movement across Britain and the rest of the EU.

Asscher writes, however, that radical reform of the current EU rules on 
immigration are needed. “Wage-lowering labour migration inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> nowadays leads to unequal 
competition between workers,” he writes.

“Migration leads to tension within and between communities. And this lack of 
control cannot be diminished by making forced efforts to emphasise a European 
identity. For this we need unity in diversity. Progressive patriotism is the 
required antidote not only against the nationalist and xenophobic politics, but 
also as an alternative for the politics that ridicules or even throws suspicion 
on the longing for community or national identity.”

In his letter to socialist leaders, Asscher specifies reform of the EU’s 
posted-workers directive, which allows companies to pay foreign workers less 
than locals who benefit from collective bargaining, as a priority. Corbyn has 
also repeatedly said that this is the goal of the British Labour party.

Asscher also suggests a broader rethink of the left’s attitude to immigration. 
“For too many people, theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> 
has become the symbol of social injustice, which fades its enormous achievement 
of peace and cooperation into the background, he writes. “Is it strange that 
people are fed up with the EU? I believe not.

“This is why we need new, fair and progressive rules of the game. And those 
can only be set when we collaborate. The forthcoming Brexit negotiations 
provide us with a unique opportunity to set those new rules.”

A spokesman for Asscher said Corbyn had been “very positive” when he received 
the letter.

In a statement to The Guardian, Asscher said: “Let’s not give populists a 
monopoly on the notion of national pride. If we discuss migration only in terms 
of economics, labour migration within the EU for example, or in terms of 
humanitarian obligation [the refugee crisis], we run the risk of diminishing 
tolerance instead of increasing it.

“Newcomers’ ticket to our society? The adoption of our shared values, ranging 
from freedom of speech and religion to equal treatment of men and women and 
respecting the rights of the LGBT community.

“We need to show that our societies are based on the principle of give and 
take: You can only be part of a society when you participate in it. Everyone 
must accept the basic premise that if you want to be accepted, you have to 
accept others.”

Labour’s shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, said: “After six wasted years of 
the Tories opposing every Labour proposal to clamp down on tax avoidance, this 
reveals what our European neighbours believe is the main priority for Theresa 
May’s government. It also gives an insight into what a Tory Brexit would truly 
look like – a tax haven off the coast of Europe.”
 