
Everyone can lie. That is the agony and the ecstasy of the internet. It is 
guilt-free, open-season, licensed mendacity. You can forget the glory days when 
it was the empire of the weak, the kingdom of the free. It is like capitalism 
in the 19th century. It is raw, unfettered, unreliable power. We are right to 
fear it.

A challenge to Facebook’s reach and power is long overdue | John Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/challenge-facebook-reach-power-overdue-mark-zuckerberg>
Barack Obama’s questioning of Russia’s reputed involvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/white-house-putin-russia-hacking-us-election-trump>
 in the American presidential election need not take long. Prima facie, it was 
blatant. Vladimir Putin’s denials are worth as muchas Donald Trump’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
.

They would deny it, wouldn’t they? Hacking and leaking private material about 
the Hillary Clinton campaignthrough WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
, along with Facebook’sfacilitating of fake news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/19/facebook-fake-news-mark-zuckerberg>
, plausibly influenced a key demographic in three states with knife-edge 
results.

For America to protest at such intervention is rich, after decades of meddling 
in elections in Latin America and elsewhere. But two wrongs don’t make a right. 
The more we know, the better.

The age of such cyber-conflict is in its infancy. Wars in which clumsy bombers 
blast hell out of defenceless cities are medieval when set against the 
intrusion and destruction promised by the internet against states and 
individuals. Every week we learn of the impotence of authority in the face of 
hackers and fraudsters, infiltrators and anarchists. How far they can conquer 
states must be moot. But their most powerful weapon remains the oldest: 
information.

Fake news inputs facilitated by Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> clearly poisoned America’s 
democratic process in ways that would be actionable under domestic law. For the 
corporation’s boss, Mark Zuckerberg, to protest that he is “just” a tech 
distributor and not a media corporation is rubbish. It is like Northcliffe 
claiming to be in the wood pulp business.

The company does not just disseminate unedited and unmodulated; by doing so it 
generates vast (and often untaxed) revenues for itself, and also for those 
creating this “news”. Witness the sports cars boughtby Macedonian schoolboys 
through telling lies about Clinton <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/magazine-38168281>
. Signs offrantic editorial activity at Facebook 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/15/facebook-flag-fake-news-fact-check>
 in recent weeks indicate an awareness of guilt.

If the internet is in its infancy, so is its regulation. The swiftness with 
which the Facebook/Google duopoly has mastered algorithmic targeting and thus 
advertising revenue has stunned all concerned. The duopoly over gathering and 
disseminating information would attract instantaneous control were it within 
one state’s jurisdiction. Market plurality is an iron law of capitalism. It 
must be enforced.

How this might be done has a hundred answers; that it must be done is clear. 
Current farcical attempts by the British government to regulate newspaper 
content are like building sandcastles in a tsunami. Domestic and international 
law has to be brought up to date if the wheels of democracy are not to jam. The 
idea that this might emerge from Putin’s Russia, Trump’s America, Brexit 
Britain or the indolent European Union may seem fanciful. But sooner or later 
it must, and will, come.
 