
Politicians don’t answer questions: this is so long established, so easily 
observed, so universal, that the intricacies ofPeter Bull’s research 
<https://theconversation.com/theresa-may-has-a-very-special-technique-for-avoiding-questions-67424>
 into the subject [pdf download 
<https://ecpr.eu/Filestore/PaperProposal/89ebb493-ac8a-472f-a12a-3c88edc95021.pdf>
] seem almost decorative, like devising 35 typologies for the Pope’s 
Catholicism. And yet the York University psychologist, who specialises in 
micro-analyses of interpersonal communication, has a series of insights, some 
very broad, some very precise and relating to Theresa May, that have 
crystallised the process, driven home its necessity, and elaborated its 
mechanisms so precisely as to have more or less destroyed my faith in public 
life.

First, Bull details why politicians evade giving direct answers to 
interviewers: “It’s primarily to do with face; positive face is concerned with 
making sure they themselves don’t look bad, and negative face is about keeping 
one’s freedom of action and not committing to anything.” Positive face is, of 
course, pretty ignoble, and politicians we perceive to be able to say what they 
really feel, regardless of the flak they get, are admired disproportionately to 
how honest or talented or effective they demonstrably are.

Negative face, however, is much more of a conundrum. Thinking specifically 
about current politics, there are very few plain, practical answers May could 
give to anything, without inhibiting her room for manoeuvre in the near future, 
even as near as tomorrow. This might explain why, inone interview with Andrew 
Marr <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37268458> that Bull analysed for The 
Conversation 
<http://theconversation.com/theresa-may-has-a-very-special-technique-for-avoiding-questions-67424>
, she gave a straight answer only 14% of the time. (Bull has found the average 
explicit answer rate in British political life to be 46%. I was surprised to 
find it so high, but this is comparable to a 1991 study that put it at 39%).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNBKCAOC1qc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNBKCAOC1qc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuNBKCAOC1qc&media=>
“A non-reply may include several different forms of not replying,” says Bull. 
May’s signature evasion is to answer a specific question with a non-specific 
answer. So, for instance, Marr asked her whether she would prevent a second 
referendum in Scotland, and she replied: “I don’t think it’s a question of 
whether there could be a second referendum, it’s whether there should be a 
second referendum.” Within that leap from specific to non-specific, she 
rephrases the question, then answers it as she posed it (“that’s a little ploy 
that politicians often use”).

She also expresses a hope rather than a plan. “She’s making political points 
all the time,” Bull notes. “Presenting policy, justifying policy, giving 
reassurance. She often talks in terms of aspirations. In PMQs on Wednesday, she 
was asked about the border in Ireland. She said: ‘Of course, we don’t want a 
return to a hard border between north and south.’ Would anyone want that?” This 
is where aspiration becomes indistinguishable from platitude; people rarely 
aspire to anything to which anyone else would not aspire.

David Cameron avoids question on benefiting from father’s tax affairs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/05/david-cameron-avoids-question-father-tax-affairs-panama-papers>
May is often compared to Margaret Thatcher – they have that ineffable, 
sphinxish quality so rare in public life (let’s call it, for brevity, being 
female), but theirevasive techniques 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vu7kZdbI2sg> couldn’t be more different. 
Thatcher frequently attacked the interviewer, which might have been charmless, 
but had the desired effect: few stayed on point after a skirmish. (“Theresa May 
isn’t like that at all. She is very polite.”) Neil Kinnock was known for 
negative evasion – he would tell the interviewer what he wasn’t going to do, 
which wasn’t effective at all, encouraging a predictable, punchier response: 
well, whatare you going to do, then?

Bull is sceptical about whether adversarial interviewing styles are the best 
way of eliciting an answer. “It’s possible to construct a question in such a 
way that they’re bound to answer. If, for example, Jeremy Corbyn is still there 
by the next election, and an interviewer said, ‘Can you give us an idea of how 
things would be different if you were in No 10?’, he’s bound to answer that.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fnever-give-a-straight-answer-zoe-williams-learns-to-talk-like-a-politician%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8db305db76616008b1a7215b709827e2d7f6b257%2F0_109_1728_1036%2F1728.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Never%20give%20a%20straight%20answer%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20talk%20like%20a%20politician&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fnever-give-a-straight-answer-zoe-williams-learns-to-talk-like-a-politician%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Never%20give%20a%20straight%20answer%3A%20how%20I%20learned%20to%20talk%20like%20a%20politician&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fnever-give-a-straight-answer-zoe-williams-learns-to-talk-like-a-politician%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8db305db76616008b1a7215b709827e2d7f6b257%2F0_109_1728_1036%2F1728.jpg>
 Tony Blair being grilled by David Dimbleby live on TV in 2001. Photograph: Ken 
McKay/Rex/Shutterstock 
It sounds easy, the Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> way, until you try it. I 
asked Bull to interview me as though I were her.

PB: First of all, prime minister, it’s a great pleasure to have this interview 
with you. Can you tell us exactly what you are negotiating for in relation to 
our European partners?

ZW: I’m negotiating for a Britain that is globally respected and prosperous. 

PB: I’m sure that’s what we all want, but what specifically would you do?

ZW: Well, I’m going in to the negotiations with a hand, if I tell you what’s 
in it, I’ll be playing blind and they won’t.

PB: So in effect, you don’t want to say what you’re negotiating for?

ZW: The British people have voted to restore sovereignty to Britain, and 
that’s what I’m going to get.

PB: Surely parliament is sovereign, so parliament has a right to know?

ZW: This is really hard, isn’t it?

PB: Every time you evade, I follow up. Andrew Marr is much gentler than that.

ZW: OK, give me another.

PB: Obviously, the situation in Syria is causing huge concern. Do you have any 
plans to involve British troops on the ground?

ZW: There can be no solution to Syria that isn’t taken in concert with 
international partners, both in Europe and beyond.

Jeremy Paxman's top 10 Newsnight moments - in videos
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/apr/30/jeremy-paxmans-top-10-newsnight-moments>
PB: Yes, but if the decision was taken internationally to intercede on the 
ground, would you commit British troops?

ZW: Mmm … well, yes, obviously, if that’s what everyone decided was necessary.

PB: That would be banner headlines, if you said that.

Clearly, politicians are seasoned evaders, and an amateur couldn’t compete. 
But what struck me is that these conversations are nothing like a civilian 
evasion, nothing at all like pretending to like a gift or a haircut. They’re 
not even anything like a deliberate, non-white lie, in which there is at least 
the challenge of darting away from the matter. It’s like being in a 
conversation based on a deliberate premise of meaninglessness. You take 
discourse – which is actually quite a sacred thing, a moment in which people of 
good faith can get closer to one another – and you turn it into the opposite of 
that. It’s nebulously humiliating, like being naked in public and having as 
your best and only tactic the plan of diverting people’s attention somewhere 
else. I felt genuinely sorry for all of them, even Thatcher.
 