
Nuisance calls <https://www.theguardian.com/money/nuisance-calls> could 
largely be eradicated under a new BT service that allows phone users to block 
firms making the calls, which other telecom firms are expected to follow.

Many smartphones already allow users to block numbers after receiving unwanted 
marketing calls. But the newBT <https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> 
call protect system allows users to block the companies themselves even when 
they change numbers.

BT says the free service has the potential to prevent 30m calls before they 
reach homes each week.

It uses live call data analysed by BT’s centre in Oswestry, Shropshire, to 
identify rogue numbers – typically those that make enormous numbers of calls – 
by adding them to a centrally held blacklist of numbers.

BT said recent data showed that it could divert up to 15m calls a week from 
personal accident claims and PPI companies alone.

Users will also be able to compile their own personal blacklists by adding 
individual unwanted numbers by dialling 1572 after receiving the call or by 
going online.

Nuisance callers identified by large numbers of customers will then also be 
added to the centrally held list.

Vickie Sheriff, director of campaigns and communications at Which?, said the 
new service was a sign that telecoms companies were finally start to take 
seriously their responsibility to tackle nuisance calls.

She said: “We have long campaigned for tougher action to tackle this problem 
and it’s encouraging to see new technology being rolled out as part of the 
solution.

“Now it needs to deliver results for the millions of people harassed every day 
by nuisance calls, and we expect other companies to follow suit with their own 
solutions.”

The Information Commissioner’s Office has imposed £1m worth of fines since 
last April on companies caught making nuisance calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/25/fines-rocket-to-2m-for-nuisance-calls-firms>
. From April, the government is proposing to allow the commissioner to also
impose fines of up to £500,000 on the individual directors of such firms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/23/bosses-behind-nuisance-phone-calls-could-face-500000-fine>
.

The ICO’s group enforcement director, Andy Curry, predicted this would make 
2017 an“uncomfortable year” 
<https://twitter.com/ICOnews/status/819941330633760768> for these directors. 

A survey for BT found that people receive an average of four nuisance calls a 
week, and 60% find them stressful.


John Petter, chief executive of BT Consumer, said: “We’ve been at the 
forefront of equipping our customers to defend themselves against the huge 
numbers of PPI and unwanted marketing calls that are continuing to grow.

“Now, with our unique technology, we can identify and tackle huge numbers of 
those calls in the network and also give our customers control over the calls 
they receive.”

Digital minister Matt Hancock said: “Nuisance callers are a terrible blight on 
society and government and industry are working together to crack down on them.

“We’ve forced companies to display their numbers when they call you, made it 
easier to prosecute those involved in making the calls and increased the 
maximum fines up to £500,000.

“We welcome BT’s new service, which offers customers an additional level of 
protection, helping them to fight back against this ongoing harassment.”
 