
A new study <http://advances.sciencemag.org/content/3/1/e1601207> has shown 
thata 2015 NOAA paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jun/08/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-noaa-global-warming-faux-pause-paper>
 finding that the Earth is warming more rapidly than previously thought was 
correct.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnyX32nkYBs&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnyX32nkYBs>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhnyX32nkYBs&media=>
 Lead author Zeke Hausfather explains the paper. 
Once again, science is shown to work. The laborious process in which 
scientists check and recheck their work and subject their ideas to peer review 
has led to another success. An independent test of global warming data has 
confirmed a groundbreaking 2015 study that showed warming was faster than prior 
estimates.


Because of its inconvenient findings, the study’s lead author Thomas Karl was 
subjected toharassment by Lamar Smith (R-TX) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2015/nov/25/leading-scientists-accuse-house-panel-of-harassing-climate-researchers>
, chair of the House Science Committee, in an effort to impugn his credibility. 
But now Karl and his co-authors have been vindicated.


Let’s take a step back and discuss the science. Measuring the temperature of 
the Earth is hard. There are many locations to measure and many choices to 
make. Should we measure the temperature of the ground? Of the ocean waters? How 
deep in the water? If we measure air temperatures, what height should the 
measurements be taken? How many locations should we make measurements at? What 
happens if the instruments change over time or if the location changes? What 
happens if a city grows near a measurement location and the so-called urban 
heat-island effect grows? How do we estimate the temperatures in areas where no 
measurements exist?


These and many other questions make measuring global warming challenge. 
Different groups of scientists make different decisions so that depending on 
the institution, they will get a slightly different temperature result.


But this diversity is also a good thing. It turns out that it doesn’t matter 
whose results you use – NASA, NOAA, The Hadley Centre in the UK, the Japanese 
Meteorological Agency, or the Berkeley Earth group – they all report a warming 
world. However, the rates are slightly different. So, one persistent question 
is, which group is most accurate? Whose methods are best?

The new study looks into just this question. The group focused on perhaps the 
biggest differences among the groups – how they handle ocean temperatures. 
Specifically, global temperature values typically use a combination of 
near-surface air temperatures in land regions and sea surface temperatures in 
ocean regions. Since oceans cover approximately 70% of our planet, the way 
ocean temperatures are dealt with can separate the warming rates between these 
groups.

Ocean temperatures can be measured by ship-based temperature sensors, by 
special floating measuring instruments, or by satellites. Prior to the advent 
of satellites and floating sensors, ships were the main temperature sensing 
platforms. Ship sensors, which measure engine intake water, are known to be 
slightly warmer than the actual water. So using them introduces a warm bias in 
the measurements.


Also, as ships have gotten larger, the depth of the engine intakes have 
increased – meaning the tested water was further from the actual ocean surface. 
Since the temperature results from buoys differs from ship measurements, the 
various scientific groups have tended to try to perform corrections between the 
different sensors. The way the correction is done affects the reported warming 
rate.

The authors recognized that one of the biggest questions is how to stitch 
together different temperature results from different sensors. Therefore, they 
broke the temperature data up into groups according to the measurement device 
(buoys, satellites, ARGO floats, ships, etc.) and they evaluated warming rates 
separately for each group. The authors also used advanced statistics to handle 
areas where no data were recorded.

After applying their tests, the authors found that the results promoted by 
Karl at NOAA are the best, and other groups, in particular the Hadley Centre in 
the UK and the Japanese agency, are too cold.

So what does this all mean? A few things. First, this study is a nice reminder 
that the proper way for science to work is for publications to be scrutinized 
and checked by others. This process leads the entire scientific community to a 
deeper understanding of the science.

Second, this validates the scientists who were originally attacked by 
political non-scientists and in some cases by contrarian scientists. For 
instance, Judith Curry, a well-known critic of mainstream climate science was 
quoted as saying:

The new NOAA dataset disagrees with a UK dataset, which is generally regarded 
as the gold standard for global sea surface temperature datasets … The new 
dataset also disagrees with ARGO buoys and satellite analyses ... Color me 
unconvinced.


 I actually study ocean temperatures so I knew this statement by Judith Curry 
was complete nonsense. It is nice to see a team actually take the time to prove 
it. Perhaps she and others will finally admit they were wrong.

This paper is another reminder why it is so important to invest in the 
temperature measurements that are needed to create long-term climate records. 
We really need uninterrupted measurements that span many years/decades if we 
want to truly understand the Earth’s changing climate. Even though the costs of 
making these measurements are very small compared to what we spend on other 
less important activities, I am concerned that the new US administration will 
decide to pull the plug on these projects. If that happens, we will be flying 
blind.

Finally, and for those who read my posts regularly, I am sounding like a 
broken record. Global warming is happening, it never stopped, it never paused, 
and the models have gotten it right.

It reminds me of a debate between creationists and scientists. One scientist 
whose name I cannot remember stated, “we have the fossil record, we win.” Well, 
a similar quote works here. “We have the data, we win.” Now let’s move on to 
solving the problem.
 