
Brexit may have caused an anti-immigration buzz but a traveller from the 
continent has made the UK its new home: the viper’s bugloss mason bee.

The bee is common in the UK’s European neighbours but has been discovered for 
the first time in this country, in a small park in Greenwich, London.

“I always have half an eye open, but I certainly didn’t expect that,” said 
David Notton, an insect expert at the Natural History Museum, who made the 
discovery in June. “It’s quite a big bee, so, if it was new, I thought someone 
else would have already spotted it.”

DNA tests confirmed the identity of the bee 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/309013543_Viper%27s_Bugloss_Mason_Bee_Hoplitis_Hoplitis_adunca_new_to_Britain_Hymenoptera_Megachilidae_Megachilinae_Osmiini>
 -Hoplitis adunca - and Notton gave it a common name based on the plant it 
exclusively feeds on, a blue-flowering plant in the borage family calledviper’s 
bugloss <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Echium_vulgare>.

Mason bees are solitary insects which nest in hollows in wood or plant stems 
and use mud to make walled compartments for their eggs. About 50 viper’s 
bugloss mason bees are now in Greenwich, making use of nesting boxes in the 
park provided by the Land Trust.

The viper’s bugloss mason bee is an expert traveller, because it can nest in 
holes in vehicles and freight, and Notton said that was a likely way it had 
arrived in London.

But he does not expect it to become widespread in the UK: “It needs a hot 
microclimate and it is at the edge of its [temperature] range” in southern 
England. However, he said places such as Dungeness, Rye and Salisbury Plain, 
where viper’s bugloss is common, could be settled by the bee in future.

Notton has also recently discovered a new-to-the-UK digger wasp and spider 
wasp, with the academic papers confirming the finds due soon. “It’s been a very 
good year,” he said.

The UK hosts 270 different types of bee, but only about half-a-dozen new 
species have been found in the last half-century. “But there are a lot of new 
insects turning up at the moment due to the globalisation of transport and 
possibly due to climate change making the UK warmer.” The arrival of one 
unwelcome new immigrant, theAsian hornet, which preys on honeybees, was 
confirmed in September 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/20/threat-honeybees-asian-hornet-arrival-uk-confirmed-defra-invasive-species>
.

The viper’s bugloss mason bee joins about 80 species of bee in the Greenwich 
park, but Notton said the situation is mixed for bees across Britain: “Some bee 
species are doing OK, while others are struggling, with habitat change, climate 
change and pesticides all impacting the environment.”
 