
Rampant road building has shattered the Earth’s land into 600,000 fragments, 
most of which are too tiny to support significant wildlife, a new study has 
revealed.

The researchers warn roadless areas are disappearing and that urgent action is 
needed to protect these last wildernesses, which help provide vital natural 
services to humanity such as clean water and air.

The impact of roads extends far beyond the roads themselves, the scientists 
said, by enabling forest destruction, pollution, the splintering of animal 
populations and the introduction of deadly pests. New roads also pave the way 
to further exploitation by humans, such as poaching or mining, and new 
infrastructure.

Humans have destroyed a tenth of Earth's wilderness in 25 years – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/08/humans-have-destroyed-a-tenth-of-earths-wilderness-in-25-years-study>
An international team of researchers analysed open-access 
<https://www.openstreetmap.org/#map=5/51.500/-0.100> maps 
<http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/set/groads-global-roads-open-access-v1> 
of 36m km of road and found that over half of the 600,000 fragments of land in 
between roads are very small – less than 1km2.

A mere 7% are bigger than 100km2, equivalent to a square area just 10km by 
10km. Furthermore, only a third of the roadless areas were truly wild, with the 
rest affected by farming or people.

The last remaining large roadless areas are rainforests in the Amazon and 
Indonesia and the tundra and forests in the north of Russia and Canada. 
Virtually all of western Europe, the eastern US and Japan have no areas at all 
that are unaffected by roads. The scientists considered that land up to a 
kilometre on each side of a road was affected, which they believe is a 
conservative estimate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fnew-map-reveals-shattering-effect-of-roads-on-nature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b9265a4855a3af180be127c2c2ca0a47e4a0ae%2F14_0_3410_1576%2F3410.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=New%20map%20reveals%20shattering%20effect%20of%20roads%20on%20nature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fnew-map-reveals-shattering-effect-of-roads-on-nature%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=New%20map%20reveals%20shattering%20effect%20of%20roads%20on%20nature&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F15%2Fnew-map-reveals-shattering-effect-of-roads-on-nature%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71b9265a4855a3af180be127c2c2ca0a47e4a0ae%2F14_0_3410_1576%2F3410.jpg>
 A global map of the ecological value of roadless areas. The index values 
indicated in blue highlight areas that are especially large and well connected 
and/or notably rich in biodiversity. The red areas are completely roaded: 
covered by roads and 1km buffers alongside either sides of the road. 
Photograph: P Ibisch et al/Science 
The length of the world’s roads is projected to increase by more than 60% by 
2050, say the researchers, but only about 5% of the roadless areas currently 
have any legal protection, according to the new workpublished in the journal 
Science <http://science.sciencemag.org/cgi/doi/10.1126/science.aaf7166>.

“As roads continue to expand, there is an urgent need for a global strategy 
for the effective conservation, restoration and monitoring of roadless areas 
and their ecosystems,” said Prof Pierre Ibisch, who led the study and is at the 
Eberswalde University for Sustainable Development in Germany. “We urge 
governments to avoid the costly building of roads in remote areas, which would 
be ecologically disastrous.”

Asian transport projects may thwart efforts to save world's tigers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/asian-transport-projects-may-thwart-efforts-to-save-world-tigers>
The natural world is in the midst of a mass extinction as wild places are 
destroyed by conversion to farmland, mining and pollution, and animals are 
hunted in huge numbers. In October, a major analysis found the number of wild 
creatures was on track tofall by two-thirds by 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
, compared to 1970.

Roads are the catalyst for much of the destruction by, for example, giving 
illegal loggers access into the Amazon orpoachers access to wild animals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/19/worlds-mammals-being-eaten-into-extinction-report-warns>
. But Ibisch said the road maps the team used, though the best available, were 
certain to be incomplete and that the true situation was even worse, for 
example in Borneo where many oil palm plantation roads have yet to be mapped.

Ibisch also said international attempts to protect the environment often 
ignored the importance of the last remaining roadless areas. “It is astonishing 
to see they have not taken into account roadless areas,” he said.
 