
The next chief inspector for England’s schools has dismissed criticism over 
her lack of teaching experience and told MPs that she does not see herself as a 
crusader for higher standards in schools.

Amanda Spielman, who will take over as Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> chief in January if she is 
approved by parliament, told the education select committee that she was open 
to discussions on the use of “outstanding” as the top rating awarded by 
inspectors, saying that the word made her uncomfortable.

Spielman was nominated as Her Majesty’s chief inspector of schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
 by the education secretary, Nicky Morgan, after a career in finance and as a 
founder of the Ark academy chain, and faced immediate criticism from classroom 
teaching unions for her lack of formal experience as a teacher.

But in what was effectively her confirmation hearing, Spielman said she had 
received a “huge amount of positive reaction” since her nomination, including 
from the two headteachers’ unions.

Teacher or not, Ofsted’s new chief inspector passes the test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/21/teacher-ofsted-amanda-spielman-lack-classroom-experience>
“It’s something that will always be there, that I haven’t been a teacher,” she 
told MPs. “I have to make sure the team as a whole does have plenty of 
experience but I really don’t see that as a real impediment to doing the job.”

Spielman said she would focus on making sure that Ofsted’s structure allowed 
“the right skills” to be in place. “I don’t see it as a problem,” she said.

She also sought to reassure those worried her involvement with multi-academy 
trusts would make her too sympathetic to academy schools run by chains. 
Spielman said it was now “impossible” for Ofsted to avoid inspecting the 
management of academy chains.

Spielman drew a clear contrast with Ofsted’s incumbent Sir Michael Wilshaw, a 
former headteacher, saying that that the role of chief inspector was “not about 
being a superhead”. She also appeared to support criticisms of Ofsted’s ratings 
for schools, including the coveted “outstanding” status.

“I’m quite uncomfortable about some of the effects you see it having in the 
system, I have to say,” she told the committee, adding: “It’s something I would 
like to see fully discussed.”

Critics say the attempt to reach “outstanding” places unrealistic pressure on 
staff and penalises schools in deprived areas that struggle to ever qualify for 
the highest rating.

Spielman’s appearance coincided with new figures from Ofsted 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/record-levels-of-children-in-good-and-outstanding-schools>
 showing that the number of schools in England judged good or outstanding had 
reached record levels.

Ofsted’s inspection results in the current academic year mean that 86% of 
state schools in England are rated either good or outstanding.

Councils failing to protect at-risk children, says Ofsted
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/28/councils-failing-children-at-risk-ofsted-social-care>
But Wilshaw responded with a statement 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/hm-chief-inspector-raises-concerns-about-secondary-schools>
 noting that of the 416 secondary schools inspected between September 2015 and 
March 2016, just 57% were rated good or outstanding.

“The nation should be worried. Our future prosperity depends on this 
generation of young people receiving a good education. So it is vital that we 
raise standards for all children and find lasting solutions to close the 
regional divide in secondary schools,” Wilshaw said.

During her hearing Spielman demurred when asked if she agreed with Wilshaw’s 
assertion that state schools remained “mediocre”, telling MPs that she saw the 
role of chief inspector as “dogged and relentless … rather than shouting at 
people”.

Meanwhile, the exam regulator Ofqual released a poll 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/perception-of-a-levels-and-gcses-wave-14>
 showing continued concerns over the conduct of GCSE and A-level examinations. 
The poll of staff, students and parents conducted by YouGov found that 
headteachers remain especially critical of the marking and consistency of GCSEs.

In response, a joint statement by the National Association of Head Teachers 
and the Headmasters’ and Headmistresses’ Conference said trust in exam results 
“continues to drain away”.

“It remains vital that everyone can have confidence in the exams system. At 
present that isn’t the case. We have asked for robust and fair remarking to 
help restore trust and will continue to press for that with Ofqual,” the 
statement said.

 