
Simon Stevens <https://www.theguardian.com/society/simon-stevens> intends to 
remain as the boss of NHS England for at least the next two years and tough out 
his tense relationship with Theresa May, despite Downing Street aides briefing 
against him.

The chief executive will keep setting out his views about NHS funding, but he 
will stop making the case in public for moremoney for social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/10/tory-plans-making-social-care-worse>
 – which has antagonised May – in a bid to repair relations with No 10.

NHS England chief hits back at Theresa May on health service funding
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
Stevens laid bare the deep divisions between himself and May over the NHS’s 
finances at thepublic accounts committee on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
, when he repeatedly contradicted her views on how much money the service was 
getting and needed.

Allies dismissed briefings against Stevens by some of May’s officials, which 
portrayed him as “unenthusiastic” and “unresponsive”. They said the comments 
were “a massive strategic blunder by No 10” and that he planned to remain in 
post until 2019 in order to personally oversee his promised “transformation” of 
where and how patients are cared for by a radically modernisedNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

But his allies acknowledged that the likelihood of the NHS’s ongoing winter 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
 deepening further could lead to further difficulties for Stevens with May and 
her team, especially if the chaos engulfing many hospitals sparked a political 
blame game.

“At the moment, Simon intends to stick in. He’s fired up, he’s ready for the 
challenge, not the challenge of dealing with No10 – that’s irrelevant. What 
matters to him is the really, really hard job of changing the NHS to make it 
better,” one friend said.

Supporters said Stevens was not cowed by Downing Street’s irritation with him 
being aired in a national newspaper hours before he gave evidence to MPs about 
the NHS’s finances. However, he will stop arguing publicly for money currently 
used to fund the “triple lock” for pensioners to instead be ploughed into 
social care, a suggestion No 10 aides saw as him offering solutions to a 
pressing political question outside his remit.

May’s spokeswoman insisted on Thursday that the prime minister still had full 
confidence in Stevens, even after his punchy performance on Wednesday, which 
was watched closely in Westminster.

However, government insiders say privately they are determined not to loosen 
the purse strings before Stevens has shown he can carry out reforms. “There are 
definitely questions about effectiveness and efficiency,” said one source, 
adding that little had changed – apart from the traditional pressures of winter 
– since thefunding deal with the NHS was struck by David Cameron’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/01/david-cameron-nhs-budget-pledge-2015-election>
.

Government sources insisted the spat with Stevens was not a clash of 
personalities but was more about concerns over whether he was carrying out the 
radical reforms that were the quid pro quo for extra funding.

Conservative MP Andrew Murrison said that May may well seek to replace Stevens 
before 2020 with “somebody she can rely upon running an organisation that’s 
going to be of extreme political importance as we get closer to the next 
general election”.

Murrison, a minister under David Cameron and former surgeon, added: “Stevens 
was correct in his evidence to the public accounts committee; he said it like 
it is on NHS funding, especially about the disparity between healthcare 
spending in the UK and that in economies which the UK can reasonably be 
compared to, notably Germany.

The Guardian view on NHS politics: a truce is necessary but not inevitable | 
Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/the-guardian-view-on-nhs-politics-a-truce-is-necessary-but-not-inevitable>
“But there’s clearly a feud between him and Downing Street. It would not 
surprise me if No 10 looked unfavourably on Simon Stevens, given what’s 
happened over the last 24 hours.”

But another Tory MP, who did not want to be named, backed Stevens. 

“My view is that Simon Stevens is correct and Jeremy Hunt did say going into 
the election that ‘we will give the NHS what it needs’. The reality is that is 
going to mean the government making up more of the£30bn [projected gap in NHS 
funding by 2020] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jul/05/nhs-face-funding-gap-2020> 
that was identified and it needs to be real terms increases.

“There is no current active dislike among Tory MPs for Stevens, except from 
the hard right who have always viewed him as a Labour special advisor, and 
therefore with scepticism.”

Nigel Edwards, the chief executive of the Nuffield Trust thinktank, said the 
pointed comments made by Stevens to MPs showed he was demonstrating the 
independence given to NHS England in the shakeup implemented by the coalition 
government. “A series of further flashpoints are coming up with a difficult 
winter continuing and a severe strain on finances and staff. A constructive 
relationship between the government and NHS leaders is essential,” he said.

Prof Chris Ham, the chief executive of the Kings Fund, said: “Depending on the 
severity of winter pressure and then the end-of-year position, there is bound 
to be a debate on who is to be held accountable for the financial and 
operational pressures. Because of the complexity of the system, it is unclear 
whether the buck stops with the Department ofHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health>, NHS England or NHS Improvement. 
This means that it could be any one of Jeremy Hunt, Simon Stevens or Jim Mackey 
who find themselves in the firing line.”


 