
Hospital doctors have warned Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> that the NHS “will fail” this 
winter and patient care will suffer unless she provides an emergency cash 
injection.


The leaders of 33,000 doctors from 30 medical specialties urged the prime 
minister to recognise that hospitals are “paralysed by spiralling demand” and 
warned of an exodus of personnel quitting the already understaffedNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

In a letter to May, the Royal College of Physicians (RCP) and a host of senior 
doctors told her that the NHS is trying to tackle so many problems with such 
limited resources that it is in danger of not being able to do its job of 
caring for patients.

“The NHS is the embodiment of your view that ‘We have a responsibility to one 
another’. Without urgent investment, the NHS will fail to live up to this 
responsibility this winter,” they say. The signatories include Prof Jane Dacre, 
the college’s president, as well as experts in cardiology, geriatric medicine 
and acute medicine.

More than 2m people wait over four hours in A&E, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/10/more-than-2m-people-wait-over-four-hours-in-a-and-e-nhs-figures-show>
In a direct challenge to May’s repeated view that the government has given the 
NHS enough money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/03/theresa-may-accused-of-being-in-denial-over-nhs-financial-woes-meg-hillier>
, they claim that only an urgent bailout will stop the service – which experts 
say is under pressure like never before in its 69-year history – running into 
even more serious difficulties.

They welcome the pledges to train more doctors and increase the NHS’s budget 
by 2020. But they say: “Frontline staff and managers across health and social 
care are clear: investment levels are not sufficient to meet current or future 
patient needs. As a result, in spite of rapid advances in clinical care, 
services are often too paralysed by spiralling demand to transform and 
modernise. Promises of future investment will not address the very real 
challenges we face going into 2017: the time to invest is now.”

Money is so tight that “the quality of patient care is threatened by demands 
which the health service does not have the capacity or resource to meet”, they 
add.

Downing Street declined to respond to the letter, but May has told Simon 
Stevens, the chief executive of NHS England, that the service will not get any 
extra money and that he should concentrate on making major efficiency savings.

The Department of Health <https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> replied 
on May’s behalf, but did not respond to the RCP’s plea for an immediate cash 
boost or warning that the NHS could fall.

It said : “We know the NHS is facing increasing demand from an ageing 
population, but this makes building a safer healthcare system more urgent, not 
less.

“Since just last year, we have 3,100 more nurses and 1,600 more doctors. We’re 
also joining up health and social care for the first time and investing £10bn 
to fund the NHS’s own plan to transform services and relieve pressure on 
hospitals.”

The doctors’ letter comes as more than 20 MPs from all three main parties and 
two former health secretaries call on May to set up an NHS and care convention 
to work out how to fund the soaring costs of medical and social care in the 
long term, given the ageing population.

The initiative has come from the Liberal Democrat MP Norman Lamb, who was a 
health minister in the coalition government. Backers include Dr Sarah 
Wollaston, the highly respected Conservative who chairs the Commons health 
select committee; three other select committee chairs; the ex-Tory health 
minister Dr Dan Poulter; Alan Milburn, the health secretary under Tony Blair in 
1999-2003; and Stephen Dorrell, his Tory predecessor in 1995-97.

In a further sign of the government’s difficulties over its handling of the 
NHS, A&E doctors made clear that they believe Jeremy Hunt’s plan todowngrade 
the duty on hospitals to treat 95% of A&E patients within four hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
 is misguided. They were responding to the health secretary telling MPs on 
Monday that the four-hour target should not apply to the 30% of people who seek 
help at an A&E unit despite being neither an urgent or emergency case.

Dr Taj Hassan, president of the Royal College of Emergency medicine, which 
represents A&E medics, said Hunt was right to say that emergency departments 
should be for genuine medical emergencies only.

“However, it is exactly those patients who present as emergencies that pose 
the greatest challenges as a substantial proportion of these spend long periods 
of time in the emergency department, waiting for a bed. Seeking to target 
patients with minor illness should not be the priority,” Hassan said.

In new evidence of the chaos engulfing many hospitals, nurses report that some 
patients are waiting up to 23 hours in hospital corridors across the UK because 
beds are in such short supply.Hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/hospitals> are under such pressure that 
nurses are being told to discharge even patients who are not fit to leave in 
order to free up beds, the Royal College of Nursing claimed.

“Nurses from Scotland to London report serious concerns over the quality of 
the care they can provide in what for many are the worst conditions they have 
ever experienced,” said Janet Davies, the RCN’s chief executive.
 