

NHS whistleblowers face being “fired, gagged and blacklisted” while 
disclosures go uninvestigated owing to the healthcare regulator’s lack of 
powers and resources, a group of doctors, staff and patients has warned.

The Care Quality Commission (CQC) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/care-quality-commission> was criticised 
for being “low value” by the group, which has called for radical change in how 
the health service is regulated.


In a letter to the Times, the group, which has exposed huge failings, said the 
CQC had failed to detect poor care and governance since it replaced the 
Healthcare Commission in 2009. It cited an example where an inspection of a 
foundation trust cost £273,900 but failed to spot hundreds of uninvestigated 
deaths.


Dismissed NHS whistleblower who exposed safety concerns handed £1.22m
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/04/dismissed-nhs-whistleblower-who-exposed-safety-concerns-handed-122m>
“The CQC protests that it has no powers to investigate individual cases,” the 
group said. “Many patients, bereaved relatives and whistleblowers are deeply 
frustrated that disclosures to the CQC have not resulted in change. On the 
contrary, ifNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> staff whistleblow, 
they may still be fired, gagged and blacklisted.”

Sir Robert Francis QC said the watchdog had to do more to protect 
whistleblowers, inhis report into failings at Mid Staffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/jan/30/robert-francis-man-behind-nhs-mid-staffs>
.

Julie Bailey, whose mother was a victim of the problems at the trust, signed 
the letter with 13 other whistleblowers.

They include Dr Stephen Bolsin, who revealed failings at Bristol Royal 
infirmary’s paediatric cardiac unit, and Baby P whistleblower Kim Holt. Holt 
told the Times: “It’s very frustrating because I feel like the CQC have got all 
the information. They know what’s happening.

“They sit and listen and nod their heads and say, ‘That’s dreadful,’ but then 
they don’t do anything about it. [Whistleblowers] that I sat alongside in 
meetings at CQC have since lost their jobs.”

Sir Mike Richards, the chief inspector of hospitals, said: “The CQC takes 
concerns raised by staff extremely seriously and we act where appropriate, 
whether carrying out or bringing forward an inspection, raising concerns with 
the provider, or alerting another organisation, including the police.”
 