Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20announces%20new%20Scottish%20independence%20referendum%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20announces%20new%20Scottish%20independence%20referendum%20bill%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Fnicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon announces new Scottish independence referendum bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-announces-new-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-video>
Last week’s Conservative conference has catalysed every corner of British 
politics. Theresa May’sinsistence that the EU referendum gives her a mandate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/mays-conservative-party-conference-speech-key-points-analysed>
 that could remove Britain from the European single market – and prerogative 
powers to achieve it – has proved to be a serious, perhaps ultimately even a 
fatal, piece of overreach and a blood transfusion to the opposition. As 
unintended consequences go, it doesn’t get much bigger than this.

May’s approach to Brexit has roused parliament from 100 days of 
post-referendum uncertainty. It has puta bit of life into the Labour party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/10/labour-mps-clash-with-corbyn-over-brexit-and-sacking-of-chief-whip>
. It has emboldened the moderatepro-European Tories 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/30/anna-soubry-brands-liam-foxs-free-trade-speech-delusional>
. It has enraged the Scottish nationalists. And it has shown all three that 
they not only have a common interest in stopping it from happening, but that 
they can also achieve it by cooperating in the Westminster parliament, where 
they have a majority if they work sensibly.

The unromantic truth: oil money is vital to the Scottish nationalist cause | 
Ian Jack
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/24/scotland-oil-money-nationalist-dream-nicola-sturgeon-independence>
True, you might not have seen it that way if you had watched the SNP 
conference leap to its feet in Glasgow today as Nicola Sturgeonannounced that 
she would publish a new draft independence bill next week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
. The delegates whooped at the announcement because many of them long for a 
rerun of the independence vote in September 2014, albeit with a different 
outcome, and perhaps even thought that was what the first minister had offered. 
But it is important to understand what Sturgeon didn’t say to them, as well as 
what she did.

Sturgeon did not fire the starting gun on a second independence referendum 
today. She doesn’t wanta second vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/scots-independence-referendum-brexit-nicola-sturgeon>
 unless she thinks she can win it. At the moment she can’t do that. The current 
polling –the latest example was BMG’s poll in the Herald on Friday 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/politics/14798246.Hard_Brexit_is_not_a_game_changer_for_SNP__new_poll_suggests/?commentSort=score>
 – all counsels caution. And, beneath the apparent bravado, caution is what the 
SNP leader offered.

Her words tell that story for anyone who cares to read them carefully. “I am 
determined,” she said, “thatScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> 
will have the ability to reconsider the question of independence – and to do so 
before the UK leaves the EU – if that is necessary to protect our country’s 
interests.” Sturgeon gave herself more get-out-of-jail options in her speech 
than she would have had in an open prison.

What she actually said elsewhere in her speech is important too. It’s not 
often you hear a Scottish nationalist leader make an apparently serious offer of
“coalition” to Labour, Lib Dem and even moderate Tory leaders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-to-reach-out-to-other-parties-to-fight-hard-brexit>
. But that’s not what Sturgeon did. She set out a list of Scottish aims, 
including devolved powers and access to the single market, that are predicated 
on remaining in the UK, not on breaking free of it, and which can only be 
achieved with support from others at Westminster. It’s why she said: “Today I 
want to concentrate on what we will do in the months ahead to protect the 
interests of Scotland and – in so far as we can – of the UK as a whole.”

This is in part a tactical stance too, of course. When Sturgeon says the ball 
is in May’s court she is looking for, perhaps even hoping for, May to overreach 
again. The SNP are past masters at framing issues in such 
heads-we-win-tails-you-lose ways. But the pragmatic side of Sturgeon also sees 
thegathering pressure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/12/brexit-mps-david-davis-eu-exit-plan>
 this week for the UK parliament to shape the Brexit process as a chance to 
achieve serious gains for Scotland without the very real danger of a lost 
second referendum.

How do Scots feel about having another independence referendum, post-Brexit? | 
David Torrance, Vonny Moyes and Mike Small
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/scots-independence-referendum-brexit-nicola-sturgeon>
One reason why Sturgeon needs to do this is because she is not now quite as 
popular these days as either her Scottish or her English admirers imagine. It’s 
not just that Brexit has failed to generate the support for independence that 
many expected. It’s also that Sturgeon’s own satisfaction ratings among Scots 
have fallen sharply,down by 12 points since April 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3781/Brexit-does-not-trigger-significant-increase-in-support-for-independence.aspx>
. She now trails the Tories’ Ruth Davidson on satisfaction. The inference is 
that it is time for Sturgeon to deliver.

It is easy to see why some people on both sides of the border have convinced 
themselves that England and Wales’s Brexit vote might trigger Scotland’s 
departure from the United Kingdom. Even now, it’s not an outcome that can be 
wholly dismissed. But the claim is beginning to look seriously incompatible 
with the facts. Intriguingly, an opposite dynamic may now be the one to watch. 
Far from separating Scotland from Britain, Brexit may be drawing Scottish 
nationalism into the heart of British politics in a new and unexpected way.

Much of this is down to May’s determined embrace of Brexit and the appointment 
of the Brexiteers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/take-back-control-brexiteers-immigration-policy-johnson-davis-fox>
 to key posts in the government. What seemed tactically adeptin the summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/16/johnson-davis-fox-three-brexiteers>
 now seems more of a ball and chain, largely because of the studied vagueness 
of the government’s strategy. But the real catalyst is the gradual dissolution 
of economic confidence across the UK.

Those who said that the foreign exchange markets were the only real opposition 
to the May government may have had a point a week ago. But a lot has changed in 
a week. The continuing slide in the pound,the £66bn annual price tag for a hard 
Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/11/hard-brexit-treasury-66bn-eu-single-market>
, and then thetemporary disappearance of Marmite from Tesco shelves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/13/great-marmite-war-reality-brexit-bite>
 all added to the sense that the May government is fiddling while British 
business burns. Public opinion has not had remorse about the referendum result 
yet, but that may change, opening up some political space 
for opponents of Brexit.

This presents a real rallying opportunity for pro-European and soft-Brexit 
forces alike. Sturgeon sniffs that opportunity. But the battle will be fought 
at Westminster, not Holyrood. This is uncomfortable from an SNP perspective; 
the party is always happiest haranguing from its home base at Holyrood, not 
wheeling and dealing at distant Westminster. But the votes and the power to 
change things are at Westminster and Whitehall. The election this week of the 
party’s Westminster leaderAngus Robertson as Sturgeon’s new deputy 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-37640935> is another 
reminder that the centre of gravity of Scottish politics has in some ways been 
shifting to London since 2015.

The big question is whether the opposition parties and the moderate Tories at 
Westminster have the programme, as well as the votes, to change the May 
government’s direction on Brexit. At this early stage, they have shown they 
have the power to put a divided government’s nose out of joint. Now they have 
to agree some shared red lines and to mobilise to promote them at every turn. 
That will be harder. It will involve creativity, as well as give and take. But 
the phoney war on Brexit is over, and British politics has at long last got 
real once again.
 