
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> has 
said the Scottish government will “actively consider” whether it will formally 
join in the next legal battle over the right of MPs to vote onarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> after the British 
government’s defeat in the high court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/parliament-must-trigger-brexit-high-court-rules>
.

Scotland’s first minister told Holyrood on Thursday that the court ruling was 
“hugely significant and it underlines the total chaos and confusion at the 
heart of theUK government” <https://www.theguardian.com/politics>.

Sturgeon hinted that the SNP’s 56 MPs in Westminster would vote against the 
triggering of article 50, given thatScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> voted to remain in the EU. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>

High court says parliament must vote on triggering article 50 - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/03/article-50-high-court-ruling-high-court-set-to-rule-on-whether-mps-should-vote-on-triggering-article-50-politics-live>
“SNP MPs in the House of Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/houseofcommons> will certainly not vote 
for anything that undermines the will or the interests of the Scottish people,” 
she told first minister’s questions at Holyrood.

The Scottish government had legal counsel attending the article 50 hearing 
throughout as an observer, partly in preparation for a decision by Sturgeon on 
whether to formally participate in the case.

Sturgeon said she would now look at Thursday’s judgment very carefully before 
deciding on the next steps. “We should remember that their refusal to allow a 
vote in the House of Commons is not some matter of high constitutional 
principle: it is because they don’t have a coherent position and they know that 
if they take their case to the House of Commons, that will be exposed,” she 
said. “The job of this government is to protect Scotland’s interests. Scotland 
voted to remain in the EU and my job is therefore to protect our place in Europe
and the single market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/10/no-single-market-access-for-uk-after-brexit-wolfgang-schauble-says>
 as far as I possibly can.”

Northern Ireland’s deputy leader, Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness>, said the high court 
verdict showed the approach by May’s Conservative party to Brexit had been 
“shambolic … I have no faith in the British parliament supporting the 
democratically expressed wishes of the people of the North to remain in Europe. 
Any decision taken about the future of the people of Ireland needs to be taken 
on this island.”

The votes of Northern Ireland MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/northernireland> in the House of Commons 
could prove critical ifTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> is forced to ask parliament 
to trigger article 50. All eightDemocratic Unionist party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/dup> MPs are highly likely to back Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> in the Commons and the 
party’s leader Nigel Dodds said the ruling was “disappointing … On 23 June the 
British people as a whole gave a clear mandate for the UK government to leave 
the EU. There must be no attempt to block Brexit by people who refuse to accept 
the will of the people of the UK.”

But the position of the two Ulster Unionist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/uup> (UUP) MPs is less predictable. In 
June its leader, Mike Nesbitt, called for a remain vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/jun/20/eu-referendum-live-warsi-leave-parliament-recalled-jo-cox?page=with%3Ablock-5767ecbce4b0b0e126071086>
 but the party has since switched position and said its MPs will back the 
government to allow for the referendum result to be implemented. All threeSDLP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sdlp> MPs are expected to vote against 
any triggering of article 50. McGuinness’ party, Sinn Féin, do not take their 
seats in Westminster.

UK needs further devolution to prevent Brexit anger, says Gordon Brown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/uk-needs-further-devolution-to-prevent-brexit-anger-says-gordon-brown>
Earlier on Thursday, the former prime minister Gordon Brown argued in a speech 
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/uk-needs-further-devolution-to-prevent-brexit-anger-says-gordon-brown>
that Britain should adopt a more federal structure to guard against discontent 
turning to anger as standards of living fall after Brexit.

Brown <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown> said wholesale 
reform of the UK was needed as the nation is united in name only, with a much 
greater degree of devolution required for Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and 
the English regions.

He said the strains of the vote to leave the EU were already beginning to show 
as different nations, regions, sectors and companies were “desperately seeking 
their own opt-outs from a hard Brexit”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotland-mps-joining-article-50-legal-battle-brexit-high-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8906d43aabe55dbab135471b9eaef3a82027ca%2F0_174_4590_2754%2F4590.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20deciding%20whether%20to%20join%20article%2050%20legal%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotland-mps-joining-article-50-legal-battle-brexit-high-court%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%20deciding%20whether%20to%20join%20article%2050%20legal%20battle&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotland-mps-joining-article-50-legal-battle-brexit-high-court%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1e8906d43aabe55dbab135471b9eaef3a82027ca%2F0_174_4590_2754%2F4590.jpg>
 Gordon Brown said in a speech on Thursday that ‘we need to reimagine the UK 
for new times’. Photograph: Leon Neal/Getty Images 
Brown said the optimism felt by leave voters in the north of England would in 
particular be short-lived as the region is more dependent on trade than the 
south. “We could see discontent turn into anger as standards of living fall 
faster and jobs start to go,” he said.

“It is clear that the UK in its present form is not working for everyone. To 
prevent the harmful divisions that now exist from deepening, we need to 
reimagine the UK for new times.”


To address inequalities in the UK, Brown called for EU powers over 
agriculture, fisheries, regional policies and social funds to be repatriated 
not to Westminster, but nations and regions. More than half of the £4bn spent 
annually in the UK by the EU should be returned to local and devolved 
governments, he said.

He suggested the way to achieve this would be a people’s constitutional 
convention – an idea backed by Jon Trickett, a Labour frontbencher and election 
coordinator. “A people’s convention is the starting point if we are to give 
fairness, hope and opportunity to the regions,” Brown said.

Some of his other suggestions include devolving employment law to Scotland and 
creating co-decision for the four nations of the UK on fundamental issues so 
that Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland would not be able to betaken out of 
the European convention on human rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/25/uk-must-leave-european-convention-on-human-rights-theresa-may-eu-referendum>
 against their will.

Zac Goldsmith, the former Conservative MP who is standing in a byelection 
having quit his Commons seat as a protest against the Heathrow airport 
expansion, warned that moves to block the UK’s exit from theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> could also lead to anger, saying it 
would provide a boon for the far right.

He told LBC radio: “If we were to overturn the outcome of the biggest 
democratic exercise we have ever had in this country – 17 million people – if 
we put our fingers up to them, if we turn our backs on them, or ignore them, I 
think we would see the emergence in this country of the kind of far right 
extreme movements that plague the continent, but fortunately do not plague this 
country.”

 