
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> said on 
Monday she would not rule out “associate citizenship” of the EU as an 
alternative for Scotland in order to avoid Brexit.

Scotland’s first minister told an audience in Dublin that “we should be 
open-minded about solutions that can help, whether it isScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> or individuals, who want to retain 
their citizenship, their relationship with the EU”.

Sturgeon was reacting to questions from students at Trinity College Dublin 
about the notion of“associate citizenship” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/eu-citizenship-proposal-could-guarantee-rights-in-europe-after-brexit>
 – which has been backed byGuy Verhofstadt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/guy-verhofstadt-diehard-european-to-lead-brexit-talks-for-european-parliament>
, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator.

In her speech to the university’s Philosophical Society, Sturgeon said: “We 
shouldn’t be ruling out anything just now. People say to me – as I’m sure they 
are saying to [Verhofstadt] about that particular proposal – that is 
impossible, that could never work. Well, how do we know that?

“We are going into a period that is completely uncharted, in terms of what 
happens now.”

She added: ”We are going to have to be imaginative, innovative and creative in 
the period ahead, if we are going to come out of this Brexit scenario in good 
shape, without damaging the things that we value in the UK. So let us be 
open-minded about some of the suggestions.”

Verhofstadt said he was attracted to the idea “that people who are European 
citizens and saying they want to keep ithave the possibility of doing so 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/25/britons-could-pay-for-eu-citizenship-after-brexit-says-top-negotiator>
”.

Sturgeon repeated her view that a second Scottish independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/nicola-sturgeon-snp-referendum>
 is highly likely after the Brexit vote. She stressed that the Scottish 
government would be exploring all alternative options to Scotland being pushed 
off a “hard Brexit cliff edge”.

She admitted that a section of the electorate who vote for the Scottish 
National party voted for Brexit in the June referendum and also accepted that 
there were many things wrong with the EU that had to be reformed.

On Brexit being an opportunity for the SNP’s ultimate goal of independence, 
she said: “I have always believed Scotland will become an independent country 
and I think it will become an independent country well within my lifetime – and 
this may be the moment for that.”

Her speech in Trinity, where she accepted an honorary patronage from the 
Philosophical Society, was part of a two-day tour of Dublin. On Tuesday she 
will be a guest of the Irish Business and Employers Confederation, when she 
will argue for new, stronger links between businesses in Scotland andIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>.
 