
Ironically, I am starting to feel a bit “left behind” by Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>. He was pretty much working 
as a waitress in a cocktail bar <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uPudE8nDog0> 
when we met him. (Certainly a less elitist backstory to the accurate one: 
namely, that he was a private-school-educated City commodities trader.) But 
now, like some on-the-make media prick who always looks over your shoulder in 
case someone better comes along, Nigel has caught Donald Trump’s eye and walked 
off mid-conversation with us. AsAlan Partridge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=l2D3-FkoXNU> almost said: “Don! Don! Don! Don! 
Don! Don! Don! DON!”

In fact, it’s starting to feel like Nigel freeing us from the EU will turn out 
to be a classic early-21st-century “liberation” operation. There hasn’t been a 
“here’s your sovereignty – see ya!” like it since 2004, when coalition governor 
Paul Bremerhanded over <http://www.economist.com/node/2812317> to the Iraqis, 
and promptly floored it to the airport. Nigel, aren’t you staying for the 
Brexit party? I think it’s going to get really lively!

But Nigel has gone off to America, where he is rampant. Mr Big Stuff 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9f4CyQto-0E> – who do you think you are? Let 
Nigel tell you who he thinks he is. “I’m the catalyst for the downfall of the 
Blairites, the Clintonites, the Bushites, and all these dreadful people who 
work hand in glove with Goldman Sachs and everybody else, who have made 
themselves rich, and ruined our countries,”Farage explained 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/10/nigel-farage-jokes-about-trumps-alleged-sexual-assaults>
 in a radio interview this week, about 10 minutes before JPMorgan boss Jamie 
Dimon was touted as Trump’s Treasury pick.

The 'special relationship' - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gallery/2010/mar/28/foreignpolicy-usa> 
Anyway, Nigel can’t wait to tell you how yuge he is now. A man who failed to 
get elected to our parliament seven times is referring to the two-term 
president of the United States as “that Obama creature”.

Sources are briefing he will be the go-between for Trump and Theresa May, 
though Number 10 denies a role. “If [Trump] did offer me a job,” Farage has 
said, “I would quite like to behis ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/no-10-denies-nigel-farage-will-be-given-go-between-role-with-us>
 to the European Union.” And if none of these plays comes off, he can always 
link himself with a big-money move to LA Galaxy.

In the meantime, he is styling himself as the Maggie to Donald’s Ronnie, even 
though you just know Trump is eventually going to do something far more 
humiliating to him than justinvade Grenada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/10/reagan-apologise-angry-thatcher-grenada-white-house-tapes>
 without telling him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nigel%20Farage%3A%20'I'll%20tell%20Donald%20Trump%20not%20to%20touch%20Theresa%20May'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nigel%20Farage%3A%20%27I%27ll%20tell%20Donald%20Trump%20not%20to%20touch%20Theresa%20May%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fnigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video&media=>
Nigel Farage: ‘I’ll tell Donald Trump not to touch Theresa May’ – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/nigel-farage-donald-trump-touch-theresa-may-video>
Until then, Nigel is all dressed up and doing the town. Consider the advice he 
said he’d give Trump about meeting Theresa May: “Don’t touch her, for God’s 
sake!” Remember, girls: even when you’re the prime minister you haven’t escaped 
guys joking about you being sexually assaulted. You’ve dropped your trade 
briefing papers on the floor, Mrs May. While you’re down there …

“If it comes to it,” Nigel went on, “I could be there as the responsible adult 
role, to make sure everything’s OK.” Wow. When Nigel said “I want my life back 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jul/04/nigel-farage-resigns-leader-ukip-video>
”, I’d assumed he meant spending sullen time with his family, not acting as the 
cockblock intern for the leader of the free pussy-grabbers.

For all its comic grotesquery, of course, the Farage/Trump dynamic is an old 
tale: British politicians getting a massive hard-on for American ones. People 
derided Tony Blair as George W Bush’s poodle, and Nigel’s version of lapdogging 
is just a different take.

Farage could literally curl up on Trump’s lap to stop him assaulting female 
premiers. If they widened his frottage-combating duties it could be a fulltime 
job – Trump will be in the presence of many females a day, and you have to 
remember he is a man whose sole, frequently stated reason for notcoming on to 
his own daughter 
<http://www.mediaite.com/online/donald-trump-wont-stop-joking-about-banging-his-daughter/>
 is the fact they’re related. So Farage could be kept in the Oval Office as an 
anti-grope Jeeves.

And he’d be grateful. This week I saw a hilarious clip of Trump beckoning 
Farage out of a crowd – a bit like Courteney Cox in theDancing in the Dark 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=129kuDCQtHs> video – and Farage telling him 
obsequiously he was “handing over the mantle”. Aw, the look on his little face 
just for being noticed! It was like a wildlife documentary, where some weaker 
male in the pack defers to the alpha. Donald has had the sex Nigel only wishes 
he’d had. Still, if Nigel can’t have had it, he’s going to stand as near to 
someone who has as he’s allowed. Everything seems bigger in America – even bits 
of Nigel Farage.

Like Trump, Nigel’s the sort of champion of ordinary people who looks like 
he’d privately scream for the sanitiser the minute he’d finished having to 
shake their hands. Tabloid editors used to have a nasty phrase for this 
shudder-inducing contact: “meet the readers”.

It is possible Farage will be the most successful British politician in 30 
years as well as a man of very small stature

I detect the exact same discomfort in men such as Nigel and Donald. During the 
last general election campaign,I waited for hours 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/apr/08/nigel-farage-seems-nervous-even-his-supporters-cant-ask-questions>
 in a Grimsby pub with Nigel’s supporters and canvassers for him to honour his 
planned appearance. But he blew them out to go and have lunch with reality star 
Joey Essex, who he’d already spent half the morning with. They were so 
disappointed, and I felt for them.

The point of vignettes like this is to illustrate a simple truth: it is 
entirely possible forNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> to be the most successful 
British politician of the last 30 years as well as a man of very small stature. 
What that tells you about the state we’re in is up to you – I certainly 
wouldn’t wish to take Farage’s huge achievement from him. But once I’d watched 
him stand up his own crestfallen footsoldiers like that for some reality TV 
idiot (Essex, not Trump), I knew he was capable of standing them up in far 
bigger ways.

Of course, he wasn’t my dog in the fight, and as a 
liberal-metropolitan-elite-whatever I don’t need him like his supporters 
really, really do. So I now have the luxury of being able to enjoy the show as 
Nigel attempts to have a second act with an American life. Character is 
destiny, and I can’t help suspecting that a Nigel Farage this unbound is going 
to make a fascinating mistake. It may not feel quite as fascinating to those he 
promised to help – but that’s showbiz, guys. What else did you think this was?
 