
No more pussyfooting around: Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> and his associates have 
poisoned our country’s political culture, and it’s time to push back. Their 
offensive – in every sense of the word – has been so swift, so devastating, 
that we risk normalising it.

Let’s take a moment to absorb their latest intervention. In June this year, Jo 
Cox <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-cox>, a Labour MP, was murdered by 
Thomas Mair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
, a fascist, white supremacist terrorist. As he stabbed and shot her, he yelled 
“Death to traitors, freedom for Britain!” This was a political act: the use of 
violence to achieve political ends. The individual who politicised Jo’s death 
was the terrorist who killed her.

If anybody has a right to speak out about the dangers of hatred and extremism 
in modern Britain, it is Jo’s bereaved husband,Brendan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brendan-cox-youve-heard-so-much-about-jos-death-wed-like-to-talk-about-her-life>
.

On Tuesday morning, hours after a truck was driven into a Berlin Christmas 
market <https://www.theguardian.com/world/berlin-christmas-market-attack>, 
Nigel Faragespotted an opportunity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
. “Terrible news from Berlin but no surprise,”he wrote 
<https://twitter.com/Nigel_Farage/status/811123023621267456>, not even 
bothering to separate his horror and his vindication with a comma. “Events like 
these will be the Merkel legacy.”Brendan Cox’s response 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/nigel-farage-accuses-jo-cox-widower-brendan-cox-of-supporting-extremism>
 – “blaming politicians for the actions of extremists? That’s a slippery slope 
Nigel” – was logically flawless.

Farage’s response in turn – that Cox “would know more about extremists than 
me” because of his links to the anti-fascist organisationHope Not Hate 
<http://www.hopenothate.org.uk/> – is shocking on a number of levels. First, he 
is talking about a widower whose wife was murdered by an extremist six months 
ago. Second, he smeared an organisation that exists to drive back racism – at a 
time when hate crimes have surged after a referendum campaign made inflammatory 
by politicians including Nigel Farage.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Farage%20accuses%20Brendan%20Cox%20of%20backing%20extremist%20groups%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Ffarage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video&media=>
Farage accuses Brendan Cox of backing extremist groups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/20/farage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
Far-right terrorist Thomas Mair jailed for life for Jo Cox murder
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
Then came Farage’s sidekicks. “When are we allowed to say that Brendan Cox is 
a total arse?”tweeted the Breitbart columnist James Delingpole 
<https://twitter.com/JamesDelingpole/status/811164707403038720>. “I’m sorry 
about his wife but he chose to massively politicise it. Who does that?”asked 
Ukip bankroller Arron Banks 
<https://twitter.com/Arron_banks/status/811233164530225156>, accusing Jo’s 
widower – rather than the far-right terrorist who killed her – of politicising 
her death.

When Hope Not Hate threatened legal action to defend its reputation after being
smeared on national radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/20/farage-accuses-brendan-cox-of-backing-extremist-groups-video>
 by a prominent politician, Farage’s henchmanRaheem Kassam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/raheem-kassam-pulls-out-of-ukip-leadership-contest>
accused the organisation of 
<https://twitter.com/RaheemKassam/status/811216371380002816> “using threats to 
attempt to silence political opposition. Idiots don’t realise how powerful he 
became this year”.

When Farage’s power was queried, Kassam responded with a picture of Farage and 
Donald Trump in the president-elect’s golden lift. Don’t mess with Farage, was 
Kassam’s implication, because he now has the patronage of the soon-to-be most 
powerful man on Earth. (You can donate to Hope not Hate’slegal fund 
<https://donate.hopenothate.org.uk/page/contribute/farage-to-court> here.)

These individuals are a political cesspit. They are almost farcically 
unpleasant comic-book villains. Kassam has called forNicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>’s mouth to be taped 
shut, “and her legs so she can’t reproduce 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/ukip-leadership-frontrunner-raheem-kassam-nicola-sturgeon-twitter-apology_uk_5813943de4b0672ea688ddc0>
”, while Banks hasridiculed journalists for reporting racist incidents 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/adam-boulton-sky-news-arron-banks-leave-eu-ukip-referendum-racism-brexit_uk_5770e31be4b08d2c563978b8>
. Farage himself stood in front of a poster featuring dark-skinned migrants and 
the words “BREAKING POINT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
” just days before the referendum.

Some say: just ignore them. Treat them as internet trolls who thrive on 
attention. They hate nothing more than being ignored.

This is, I’m afraid, terribly naive. These individuals are transforming 
political culture in Britain. Consider how much more venomous, poisonous and 
intolerant politics has become in just the course of the year. Left unchecked, 
it will get much, much worse.

There is a deliberate attempt to delegitimise all shades of progressive 
opinion. This is the approach of the rightwing authoritarian populism sweeping 
the western world: to treat all left-of-centre opinion as illegitimate, 
extremist and even treasonous. The British press – dominated as it is by 
rightwing oligarchs – is instrumental in forging this intolerant new culture.

Two months ago, the Daily Mail had a front page that read: “Damn the 
unpatriotic Bremoaners and their plot to subvert the will of the British people.
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/12/daily-mail-bremoaners-brexit-mps-cbi-bbc-paul-dacre>
” The Daily Express opted for “Time to silence EU exit whingers. 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/daily-mail-express-brexit_uk_57fdfd14e4b08e08b93d2ad3>
” AsBrexit <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> encounters 
trouble – as it will – this will deteriorate, and rapidly so. Critics of the 
government’s Brexit agenda will be transformed into traitors and wreckers 
responsible for sabotaging Britain’s grand national revolution.

Donald Trump on tape saying 'every racist thing ever', claims actor Tom Arnold
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/donald-trump-apprentice-outtakes-tape-tom-arnold>
Online, you can see how hysteria and hatred are being stirred up. During the 
referendum campaign a far-right activist photoshopped a picture of me holding a 
whiteboard explaining my reasons for voting remain: it was changed to claim it 
was because “Britain’s loss of independence is justice for colonialism”. It was 
shared on various far-right websites, including Britain First. Using their own 
names,people responded by suggesting 
<https://twitter.com/OwenJones84/status/733711134155526144> we “should start 
just shooting these freaks”, that I was “a traitor and [need] to be erased”, 
that I needed a “smack in the face with a baseball bat”, and so on.

From politicians to journalists, many of those deemed to be dissenting from 
the tide of rightwing populism have experienced the same. Next monthDonald Trump
 <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> will enter the White House, 
becoming the chief patron of the rightwing populists, and there will be many 
elections in which such movements are expected to succeed, such as in France 
and the Netherlands.

The atmosphere is intolerant now; the risk is it may become suffocating. And 
as it does, as more hysteria and hatred is stirred up, violent extremists – 
such as Jo Cox’s killer – will become ever more emboldened. For some reason we 
forget that it was only five years ago that the far-right terroristAnders 
Breivik <https://www.theguardian.com/world/anders-behring-breivik> marched on 
to a Norwegian island and murdered dozens of young socialists. Why? Because he 
considered them to be traitors to their country, responsible for the 
“Islamisation” of Norway and Europe.

We face a great danger, and not even those who will suffer because of it have 
realised just how grave it is. Intolerance and hatred have been legitimised 
across the western world. Dissent is becoming treason. That is bad enough. But 
there are other violent extremists who are being both radicalised and 
legitimised across the west. If we don’t take a stand now, new dark chapters 
are soon to arrive.
 