
The streets surrounding Shijia primary school in Beijing were mobbed by a 
crowd of parents so dense that cars were obliged to beat a retreat.

At 3.45pm on Friday, 11-year-old Zou Tingting, five minutes late, bounded 
through the school's west gate and into her waiting mother's arms. Tingting's 
classes were over, but her day was just beginning – she had an hour of 
homework, plus lessons in ping pong, swimming, art, calligraphy and piano.

Tingting's mother, Huang Chunhua, said that, like many Chinese mothers, she 
once considered Tingting's academic performance her top priority; now she 
realises the importance of a well-rounded education. "I've seen British 
curricular materials, and I'm actually kind of jealous," she said. "British 
teachers guide students to discover things on their own – they don't just feed 
them the answers, like inChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>."

In recent weeks British parents and educators have been in a panic about the 
discrepancy between the Chinese education system and the UK's. In December the 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) released the 2012 
results for its triennial Programme for International Student Assessment (Pisa) 
test – a reading, maths and science examination administered to half a million 
15-year-olds in 65 countries. Shanghai students topped the rankings; the UK 
ranked 26th.

Next week education minister Elizabeth Truss will lead a "fact-finding 
mission" to Shanghai to learn the secrets of China's success. She plans to 
adjust the UK's education policy accordingly.

Yet Chinese parents and educators see their own system as corrupt, 
dehumanising, pressurised and unfair. In fact, many are looking to the west for 
answers. Huang said that someparents bribe Shijia primary school  
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/world/in-china-parents-bribe-to-get-students-into-top-schools-despite-campaign-against-corruption/2013/10/07/fa8d9d32-2a61-11e3-8ade-a1f23cda135e_story.html>
to admit their children (though she declined to say whether she had done so 
herself).

Tingting attends an expensive cramming school at weekends, leaving her tired. 
She will probably have to abandon extracurricular activities in high school to 
devote more time to the college admission exam, called thegaokao. Many parents 
consider the gruelling nine-hour test a sorting mechanism that will determine 
the trajectory of their children's lives.

Chinese experts are also less impressed than Truss by the Pisa scores. "Even 
though Shanghai students scored well on the test, this doesn't mean that 
Shanghai's education system doesn't have any problems," said Lao Kaisheng, a 
professor in the education department of Beijing Normal University. "In fact, 
it's the opposite."

As long as China's education system remains vast but resource-constrained, Lao 
added, its schools will default to testing as a reliable indicator of 
competence. "The education system here puts a heavy emphasis on rote 
memorisation, which is great for students' test-taking ability but not for 
their problem-solving and leadership abilities or their interpersonal skills," 
he said. "Chinese schools just ignore these things."

According to an analysis of the rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/dec/03/shanghai-china-oecd-education-ranking>
, the children of Shanghai's cleaners and caterers are three years more 
advanced than UK lawyers' and doctors' children in maths. Yet the figures are 
an unreliable measure of equality. Although Shanghai's 23 million people make 
up less than 2% of China's population, its per capita GDP is more than double 
the national average; its college enrolment rate is four times as high.

Furthermore, nearly half of Shanghai's school-age children belong to migrant 
families and were effectively barred from taking the test: because of China's 
residence registration system, these students are forced to attend high school 
in their home provinces, where schools are often debilitatingly understaffed. 
Although students from 12 provinces took the test in 2009, the government only 
shared Shanghai's scores.

"The OECD has not disclosed if other Chinese provinces secretly took part in 
the 2012 assessment 
<http://www.brookings.edu/blogs/brown-center-chalkboard/posts/2013/12/11-shanghai-pisa-scores-wrong-loveless>
. Nor have Pisa officials disclosed who selected the provinces that 
participated," wrote Tom Loveless, an education expert at Harvard University, 
on a Brookings Institute blog. "There is a lack of transparency surrounding 
Pisa's relationship with China."

Wang Peng, a teacher in Wuhu, a city in Anhui province, said that his school's 
average class size is significantly larger than most in Shanghai, and that it 
cannot compete in terms of financial strength. Wang said he makes about £300 a 
month; teachers in big cities make twice as much. "As far as education methods 
go, there's not a huge difference [between Wuhu and Shanghai]," he said. "But 
the general educational environment, and the opportunities that students 
receive – those are really different."

Occasionally, reminders of the system's ruthlessness cause soul-searching. In 
2012, pictures of a classroom of Chinese high-school students hooked up to 
intravenous amino acid drips while studying for thegaokao went viral on social 
media. Last May two teenagers in Jiangsu killed themselves after "failing to 
complete homework", according to state media. In 2012, a student emerged from 
the exam to learn that his mother had died in a car crash 12 days prior; the 
school and his relatives conspired not to tell him so as to not distract him.

Authorities recognise the problem. Last June the government issued guidelines 
urging schools to focus on students' "moral development", "citizenship" and 
"ambition" rather than their test scores.

Yet solutions remain elusive. One recently retired teacher at a Beijing middle 
school said she earns extra money by teaching an after-school cramming course 
called maths olympiad. The programme was designed as an advanced exercise for 
outstanding maths students.

In the late 1990s Beijing authorities barred grade schools from setting 
entrance exams, and some simply adopted maths olympiad scores as a substitute. 
Parents began to see the course as required, even if their children were 
uninterested or under-qualified. Although the education ministry has repeatedly 
cracked down on maths olympiad instruction, schools maintain the programme 
under different names, state media reported in 2012. Enrolment figures remain 
high.

"When maths olympiad first started, it had the right idea 
<http://usa.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2012-11/27/content_15961074_2.htm> – it was 
a programme for students who were really interested," said the teacher, who 
requested anonymity because of the course's controversial profile. "There are a 
lot of kids without the ability who go to study this stuff, and it consumes 
their weekends, and their winter and summer vacations.

"These students aren't developing in a healthy way. This shouldn't be allowed 
to happen."
 