
Welcome to the wonderful world of Brexit PLC: a nod here, a wink there, 
something under the counter and “I-don’t-mind-if-I-do”. No one knows, yet, what 
a government minister or official said to the Japanese company Nissan, to 
secure a massive new investment inBritain’s biggest car plant in Sunderland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-to-make-new-qashqai-and-x-trail-models-in-britain>
. We can only be sure it is neither the first nor the last.

As Theresa May’s government steers its unsteady course between the shoals of 
soft Brexit and the storms of hard, it assures all and sundry that everything 
will be fine on the night. But harsh business reality is immune to the cliches 
of political spin.

Nissan has to make a decision now on a planned 2018 investment for its new 
Qashqai and the X-Trail SUV vehicles. Vague assurances would not do. This was 
hard cash and 7,000 jobs, threatened by a double-figure tariff on trade with 
Europe under “hard Brexit”. The idea that industry minister Greg Clark could 
have got away with “just trust me” is ludicrous. Clark’sreported guarantee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/no-10-denies-sweetheart-deal-with-nissan>
 of continuing “competitiveness”, plus subsidies for training and other forms 
of job support, must have been expressed in bankable terms.

Nissan to make new car models in UK as economy defies Brexit fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-to-make-new-qashqai-and-x-trail-models-in-britain>
Similar deals are rumoured to be busting out all over Planet Brexit. The 
farmers have allegedly been given assurances that the migrant worker schemes on 
which their harvests depend will be protected. The big banks are told over 
ministerial lunches there is no question of obstacles to the free movement of 
their staffs round Europe. Care homes, NHS hospitals, the construction 
industry, tourism are all beating paths to Whitehall’s doors, relying as they 
do on low-paid continental and seasonal labour. Within the car industry, it 
goes without saying that Toyota, Ford and other big manufacturers are awaiting 
the same soothing words asNissan <https://www.theguardian.com/business/nissan> 
has received. Otherwise all hell will break loose.

The British government complains when international companies are offered 
sweetheart deals from Ireland, Luxembourg or Monaco. When investment becomes a 
free-for-all, there is a rush to the bottom. Countries compete with each other, 
either to subsidise business or – the same thing – to excuse them taxes or 
compensate them for tariffs. The prospect under a “hard” Brexit, and a 
reversion to World Trade Organisation tariffs, would result in myriad such 
deals, day in, day out. And when clout is the issue, one thing is for sure: the 
smaller the business the less clout.

Ever since the industrial revolution, free trade has been one of the greatest 
boons that politics has brought to mankind. The idea that it should start to 
unravel within the European cradle of that revolution is appalling. Soft Brexit 
is a no-brainer. Britain has to trade openly with Europe and Europe with 
Britain.
 