
Downing Street has welcomed Donald Trump’s pledge to seek a rapid trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
 with the UK after Brexit while stressing that only limited discussions are 
possible before the departure from the EU is finalised.

Speaking after the US president-elect told one of May’s backbench MPs, Michael 
Gove, that he thinks Britain was “smart” for opting out of an EU he believes is 
on the brink of collapse, the prime minister’s spokeswoman hailed the comments 
as positive.

In an interview with the former Tory leadership contender 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/michael-gove-uk-interview-tory-times>
 for the Times, Trump told Gove he would seek a trade agreement with the UK 
“very quickly” once it left the EU.

“We welcome the commitment from the president-elect to engage with the UK on 
this, to work together to agree a deal quickly,” May’s spokeswoman said on 
Monday.

“That highlights the opportunity of the UK leaving the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> in terms of how we approach this. When 
the prime minister visits the United States there will obviously be an 
opportunity to have early discussions on this.”

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20is%20'smart'%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20is%20%27smart%27%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&media=>
UK is ‘smart’ to leave EU, Trump tells Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/16/uk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
She added: “We’ve also been clear we will respect our obligations while we 
remain in the EU.” These mean Britain cannot enter into or sign trade deals 
with another country until it formally leaves the bloc.

Asked what this meant in practical terms, the spokeswoman said the UK could 
“have scoping decisions to look at the areas where we can benefit most”.

Trump said he could understand why voters chose Brexit in last year’s 
referendum. “You look at theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> and it’s Germany. Basically a vehicle 
for Germany. That’s why I thought the UK was so smart in getting out,” he said.

Gove, the first senior Conservative to meet Trump, spent an hour chatting to 
the president-elect in what he called his “glitzy, golden man cave” in Trump 
Tower, New York.

No 10 plays down prospect of UK-US trade deal being ready when Brexit happens 
- Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/16/trump-wants-a-uk-us-trade-deal-signature-ready-for-brexit-in-2019-says-gove-politics-live>
Trump stressed his fondness for the UK and said other countries could follow 
its lead and leave the EU,something Gove predicted during the referendum 
campaign 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/politics/662384/EU-referendum-Brexit-Michael-Gove-speech-liberate-Europe-Brussels-Vote-Leave>
. “I believe others will leave. I do think keeping it together is not gonna be 
as easy as a lot of people think,” said Trump.

Asked whether he would press ahead with a trade deal with the UK that would 
come into force after Brexit, Trump told the former justice secretary: 
“Absolutely, very quickly. I’m a big fan of the UK. We’re gonna work very hard 
to get it done quickly and done properly. Good for both sides.”

He said he was keen to meet the prime minister after his inauguration, which 
will take place on Friday. “I will be meeting with [Theresa May]. In fact if 
you want you can see the letter, wherever the letter is, she just sent it. 
She’s requesting a meeting and we’ll have a meeting right after I get into the 
White House and … we’re gonna get something done very quickly.”

Trump told Gove that May had written to him after Christmas and sent him as a 
gift a copy of Winston Churchill’s address to the US people in the wake of the 
Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.

May’s spokeswoman said the prime minister was not concerned about Trump 
showing others their correspondence: “I think he was delighted to receive a 
gift. And often when you’re delighted to receive a gift you tell people about 
it.”

Trump also threatened to place a 35% import tax on BMW cars if the German 
company sticks to a decision to build a plant in Mexico 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/07/fear-and-threats-mexico-hits-back-over-trumps-bullying-of-automakers>
, and criticised Angela Merkel, promptinga retort in Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/germany-hits-back-at-trump-criticism-of-refugee-policy-and-bmw-tariff-threat>
.

He said the German chancellor’s decision to welcome refugees jeopardised the 
stability ofEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. 

“I think she made one very catastrophic mistake and that was taking all of 
these illegals, you know taking all of the people from wherever they come from. 
And nobody even knows where they come from,” he said.

“People, countries, want their own identity and the UK wanted its own 
identity. But I do believe this: if they hadn’t been forced to take in all of 
the refugees, so many, with all the problems that it … entails, I think that 
you wouldn’t have a Brexit.”

In a separate interview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
 with the German newspaper Bild, Trump said he might contemplate tightening 
restrictions on Europeans travelling to the US. He said: “That could happen, 
but we’ll see. I mean, we’re talking here about parts of Europe, parts of the 
world and parts of Europe, where we have problems, where they come in and cause 
problems. I don’t want to have these problems.”


Asked about his election promise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
 to stop Muslims entering the US, Trump said he would like to see “extreme 
vetting”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fno-10-welcomes-donald-trumps-pledge-for-a-speedy-uk-us-trade-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85db8226702d7a55155a9f5de7c4755bc1ba8c7%2F0_137_2771_1663%2F2771.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=No%2010%20welcomes%20Donald%20Trump's%20pledge%20for%20a%20speedy%20UK-US%20trade%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fno-10-welcomes-donald-trumps-pledge-for-a-speedy-uk-us-trade-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=No%2010%20welcomes%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20pledge%20for%20a%20speedy%20UK-US%20trade%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fno-10-welcomes-donald-trumps-pledge-for-a-speedy-uk-us-trade-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa85db8226702d7a55155a9f5de7c4755bc1ba8c7%2F0_137_2771_1663%2F2771.jpg>
 Donald Trump has criticised Angela Merkel’s refugee policy. Photograph: Bernd 
von Jutrczenka/AFP/Getty Images 
May’s spokeswoman said it was too early to say whether the prime minister 
would raise objections about such plans.

“First and foremost, let’s have the inauguration at the end of the week, let 
the president-elect take office, and then set out what their policies are going 
to be,” she said.

She also insisted May had no problem with learning about Trump’s views via a 
newspaper interview by one of her backbench MPs.

“We are already establishing good relations with the president-elect and his 
team,” she said, saying May and Trump had spoken, and their teams were in 
contact before the visit.

A guide to Trump-speak: take it seriously, but not literally
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/a-guide-to-trump-speak-take-it-seriously-but-not-literally>
“I don’t think we have concerns there, and if the British press are succeeding 
in being able to do their jobs as reporters and interview world leaders, we 
should be proud.”


May is also backing her chancellor, Philip Hammond, over comments he made to a 
German newspaper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 warning the UK could shift towards being a corporate tax haven if the EU fails 
to provide it with an agreement on market access after Brexit.

“She shares the view that the chancellor set out, that we would want to remain 
in the mainstream of a recognisable European-style taxation system, but if we 
are forced to do something different, as we can’t get the right deal, then we 
stand ready to do so,” her spokeswoman said.


In the interview with Gove, Trump made a series of provocative comments about 
foreign policy, reiterating thathe could do a deal with Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-to-hold-summit-with-vladimir-putin-within-weeks>
 that would result in sanctions being lifted.

And he said he believed the Nato military alliance is obsolete and needs 
reform. “They have sanctions on Russia – let’s see if we can make some good 
deals with Russia. For one thing, I thinknuclear weapons should be way down and 
reduced very substantially 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons-arms-race>
, that’s part of it. Russia’s hurting very badly right now because of sanctions 
but I think something can happen that a lot of people are gonna benefit.”

He also said he would appoint Jared Kushner, his son-in-law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-conflicts-of-interest>
, as a Middle East peace envoy.
 