
Racism is a serious problem within the LGBT community and needs to be 
addressed. Despite the determination of many minority ethnic LGBT people to do 
just that, it is not happening. “How can I be a bigot when I am myself a member 
of an oppressed minority?” is a prevailing attitude among some white LGBT 
people. But another far more pernicious reason is that the LGBT world revolves 
around white gay men to the exclusion of others. The rainbow flag is whiter 
than it appears.

Texas bill could force teachers to out students to parents, LGBT activists fear
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/texas-lgbt-rights-students-teachers-parents-bill>
“I’m sexualised for my skin tone and never treated as a person,” Saif tells 
me. “The community is trained to accept a white, ‘masc’, muscled gay man and 
the rest of us are not really accepted or ‘one of their own’.” It’s not the 
individual he blames, but being conditioned by a community that venerates the 
“sexual image of a white gay man”. According to research byFS magazine 
<https://www.fsmag.org.uk/fs148-racism-and-the-gay-scene>, an astonishing 80% 
of black men, 79% of Asian men and 75% of south Asian men have experienced 
racism on the gay scene.

This manifests itself in numerous ways. Some are rejected because of their 
ethnicity; on the other hand, some are objectified because of it. On dating 
sites and apps, profiles abound that say “no Asians” or “no black people”, 
casually excluding entire ethnic groups. It’s like a “bastardised ‘No dogs, no 
blacks, no Irish’ signs”, asAnthony Lorenzo puts it 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/anthony-lorenzo-/on-being-black-and-gay_b_8302598.html>
.

“On apps like Grindr,” writes Matthew Rodriguez 
<https://mic.com/articles/144985/here-s-one-brutal-truth-every-white-gay-man-needs-to-hear>
, “gay men brandish their racial dating preferences with all the same 
unapologetic bravado that straight men reserve for their favourite baseball 
team.”

Homi tells me he has Persian ancestry, and is “sometimes mistaken for being 
Greek, Italian, Spanish, etc”. Once, at a nightclub, he was relentlessly 
pursued by a fellow patron. Eventually, he was asked: “Where are you from?” 
When Homi answered India, the man was horrified. “I’m so sorry – I don’t do 
Indians! Indians are not my type.”

Historically, LGBT publications been dominated by white men and have neglected 
issues of race

And it is not simply a western phenomenon. Luan, a Brazilian journalist, tells 
me his country has a “Eurocentric image of beauty” and there is a “cult of the 
white man, which is absurd, given more than half the population is black or 
brown”. Others speak of their experiences of being rejected by door staff at 
LGBT venues. Michel, a south Asian man, tells me of being turned away because 
“you don’t look gay”, and being called a “dirty Paki”. He says it has got worse 
since theOrlando nightclub massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/orlando-terror-attack>, where the gunman 
was Muslim.

And then there’s the other side of the equation: objectification. Malik tells 
about his experiences of what he describes as the near “fetishisation” of race. 
The rejection of people based on ethnicity is bad enough, he says, “but it can 
be just as gross when someone reduces you to your ethnicity, without consent, 
when dating/hooking up”. His Arab heritage was objectified and stereotyped by 
some would-be lovers, even down to presuming his sexual role.

When the Royal Vauxhall Tavern – a famed London LGBT venue – hosted a 
“blackface” drag act, Chardine Taylor-Stone launched theStop Rainbow Racism 
<https://chardinetaylorstone.com/say-no-to-rainbow-racism-campaign/> campaign. 
The drag act featured “exaggerated neck rolling, finger snapping displays of 
‘sassiness’, bad weaves” and other racial stereotypes, she says. After 
launching a petition against the event, she received threats of violence. 
“White LGBTQs who are truly against racism need to step up and take ownership 
of what is happening in their community,” she writes.

LGBT publications are guilty too. Historically, they’ve been dominated by 
white men, have neglected issues of race, and have portrayed white men as 
objects of beauty. Dean stopped buying mainstream gay magazines two years ago. 
“The only time they would write about people of colour is when they had done 
something homophobic,” he says. “The gay media is completely whitewashed.”

There has been positive change in recent months, one leading black gay 
journalist tells me, but only because of the work of ethnic minority LGBT 
individuals “holding magazines to account, setting up their own nights across 
the scene” and using social media, blogs, podcasts and boycotts to force change.

While LGBT people are much more likely than heterosexuals to suffer from 
mental distress <https://www.fsmag.org.uk/fs148-racism-and-the-gay-scene>, the 
level is even higher among ethnic minorities. Undoubtedly, racism plays a role. 
As Rodriguez puts it, seeing dating app profiles rejecting entire ethnic groups 
causes “internalised racism, decreased self-esteem andpsychological distress 
<https://mic.com/articles/144985/here-s-one-brutal-truth-every-white-gay-man-needs-to-hear>
.”

James Baldwin’s Giovanni’s Room: an antidote to shame
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/19/james-baldwin-giovannis-room-garth-greenwell-60th-anniversary-gay-novel>
Many of the rights and freedoms that all LGBT people won were down to the 
struggles of black and minority ethnic people: at theStonewall riots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/08/stonewall-inn-customers-barack-obama-monument-riots-1969>
, for example,non-white protesters 
<http://www.aazah.com/articles/whitewashing-history-stonewall-movie-leaves-out-trans-women-and-black-drag-queens-who>
. The least that white LGBT people can do is to reciprocate and confront racism 
within their own ranks. Shangela, an actor, tells me that racism from the LGBT 
community “hurts more because it’s coming from people that I’m meant to share a 
kinship with”.

The far-right movements on the march across the western world are consciously 
trying to co-opt the LGBT rights campaign for their own agenda. Muslims are 
portrayed as an existential threat to gay people, particularly after Orlando. 
There are those who only talk about LGBT rights if it is to bash Muslims or 
migrants as a whole. Americanwhite nationalist 
<http://www.vocativ.com/352839/white-supremacists-sell-rainbow-lgbt-flags/> 
websites now sell LGBT pride flags along with the Confederate flag. This week,
Milo Yiannopolous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/20/milo-yiannopoulos-nero-permanently-banned-twitter>
 – a gay attention-seeker who has become an icon of the US far right – was at 
the centre of a media storm because a platform to speak at his old school was 
withdrawn. In the Netherlands, the anti-immigrant right was led by a gay man, 
Pim Fortuyn, until his assassination. In France, reportedly a third of married 
gay couples support the far-rightNational Front 
<http://www.lemonde.fr/politique/article/2016/04/12/l-attraction-en-hausse-du-front-national-aupres-de-la-communaute-gay_4900269_823448.html>
.

The struggle against racism has, of course, to be led by people of colour who 
suffer the consequences – such asBlack Out UK <https://blkoutuk.com/>, which 
fights for a platform for black gay men, andMedia Diversified 
<https://mediadiversified.org/>, which campaigns for minority representation in 
the media. But unless white LGBT people – who the official gay scene venerates 
– listen to the voices of those who are sidelined, little will change.

Being oppressed yourself does not mean you are incapable of oppressing others: 
far from it. LGBT people have had to struggle against bigotry and oppression 
for generations. It is tragic that they inflict and ignore injustice in their 
own ranks.
 