
On Friday, the director of national intelligence released a report 
<https://www.dni.gov/files/documents/ICA_2017_01.pdf> accusing the Russian 
president, Vladimir Putin, of directlyinterfering in the US presidential 
election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/vladimir-putin-slates-baseless-amateurish-us-election-hacking-report>
 with the aim of undermining Hillary Clinton and helping Donald Trump. While 
most of the main conclusions had already been anonymously leaked to journalists 
either before or after the election, the report represents an open declaration 
by the CIA, FBI and NSA that a foreign power played a role in securing the 
president-elect’s victory.

The DNI report has come in for some criticism, and not only from Trump’s 
defenders. Kevin Rothrock, an editor for the Moscow Times, has a goodsummary 
<https://themoscowtimes.com/articles/american-unintelligence-on-russia-op-ed-56746>
 of its shortcomings, which include inaccurate statements about Russian 
politics and a bizarre overemphasis on the role ofRT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/rt-russia-news-us-election-hacking-margarita-simonyan>
, the Kremlin-controlled media network. “America’s case against the Kremlin 
suffers from some major flaws that should be acknowledged,” he writes, “even by 
individuals who argue reasonably that the Russian government likely used 
hackers to attack and undermine democratic institutions in the US.”

These flaws may best be understood as a result of growing panic within the US 
intelligence community. Trump is less than two weeks away from taking office, 
and he’s already pledging to pare down the CIA and attacking the agency 
frequently on Twitter. The same day the report was released, the agency’s 
former director James Woolsey quit Trump’s transition team, former acting 
director Michael J Morelldenounced 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/06/opinion/trumps-dangerous-anti-cia-crusade.html>
 Trump in a New York Times op-ed and NBC aired an interview with former 
director Leon Panetta that also harshly criticized Trump. There is no precedent 
for this kind of open clash between an incoming president and the intelligence 
community.

Given that many current CIA officials reasonably fear for their jobs, the 
report’s sloppiness isn’t all that surprising. Nor is the lack of major new 
information, since most of the key details had already been leaked, and the 
report’s significance lies mainly in the agencies putting them on the record.

What is surprising is how ineffectual the report is proving to be as a 
bombshell.

Depending on one’s perspective, this could be seen as either reassuring or 
concerning. On the one hand, it’s probably healthy for democracy that the CIA 
did not make a more concerted attempt to release this information before the 
election and has not taken any kind of radical steps to block Trump’s 
inauguration since. On the other hand, assuming the report’s main conclusion is 
basically correct, it means the US government, including the CIA, is about to 
fall under the control of a dangerous buffoon whose election was facilitated by 
a hostile foreign power – and that the intelligence community saw this coming 
and completely failed to prevent it.

Donald Trump 'not denying Russia was behind hacking campaign', says Priebus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>
As CIA sources told the Washington Post 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/obama-orders-review-of-russian-hacking-during-presidential-campaign/2016/12/09/31d6b300-be2a-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.90d2357f6c61>
 last month, Barack Obama met with congressional leaders and top intelligence 
officials in September to discuss publicly holding Russia accountable for 
hacking the Democratic National Committee. The Republican Senate majority 
leader, Mitch McConnell, refused to give this announcement his blessing, 
regarding it as a politicized use of intelligence before the election. At the 
time, Obama, like most observers, had good reason to believe Clinton would 
prevail in November, and thus refrained from personally alerting the American 
public to Russia’s role and from taking serious steps to counter it.

This was an understandable, and in many respects admirable, decision. It was 
also, with the benefit of hindsight, a fatal error. There is no preventing 
Trump from taking office at this point, and while it’s impossible to know 
whether releasing better information about Russia’s role sooner might have made 
a difference, we do know that the American people were not fully informed about 
the dangers of electing a compromised candidate.

For that matter, there is reason to believe Clinton’s campaign was 
deliberately undermined by the FBI director’s baseless innuendo about her 
emails a week before election day. Politicized information, both from the FBI 
andRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, was used against Clinton, 
while the White House held its fire on potentially more damaging information 
about Trump, out of some combination of respect for norms and overconfidence 
about Clinton’s chances.

Now Trump will take control over the CIA, and he will want revenge on everyone 
who tried to make Russia’s role public. The agency that refrained from abusing 
its power domestically under Obama could easily be turned into an instrument of 
abuse under the new administration.

And while the accusations about Trump’s connection to Russia are now public, 
they are too late and too unsubstantiated to fully persuade the American people 
of the danger we now find ourselves in. Americans who want to stop Trump are 
going to have to find a better way.
 