
A wave of revulsion rolls around the world. Approval ratings for incumbent 
leaders areeverywhere collapsing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/era-globalisation-brexit-eu-britain-economic-frustration>
. Symbols, slogans and sensation trump facts and nuanced argument. One in six 
Americans now believe thatmilitary rule would be a good idea 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/world/americas/western-liberal-democracy.html>
. From all this I draw the following, peculiar conclusion: no country with a 
McDonald’s can remain a democracy.

Globalisation as we know it is over – and Brexit is the biggest sign yet | 
Ruchir Sharma
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/era-globalisation-brexit-eu-britain-economic-frustration>
Twenty years ago, the New York Times columnist Thomas Friedman proposed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/12/08/opinion/foreign-affairs-big-mac-i.html> his 
“golden arches theory of conflict prevention”.This holds that 
<http://www.thomaslfriedman.com/the-lexus-and-the-olive-tree/> “no two 
countries that both have McDonald’s have ever fought a war against each other 
since they each got their McDonald’s”.

Friedman’s was one of several end-of-history narratives suggesting that 
global capitalism would lead to permanent peace.He claimed 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1996/12/08/opinion/foreign-affairs-big-mac-i.html> that 
it might create “a tip-over point at which a country, by integrating with the 
global economy, opening itself up to foreign investment and empowering its 
consumers, permanently restricts its capacity for troublemaking and promotes 
gradual democratisation and widening peace”. He didn’t mean that McDonald’s 
ends war, but that its arrival in a nation symbolised the transition.

In using McDonald’s as shorthand for the forces tearing democracy apart, I am, 
like him, writing figuratively. I do not mean that the presence of the burger 
chain itself is the cause of the decline of open, democratic societies (though 
it has played its part in Britain, using our defamation laws againstits critics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2005/feb/15/food.foodanddrink>). Nor do I 
mean that countries hosting McDonald’s will necessarily mutate into 
dictatorships.

The old forms and forums still exist, but their power seeps away, re-emerging 
where we can no longer reach it

What I mean is that, under the onslaught of the placeless, transnational 
capital that McDonald’s exemplifies, democracy as aliving system withers and 
dies <http://www.polity.co.uk/book.asp?ref=0745633153>. The old forms and 
forums still exist – parliaments and congresses remain standing – but the power 
they once contained seeps away, re-emerging where we can no longer reach it.

The political power that should belong to us has flitted into confidential 
meetings with the lobbyists and donors who establish the limits of debate and 
action. It has slipped into the diktats of the IMF and the European Central 
Bank, which respond not to the people butto the financial sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/07/greece-financial-elite-democracy-liassez-faire-neoliberalism>
. It has been transported, under armed guard, into the icy fastness of Davos, 
where Friedman finds so warm a welcome (even when he’stalking cobblers 
<http://fusion.net/story/40256/what-on-earth-was-thomas-friedman-talking-about/>
).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmichael-sheen-brexit-owen-jones-video-interview&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Michael%20Sheen%3A%20'Brexit's%20message%20appealed%20to%20abandoned%20communities'%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmichael-sheen-brexit-owen-jones-video-interview>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Michael%20Sheen%3A%20%27Brexit%27s%20message%20appealed%20to%20abandoned%20communities%27%20%E2%80%93%20video%20interview&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fmichael-sheen-brexit-owen-jones-video-interview&media=>
Michael Sheen: ‘Brexit’s message appealed to abandoned communities’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/video/2016/nov/01/michael-sheen-brexit-owen-jones-video-interview>
Above all, the power that should belong to the people is being crushed by 
international treaty. Contracts such as Nafta, Ceta the proposed TransPacific 
Partnership andTrade in Services Agreement 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trade_in_Services_Agreement> and the failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/germany-trump-ttip-trade-deal> 
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership are crafted behind closed doors 
in discussionsdominated by corporate lobbyists 
<http://corporateeurope.org/sites/default/files/businesseurope-uschamber-paper.pdf>
. And those lobbyists are able to slip in clauses no informed electorate would 
ever approve of, such as the establishment ofopaque offshore tribunals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
, through which corporations can bypass national courts, challenge national 
laws and demand compensation for the results of democratic decisions.

These treaties limit the scope of politics, prevent states changing social 
outcomes and drive down labour rights, consumer protection, financial 
regulation and the quality of neighbourhoods. Theymake a mockery of sovereignty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/sovereignty-corporations-liam-fox-eu>
. Anyone who forgets that striking them down was one of Donald Trump’s main 
promises will fail to understand why people were prepared to risk so much in 
electing him.

At the national level too, the McDonald’s model destroys meaningful democracy. 
Democracy depends on reciprocal belief, trust and belonging: the conviction 
that you belong to the nation and the nation belongs to you. The McDonald’s 
model, by rooting out attachment, could not have been better designed to erase 
that perception.

Sovereignty? This government will sell us to the highest bidder | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/27/sovereignty-corporations-liam-fox-eu>
As Tom Wolfe observes in his novel A Man in Full 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/1998/nov/07/fiction.tomwolfe>, “the only way 
you could tell you were leaving one community and entering another was when the 
franchise chains started repeating and you spotted another 7-Eleven, another 
Wendy’s, another Costco, another Home Depot”. The alienation and anomie this 
destruction of place promotes are enhanced by the casualisation of labour and a 
spirit-crushing regime of monitoring, quantification and assessment (at which
McDonald’s excels 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books/about/Working_for_McDonald_s_in_Europe.html?id=KKWtTdNbgHAC&redir_esc=y>
). Public health disasters contribute to the sense of rupture. After falling 
for decades, for instance, death rates among middle-aged white Americans arenow 
rising 
<http://www.hamiltonproject.org/papers/the_changing_landscape_of_american_life_expectancy>
. Among the likely causes are obesity and diabetes, opioid addiction and liver 
failure, diseases whose carriers are corporations.

Corporations, released from democratic constraints, drive us towards climate 
breakdown, an urgent threat to global peace. McDonald’s has done more than its 
fair share: beef production is among themost powerful causes of climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/22/festive-christmas-meal-long-haul-flight-meats-damaging-planet>
.

In his book The Globalisation Paradox 
<https://www.hks.harvard.edu/centers/cid/publications/books/the-globalization-paradox-democracy-and-the-future-of-the-world-economy>
, the Harvard economist Dani Rodrik describes a political trilemma. Democracy, 
national sovereignty and hyperglobalisation, he argues, are incompatible. You 
cannot have all three at once. McDonaldisation crowds out domestic politics. 
Incoherent and dangerous as it often is, the global backlash against mainstream 
politicians is at heart an attempt to reassert national sovereignty against the 
forces of undemocratic globalisation.

An article about the history of the Democratic party 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/10/how-democrats-killed-their-populist-soul/504710/>
 by Matt Stoller in the Atlantic reminds us that a similar choice was 
articulated by the great US jurist Louis Brandeis. “We may have democracy, or 
we may have wealth concentrated in the hands of a few, but we can’t have both,” 
he said. In 1936 the congressman Wright Patman managed to pass a bill against 
the concentration of corporate power. Among his targets wasA&P 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Great_Atlantic_%26_Pacific_Tea_Company>, the 
giant chainstore of his day, which was hollowing out towns, destroying local 
retailers and turning “independent tradesmen into clerks”.

How cities took over the world: a history of globalisation spanning 4,000 years
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/dec/01/how-cities-took-over-the-world-a-history-of-globalisation-spanning-4000-years>
In 1938 President Roosevelt warned that “the liberty of a democracy is not 
safe if the people tolerate the growth of private power to a point where it 
becomes stronger than their democratic state itself. That, in its essence, is 
fascism.” The Democrats saw concentrated corporate power as a form of 
dictatorship. They broke up giant banks and businesses and chained the 
chainstores. What Roosevelt, Brandeis and Patman knew has been forgotten by 
those in power, including powerful journalists. But not by the victims of this 
system.

One of the answers to Trump, Putin, Orbán, Erdoğan, Salvini, Duterte, Le Pen, 
Farage and the politics they represent is to rescue democracy from 
transnational corporations. It is to defend the crucial political unit that is 
under assault by banks, monopolies and chainstores: community. It is to 
recognise that there is no greater hazard to peace between nations than a 
corporate model that crushes democratic choice.

Twitter: @GeorgeMonbiot 
<https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
. A fully linked version of this column will be published atmonbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 