
Do they understand what they have signed? Plainly they do not. Governments 
such as ours,now ratifying the Paris agreement on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/theresa-may-uk-ratify-paris-climate-change-agreement-this-year>
, haven’t the faintest idea what it means – either that or they have no 
intention of honouring it.

For the first time we can see the numbers on which the agreement depends, and 
their logic is inescapable. Governments can either meet their international 
commitments or allow the prospecting and development of new fossil fuel 
reserves. They cannot do both.

Existing coal, oil and gas fields will blow carbon budget – study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/23/existing-coal-oil-and-gas-fields-will-blow-carbon-budget-study>
The Paris agreement, struck by 200 nations in December, pledged to hold 
<https://unfccc.int/resource/docs/2015/cop21/eng/l09r01.pdf> “the increase in 
the global average temperature to well below 2C above pre-industrial levels”, 
and aspired to limit it to 1.5C. So what does this mean? Thanks toa report by 
Oil Change International 
<http://priceofoil.org/content/uploads/2016/09/OCI_the_skys_limit_2016_FINAL_2.pdf>
, we can now answer this question with a degree of precision.

Using the industry’s own figures, it shows that burning the oil, gas and coal 
in the fields and mines that is already either in production or being 
developed, is likely to take the global temperature rise beyond 2C. And even if 
all coal mining were to be shut down today, the oil and gas lined up so far 
would take it past 1.5C. The notion that we can open any new reserves, whether 
by fracking for gas, drilling for oil or digging for coal, without scuppering 
the Paris commitments is simply untenable.

There are tax breaks for North Sea oil and gas companies, and fracking, but 
not of course for renewables

This is not an extreme precautionary case. Quite the opposite, in fact: the 
report uses the hazard assessment adopted by the United Nations. This means a 
66% chance of preventing 2C of global warming and a 50% chance of preventing 
1.5C – an assumption of risk that in any other field would be regarded as 
reckless.

Even so, to prevent the odds from becoming any worse, a 2C target means that 
we can use only around 85% of the fossil fuel that’s currently good to go, 
while a 1.5C target means we can extract little more than a third (the figures 
are explainedby the US environmentalist Bill McKibben in an article in New 
Republic <https://newrepublic.com/article/136987/recalculating-climate-math>). 
So what’s the point of developing new reserves if the Paris agreement precludes 
the full extraction of those already in production?

The only means of reconciling governments’ climate change commitments with the 
opening of new coal mines, oilfields and fracking sites is carbon capture and 
storage: extracting carbon dioxide from the exhaust gases of power stations and 
burying it in geological strata. But despite vast efforts to demonstrate the 
technology, it has not been proved at scale,and appears to be going nowhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/25/uk-cancels-pioneering-1bn-carbon-capture-and-storage-competition>
. Our energy policies rely on vapourware.

As for the belief among some governments that they can overshoot the climate 
targets, then at a later date suck carbon dioxide out of the air: this depends 
on scenarios that would beno less realistic if they involved sorcery 
<http://kevinanderson.info/blog/the-hidden-agenda-how-veiled-techno-utopias-shore-up-the-paris-agreement/>
. The most popular proposal is to combine the capture and storage phantasm with 
biofuel plantations covering an area between one and three times the size of 
India, then harvesting the material they grow, burning it in power stations and 
burying the emissions. The use of a mere few hundred million hectares of 
fertile land would have to compete with all the other problems the biofuel wand 
is meant to magic away, such as the use of petroleum in cars and kerosene in 
planes, as well as the minor issue of feeding the world’s people.

All this nonsense is a substitute for a simple proposition: stop digging. 
There is only one form of carbon capture and storage that is scientifically 
proven, and which can be deployed immediately: leaving fossil fuels in the 
ground.

Not developing fossil fuel reserves is much easier than breaking them open 
then having to close them later. As theOil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/oil> Change report points out, shutting 
working mines and wellheads means confronting and compensating companies that 
have invested heavily in production, and retraining and re-employing the people 
who would lose work. Some of this will have to happen anyway, if governments 
are to honour their promise in Paris. But their effort should be to minimise 
pain, not to extend it.

Their choices are as follows. First: a gradual, managed decline of existing 
production and its replacement with renewable energy and low-carbon 
infrastructure, which offer great potential for employment. Second: allowing 
fossil fuel production to continue at current rates for a while longer, 
followed by a sudden and severe termination of the sector, with dire 
consequences for both jobs and economies. Third: continuing to produce fossil 
fuels as we do today, followed by climate breakdown. Why is this a hard choice 
to make?

Our governments seem determined to choose option three. Globally, some $14tr 
is being lined up 
<http://priceofoil.org/content/uploads/2016/09/OCI_the_skys_limit_2016_FINAL_2.pdf>
for new fossil fuel extraction and freight over the next 20 years. Governments 
are intervening all right: to try to crush political opposition to these 
projects, while using public money to protect them from market forces.

Shale gas ban 'would cement decline of UK manufacturing'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/27/shale-gas-fracking-cement-decline-uk-manufacturing-ineos>
In Britain, for example, tax rebates for North Sea oil and gas companies are 
so generous that over the next five years the government is likely to give them 
around£5bn more than it receives in revenues 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/newsbysector/energy/oilandgas/12196260/North-Sea-oil-to-post-losses-of-1-billion-a-year.html>
. There are similartax breaks for fracking companies 
<http://energydesk.greenpeace.org/2016/05/25/oil-tax-how-the-uk-taxpayer-could-spend-millions-funding-the-hunt-for-fracked-gas/>
 – but not, of course, for renewable energy.

While local people have been granted a special veto over wind turbines 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/giving-local-people-the-final-say-over-onshore-wind-farms>
, the government has awarded itselfspecial powers to override local decisions 
on fracking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/13/government-will-step-in-if-councils-dont-fast-track-fracking-applications>
, to ensure that it goes ahead. And if brute power is insufficient, it is 
backed up by bribery: the prime minister, Theresa May, has offered local people
cash payments of up to £10,000 per household 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/06/fracking-local-people-payments-theresa-may>
 from the tax revenues (if there are any) that fracking is meant to generate. 
There is no such entitlement to share the income from wind power: we wouldn’t 
want to encourage it.

There’s a reason for this blatant asymmetry: fossil fuel companies are rich 
and powerful. Preventing climate breakdown means defending democracy from 
plutocrats. It’s their interests versus the rest of humanity’s.

So when May announced at the UN last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/sep/20/un-general-assembly-obama-final-address-syria-ceasefire-refugees-live-updates>
 that she was ratifying the Paris agreement, perhaps what she meant was that 
she was going to reverse her government’s suite of energy policies. Or maybe it 
wasn’t that. Perhaps she meant that she doesn’t intend to do anything except 
sign a piece of paper. Has she even considered the implications of this choice? 
I doubt it. After all, it’s only the future of life on Earth that’s at stake.


 