
“I’m obsessed with why people are so scared about sex,” Non Pratt muses. She 
has never been one to pull punches. Her acclaimed debut novel,Trouble 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trouble.html> follows Hannah, a 15-year-old 
girl who gets pregnant. Although recent statistics show teenage pregnancy rates 
in the UK falling closer into line with the rest of Europe, it’s a topic that 
still interests Pratt for what it reveals about our attitudes to teenagers and 
sex.

Pratt found the idea for Trouble while listening to the radio, she explains. 
“Somebody was getting really angry about teenagers being pregnant, but they 
were talking about pregnant teenagers as if there was a type of person who got 
pregnant. I got really angry – there is not one type of person who gets 
pregnant,” she says. “I got angry enough that I wanted to write something where 
Hannah looks like the type of person who gets pregnant, but when you look 
closer you see that she’s a human being. There’s no such thing as types, she’s 
not of the demographic you might expect.”

Ever since she was 14, the age she started writing, Pratt has been “obsessed” 
with society’s attitudes to teenagers and sex, and “how we treat teenagers who 
are both sexually confident or sexually curious”. While today’s culture is 
hyper-sexualised, Pratt believes that young people are still encouraged to be 
frightened of sex. “We still talk about it as though sex is this terrible, 
terrifying thing, when actually it’s the one thing that you want your 
teenagers, as adults, to grow into adults to enjoy,” she says. “All of the 
other things that people worry about like drugs, alcohol, violence – those 
things can kill you. You don’t want people to grow up and be good at taking 
drugs. But you actually do want someone to grow up and be good at having sex, 
because it’s an important and healthy part of living.”

Trouble by Non Pratt review – a refreshing take on teenage pregnancy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/may/10/trouble-non-pratt-review-teenage-fiction>
Along with alcohol and swearing, her novels portray sex candidly, honestly. 
The opening lines of Trouble, for example, are: “I had sex with Fletch again 
last night. It was all right, better than last time anyway […] We didn’t cuddle 
afterwards – that’s not really how it is with us.”

Is the brutal honesty in her fiction intended as educational, trying to make 
up for an absence of open discussion in schools? Pratt believes the efficacy of 
courses such as the UK’sPSHE 
<https://www.tes.com/articles/teachers-tv-secondary-pshe-resources-sex-and-relationship-education>
 can be “so hit and miss – there are some schools who are good at opening up a 
discussion, and there are others who just pretend that it isn’t happening. I 
just don’t think that it should be a lottery.” What could be done to improve 
it? “You should be talking about consent, and you should be talking about 
sexuality all the time; the ridiculous assumption that everybody’s heterosexual 
is a dangerous and unhelpful precedent. We should be dismantling that through 
schools.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fnon-pratt-im-obsessed-with-why-people-are-so-scared-about-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b5b1b401bd11c672cc691efe94c0a52febaea43%2F0_0_1724_2362%2F1724.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Non%20Pratt%3A%20'I%E2%80%99m%20obsessed%20with%20why%20people%20are%20so%20scared%20about%20sex'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fnon-pratt-im-obsessed-with-why-people-are-so-scared-about-sex%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Non%20Pratt%3A%20%27I%E2%80%99m%20obsessed%20with%20why%20people%20are%20so%20scared%20about%20sex%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2F2016%2Faug%2F23%2Fnon-pratt-im-obsessed-with-why-people-are-so-scared-about-sex%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b5b1b401bd11c672cc691efe94c0a52febaea43%2F0_0_1724_2362%2F1724.jpg>
 The cover of Non Pratt’s latest novel, Unboxed. Photograph: Barrington Stoke 
Friendship rather than sexuality, however, is the strongest dynamic across all 
of Pratt’s novels. Her latest, Unboxed, concerns a group of friends who reunite 
to open a time capsule created before one of them died. Remix features two best 
friends who attend a music festival after messy breakups, and at the core of 
Trouble is an intriguing friendship between Hannah and a boy named Aaron, who 
pretends to be the father of her baby while she hides the true father’s 
identity.



“I think friendship is an underrated theme in children’s literature, and in 
adult literature too,” Pratt muses. “When I go on school visits, I ask who has 
had a romantic relationship and perhaps a smattering of hands will go up. Then 
I ask who’s had a friendship, and every hand goes up! A friendship is one of 
the most important relationships you can have, and the only time I’ve ever been 
truly heartbroken is when I stopped being friends with someone. It was the 
worst feeling, it took me much longer to recover from than any breakup. I want 
to write about this in books and I want to explore that bond that you develop 
between people and how elastic, or brittle it is.” And she’s going to; her 
fourth novel, Truth or Dare – due out in 2017 – follows two friends who begin 
performing dares for money. Prepare for more harsh truths.
 