
The north-south divide on house prices has become a gaping chasm. While the 
typical UK home is now worth £78,881, 8.8% more than a year ago, striking 
regional variations are making such averages meaningless. And nowhere is this 
more apparent than in the differing fortunes of London and Scotland. The 
average home in Greater London is now worth £22,000 more than a year ago, while 
in Scotland it has fallen in value by £904 over the same period.

The figures, from the Halifax, cover the period July 1 to September 30. They 
reveal that prices in London rose by a hefty 8.9% in the third quarter of this 
year - the highest quarterly rise ever recorded - and house prices are now 
20.6% higher than 12 months ago. The average London price-tag is now £131,353. 
A year ago it was £109,243.

However, while a standard semi in Bexley or Havering will cost you around 
£118,000 - £120,000, an equivalent property in leafy Barnet or Richmond upon 
Thames would set you back more than double this (£262,000 and £306,000 
respectively).

Prices also rose sharply in the rest of the south-east and are 13.3% up on a 
year ago. Hotspots include Reading and Slough, where typical semis go for 
around £130,000 - £140,000. A similar picture emerged in the south-west, where 
prices are up 12.6% on this time last year. The average price-tag there is 
£84,719.

In East Anglia prices jumped 5.5% in the third quarter, lifting the annual 
increase to 10.1%, and they are rising in Wales, where the average price is now 
£61,230 - 6.5% up on a year ago.

The east midlands has enjoyed strong price growth in recent months - great 
news for homeowners but not so good for would-be buyers.Property 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> values are 9.1% higher than 12 
months ago. The annual increase in the west midlands is only 4.1%, but the 
signs are that things are gathering pace. For the amount a standard semi in 
Solihull would cost you - £102,450 - you could buy two equivalent £49,900 
properties in Stoke-on-Trent.

The largest quarterly rise of the three regions of northern England was seen 
in the north-west. Average price-tag there is £59,868. Prices in the north of 
England, which includes Newcastle upon Tyne and Durham, are now higher than 
their previous peak in the late 80s/early 90s. But average property costs in 
Yorkshire & Humberside are up only slightly on a year ago.

In Scotland, the average price is down 1.3% on a year ago, from £61,251 to 
£60,347 - further proof that the much-touted recovery of the market has yet to 
touch all parts of the UK. Meanwhile, house prices in Northern Ireland have 
become very volatile recently. Average prices plunged 4.2% in the period April 
to June this year, then shot up 8.6% in July to September, with the average now 
£66,000.
 