
Elections to a new Northern Ireland assembly will take place on 2 March, James 
Brokenshire has announced. TheNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> secretary was forced to call 
the poll after 5pm on Monday when it became clear there would be no 11th-hour 
deal to bring the Democratic Unionist party and Sinn Féin together to save 
power sharing in the region.

Brokenshire was obliged by law to declare an election date after the deadline 
this evening, drawning a curtain over nearly a decade of cross-community 
coalitions between unionists and nationalists.


The present assembly will sit until 26 January, when it will be dissolved. The 
new election takes place just 10 months after the previous one, which resulted 
in a joint Sinn Féin-Democratic Unionist party government.

The devolved administration fell after a row over a bungled green energy 
scheme and the Democratic Unionist first minister’s refusal to temporarily 
stand down from her post.


Sinn Féin earlier on Monday refused to nominate a new deputy first minister in 
the Stormont parliament, thus triggering an election. The Democratic Unionists 
had once again put forwardArlene Foster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/arlene-foster> as first minister.


But under the complex rules of power sharing in the province, a government 
could not survive if the main political representatives of one section of the 
community refused to participate in the administration.

Announcing the election, the Northern Ireland secretary said: “I am now 
obliged under relevant legislation to propose a date for the next Northern 
Ireland assembly election. The election seeks to have the views of the future 
of Northern Ireland and bring people back together again and assures those 
lines of communications remain open.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsinn-fein-election-northern-ireland-first-minister-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sinn%20F%C3%A9in%20has%20forced%20an%20election%2C%20says%20NI%20first%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsinn-fein-election-northern-ireland-first-minister-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sinn%20F%C3%A9in%20has%20forced%20an%20election%2C%20says%20NI%20first%20minister%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsinn-fein-election-northern-ireland-first-minister-video&media=>
Sinn Féin has forced an election, says NI first minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/16/sinn-fein-election-northern-ireland-first-minister-video>
Just before the collapse of the power-sharing coalition between Sinn Féin and 
the DUP, Theresa May telephonedMartin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/martin-mcguinness> and Arlene Foster to 
encourage them to reach a last-minute deal to save the devolved institutions. 
May told them that they needed to do so to strengthen Northern Ireland’s voice 
in the forthcoming Brexit negotiations with the EU.


A spokeswoman for the prime minister said: “She spoke to both Arlene Foster 
and Martin McGuinness to encourage them to use what time was left today to try 
to find a resolution to the situation in Northern Ireland, outlining the 
importance of finding a way forward – particularly in the context of wanting to 
make sure that Northern Ireland has a voice in the UK’s exit from the European 
Union as we approach the critical period before triggering article 50.”

SDLP backs British-Irish rule if Northern Ireland devolution fails
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/northern-ireland-british-irish-rule-sdlp-dup-sinn-fein>
Her appeal failed to sway Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein>, and the party declined to 
nominate a deputy first minister. Shortly afterwards, Foster appeared in 
Stormont’s Great Hall surrounded by DUP stalwarts including several of the 
party’s MPs at Westminster. She said: “Northern Ireland does not need an 
election; it needs stable government.”


The first minister said Sinn Féin had forced the election on Northern Ireland. 
“They have forced an election that risks Northern Ireland’s future and 
stability and which suits nobody but themselves,” she said.

If the DUP and Sinn Féin are once again returned as the two largest parties in 
the new assembly, the chances of them forming a fresh cross-community 
government appear at this stage to be remote. The atmosphere between the two 
parties remains toxic.


McGuinness, who is in ill health and being treated for a rare condition that 
attacks the heart and other vital organs, resigned as deputy first minister 
last Monday. He took the action in protest at Foster’s refusal to step aside 
while a public inquiry is held into the renewable heat incentive (RHI), an 
energy scheme whose costs have spiralled out of control.


It is unclear whether McGuinness will stand himself as a candidate in the 
forthcoming electoral contest. While Sinn Féin is keen for his name to be on 
the party’s slate in Foyle, it is understood that his family are concerned 
about his health and the impact a bruising election campaign could have on it.


If McGuinness does not stand again, one of the frontrunners to succeed him is 
Michelle O’Neill, the Sinn Féin health minister in the outgoing government. On 
Monday she highlighted the difficulties in piecing together a new power sharing 
arrangement with the DUP.


“Sinn Féin will only be part of institutions which work and deliver for all in 
the community,” she said. “There can be no return to the status quo. If 
something is broken, you stop and you fix it.”


The cross-community Alliance party said it wanted to keep the focus during the 
campaign on allegations of corruption and cronyism associated with the RHI 
scheme as well as other scandals. Naomi Long, the Alliance leader, said: “Our 
party isn’t to blame for the snap election called as a result of the DUP’s and 
Sinn Féin’s mess.

“But unlike some, we are not running scared of an election. We will be facing 
the people confident – and offering the electorate an alternative to the 
secrecy, corruption and cronyism that they are sick of at Stormont.”
 