
It’s time – nay, high time – to get a little more interested in Ofcom as a 
tide of new challenges sweeps in. Worried aboutRupert and his merger mania 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/murdoch-sky-bid-competition-complaints-rights-deals>
? Call for Ofcom. Worried aboutBritain’s sluggardly broadband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/16/more-than-1m-homes-still-dont-have-decent-broadband-says-ofcom>
? Call for Ofcom. Worried over who should regulate the BBC as its trust goes 
bust? Call for Ofcom.

Yet this, remember, is a bouncing Blair baby (born 2003) that all good Tories 
are supposed to want cut down to size. Here’s an exultant PM Cameron in 2010: 
“With a Conservative government, Ofcom as we know it will cease to exist … Its 
remit will be restricted to its narrow technical and enforcement roles.” 
Huffle-puffle. All British broadcasting – who shall own it, who shall run it, 
who shall explore its future – is now effectively superintended from one big 
office in Southwark Bridge Road. Politicians come and go: butOfcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> goes marching on.

How has this unlikely triumph for onrushing regulation been contrived? By 
shrewd, punctilious operation (you might fairly say). By an appointments policy 
that draws the media and communications industries’ great and good into a broad 
church. But also by a sense of inevitability. For every time something goes 
wrong in a headline-catching area, Whitehall looks around for a problem-solver 
or long-grass specialist. Ah! Here’s Ofcom.

Lord Justice Leveson wanted to make it the flashing blade of probity for Fleet 
Street, until even the politicians protested. The moment theBBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc> slid into another thrashing crisis, the 
stripping-away of its self-regulatory powers became inevitable. Another 
empire-builder. And who, out in the media world, would want to argue with that 
– or anything else that Ofcom decrees? Heads down; lips buttoned; prudence and 
self-preservation rule OK.

But now, perhaps, you can feel such restraints beginning to fray a little. It 
will be difficult for Ofcom, if ministerially summoned to action, to block 
Murdoch’s bid to buy the whole of Sky this time. And as for the BBC, expect hot 
potatoes by the lorryload.

So it’s instructive to play Dacre of the Mail or Gallagher of the Sun, and 
imagine what they might say when a BBC dust-up lands at Ofcom’s door.

Hear a screech of brakes turn into screams. For what is this monster, as the 
scales drop from tabloid eyes? Its supreme chair, the monarch of the top board, 
is a former director of BBC policy planning. The subsidiary content board that 
will handle the vast bulk of BBC regulation is currently chaired by Nick 
Pollard, a former BBC (and almost everything else) hand recalled to the colours 
to report on the corporation’s Jimmy Savile coverage.

Those who sit alongside him include a former BBC news and current affairs 
(Wales); a former BBC head of news and current affairs (Northern Ireland); a 
former BBC controller of public policy; a couple of experienced BBC freelance 
broadcasters – and now, recruited to run the content group, a former deputy 
boss of the BBC newsroom and controller of News 24.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fofcom-nothing-can-stop-except-perhaps-bbc-regulation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f5d03dd89a66a9e04842542f82a218ed9cd3994%2F0_357_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nothing%20can%20stop%20the%20mighty%20Ofcom%3A%20except%2C%20perhaps%2C%20the%20BBC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fofcom-nothing-can-stop-except-perhaps-bbc-regulation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nothing%20can%20stop%20the%20mighty%20Ofcom%3A%20except%2C%20perhaps%2C%20the%20BBC&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmedia%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fofcom-nothing-can-stop-except-perhaps-bbc-regulation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f5d03dd89a66a9e04842542f82a218ed9cd3994%2F0_357_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Nick Pollard: one of many senior Ofcom figures with a stint at the BBC on his 
CV. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Observer 
This wasn’t supposed to happen, of course. Sir David Clementi, the City big 
name called into advise government on dismembering BBC regulation, wanted Ofcom 
to create a separate mirror-image of its content board so that tackling 
corporation regulation could be a more concentrated, transparent task. But 
Ofcom quietly brushed Clementi aside a few months ago. The BBC is to be just 
another weighty job grafted onto existing structures (with 50 new signings to 
staff it recruited already).

You can feel the Mail’s ancestral rage rising already. Think quango bloat. 
Think supposed supreme court prejudice squared. And if, perchance, the next row 
is yet another Brexit bomb, then note that Sharon White, Ofcom’s chief 
executive, is the wife of Robert Chote, the head of the Office for Budget 
Responsibility whose forecasts of post-EU financial hardship so outraged mighty 
media Leavers. What’s more, Sharon was a top Treasury mandarin whisked over to 
Ofcom on George Osborne’s watch – and just look who sits there at her boardroom 
side: Graham Mather, chairman of the European Policy Forum. Cue 
nest-of-elite-vipers diatribe.

Look at Leveson, with his almost obsessive anxiety to keep newspaper editors 
or political players away from press regulation. Then ask yourself whether 
Ofcom’s nominating committee (choosing candidates, giving ministers only 
approval rights for topmost posts) is Leveson-compliant. Would two out of the 
last three Ofcom chiefs have been allowed to come straight out of Blair’s 
Downing Street? Is it right that they’re both now employed in private companies 
as lofty guides to regulatory navigation?

“Ed Richards was chief executive of Ofcom, the UK media and telecoms 
regulator, for eight years. In that role, he worked closely with the European 
commission and was also vice-chair of the Body of European Regulators for 
Electronic Communications,” says Flint Global, where Ed is managing partner. 
“Ed leads on advice to clients on regulatory challenges, competition and policy 
development.”

Much of such criticism, perhaps, may be deemed pretty steaming detritus. But 
that wouldn’t stop mighty Dacre-lashed waves of it coming down the Thames at 
storm time. And nor does it make Ofcom, in history and present operation, 
totally fit for any possible practice. Our media world is a tight little entity 
where job-waltzes between the BBC/C4 public sector and private areas of ITV and 
indie production companies are the absolute norm.

In this world, everyone knows everyone, and everyone has a back story. Will 
that make regulating Broadcasting House and its output easy? No. It creates a 
new swirl of motives, doubts and potential sorrows. Too close, but also too 
distant, for comfort.

Good luck to Ofcom on the great journey of 2017, then. Good luck to all called 
to play BBC guardian in times of stress. But as for peace, calm and harmony on 
Southwark Bridge … Look down into the murky waters. You ain’t seen nothing yet.
 