
The way Greg tells it, it was like a trapdoor swinging open beneath him. One 
day, he was a promising young academic. The next, his fixed-term contract was 
up, his wife was ill – and barely any money was coming in to cover the 
mortgage, to pay for the groceries, to keep the entire show on the road. The 
trapdoor was wide open; now it would take everything he had not to plunge 
through it.


Universities accused of 'importing Sports Direct model' for lecturers' pay
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/universities-accused-of-importing-sports-direct-model-for-lecturers-pay>
Greg wanted me to hear his story, but I did not find it easy to sit through. 
For him, it’s both a warning of what can happen to any academic living on 
casual contracts – and a source of shame. Hardly any of his colleagues at the 
University of Nottingham know and this piece will not give his real name or 
identifying details. “There’s a lot of snobbery in academia,” he says, 
imagining a faculty drinks and some brogue-wearing professor discovering his 
background. “That one cutting remark.”


Yet it begins conventionally enough, in the middle of the last decade, with a 
grant for some more university research about to come through. Except it 
didn’t. The plans he and his wife had made were suddenly dust. They had always 
been “tight”, Greg remembers, even paying off some of the mortgage. But as an 
academic on a casual contract, his only safety net had been a little saving and 
a lot of ambition – and now the couple’s finances went “from the comfortable to 
the calamitous”.


In a rush to bring in money, he became what one advert describes as an 
“outdoor cleaning operative” or, as he calls it, a binman. During his part-time 
shifts, he had to keep clean an entire out-of-town retail park – from the 
carpark out front to the bins by the shopfronts to the skips and bushes around 
the back. It was the beginning of what he calls “the humbling”. His PhD counted 
for nothing; what others saw were his metal litter-picker, and his outfit.


A few months earlier, he had been writing scholarly papers. Now he was picking 
up used sanitary pads. Shoppers would see him sweeping away fag-ends and lob 
theirs right by him to collect. Strangers would call him “scum”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f134c4ab7d8a15681f6c1e9c025ccfe98b41f4%2F0_147_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20'I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20%27I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F51f134c4ab7d8a15681f6c1e9c025ccfe98b41f4%2F0_147_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 The grounds of the University of Nottingham. Photograph: Alamy 
It was humiliation, on starvation wages. He would crawl into supermarket skips 
for food to take home, keep his eyes peeled for dropped coins. Sometimes he 
would get caught. Once he tried over and again to pick up a 50-pence piece. 
Looking up, he saw a cluster of workers watching: they had superglued it to the 
ground. Now they were laughing. Then they chucked coppers at him.

These memories Greg calls his “scars”. They are not the only things that stay 
with him. In one email, he told me: “I am still obsessed with money because I 
once had to shovel shit to earn it.” He didn’t mean it as a figure of speech.


Over time, he took on more work: one day of teaching at Nottingham and another 
at a rival university. These were casual contracts: short-term, and paying him 
only by the hour. As such, they offered more experience than income. So he also 
did some gardening and, where possible, wrote for a local newspaper.


He was pulling five jobs, working up to 70 hours a week. And he was still only 
making £22,000 to £23,000 a year before tax – below the national average.


What’s exceptional about Greg’s story isn’t that he found himself in a 
precarious position – it’s how far he went to escape it. As the Guardian 
reports as part of a series on a new wave of workers in insecure positions, 
more than half of all academics in the UK are on some kind of casual contract. 
According to the latest official figures, 45% of all Nottingham staff either 
teaching students or teaching and researching count as casual labour. The vast 
majority of those are on “atypical” contracts. Like Greg, they may be paid by 
the hour to teach fee-paying undergraduates and mark their essays and exams.


Part-time lecturers on precarious work: 'I don't make enough for rent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/16/part-time-lecturers-on-precarious-work-i-dont-make-enough-for-rent>
It can be gruelling and insecure work. Before talking to Greg, I met Steven 
Parfitt. After five years of teaching history to undergraduates, he has still 
not got a permanent contract – despite excellent student feedback anda string 
of academic publications <http://nottingham.academia.edu/StevenParfitt>. A 
labour historian, he is in effect a 21st-century pieceworker, cobbling together 
casual jobs from different universities across the east Midlands. This 
semester, he will be teaching at Nottingham, Loughborough and Derby. “I 
sometimes spend more time on a train than I do teaching,” he says. Then there’s 
all the research he must do to have a hope of some day landing a permanent 
position.

For all this he earns less than £10,000 a year. In five years he has not had a 
single above-inflation pay rise. During the long summer holidays, when there is 
no teaching or marking to be had, he relies on his partner for income. He holds 
out no hope of buying a home or of starting a family. At 31, many of the rites 
of passage of adulthood are off-limits.


Originally from Auckland, Parfitt once worked as a sorter for the New Zealand 
postal services. That was years back, yet it paid “comfortably more” than he 
earns now.


Tell Greg this and he nods: “I had more rights as a litter-picker than I had 
as a lecturer on fixed contracts. Because at least I got holidays as a 
litter-picker.” What marks him out are two things. First, he had no one to turn 
to for extra funds. His wife was too ill to earn much and his parents were also 
hard up. Despite that, he wanted to cling on to his threadbare middle-class 
lifestyle: the house, the car, the TV. Most of all, “I craved security. I had 
to make sure I wouldn’t be cast further down.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae31e3b2d844a2c739f1a813e9d32fda1d5544ca%2F528_0_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20'I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20%27I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fae31e3b2d844a2c739f1a813e9d32fda1d5544ca%2F528_0_2953_1772%2F2953.jpg>
 University of Nottingham’s Jubilee campus extension. Photograph: Make/Ken 
Shuttleworth Architect 
So he would “wake like a frightened rabbit” at 2.45am and get into work for 
about 3.30am. In the dark and cold and wet, he would clean the retail park. 
Just before the shoppers came, he would go home, run a bath and fall asleep 
there. He would wake up with a shiver when the water went cold.


“That was the signal to get in a suit, get in my car and get to Nottingham.” 
He would park up, catnap in the car for another 20 minutes – then begin a day’s 
teaching. He talks about it like an actor putting on face paint and striding 
onstage. “You were putting on someone else who was bright and cheery and 
engaging. Never any looking back.”


In a timetable that allowed him almost no time to himself, he had one personal 
ritual. On the mornings he drove up the hill into Nottingham’s beautiful 
campus, he would put onWhat I Do by Alan Jackson 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=e1TSjQNJ1As> and sing along. “Corny country 
and western,” he tells me.

Afterwards, I had a listen. It’s a simple lyric about holding on to one’s 
dreams that begins: “I’ve been a waiter, a roofer, a clerk / I’ve shovelled 
manure till my pride hurt.” It ends: “So I count my blessings when I step up to 
sing / Cause there are so many people who would give anything / To do what I 
do.”


Neither of Greg’s parents went to university, and now he was doing the most 
menial jobs to pay for an academic career. For someone who even now doesn’t 
feel like he belongs in “snobbish” higher education, it must have been so 
tempting to give up on his dreams and get something steadier. That song 
reminded him “how privileged I am to have managed to get a job here. To get my 
foot in the door.”


Besides, there were “a hundred talented people” with PhDs and publications who 
could take his place. “You’re so fearful.”


Greg is proud of his university, Nottingham. It is one of the biggest and most 
prestigious in Britain. It is expanding fast – into China, Malaysia and academy 
schools. School visitors on open days are shown anew £40m sports centre 
<http://www.nottinghampost.com/take-a-look-around-university-of-nottingham-s-new-40m-sports-village/story-29787729-detail/story.html>
, complete with a 200-machine “fitness suite”. Nearby is a swanky hotel, also 
built by the university. Last year, the vice-chancellor, Sir David Greenaway, 
received a total pay and pension package of £381,000.

Last year, this charitable enterprise made a surplus of £25m. In 2014, it also 
racked up a £25m surplus. Looking at all these millions, critics of the 
university’s vast “reserve army” of academic labour argue that it could afford 
to turn many of those contract positions into permanent jobs.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b138898cb76d5e29d9b6b7b04f22a240f994df%2F0_14_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20'I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nottingham%20academic%20on%20casual%20contract%3A%20%27I%20had%20more%20rights%20as%20a%20binman%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fnottingham-academic-on-casual-contract-i-had-more-rights-as-a-binman%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94b138898cb76d5e29d9b6b7b04f22a240f994df%2F0_14_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A student walks through the campus of the University of Nottingham in Ningbo, 
China. Photograph: Qilai Shen/EPA 
Instead, it gives UK undergraduates paying £9,000 a year in tuition fees (and 
thousands more in living costs) teachers who may not even be earning that much. 
Just like Greg or Parfitt, they may be juggling different classes on entirely 
different courses at universities hundreds of miles apart. There is some 
evidence to suggest that the low pay and insecure employment of the academics 
is affecting the education for which students are paying so much.


Students! Your lecturers are on strike because they are struggling to survive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/may/26/students-your-lecturers-are-on-strike-because-they-are-struggling-to-survive>
I have seen sections of a recent private survey of Nottingham teaching staff 
on casual contracts, undertaken by the local branch of the University and 
College Union. Like Greg, many of the respondents stress that they give their 
best, however much it costs. One comment reads: “Either you stick to the hours 
you are contracted to work and provide substandard teaching for your students, 
or you put in extra hours, effectively reduce your hourly rate of pay, and try 
to be good at your job.”


But others admit they cannot perform as well as they would like. “The lack of 
value that I feel towards me is passed on in my feelings towards the students’ 
education,” writes one. “I have heard people complaining about the fact that 
they are paid 10 minutes to correct one exam, therefore they will use only 10 
minutes to read them,” says another. A third describes being “definitely much 
less inclined to go the extra mile in terms of preparing for a class”.

I asked the University of Nottingham how its use of casual labour affected 
both teachers and students. It issued a statement that reads in part: “In order 
for Nottingham to succeed in a globally competitive environment, it is 
essential that we retain the ability to operate with part of our workforce in a 
flexible mode to enable us to adjust and respond to changes in demand.” Like 
the Universities and Colleges Employers Association, it also argues that, 
measured by hours worked, casual academic staff are far outnumbered by 
full-timers. But the comparison is only superficially revealing: if a casual 
teaches for one day a week, he or she only counts as about one-fifth of a full 
timer. The whole frustration for people like Greg and Parfitt is that they 
can’t get full-time jobs.


Trying to make an impossible situation possible, Greg finally broke down. 
After two years on five jobs, he fell seriously ill. He quit the litter-picking 
and, years later, he still won’t shop in that retail park. The teaching he 
carried on in a state of “permanent exhaustion”. The stress and worry also 
contributed to the end of his marriage. “I would shout a lot and I was angry.”


Then, after over a decade at Nottingham, it offered him a permanent position. 
“You’re meant to feel grateful you’ve escaped,” he says. “Then you think: can I 
ease off a little bit now? Just a little bit?”
 