
Anyone who has attended a gig or a football match is familiar with old-school 
ticket touts. They stand by the station, or pace up and down outside the venue, 
peppering the air with their mantra: “Tickets for the match, I’ll buy or sell.”

How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
While street touts are still a common sight, they’re something of a relic of a 
bygone era. These days, the real money is made by so-called “armchair touts”, 
computer-savvy traders who deploy a variety of techniques to snap up tickets 
the moment they go on sale. Genuine fans are left empty-handed and have no 
choice but to resort to so-called “secondary” ticket sites such asviagogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/26/tickets-trader-viagogo-slammed-for-callous-resale-profiteering>
, Get Me In andStubHub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
.

There, the armchair touts are waiting, offering the highly prized tickets at 
vastly inflated prices. It’s a licence to print money, as aninvestigation by 
the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
revealed last year. But even the armchair traders aren’t at the top of the 
touting food chain though. Far less visible, but more lucrative, is the 
business of touting expensive venuedebentures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/aug/15/investing-debentures-good-idea>, 
boxes and VIP sections.

This weekend it emerged that a box at the Royal Albert Hall, on the same level 
as the Queen’s berth in the royal box,is up for sale for £2.5m 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-38571982>. But will the buyer be 
the same person sitting in the box come concert day? Perhaps not. Harrods 
Estates, which is managing the sale, is likely to field bids from ticket 
agencies, essentially industrial-scale touts, looking to buy the box and make a 
profit by selling seats for in-demand events individually.

This is where the real money is, according to Reg Walker, a security expert 
who works with venues to curb touting and hasgiven evidence to MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/mps-call-for-inquiry-into-ticket-touts-and-resale-websites>
 on the scale of the problem. “It’s been going on for years and there’s not a 
venue in the UK that hasn’t been infiltrated by touts this way,” he said. 
“There’s massive amounts of money to be made because if you’ve got a box, or a 
section of seats, you’ve got them all year round. As a tout, it gets you a 
regular supply of good seats without having to get up early when tickets go on 
sale oruse a bot [automated software] 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/19/touts-using-bots-buy-tickets-face-jail>
 to harvest tickets.”

Until last summer, you’d have been hard-pressed to find a politician willing 
to talk about ticket touting

Some people will be outraged that touts would target a noble institution such 
as the Royal Albert Hall, named for Queen Victoria’s husband and the scene of 
Britain’s annual patriotic chest-thumping event, the Last Night of the Proms. 
It might be a blessing in disguise, though.

Until last summer, you’d have been hard-pressed to find a politician willing 
to talk about ticket touting.Labour MP Sharon Hodgson 
<http://www.sharonhodgson.org/sharon_hodgson_mp_meets_minister_about_ticket_abuse_ahead_of_the_rugby_world_cup>
 served as the sole parliamentary standard-bearer for the issue. After all, it 
was only millennials missing out on gig tickets, and the cultural appetites of 
young people are hardly top of the priority list when you’re trying to win 
votes. But support for a crackdown on touts snowballed in 2016, gathering up 
Tory MPs, as they targeted artists favoured by older, more influential and 
wealthier people.

When touts staged a feeding frenzy on Phil Collins’ show, also at the Albert 
Hall, the issue gained traction. So too with atheatre production of Harry Potter
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/13/harry-potter-cursed-child-ticket-resale-prices>
, a name surely familiar to even the most dog-eared members of the Commons and 
the Lords. Now that tickets for the Royal Albert Hall’s performances byvirtuoso 
pianist Lang Lang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/mar/07/lang-lang-interview-piano-method-concert>
 and David Gilmour are seen to be under threat, perhaps the government will 
finally be minded to act.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DETxmCCsMoD0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DETxmCCsMoD0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DETxmCCsMoD0&media=>
 Will Theresa May now take note of ticket touts? 
Economics professor Michael Waterson completed his review of secondary 
ticketing in May last year. His suggestions included enforcement action against 
anyone who breaches consumer laws. As has beenmade abundantly clear in the 
Guardian and elsewhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/ticket-resale-websites-run-risk-of-fines-cma-launches-investigation-competition-and-markets-authority>
, touts who buy and resell tickets are routinely flouting some of these laws. 
Many ticketing experts insist there is no legal way to resell tickets for 
profit.

Four months after Waterson published his review, he expressed fears that it 
had been “pushed into the long grass” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
. Another four months on and theCompetition and Markets Authority has launched 
a probe into the industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/19/ticket-resale-websites-run-risk-of-fines-cma-launches-investigation-competition-and-markets-authority>
, but the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) remains curiously 
tight-lipped. The department, led by Karen Bradley, says only that it will 
respond “in due course”.

Meanwhile, touts continue to leech off the creative brilliance of Britain’s 
music scene and the popularity of must-have sports events. In an episode of 
Desert Island Discs,Theresa May once revealed herself to be a fan of Abba 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/23/theresa-may-desert-island-discs-dancing-queen>
. Perhaps it will take an Abba comeback tour for her government to realise that 
in this industry the winner takes it all. And the only winners are ticket touts 
making money, money, money.
 