
A market-leading savings bond announced in the autumn statement will hopefully 
encourage other providers to unveil better-paying deals, and could mean the 
government thinks interest rates may rise next year, according to one industry 
expert.

During his speech on Wednesday chancellor Philip Hammond pulled a small rabbit 
out of his hat in the form of agovernment-backed three-year NS&I savings bond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/government-backed-savings-bond-national-savings-investments>
 expected to pay around 2.2% interest, which will go on sale in the spring. The 
Treasury said this was the “indicative” rate, and added: “This may be adjusted 
to reflect market conditions when the product is launched.”

The best current equivalent bond pays 1.63%, and Susan Hannums from 
Savingschampion.co.uk said the fact the government opted for a rate that is 
market-leading but not completely out of reach for other providers could 
encourage competition. “We may see a flurry of activity around that time.”

She added: “Does [the rate] mean they are expecting interest rates to rise 
next year? That might be why they are pricing it around that level.”

Nevertheless, the offer is not going to cause a mass outbreak of excitement, 
and many market commentators said high-interest current accounts still offer 
some of the best returns. Nationwide and Tesco Bank have, respectively, 
accounts paying 5% for 12 months and 3% with no time limit.

However, there was also bad news for savers last week, with figures showing 
cash Isa rates are on the slide. First Direct revealed it is cutting the rate 
on its cash Isa from 0.9% to 0.5% from 10 February 2017. It had only just cut 
the rate from 1.3%.

Cash Isa rates have taken a hammering of late, with information provider 
Moneyfacts saying the average long-term fixed Isa rate has dipped below 1% for 
the first time. This month the figure stood at 0.98% – down from 1.98% a year 
ago. The highest five-year fixed cash Isa rate currently on offer is 1.5% from 
Metro Bank.

Meanwhile, the average no-notice cash Isa rate is now just 0.73%. If you want 
a decent-paying easy-access Isa Coventry building society offers 1.1%. Those 
with cash in what may be the lowest-paying instant-access Isa – NatWest’s 0.01% 
on £1-£24,999 – should probably move it pronto.

On Wednesday, Hammond also confirmed the increase in the annual Isa allowance 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/autumn-statement-2016-documents/autumn-statement-2016>
 from £15,240 to £20,000 from April 2017.
 