
Yes, I still believe that nuclear power can make a useful contribution to 
low-carbon energy. No, I do not believe that the new plant the government has 
just approved atHinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-station-gets-go-ahead>
 is part of that useful contribution. Far from it: this preposterous white 
elephant could scarcely be better designed to persuade people that nuclear 
energy is an expensive and dangerous distraction from the decisions we have to 
make.

Let’s start where all such discussions should start: at the most important 
place. The overwhelming priority for those who make decisions about energy must 
be to avert climate breakdown. They need to keep the lights on, but not by 
sacrificing the future welfare of humanity and Earth’s living systems. It is 
better to light a candle than to curse the darkness. It is also better to curse 
the darkness than to burn your house down.

Nuclear power <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/nuclearpower>, whatever 
its detractors might claim, is a low-carbon energy source, roughly comparable 
to renewables in terms of total emissions. To shut down viable nuclear capacity 
in the midst of a climate change emergency (now, in other words), as Germany 
and Japan have done, is a refined form of madness, especially when at least 
some of that capacity is likely to be replaced by gas or coal, whose carbon 
emissions are much higher. Replacing fossil fuels with renewables, on the 
timescale in which we need to act, is hard enough, without setting yourself the 
additional, unnecessary challenge of also replacing nuclear power.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnuclear-power-no-hinkley-point-yes-atomic-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc333d5160d1b033222c4f00e2fff0fc37e9fbd1%2F1013_613_2136_1281%2F2136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nuclear%20power%20%E2%80%93%20yes%20please.%20Hinkley%20Point%20%E2%80%93%20no%20thanks%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnuclear-power-no-hinkley-point-yes-atomic-energy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nuclear%20power%20%E2%80%93%20yes%20please.%20Hinkley%20Point%20%E2%80%93%20no%20thanks%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fnuclear-power-no-hinkley-point-yes-atomic-energy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc333d5160d1b033222c4f00e2fff0fc37e9fbd1%2F1013_613_2136_1281%2F2136.jpg>
 Security staff block a road leading to the crippled Fukushima nuclear plant in 
Japan. Despite being a nuclear level 7 accident, no one has died as a result of 
radioactive discharge. Photograph: The Asahi Shimbun via Getty Images 
Atomic energy is far less dangerous to human beings and the living world than 
fossil fuels. The dangers of radioactive discharge and nuclear accidents have 
beensystematically exaggerated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/apr/05/anti-nuclear-lobby-misled-world>
 by campaigners. As a result, the dangers of fossil fuel burninghave been 
implicitly downgraded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/16/nuclear-scare-stories-coal-industry>
.

Remember that even the Fukushima disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/fukushima>, a level 7 nuclear accident 
(the highest category), caused by a massive earthquake and tidal wave hitting 
an antiquated reactor, has so far killed no one as a result of radioactive 
discharge, and isunlikely to do so in the future 
<http://www.unis.unvienna.org/unis/en/pressrels/2013/unisinf475.html>. Fossil 
fuel burning, by contrast, kills hundreds of thousands of people every year 
through air pollution, and presents a possibly existential threat to 
civilisation through climate change.

But keeping viable plants open and replacing a superannuated nuclear fleet 
with new plants are slightly different decisions. In the latter case, 
governments have to decide two things: whether nuclear power is the best means 
of replacing the low-carbon energy the old plants were producing and, if so, 
which nuclear technology should best be adopted.

It’s not just that Theresa May’s government has taken the wrong decision – it 
does not appear to have made a decision at all. It has simply adopted the 
proposal on the table, without subjecting it to a serious comparison with the 
alternatives.

Flamanville: France's beleaguered forerunner to Hinkley Point C
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/flamanville-france-edf-nuclear-reactor-hinkley-point-c>
There are several problems with the Hinkley C proposal but the most immediate 
is this: it could be unbuildable. We all know by now of the delays, debacles 
and disasters that have beset attempts to construct the only two plants of the 
same kind, atOlkiluoto 
<https://www.carbonbrief.org/new-nuclear-finlands-cautionary-tale-for-the-uk> 
in Finland andFlamanville 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/flamanville-france-edf-nuclear-reactor-hinkley-point-c>
 in Normandy. The evidence suggests that these are not just bad luck but an 
inherent outcome of the fabulously complex design. AsTony Roulstone 
<http://www.energy.cam.ac.uk/directory/armr2@cam.ac.uk>, who runs the masters 
programme in nuclear engineering at Cambridge, has argued,the plan for Hinkley 
C is 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/sep/18/we-are-pro-nuclear-but-hinkley-c-must-be-scrapped>
 like “building a cathedral within a cathedral”.

If this is true, not only will Hinkley C leave us with a gigantic bill and 
nothing to show for it, it will also have stymied – through the misallocation 
of both financial and political resources – other contributions to the 
low-carbon economy, in the form of renewable power and energy-saving 
technologies, which could be deployed immediately with minimal risk of failure. 
In other words, it is likely to cause energy blight.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Hinkley%20Point%20C%20nuclear%20power%20plant%20gets%20green%20light%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2Fhinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video&media=>
Hinkley Point C nuclear power plant gets green light 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/sep/15/hinkley-point-c-nuclear-power-plant-gets-green-light-video>
And it presents a longer-term risk to rational energy policy. The government 
currently has no idea what to do about the UK’s massive legacy ofnuclear waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/georgemonbiot/2012/feb/02/nuclear-waste>
. Neither of the primary proposed solutions – burial and mixed oxide processing 
(another expensive fiasco) – are politically acceptable.

Sir David MacKay obituary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/18/sir-david-mackay-obituary> 
But there are several potential technologies that raise the possibility of 
addressing three problems at once: safely disposing of nuclear waste; meeting 
the country’s energy needs at low cost; and replacing high-carbon electricity 
with a very low-carbon source. I’m talking about small modular reactors that 
use nuclear waste as fuel.

The late Professor David MacKay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/18/sir-david-mackay-obituary>
, the brilliant and exuberant chief scientist at the previous government’s 
climate change department,endorsed an estimate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/feb/02/nuclear-reactors-consume-radioactive-waste>
 suggesting that one of these potential technologies,the integral fast reactor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/dec/05/sellafield-nuclear-energy-solution>
, could supply all the UK’s energy needs for 500 years by consuming the nuclear 
waste stockpile.

I suspect that May’s unintelligible decision to build the new plant at Hinkley 
will kill nuclear power in Britain, including technologies far more promising 
than the proven formula for chaos she has just chosen.

You might welcome that prospect. If so, you should ask yourself what else 
should be done about our mountain of nuclear waste.
 