
Companies that plague householders with nuisance phone calls and texts face 
fines totalling more than £1m this year, a government watchdog has warned after 
tripling the financial punishment for rogue callers in 2015.

The information commissioner’s office <https://ico.org.uk> is investigating 90 
nuisance cases following thousands of complaints, dominated by calls about 
compensation for payment protection insurance and accidents.

Nuisance calls continue to plague consumers despite crackdown
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/08/nuisance-calls-plague-consumers-despite-crackdown>
The ICO imposed more than £1.1m worth of penalties for nuisance calls and text 
messages in 2015 – up from £330,000 in 2014 – and it already has the same total 
in the pipeline for 2016. The ICO has also identified new pestering topics for 
nuisance firms, including call-blocking services, industrial hearing injury 
claims and oven-cleaning services.

It received about 170,000 complaints in 2015 
<https://ico.org.uk/action-weve-taken/nuisance-calls-and-messages/#trends> from 
people who had received nuisance calls and texts – a slight decrease on 2014, 
when the total was 175,330.

Andy Curry, ICO enforcement group manager, said: “Nuisance marketing calls 
frustrate people. The law is clear around what is allowed, and we’ve been clear 
that we will fine companies who don’t follow the law. That will continue in 
2016. We’ve got 90 ongoing investigations, and £1m worth of fines in the 
pipeline.”


The ICO has the power to impose a maximum fine of £500,000, with the proceeds 
going straight to the Treasury. The fines imposed by the ICO in 2015 include:

 *  A record £200,000 fine in September to Home Energy & Lifestyle Management 
Ltd (Helms), a solar panels company that made6m nuisance calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/30/solar-energy-firm-record-fine-automated-nuisance-calls>
 to householders.

 * A £130,000 fine 
<https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2015/10/online-pharmacy-fined-for-selling-customer-details/>
 in October to Pharmacy 2U Ltd, a company that was selling customer details to 
postal marketing companies. Buyers of the details included a health supplements 
company cautioned for misleading advertising. 
 * A £90,000 fine 
<https://ico.org.uk/action-weve-taken/enforcement/nuisance-call-blocker-ltd-mpn/>
 in November to Nuisance Call Blocker Ltd for making unsolicited marketing 
calls to sell cold-call-blocking devices. The Poole-based company was 
telephoning people to sell a call-blocking service and device to stop the same 
type of calls the company itself was making. 
 *  A £80,000 fine to UKMS Money Solutions Ltd, a PPI claims firm that sent 
1.3m spam text messages to mobile phone numbers it had bought from list brokers.
Firm fined £850,000 for bombarding UK households with nuisance phone calls
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/dec/02/firm-fined-uk-households-nuisance-phone-calls>
The most recent fine was earlier in December when the ICO fined the Telegraph 
Media Group 
<https://ico.org.uk/action-weve-taken/enforcement/telegraph-media-group/> 
£30,000 for sending hundreds of thousands of emails on the day of the general 
election urging readers to vote Conservative, breaking the rules around direct 
marketing. The plea came in a letter from the Daily Telegraph editor, Chris 
Evans, and was attached to the paper’s usual morning e-bulletin.


The ICO was given new powers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/24/companies-nuisance-calls-texts-fined-500000-ico-ofcom>
 this year to crack down on nuisance calls, but the information commissioner,
Christopher Graham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jul/03/spam-calls-texts-180000-complaints-last-year-information-commissioner>
, is now pressing the government to go further. In particular, he wants 
ministers to bring in tougher punishments for individuals who breach data 
protection laws by selling lists of phone numbers to cold-calling companies. 
Currently, the strongest punishment for unlawful disclosure of personal data is 
a fine from a magistrates court.

Richard Lloyd, executive editor of the Which? consumer group, said: “Millions 
of people are still being plagued with nuisance calls so it’s good to see more 
firms being fined for flouting the rules. However we also need to see further 
action including much tougher penalties for senior executives of companies 
making unlawful calls, including board directors being held personally 
accountable.”
 