
Taking a sapling and planting it in the ground to watch it grow offers a 
formative experience for children. It explains, through involvement, how nature 
renews itself. Nurturing a sapling provides lessons on how nature propagates, 
and survives. The care a child provides for a tree designated their own can 
offer a first step into caring for the wider natural world.


The importance of trees: 14 reasons why we need them
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/woodland-trust-64-million-trees/2016/sep/22/the-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them>
Sadly, however, direct contact with nature appears to be a rapidly dwindling 
experience for many young people. A recent survey showed that three-quarters of 
the UK’s childrenspend less time outdoors than prison inmates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/25/three-quarters-of-uk-children-spend-less-time-outdoors-than-prison-inmates-survey>
, while one in nine won’t have set foot in a park, forest or natural environment
for a year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/monitor-of-engagement-with-the-natural-environment-pilot-study-visits-to-the-natural-environment-by-children>
. As more and more children grow up in urban spaces, rarely venturing outdoors, 
spending increasing amounts of screen time in a virtual world of apps, they 
become distanced from the natural playgrounds of park and woodland, and the 
benefits they can offer.

The Woodland Trust cares for over 22,500 hectares of UK woodland. Its 1,000 
sites are free to visit and offer an ideal introduction to the joys of the 
natural world for young minds. However, if you find green spaces are difficult 
to reach, or inaccessible, there are other ways to encourage your child’s love 
of nature.

A child’s first tree 

Planting a tree with your kids is a practical way of connecting them to 
nature. By presenting a sapling to a child as their own, it gives them a chance 
at responsibility. They have a vested interest in keeping the young tree 
growing, and can measure their own height against its development. The 
relationship between the child and the tree could be one that lasts their 
lifetime.

After months of relative dormancy, the first shoots of spring provide an 
exciting reward. As blossoms and, sometimes, fruit first appear, the gardener 
is assured that his or her efforts have been worthwhile. The tree will become 
home to insects – some beneficial, some a nuisance – and the young gardener 
will learn to recognise the difference and how to deal with them. As the tree 
grows, larger creatures will be drawn to its branches, for nectar or fruit. 
This haven would not exist were it not for the child’s efforts.

The one tree is part of a much larger picture. The Woodland Trust is aiming to 
plant 64 million new trees, that’s one tree for every child, and adult, in the 
UK. When a child takes responsibility for one sapling, there is the hope that 
he or she will realise that millions of other trees are worth cherishing and a 
greener country is one worth protecting and enjoying. All you have to do to get 
involved is order the Woodland Trust’sautumn discovery pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/autumnpack/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
.
 