
At the start of his final week in the White House, Barack Obama issued a 
warning to the incoming Trump administration about the value ofthe nuclear deal 
with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers>
.

The Trump interviews: what he said about Brexit, Putin, Israel, Syria ... and 
Twitter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
“The United States must remember that this agreement was the result of years 
of work,” read astatement 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/2017/01/16/statement-president-one-year-anniversary-implementation-day-under-joint>
 released by the White House on Monday, which did not mention the new president 
by name.

The deal, the statement said, “represents an agreement between the world’s 
major powers – not simply the United States andIran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran>.”

The White House said the agreement, implemented one year ago on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-end-nuclear-sanctions-after-prisoner-swap-agreed>
, “must be measured against the alternatives – a diplomatic resolution that 
prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon is far preferable to an 
unconstrained Iranian nuclear program or another war in the Middle East.”

Trump has not been as outright hawkish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/sep/08/iran-deal-sheldon-adelson-ted-cruz-marco-rubio>
 on the deal asother leading Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/21/iran-nuclear-deal-why-republican-promises-scrap-may-not-be-met>
, saying he could seek to renegotiate it instead of tearing it up entirely. 
Senator Bob Corker of Tennessee, the Republican chair of the Senate foreign 
relations committee who Trump considered for secretary of state,said this month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/bob-corker-iran-nuclear-deal-enforcement-trump>
 the deal would have to be strictly enforced, not scrapped.

Nonetheless, figures including Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/11/netanyahu-aims-to-discuss-various-ways-to-undo-iran-deal-with-trump>
 have expressed hope that Trump will abandon the deal, an eventuality a former 
head of the International Atomic Energy Agency said would be a “disastrous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/atomic-agency-leader-warns-disaster--donald-trump-tears-up-iran-deal-iaea>
”.

In an interview with the Times of London released on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
, Trump said he did not want to say “what I’m gonna do with the Iran deal”.

In a somewhat rambling rumination, he added: “I just don’t want to play the 
cards. I mean, look, I’m not a politician, I don’t go out and say, ‘I’m gonna 
do this’ – I’m gonna do, I gotta do what I gotta do …

“But I’m not happy with the Iran deal, I think it’s one of the worst deals 
ever made, I think it’s one of the dumbest deals I’ve ever seen … Where you 
give … $150bn back to a country, where you give $1.7bn in cash.

Iran nuclear deal: the winners and losers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/14/iran-nuclear-deal-the-winners-and-losers>
“Did you ever see $100m in hundred-dollar bills? It’s a lot. $1.7bn in cash. 
Plane loads. Many planes. Boom. $1.7bn. I don’t understand. I think that money 
is in Swiss bank accounts.”

Trump was referring to Iranian assets unfrozen as part of the deal, and to 
reports of pallets of banknotes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/03/trump-attacks-clinton-scandal-us-400-million-iran-nuclear-deal>
 being loaded on to planes for transfer which became a running sore among 
rightwing media during the presidential election.

The White House statement, in contrast, offered a detailed telling of the 
terms of the deal, which were also agreed by France, Britain, Germany, China, 
Russia and the European Union and which it said had “rolled back the Iranian 
nuclear program and verifiably prevents Iran from obtaining a nuclear weapon”.

“Instead of steadily expanding,” the statement said, “Iran’s nuclear program 
faces strict limitations and is subject to the most intrusive inspection and 
verification program ever negotiated to monitor a nuclear program.

“Iran reduced its uranium stockpile by 98% and removed two-thirds of its 
centrifuges. Meanwhile, Iran has not enriched any uranium at the Fordow 
facility nor used advanced centrifuges to enrich. In short, Iran is upholding 
its commitments, demonstrating the success of diplomacy.”

Iran moderates hope Rafsanjani’s death can soften attitudes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/iran-moderates-hope-rafsanjani-death-can-soften-attitudes>
Trump has criticised Obama’s response to other issues involving Iran, such as 
the capture in early 2016 of10 US navy sailors in the Persian Gulf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/iran-releases-us-navy-boat-crews-who-entered-territorial-waters-state-tv>
, and a statement after their release in which secretary of state John Kerry 
thanked the Iranian authorities.

At a rally in Florida in September, he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/donald-trump-calls-clinton-unstable-putin-relationship-russia-florida-pensacola>
: “When they circle our beautiful destroyers, with their little boats and they 
make gestures at our people, that they shouldn’t be allowed to make, they will 
be shot out of the water.”

The White House statement said the US had “remained steadfast in opposing 
Iran’s threats against Israel and our Gulf partners and its support for violent 
proxies in places like Syria and Yemen.

“We continue to be deeply concerned about US citizens unjustly imprisoned in 
Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/american-detained-iran-arrests-dual-nationals-robin-reza-shahini>
. And our sanctions on Iran for its human rights abuses, its support for 
terrorist groups, and its ballistic missile program will remain until Iran 
pursues a new path on those issues.

“There is no question, however, that the challenges we face with Iran would be 
much worse if Iran were also on the threshold of building a nuclear weapon.”
 