
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, in one of his 
final acts on national security, has permitted US intelligence and law 
enforcement agencies far greater access to raw communications data 
warrantlessly collected on foreign targets, a move that has alarmed privacy 
advocates.

Under an executive order, the CIA, FBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> and other security agencies will be 
able to access unfiltered surveillance aimed at foreigners abroad, before 
information identifying or revealing Americans they may be in contact with gets 
censored out.

US government collecting social media information from foreign travelers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/us-customs-social-media-foreign-travelers>
A copy of the 23-page unclassified rulebook was obtained and published on 
Thursday bythe New York Times 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/12/us/politics/nsa-gets-more-latitude-to-share-intercepted-communications.html?smprod=nytcore-iphone&smid=nytcore-iphone-share>
. The document stated that the changes were being made to enable US 
intelligence agencies “to conduct their national security missions more 
effectively”.


The rules do not change the scope of the NSA’s foreign-oriented surveillance 
dragnets, but they now permit greater unfiltered access to the massive 
communications databases. Nor do they apply to surveillance conducted under the 
Foreign IntelligenceSurveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/surveillance> Act (Fisa), a law 
circumscribing the conduct and reach of surveillance aimed at people inside the 
United States.


Instead, the rule change applies to surveillance under a highly influential 
and mostly secret Reagan-era executive order, known as 12333, which sets rules 
governing exclusively foreign-focused intelligence collection.


Privacy advocates and whistleblowers have long pointed to broad latitude 
presented within 12333 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jul/23/nsa-surveillance-reform-reagan-order>
 that they contend provides a way of avoiding the ostensibly court-ordered 
surveillance of Fisa. Some said that the new rule change underscores their 
fears.


“This development is very troubling for Americans’ privacy,” said John Napier 
Tye, a former state department official turned surveillance whistleblower. 
“Most people don’t realize this, but even our purely domestic email and text 
messages are often stored on servers outside the United States. And theNSA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/nsa> has written extremely permissive 
rules for itself to collect data outside US borders.

“So in operations overseas, the NSA is scooping up a lot of purely domestic 
communications. And now, with these new rules, many different federal agencies 
can search and read the domestic communications of normal Americans, without 
any warrant or oversight from Congress or the courts.”


The changed rules will be inherited by the administration of Donald Trump 
following his inauguration next week, which comes in the wake of an 
extraordinarypublic dispute between the president-elect and the US intelligence 
agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
 that concluded he was the beneficiary of interference by Russia in the 
presidential election.

They mean that NSA officials are no longer required to filter out information 
about innocent people whose identities have been scooped up before passing the 
intercepted communications to officials from other agencies, who will now be 
able to search through raw caches of data.


The rules state the head of another agency must make a written request for the 
intercepted communications that sets out how the agency will use and safeguard 
the data, how the data would further a particular mission and why it cannot be 
obtained another way. The NSA may, however, flag up potentially interesting 
data to other agencies “on its own initiative”.


Under the new procedures, a “high-level” NSA official will be tasked with 
evaluating requests from sister intelligence agencies for access to the raw 
surveillance.

The listed criteria for approving a request include the reasonableness of the 
request, a lack of available alternatives to acquire equivalently valuable 
information, and the ability of the requesting agency to “protect and handle 
raw [communications data] properly” – a significant concern within the 
intelligence agencies after recent mass leaks.


But the procedural changes do not set ironclad prohibitions for accessing raw 
data on Americans.

Donald Trump's truce with spy agencies breaks down over Russia dossier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
While US intelligence agencies may not search through the raw data using query 
terms “intended to select domestic communications”, analysts are permitted 
under certain circumstances to examine foreign communications “to, from or 
about a US person or a person located inside the United States if they are 
already subject to a Fisa court-authorized order”.

Additionally, the US attorney general or an intelligence agency chief can 
permit such searches against agents of a foreign power; a hostage or captive of 
a foreign power or terrorist; or to “acquire significant foreign intelligence 
or counterintelligence information”.

Similarly, the rules prohibit the intelligence agencies from using search 
terms “likely to result” in retrieving Americans’ communications, “unless there 
is reason to believe that foreign intelligence or counterintelligence will be 
obtained by the use of such selection term”.


Under the rules of the 12333 order, intelligence officials are permitted to 
analyze all metadata – details such as who emailed whom, and from where – from 
Americans’ communications that were gathered in the dragnet, but not the 
contents of the email or other electronic intercepts themselves.

In a statement, Neema Singh Guliani, a legislative counsel for the ACLU, said 
the protections contained “grossly inadequate” safeguards for personal data.

“This raises serious concerns that agencies that have responsibilities such as 
prosecuting domestic crimes, regulating our financial policy, and enforcing our 
immigration laws will now have access to a wealth of personal information that 
could be misused,” said Singh Guliani. “Congress needs to take action to 
regulate and provide oversight over these activities.”
 