
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> has made a first 
installment on its $3bn pledge to help poor countries fight climate change – 
defying Republican opposition to the president’s environmental plan.

The $500m payment to the Green Climate Fund was seen as critical to shoring up 
international confidence in Barack Obama’s ability to deliver on the pledges 
made at the United Nations’ climate change conference in Paris in late 2015.

Obama is expected to announce a number of joint climate initiatives when the 
Canadian prime minister, Justin Trudeau, visits Washington this week, sources 
familiar with the plans said.

The White House is also working with United Nations officials to encourage 
countries to formally approve theParis climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement> ahead of a 
signing ceremony on 22 April.

At least 55 countries, representing at least 55% of global climate emissions, 
must ratify the agreement before it takes effect.

Administration officials said the initial $500m payment to the Green Climate 
Fund demonstrated that Obama would follow through on the promises of last 
December’s Paris climate agreement – despite February’ssetback at the supreme 
court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/10/us-clean-power-plan-setback-will-not-affect-paris-climate-change-deal>
 andthreats by Republican presidential candidates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/climate-change-paris-deal-cop21-obama-administration-congress-republicans-environment>
 to dismantle Obama’s agenda.

 “Today, the United States provided a $500m grant to the Green Climate Fund,” 
a State Department official said. “This grant is the first step toward meeting 
the president’s commitment of $3bn to the GCF, and shows that the United States 
stands squarely behind our international climate commitments.”


How US negotiators ensured landmark Paris climate deal was Republican-proof
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/13/climate-change-paris-deal-cop21-obama-administration-congress-republicans-environment>
Administration officials described the payment as an important signal to the 
international community that Obama was pressing ahead on his climate agenda in 
his remaining months in the White House.

Obama has faced a number of recent setbacks to his climate agenda.

The supreme court last month agreed to block the centerpiece of Obama’s 
climate plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/feb/09/climate-change-supreme-court-barack-obama-plan>
 – new rules cutting emissions from power plants – until lower courts rule on 
legal challenges from 29 states and dozens of industry groups. The ruling 
created immediate uncertainty about the fate of the power plant rules and the 
Paris agreement.

Obama’s climate plan is also under political attack from Republican 
presidential contenders who say they will scrap the rules and dismantle the 
Environmental Protection Agency if they take the White House next November.

Republicans in Congress have also threatened to scrap the power plant rules 
and block any US contributions to the Green Climate Fund, which was set up in 
2009 to help poor and vulnerable countries adopt cleaner energy technologies 
and protect their peoples from rising seas, droughts and other impacts of 
climate change.

At one point Republicans insisted that the Paris agreement be submitted to the 
Senate for approval before any funds were released – before quietly relenting 
during budget negotiations last December.
 