
The Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/obama-administration> on Thursday 
announced its retaliation for Russian efforts to interfere with the US 
presidential election, ordering sweeping new sanctions that included the 
expulsion of 35 Russians.

Syrian rivals sign ceasefire deal backed by Russia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
US intelligence services believe Russia ordered cyber-attacks on the 
Democratic National Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/barack-obama-final-press-conference-election-hacking>
 (DNC), Hillary Clinton’s campaign and other political organizations, in an 
attempt to influence the election in favor of the Republican candidate, Donald 
Trump.


In a statement issued two weeks after the president said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/16/obama-retaliation-russia-hacking-us-election>
 he would respond to cyber-attacks by Moscow “at a time and place of our 
choosing”, Obama said Americans should “be alarmed by Russia’s actions” and 
pledged further action.

“I have issued an executive order that provides additional authority for 
responding to certain cyber activity that seeks to interfere with or undermine 
our election processes and institutions, or those of our allies or partners,” 
Obama said in the statement, released while he was vacationing with his family 
in Hawaii.

“Using this new authority, I have sanctioned nine entities and individuals: 
the GRU and the FSB, two Russian intelligence services; four individual 
officers of the GRU; and three companies that provided material support to the 
GRU’s cyber operations.

“In addition, the secretary of the treasury is designating two Russian 
individuals for using cyber-enabled means to cause misappropriation of funds 
and personal identifying information.” He also announced the closure of two 
Russian compounds in the US.

Obama added that more actions would be taken, “some of which will not be 
publicized”.

On Thursday, Trump, who has previously dismissed reports of Russian 
interference in the election, said in a statement: “It’s time for our country 
to move on to bigger and better things.”

He added, however, that “in the interest of our country and its great people, 
I will meet with leaders of the intelligence community next week in order to be 
updated on the facts of this situation.”

In a conference call with reporters, senior White House officials said the 
president-elect’s transition team was informed of the sanctions before they 
were announced on Thursday. Trump and Obama spoke on Wednesday, they said.

The officials added that the actions were a necessary response to “very 
disturbing Russian threats to US national security”.

“There has to be a cost and a consequence for what Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> has done,” a senior administration 
official said. “It is in a extraordinary step for them to interfere in the 
democratic process here in the United States of America. There needs to be a 
price for that.”

In Moscow, a Putin spokesman said Russia regretted the new sanctions and would 
consider retaliatory measures.

Diplomatic expulsions are normally met with exactly reciprocal action. In this 
case, however, Moscow may pause for thought. With Trump, who has spoken 
positively about Russia andVladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, just three weeks away from 
the White House, Russia may feel it is inadvisable to kick out 35 US diplomats.


However, Russian authorities on Thursday ordered the Anglo-American School of 
Moscow closed,according to CNN 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/29/politics/russia-sanctions-announced-by-white-house/>
, citing a US official briefed on the matter. The school serves children of US, 
British and Canadian embassy personnel, and would effectively make a Russian 
posting difficult for US diplomats with families.

Konstantin Kosachyov, chairman of the international affairs committee in the 
upper house of the Russian parliament, was quoted by the RIA news agency as 
saying the US move represented “the death throes of political corpses”.


The Twitter feed of the Russian embassy in London, meanwhile, called the Obama 
administration “hapless” 
<https://twitter.com/RussianEmbassy/status/814564127230271489> and attached a 
picture of a duck with the word “LAME” emblazoned across it.

On the White House call, officials were asked about the prospect of Trump 
overturning the sanctions. They acknowledged that a future president could 
reverse course but warned against such an “inadvisable” step.

Climate deniers, conspiracists and one-percenters: Trump's cabinet of 
characters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
“We have no reason to believe that Russia’s activities will cease,” a senior 
official said. “One reason why I think it is necessary to sustain these actions 
is because there’s every reason to believe Russia will interfere with future US 
elections.”

On Capitol Hill, Democrats applauded the president’s action, called for 
further measures and emphasized bipartisan support for a thorough investigation 
into Russian hacking.

“I hope the incoming Trump administration, which has been far too close to 
Russia throughout the campaign and transition, won’t think for one second about 
weakening these new sanctions or our existing regime,” incoming Senate minority 
leader Chuck Schumer said in a statement.

“Both parties ought to be united in standing up to Russian interference in our 
elections, to their cyber attacks, their illegal annexation of Crimea and other 
extra-legal interventions.”

Ben Cardin, the top Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, called 
for further sanctions from the new Congress when it convenes in January.


GOP leaders were quick to frame the new sanctions as too little, too late.

“While today’s action by the administration is overdue,” House speaker Paul 
Ryan said in a statement, “it is an appropriate way to end eight years of 
failed policy with Russia. And it serves as a prime example of this 
administration’s ineffective foreign policy that has left America weaker in the 
eyes of the world.”

Republican senators John McCain and Lindsey Graham, two of Russia’s fiercest 
critics, echoed Ryan but also called for tough Congressional sanctions.

“Ultimately, [the sanctions] are a small price for Russia to pay for its 
brazen attack on American democracy,” the two men said in a joint statement. 
“We intend to lead the effort in the new Congress to impose stronger sanctions 
on Russia.”

Fight between police officer and US diplomat broadcast on Russian TV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/russian-police-officer-us-diplomat-fight-embassy-footage>
The 35 Russian diplomats being expelled are “intelligence operatives”, Obama 
said. The state department has declared them “persona non grata” and they will 
be given 72 hours to leave the country.

Starting on Friday at noon, the White House said, Russia will be denied access 
to compounds in Maryland and New York that have been used for 
intelligence-related purposes.

A statement from the state department said the diplomatic expulsions were a 
response not only to hacking but to “a pattern of harassment of our diplomats 
overseas, that has increased over the last four years, including a significant 
increase in the last 12 months”.

The statement said the harassment has included “arbitrary police stops, 
physical assault, and the broadcast on state TV of personal details about our 
personnel that put them at risk”.

For some time, US diplomats in Russia have anecdotally reported being followed 
and harassed by police.

In June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/07/russian-police-officer-us-diplomat-fight-embassy-footage>
, a US diplomat was wrestled to the ground by a policeman as he scrambled to 
get inside the embassy. Russian authorities said the man was a CIA agent 
operating under diplomatic cover.
 