
Without ever using Donald Trump’s name, Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> savaged his successor’s 
stated inclinations on counterterrorism while issuing an impassioned plea not 
to sacrifice fundamental American values in the name of national security.

Obama used the final set-piece security speech of his presidency to present a 
highly selective account of his record, particularly about the mass 
surveillance architecture he embraced and the drone strikes that will be 
synonymous with his name.

In doing so, Obama argued that he avoided “overreach” and tacitly implored 
Trump to follow his template.

“People and nations do not make good decisions when they are driven by fear,” 
Obama warned at MacDill air force base in Florida, before a military audience 
to whom he paid tribute.

People and nations do not make good decisions when they are driven by fear
Barack Obama 
“These terrorists can never directly destroy our way of life, but we can do it 
for them if we lose track of who we are and the values that this nation was 
founded upon.”

Obama reserved a note of retribution for the Republican Congress that he holds 
responsible for preventing him from closing the Guantánamo Bay detention 
center. He suggested that he would continue transferring detainees until he 
leaves the Oval Office on 20 January, even though that tactic alone will not 
empty the Cuban facility.

“Until Congress changes course, it will be judged harshly by history, and I 
will continue to do all I can to remove this blot on our national honor,” he 
said.

Obama also said Congress was not doing its job because it had still not 
explicitly authorised a war against Islamic State (Isis) that is halfway 
through its second year. “Democracies should not operate in a state of 
permanently authorized war,” he said.

The US operation in Syria and Iraq is being conducted under the Authorisation 
for Use of Military Force passed in September 2001 against those responsible 
for the 9/11 attacks and any “associated forces”.

Yet Obama did not mention that his own administration argued to Congress 
against passing a new authorization 
<https://www.wired.com/2011/03/pentagon-isnt-hot-for-a-new-law-blessing-al-qaeda-war/>
 to use military force in 2011, long before Isis came into existence, out of 
fear that Congress would pass a law that was too broadly drawn. Nor did he 
mention his heavy reliance on the 2001 Authorization to Use Military Force –
including against Isis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/sep/11/obama-isis-syria-air-strikes-legal-argument>
 – and his administration’s decisionnot to seek the repeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/apr/10/pentagon-2001-terror-law-congress-isis>
 he suggested in a 2013 speech.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-national-security-donald-trump-overreach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e518b46518703887b5696a85c2ad0de39a1fcd%2F0_0_4170_3027%2F4170.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama%20dismisses%20his%20security%20critics%20and%20urges%20Trump%20to%20avoid%20'overreach'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-national-security-donald-trump-overreach%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%20dismisses%20his%20security%20critics%20and%20urges%20Trump%20to%20avoid%20%27overreach%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Fbarack-obama-national-security-donald-trump-overreach%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e518b46518703887b5696a85c2ad0de39a1fcd%2F0_0_4170_3027%2F4170.jpg>
 Obama combined defense of his record with an impassioned plea not to embrace 
the mass suspicion of US Muslims that Trump and his emerging national-security 
team have proposed. Photograph: Monica Herndon/AP 
Similarly, Obama dismissed concerns about the scale of global mass 
surveillance revealed by whistleblower Edward Snowden, saying he had made 
“extensive reforms” and that the surveillance was “just targeted at folks who 
may be trying to do us harm”. In fact, Obamareluctantly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/jun/05/edward-snowden-one-year-nsa-surveillance-reform>
 helped passonly one law curtailing bulk surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/02/congress-surveillance-reform-edward-snowden>
, a provision thatleft untouched 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/11/trump-surveillance-network-nsa-privacy>
 the National Security Agency’s ability to collect Americans’ international 
communications without warrants and the FBI’s unrestrained ability to 
warrantlessly search through them.

Obama asserted that the human rights critics of his drone strikes had failed 
to “weigh the alternatives” of more intense aerial bombing or a ground 
invasion, eliding the commando raids that are the stated preference of his own 
counterterrorism policy.

In his forthright defense of the thousands of drone strikes he has ordered, 
Obama insisted that he had placed appropriate safeguards around what he called 
“targeted strikes” but did not discuss the number of drone strikes he permitted 
the CIA to launch without a requirement to even know the targeted person’s name 
– somethingthe rules he has put around drone strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/obama-administration-drone-strikes-donald-trump>
 stilldo not prohibit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/06/drones-playbook-white-house-nsc-obama-clinton-trump>
.

While Obama said any successful counterterrorism policy must “not create more 
terrorists”, a survivor of his first drone striketold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/23/drone-strike-victim-barack-obama>
 in January: “If there is a list of tyrants in the world, to me, Obama will be 
put on that list by his drone program.”

Victim of Obama's first drone strike: 'I am the living example of what drones 
are'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/23/drone-strike-victim-barack-obama>
Obama combined defense of his record with an impassioned plea not to embrace 
the mass suspicion of US Muslims that Trump and his emerging national-security 
team have proposed. Placing Trump’s proposed policies on a continuum with those 
of fascists and other US adversaries, Obama argued he would “feed the terrorist 
narrative”, as terrorists want Americans to “turn on one another”.

“If we act like this is a war between the United States and Islam, we’re not 
just going to lose more Americans to terrorist attacks, but we’ll also lose 
sight of the very principles we claim to defend,” Obama said.

He swiped at Trump’s proposal to steal Iraqi oil 
<http://reason.com/blog/2016/08/15/trumps-foreign-policy-to-the-victor-belo>, 
adding: “We are a nation that won world wars without grabbing the resources of 
those we defeated.”

And in what sounded like a rebuke of Trump’s enthusiasm for walling off 
America and “bombing the shit 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/donald-trump-bomb-isis-2015-11>” out of Isis, 
Obama attacked the “false promises that we can eliminate terrorism by dropping 
more bombs or deploying more and more troops or fencing ourselves off from the 
rest of the world”.

He added that low-scale terrorist attacks would continue in the US as long as 
lax gun control makes it easy for terrorists to “buy a very powerful weapon”.

In perhaps Obama’s most concise summary of his instincts on war and peace, he 
urged the US to put the threat of terrorism “in perspective”, as they do not 
“pose an existential threat [and] we must not make the mistake of elevating 
them as if they do”. The US would do well to avoid “the path of great powers 
who defeated themselves through overreach”, he warned.

To many of Obama’s Republican critics, the argument sounds like an excuse for 
vacillation and inaction. John McCain, the Arizona Republican senator who lost 
the presidency to Obama in 2008, called the MacDill speech “a feeble attempt to 
evade the harsh judgment of history”.

As Obama prepares to end his presidency and hand over the substantial powers 
of national security to Trump – including the unresolved wars he inherited – 
some within security and human rights circles are holding out hope that the 
institutional forces that constrained Obama will also check Trump. They note 
that Obama’s stewardship over national security in several cases displayed more 
continuity with George W Bush’s record than departure from it, even as Obama’s 
election represented the sort of rebuke to Bush that Trump’s victory represents 
to Obama.

“The president-elect has said a lot of ridiculous things on the campaign 
trail, and frankly I think when he sits down and talks with the experts and 
lawyers he’ll realize that torturing people and loading up Guantánamo are 
really bad ideas,” said Raha Wala, the national-security advocacy director of 
Human Rights First.
 