
Lucy Cheke <http://www.neuroscience.cam.ac.uk/directory/profile.php?lgc23> and 
her colleagues at the University of Cambridge recently invited a few 
participants into her lab for a kind of ‘treasure hunt’.

The participants navigated a virtual environment on a computer screen, 
dropping off various objects along their way. They then answered a series of 
questions to test their memory of the task, such as where they had hidden a 
particular object.

When examining what might have influenced their performance, you might expect 
that Cheke would have been more concerned with the participant’s IQ – not their 
waistline. Yet she found a clear relationship between their Body Mass Index – a 
measure of your weight relative to your height – andapparent memory deficits 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5000869/>: the higher a 
participant’s BMI, the worse they performed on the Treasure Hunt task.

In doing so, Cheke has contributed to a small but growing body of evidence 
showing that obesity is linked to brain shrinkage and memory deficits. This 
research suggests that obesity may contribute to the development of 
neurodegenerative conditions such as Alzheimer’s Disease.

Surprisingly, it also seems to show that the relationship between obesity and 
memory is a two-way street: being overweight or obese not only impacts on 
memory function, but may also affect future eating behaviour by altering our 
recollections of previous eating experiences.

Cheke’s interest in the subject began unexpectedly. “At the time I was looking 
at the ability to imagine a future state, particularly in terms of making 
decisions about food,” says Cheke. “If you’re hungry, you’ll imagine your 
future self as being hungry, too, but obese people seem to make such decisions 
on fact-based judgements rather than imagining.”

How your eyes betray your thoughts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/jun/02/how-your-eyes-betray-your-thoughts>
One possibility was that the obesity might have been damaging their capacity 
for “mental time travel”. Scientific research has long shown that memory and 
imagination are intimately linked, as we piece together fragments of past 
recollections to predict how future events might pan out.

The link made sense, she says, with some signs that obesity affects areas of 
the brain known to be used in memory and imagination. In 2010, for instance, 
researchers at Boston University School of Medicine reported that healthy, 
middle-aged adults with increased abdominal fat tend to have slightlylower 
overall brain volume 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1002/ana.22062/abstract>. In 
particular, the hippocampus, a deep brain structure sometimes called the 
brain’s printing press thanks to its role learning and memory, was 
significantly smaller in obese people compared to leaner individuals.

There were also some hints from animal studies. “In studies focusing on weight 
changes and eating behaviours in rodents, the animals were terrible at learning 
tasks such as the Morris water maze,” explains Cheke. “The more I looked into 
it, the more I expected to see memory deficits, but that question was still 
very much open.”

Hence her experiment with the treasure hunt. Sure enough the obese 
participants found it particularly difficult to remember the location of the 
different objects – adding some important evidence for her hypothesis, and 
supportingearlier findings <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23527642> that 
indirectly linked obesity to impairments of cognitive function.

More recently, a brain scanning study including more than 500 participants 
confirmed that being overweight or obese is associated with a greater degree of 
age-related brain degeneration. These effects were biggest in middle-aged 
people, in whom the obesity-related changes corresponded toan estimated 
increase in ‘brain age’ of 10 years 
<http://www.neurobiologyofaging.org/article/S0197-4580(16)30140-3/fulltext>. 

Obesity is a complex condition with many contributing factors, however; so 
exactly how it might affect brain structure and function is still unclear.

“Body fat is the defining feature of obesity, but you’ve also got things like 
insulin resistance, hypertension, and high blood pressure,” says Cheke. “These 
can go hand in hand with behavioural factors [such as overeating and lack of 
exercise] and they can all potentially cause changes in the brain.”

“For example, insulin is an important neurotransmitter, and there’s a lot of 
evidence thatdiabetes is associated with changes in learning and memory 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2528851/>,” she adds, “but 
there’s also evidence that high body fat on its own leads to inflammation in 
the brain, which can also cause problems.”

How to optimise your brain's waste disposal system
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/aug/22/how-to-optimise-your-brains-waste-disposal-system>
Inflammation is another potential culprit. Psychologists from the University 
of Arizona examined data from more than 20,000 participants in theEnglish 
Longitudinal Ageing Study <http://www.elsa-project.ac.uk/>, in which measures 
of memory, BMI, and blood plasma levels of an inflammatory marker called 
C-reactive protein were collected every 2 years between 1998 and 2013.

They found that greater body mass was associated with a decline in memory 
function, and also with higher levels of the inflammatory protein. Although 
these links are indirect, the results suggest that brain inflammation is one 
plausible mechanism by which differences inbody mass might influence cognitive 
function <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27658542> in otherwise healthy, 
aging adults.

Animal studies support this idea. Alexis Stranahan 
<http://www.augusta.edu/mcg/dnrm/faculty/stranahan.php> of Augusta University 
and her colleagues surgically removed abdominal fat from obese mice then 
transplanted it into lean animals, and found that itinduced brain inflammation 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3921429/>, altered synaptic 
function, and cognitive deficits in the recipients.

They went on to show that obesity activates microglia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2015/oct/16/brains-immune-cells-hyperactive-in-schizophrenia>
, the brain’s resident immune cells, tostrip synapses from the hippocampus 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/26336035>. This not only links the 
inflammation associated with obesity to the brain volume reductions seen in 
other studies, but also reveals the underlying cellular mechanism.

Two-way street

This should be of particular concern, given recent evidence that the path 
between memory and obesity may go both ways, as attention and memory control 
our appetite and eating behaviour. In other words, a deficit in your memory 
could cause you to gain weight.

Early evidence that memory plays an important role in eating behaviour came 
from a 1998 study showing thatpatients with severe amnesia will readily eat 
multiple meals one after the other <http://pss.sagepub.com/content/9/5/392>, 
because they could not remember that they had just eaten.

“This shows that when we’re deciding how much to eat we’re not just basing 
those decisions on physiological signals about how much food there is in our 
stomach, but also on cognitive processes like memory,” says experimental 
psychologistEric Robinson 
<https://www.liverpool.ac.uk/psychology-health-and-society/staff/eric-robinson/>
 of the University of Liverpool.

“If your memory’s impaired or just not very good then you might overeat,” he 
adds. “I wanted to know if this could be reversed. If you improve a person’s 
memory, could that be a useful way of getting them to eat less?”

Gut bacteria regulate nerve fibre insulation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/apr/05/gut-bacteria-brain-myelin>
Robinson and his colleagues recruited 48 overweight or obese people and 
invited them to eat lunch in the lab. The participants were randomly divided 
into two groups, and given audio recordings to listen to while they ate.

Those in one group listened to audio instructing them to pay attention to 
their food, while those in the other listened to an audio book with non-food 
related content.

The researchers then invited them back the following day, presented with some 
high-energy snacks, and measured how much they ate. They found that those who 
had been instructed to focus on their lunchtime meal the previous dayate nearly 
one third less 
<https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/british-journal-of-nutrition/article/eating-attentively-reduces-later-energy-consumption-in-overweight-and-obese-females/E0379EA076042668F767E9A95D92AFCD/core-reader>
 of the snacks than those who had been distracted by the audio book.

A larger follow-up study confirmed these findings. This time, Robinson and his 
colleagues randomly assigned a total of 114 women to one of two groups, and 
tried to manipulate the extent to which they were aware of their eating 
behaviour.

Again, they gave all participants the same lunchtime meal, consisting of a ham 
sandwich, mini sausage rolls, a packet of crisps, rice cakes, chocolate chip 
cookies and seedless grapes.

Before sitting down to eat, the participants in one group were told that they 
were taking part in a study of eating behaviour, and that the amount of food 
they ate would be measured. The rest were told that they were taking part in a 
study of how their thought processes and moods change during the course of the 
day.

The researchers found no overall difference between how much participants in 
both groups ate. Those who had been told that they were taking part in a study 
of eating behaviour tended to eatfewer cookies 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4959264/> than those in the other 
group, however, apparently because their awareness of their own food 
consumption was heightened.

Attention and memory are independent of each other, but they are closely 
linked – we cannot remember something that we did not pay attention to and, by 
the same token, our memories of something tend to be more vivid the more we 
attend to it.

It’s therefore possible that a vivid memory of lunch could reactivate the 
body’s physiological state, so that we do not feel so hungry, and consequently 
eat less at dinner. On the other hand, someone who was distracted during lunch 
would form weak memories of the meal, and so thinking about it at dinner might 
make them feel hungrier and eat more.

In one 2011 study, for instance, half the participants played Solitaire on a 
computer while eating their lunch. Sure enough, they had hazier memories of 
their lunch and went on toeat significantly more biscuits 
<http://ajcn.nutrition.org/content/93/2/308.long> later on than those who did 
not.

This is particularly interesting, given the evidence that over-eating can 
impair your memory, with both the over-eating and the memory problems 
reinforcing each other, pushing you down a slippery slope. “Our research 
suggests that you might eat more if you have an impaired memory,” says 
Robinson, “so you end up in a vicious cycle where memory’s impaired by an 
unhealthy lifestyle, and then that impairment promotes over-consumption.”

He points out that we still have to be careful not to draw firm conclusions, 
though, until we have stronger proof that this vicious cycle exists and has a 
real effect on people’s health. “This idea makes sense intuitively, but there’s 
still no direct evidence for it.”

Obesity linked to memory deficits
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neurophilosophy/2016/mar/03/obesity-linked-to-memory-deficits>
Staging an intervention

In the meantime, the finding that food memories and awareness can influence 
eating behaviour does at least suggesta novel way of helping people lose weight 
<https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3607652/> and maintain a healthy 
BMI, and Robinson and his colleagues have developeda smartphone app 
<http://bmcpublichealth.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1471-2458-13-639> 
that encourages people to eat more attentively.

“There’s now convincing evidence that attention and memory affect how much 
people eat, but this comes from laboratory studies,” says Robinson.“We’re 
trying to see if the lab findings translate to the real world. Our app 
encourages people to take photos of what they’re eating and answer questions 
about their meals, the idea being that creating vivid memories will make them 
less likely to overeat during the day.”

Cheke and her colleagues are now following up their initial findings by trying 
to pick apart the various factors that contribute to obesity, in order to try 
to determine which are likely to influence brain structure and function.

They are also using a smartphone app to collect information about people’s 
lifestyles and behaviour, and are recruiting volunteers in and around Cambridge 
to help them gather the data they need.

“One person may be obese because they don’t do any exercise and eat a lot of 
junk food,” says Cheke. “Another might be obese for genetic reasons but 
actually eat really well and do lots of exercise, and yet another may be obese 
because they have insulin problems.”

“We’re trying to get all these different variables to see the relative 
contribution, so we’ve got people out wearing activity monitors and filling 
food diaries for us. Doing studies like this is the only way we’ll be able to 
tease these things apart.”

This is an updated version of an article 
<http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20161031-why-obesity-damages-your-mind-as-well-as-your-body>
 I wrote for BBC Future.
 