
The media regulator is to investigate why telephone landline prices have risen 
so fast amid concerns that the elderly and vulnerable are being adversely 
affected by price hikes.

All major landline providers had increased line-rental charges by between 28% 
and 41% in recent years, in spite of the wholesale cost of providing those 
landlines falling by 25%, saidOfcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom>.

Market leaders BT and Virgin Media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/virginmedia> had the highest line-rental 
charges, with TalkTalk and Sky not far behind, Ofcom said. The price increases 
were felt most acutely by customers with a standalone landline service – those 
who do not have broadband or a pay-TV deal.

BT under increasing pressure from Ofcom to split from Openreach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bt-openreach-competition-ofcom-european-commission>
Last year, the Guardian highlighted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/sep/19/why-british-paying-more-than-europe-broadband>
 the steep rise in landline charges in recent years that has massively 
outstripped inflation. UK consumers were found to be paying about 50% more for 
landlines than counterparts in Europe.

The telecoms firms have increased landline prices – BT’s is now £18.99/month – 
in part to offset declining revenues elsewhere. Telecoms customers now make far 
fewer voice calls on their landline as they rely on their mobiles or social 
media. However, they generally need a landline at home if they want to access 
fixed-line broadband.

Ofcom’s competition group director, Jonathan Oxley, said: “Our evidence shows 
that landline providers have been raising the price of line rental, even as 
their costs have been coming down.

“We’re particularly concerned for older and vulnerable customers, who rely on 
their landline and are less likely to change provider. So we’re reviewing this 
market to ensure these customers are protected and getting value for money,” he 
said.

Ofcom found that elderly and vulnerable people, who make up a significant 
proportion of standalone landline customers in the UK, were particularly 
affected by price rises.

The government’s digital minister, Matt Hancock, has welcomed the 
investigation. “Landlines are an essential service for thousands of households 
across the country, but especially for elderly and vulnerable people who are 
more reliant on their home phones. The government is clear that action should 
be taken where consumers are not getting a good deal, which is why we are 
launching a green paper next year to examine markets that are not working 
fairly,” he said.

A spokesperson for BT said: “We already offer a number of products that 
represent significant savings on standard line rental. For example, our home 
phone saver product, and for vulnerable customers ourBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> Basic service, which costs just 
£5.10 per month. We will engage fully in the industry consultation.”

Virgin Media said it was launching a new “Talk Protected” plan, which freezes 
line rental at £17.99/month for its older and disabled customers who rely on 
their landline the most.

Ofcom’s consultation closes on 28 February 2017.
 