
The chief inspector of schools has delivered a sharp warning to the government 
that the opening of moregrammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/grammarschools> would be “a profoundly 
retrograde step” that would damage the prospects of disadvantaged children.

In a last-ditch attempt to influence government policy, Sir MichaelWilshaw, 
who steps down from his role as head of the schools watchdog,Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, in December, said grammar 
schools’ record on admitting children from poorer backgrounds was “pretty 
woeful”.

He said that rather than boosting social mobility, selective education worked 
against the poorest children who were just starting to benefit from education 
reforms introduced first by Labour’sTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> and later by the former 
education secretaryMichael Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/michaelgove>.

Social mobility doesn’t exist – and grammar schools are part of the problem | 
Lola Okolosie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/28/social-mobility-doesnt-exist-grammar-schools-part-problem>
Wilshaw has been a longtime critic of grammar schools, but his strongly worded 
speech at aLondon Councils <http://www.londoncouncils.gov.uk/> education 
conference on Monday will be seen as a direct rebuke to prime ministerTheresa 
May’s reported support 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/07/senior-tories-likely-to-resist-theresa-mays-grammar-schools-agenda>
 for selection in schools.

The education secretary, Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>, has said she is 
keeping an open mind on grammars. Reports have indicated however that the 
government may sanction the opening of selective schools in poorer areas in an 
effort to improve social mobility.

Wilshaw told the conference the success of schoolchildren in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/11/london-challenge-turned-poor-schools-around>
, particularly those from disadvantaged backgrounds who outperform their 
counterparts elsewhere, challenged the narrative surrounding grammar schools.

“If grammar schools are the great answer, why aren’t there more of them in 
London?” he said. “If they are such a good thing for poor children, then why 
are poor children here in the capital doing so much better than their 
counterparts in those parts of the country that operate selection?

“I appreciate that many grammar schools do a fine job in equipping their 
students with an excellent education. But we all know that their record of 
admitting children from non-middle-class backgrounds is pretty woeful. The 
notion that the poor stand to benefit from the return of grammar schools 
strikes me as quite palpable tosh and nonsense – and is very clearly refuted by 
the London experience.”

England has 164 state-funded fully selective schools, while Northern Ireland 
has 69. A ban on new grammars has been in place since the Blair administration, 
but there is widespread support for greater selection from backbench Tories.

The ban was undermined by the former education secretary Nicky Morgan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/oct/15/nicky-morgan-denies-grammar-school-kent-open-floodgates>
 who gave the go-ahead last October for the opening of a new grammar school in 
Kent, which won approval because it claimed to be a satellite of an existing 
school rather than a new selective institution.

At the time May made clear her support for moves in her own Maidenhead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/29/comprehensives-maidenhead-grammar-school-campaign-no>
 constituency to open a similar satellite grammar school. Since she became 
prime minister, Downing Street has done nothing to dampen speculation that an 
extension of selection in schools is on the agenda. An announcement could be 
made as early as the Tory autumn party conference.

Wilshaw, who is due to leave his post after five years, told Monday’s 
conference the gap in attainment at GCSE level in Hackney between children on 
free school meals and those on non-free school meals was 14.6%. In Kent, which 
operates selection, the gap is nearly 34%.

“A grammar school in every town, as some are calling for, would also mean 
three secondary moderns in every town – a consequence rarely mentioned,” 
Wilshaw said. “That is why I am in no doubt that a return to selection would be 
a profoundly retrograde step that would actually lead to overall standards 
sliding back, not improving.”
 