
The Ofsted chair David Hoare, who prompted an outcry when he described the 
Isle of Wight as a poor ghetto that suffers from inbreeding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/05/ofsted-chair-david-hoare-isle-of-wight-poor-ghetto>
, has agreed to visit the island to learn more about the challenges it faces.


The former City businessman acknowledged on Tuesday that some of his comments, 
made at a teachers’ conference, were offensive and unfounded, and he offered a 
full and unreserved apology to everyone on the Isle of Wight.

It is the second apology that the head of the schools watchdog has made since 
his comments became public last week. On this occasion, in a statement issued 
by the Isle of Wight council, he formally retracted his comments regarding 
crime, drug-use and unemployment on the island, describing them as “factually 
inaccurate”.

He added: “The Isle of Wight is a wonderful part of the country, as is 
recognised not only by those who live there and move there to achieve a safe 
and rewarding quality of life for their families, but by the thousands of 
people who seek its benefits of tranquillity, beauty and many points of 
interest when holidaying there each year.”

Hoare’s comments about the Isle of Wight, made at a Teach First conference in 
Leeds, were reported in theTimes Educational Supplement 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/exclusive-ofsted-chairman-describes-underperforming-isle-wight-inbred>
 last week. “Most people go there for sailing for two weeks a year,” the TES 
reported Hoare saying. “There’s a sailing club that is one of the best in the 
world, where there’s champagne. But just within inches, there are people who 
live in a ghetto and we’ve allowed it to happen.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fofsted-chair-to-visit-isle-of-wight-after-apology-for-ghetto-remarks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F228506f7c086bea5145172c4cf271e5f639e2397%2F0_71_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ofsted%20chair%20to%20visit%20Isle%20of%20Wight%20after%20apology%20for%20'ghetto'%20remarks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fofsted-chair-to-visit-isle-of-wight-after-apology-for-ghetto-remarks%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ofsted%20chair%20to%20visit%20Isle%20of%20Wight%20after%20apology%20for%20%27ghetto%27%20remarks&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Faug%2F09%2Fofsted-chair-to-visit-isle-of-wight-after-apology-for-ghetto-remarks%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F228506f7c086bea5145172c4cf271e5f639e2397%2F0_71_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Cowes waterfront on the Isle of Wight. Photograph: Chris Ison/PA 
He continued: “They think of it as holiday land. But it is shocking. It’s a 
ghetto; there has been inbreeding.”

Hoare said he had intended to highlight poor educational outcomes in coastal 
communities, particularly among low-income white British children, but 
following a telephone conversation over the weekend with the leader of the Isle 
of Wight council, Jonathan Bacon, theOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> chief acknowledged that school 
standards on the island were now rising.


“Following my conversation with Councillor Bacon, I now have a better 
understanding of the particular challenges and barriers facing island 
communities like the Isle of Wight, including around the recruitment and 
retention of professionals such as teachers. I am keen to assist its residents 
by making sure these challenges and problems are fully recognised.”


Bacon said he was pleased Hoare had agreed to visit the island but added: “If 
Mr Hoare had been describing an inner-city area in the terms he had there would 
likely be significant levels of government intervention and funding to turn 
around the ‘causes’ of poor educational performance.

“But, because the causes are less easy to define for an island or indeed a 
coastal community, and because in general terms we get bracketed with the 
prosperous south-east of England, the Isle of Wight always seems to get 
overlooked for the help and assistance it deserves.”

He said the council, supported by Hampshire county council, had delivered the 
improvements in educational performance required by Ofsted in 2013, adding 
however: “I am concerned that our rate of progress will be slowed as government 
continues to reduce our levels of funding to support education and public 
services in general, unless it recognises our unique challenges as an island.”

• This article was amended on 24 August 2016. An earlier version incorrectly 
described David Hoare as a former banker.
 