
Sir Michael Wilshaw has called for a radical shakeup of education for those 
who do not go on to university, using his last speech as chief inspector of 
schools in England to warn of a skills gap threatening the country’s prosperity.

The inspector and former headteacher said further education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/further-education> was a “Cinderella” 
sector overlooked by policymakers, and queried whether class prejudice was the 
reason. “Is that because this is a sector that educates other people’s 
children?” Wilshaw said.

“Each year, around 100,000 16-year-olds enrol at a further education college 
to do technical or vocational courses. How many of them are the children of the 
powers that be, of national politicians and the commentariat?”

Noting that £7bn was spent on further education each year, Wilshaw said: “We 
can no longer afford to accept mediocrity on such a grand scale. We cannot 
allow this state of affairs to continue. Things have got to change.”

Sir Michael Wilshaw: Ofsted's 'Dirty Harry' bids farewell to a colourful career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/sir-michael-wilshaw-ofsteds-dirty-harry-bids-farewell-to-a-colourful-career>
He attacked the government’s review of further education provision, which will 
see underperforming colleges merge in many parts of the country. “Merging two 
poor colleges to create one even larger college is unlikely to improve them and 
may well make them worse,” he said.

Asked if the poor quality of schooling contributed to the vote to leave the 
EU, Wilshaw said: “I’m sure people didn’t go to the polling booth and think, my 
son or daughter goes to a terrible school, that’s why I’m going to vote to 
leave the European Union.

“But it leads to a sense that they are not getting a crack of the whip. People 
living in the north can read league tables as well as anyone else ... and they 
sense that somehow their children are not going to get as good a deal as 
youngsters in the south of England.”

Speaking at the launch of Ofsted’s annual report on schools 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/ofsted-annual-report-201516>, 
Wilshaw said there had been a vast improvement overall since he began his 
career. “I taught in some terrible schools in the 1970s. There were schools 
that were shockingly bad, where there was pupil violence, disruption was the 
norm and the rest of it. Schools are far better places now,” he said.

“People were leaving in their droves in inner London in those decades. And I’m 
not sure that’s the case now.”

But the former headteacher of Mossbourne academy in east London said some 
parents needed to be pushed to do more: “Good heads challenge those parents and 
say to them, directly, you are not supportive of your children, you are a bad 
parent, and that’s why your children are failing.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fengland-faces-widening-skills-gap-says-outgoing-ofsted-chief%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81acfd63e4a135ba08b409a42150d594758243fb%2F0_587_4720_2833%2F4720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ofsted%20chief%20calls%20for%20radical%20shakeup%20to%20close%20widening%20skills%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fengland-faces-widening-skills-gap-says-outgoing-ofsted-chief%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ofsted%20chief%20calls%20for%20radical%20shakeup%20to%20close%20widening%20skills%20gap&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fengland-faces-widening-skills-gap-says-outgoing-ofsted-chief%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81acfd63e4a135ba08b409a42150d594758243fb%2F0_587_4720_2833%2F4720.jpg>
 Mossbourne academy, where Wilshaw was headteacher. Photograph: View Pictures 
Ltd/Alamy 
Wilshaw noted that 1.8 million more children were attending good or 
outstanding schools in England compared with August 2010, saying there had been 
significant improvements in many parts of the country.

“In 2012 when I was appointed I criticised the poor performance of primary 
schools in Coventry, which was at the bottom of the primary league table which 
was published in my first report.

“Thanks to the focus and hard work of the local authority and school leaders, 
the city has turned things around. The proportion of children attending a good 
or outstanding primary school in Coventry has now more than doubled, from 42% 
of pupils to 93%.”

Ofsted chief links divide in education to 'malaise' behind Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw-links-divide-in-education-to-malaise-behind-brexit-vote>
The Local Government Association said Ofsted’s latest statistics showed that 
councils <https://www.theguardian.com/society/localgovernment> still had a 
vital role to play in school improvement.


“With 89% of all council-maintained schools rated as good or outstanding by 
Ofsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, it is now vital that 
government recognises councils as their education improvement partners,” said 
Richard Watts, the chair of the LGA’s children and young people board.

Speaking to an audience of school leaders and educationalists in London, 
including the former education secretaries Nicky Morgan and Kenneth Baker, 
Wilshaw said stereotypes of state schools were “out of date and frankly wrong”.

“I don’t think the many critics of our education system appreciate just how 
much has changed,” Wilshaw said. “If they did, perhaps they wouldn’t be so 
dismissive of a system that has delivered so much to so many over the last 
number of years.

“Nor would they blithely advocate turning the clock back to a time when the 
top few percent wentto grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/30/grammars-harm-british-schools-says-ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw>
 and the rest were left with a very threadbare education.”

Wilshaw said the government was failing in its duty to supply enough teachers: 
“Everywhere I go, headteachers – particularly secondary heads − tell me how 
difficult they are finding it to appoint high-calibre teachers.”

His comments came as the Department for Education admitted it was scrapping 
plans for a national teaching service to recruit teachers to struggling schools.

A freedom of information request by the TES 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/exclusive-dfe-abandons-national-teaching-service>
 found that the scheme had placed just 24 teachers, having hoped to recruit 
1,500 eventually. A DfE spokesperson confirmed the scheme had been shelved.

Wilshaw also said too many parents were opting out of mainstream education for 
religious or cultural reasons, and called for local authorities to do more to 
monitor the proliferation of small private schools.


 