
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> should stop 
“obsessing” about grammar schools and order a massive expansion of vocational 
education to address skills shortages that will worsen after Brexit, England’s 
chief inspector of schools says.

‘I came into teaching and into this job to raise standards for all children, 
not the few’ – Michael Wilshaw, scourge of ministers, bows out
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/sir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools>
In a blistering attack on the prime minister’s priorities for education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/23/theresa-mays-grammar-school-claims-disproved-by-new-study>
, Sir Michael Wilshaw, the head of Ofsted, saysmore grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 will “reduce standards for the great majority of children”, undo much of the 
progress of recent years, and be socially divisive.

Condemning the policy, reiterated by the prime minister at the Tory conference 
a fortnight ago, as a retrograde step, he says ministers should focus instead 
on promoting specialist, technical subjects in schools, and new technology 
colleges for 14-19-year-olds, so future generations have the skills necessary 
to drive the post-Brexit economy.

“If you’re going to make a success of Brexit, this is number one. It should be 
the number one government priority – not grammar schools,” he saysin an 
interview with theObserver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/ofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession>
.

Wilshaw, who retires at the end of December after completing his five-year 
term, also turns May’s claim to want to govern for the “many, not the 
privileged few” against her.

“I came into teaching and I came into this job to raise standards for all 
children, not just for the few. And by their very nature grammar schools are 
for the few – otherwise why have them?” He says he is not “sitting on the fence 
on this one” but will speak out in the strongest way against a policy shift 
that will harm not only the education of young people but society too.

“It will actually lower standards for the great majority of children. That is 
my view. And it is socially divisive as well.”

The hard-hitting intervention from the man in charge of school standards in 
England is bound to fuel more division within the Tory party over May’s plans. 
Several Conservative MPs, including former education secretaries Nicky Morgan 
and Kenneth Clarke, have cited similar concerns to Wilshaw’s. In her party 
conference speech, however, Mayvowed to press ahead 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/10/grammar-schools-theresa-may-school-gates-parents-stroud>
: “Where there is demand from parents, where they will definitely take pupils 
from all backgrounds, where they will play a part in improving the quality of 
all schools in their area – we will lift the ban on establishing new grammar 
schools.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3409e496addebb0ebbd37033e53b67d3c4b6ea4%2F0_45_3040_1824%2F3040.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ofsted%20chief%20slams%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98obsession%E2%80%99%20with%20grammar%20schools&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ofsted%20chief%20slams%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20%E2%80%98obsession%E2%80%99%20with%20grammar%20schools&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F15%2Fofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff3409e496addebb0ebbd37033e53b67d3c4b6ea4%2F0_45_3040_1824%2F3040.jpg>
 Ofsted chief says PM is wrong to focus on the grammar school issue. 
Photograph: Getty Images 
Wilshaw responds by saying that the brightest pupils will be “siphoned off”, 
meaning that comprehensives are viewed in local communities as inferior. And he 
ridicules her claim that it will not lead to a return to a binary system. “What 
does that mean? If you’re taking away the best kids from the comprehensive 
system, you’re creating, by another name, secondary moderns. You can call it 
what you like. People will know that the brightest children, the most academic 
children, are not going there.”

Comprehensives have improved so much, he argues, that many now perform better 
than grammars. “If you had asked me 20 years ago whether comprehensives were 
working I would have said no. Ask me now and I would say in many parts of the 
country they are working extremely well. The latest research shows that the 
best comprehensives are doing better than grammar schools for the most able 
children.”

Another consequence will be that comprehensives will find it more difficult to 
recruit teachers. “Once you set up grammar schools and they’re seen as the 
high-status jobs, it’ll become much more difficult for other schools to recruit 
teachers. Look at Kent. Look at Buckingham.” He adds: “So rather than obsess 
about grammar schools, focus on whether we have enough good leaders who can 
lead systemic change, because that’s the direction of travel.”

He wants to persuade more youngsters that vocational education is a real 
alternative to university and believes a better-trained and more skilled 
workforce will be even more necessary after Brexit. “The skills shortages are 
getting worse and that will exacerbated, I suspect, by Brexit.”

He adds: “If I was secretary of state for education I would insist that every 
significant multi-academy trust contained a university technology college from 
14 to 19 offering core subjects – English, maths, science – but also a 
specialism. And if you look at Germany and you look at Switzerland and you look 
at Norway, that’s the model that they pursue. They have a strong core but they 
also have specialist vocational schools, employer-led schools.”

The academy and free schools programme has, he says, given headteachers 
greater freedom and autonomy, allowing them to drive up standards, although he 
points out that some academy chains are still badly run and fail to intervene 
early enough in underperforming schools, replicating the failings of local 
education authorities.

The most difficult part of his job at Ofsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, he says, has been dealing with 
education ministers. “They come in, and they have got to make a difference. I 
understand that and obviously they’re looking for me – because I’m the bloke 
responsible for standards – to say lovely things about their policies, and that 
has been tough.”
 