
The Bank of England governor told us this week there has been a “lost decade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/05/mark-carney-isolation-globalisation-bank-of-england>
” of wage growth. But is the truth really a lot worse than that?

By chance it was the same week my 90-year-old father decided to show me his 
carefully filed tax returns from the 1960s (yes, that’s what counts for fun in 
the Collinson household). In 1963-64 his pay as an accounts clerk in London was 
£1,357 a year. In today’s money that equals a little over £25,000 a year once 
inflation is taken into account.

In some ways that £25,000 doesn’t look so great. After all, someone working in 
a similar role with his level of experience at the time might expect 
£35,000-£40,000 today. But then look at what an income of £25,000 bought in 
1963 in London.

He had already been able to buy a new-build three-bed semi on the edge of the 
city, in Rise Park, Romford, and was paying the mortgage. His wife was at home 
looking after the expanding family of five. He also had a car – a Ford Popular 
– and a Philips television. Everything was paid for from his earned income, 
with almost nothing from inheritances. But holidays were infrequent, mostly to 
relatives and friends, and never abroad.

Economic growth since the 1960s has been real, but the link between growth and 
personal prosperity has broken down

His granddaughter now works in the same city, London, for the same pay, 
£25,000. But what does an income of £25,000 buy you in 2016? The chances of 
owning a house are unimaginable. Her income affords a room in an ex-council 
flatshare in a mouldy bit of south London. She has just given up her car as she 
can no longer justify the cost. She manages to keep ahead of the bills every 
month, but only just.

Houses in Rise Park, Romford, now sell for £400,000 to £450,000, or nearly 200 
times the £2,400 my father paid when his home was built in 1956. Back then he 
had to pay a 10% deposit, or £240, equal to a fifth of his annual wage. His 
granddaughter would today have to find £40,000 to £50,000, or twice her annual 
gross pay. Yet another unimaginable prospect.

Now let’s take the mortgage. Halifax says that for a £400,000 loan the minimum 
salary is £84,000 a year. In other words, a young Londoner today would have to 
triple their pay to enjoy the same lifestyle as someone 53 years ago.

Tax is crucial. My father’s 1963-64 tax return shows income tax paid of just 
£28 and 14 shillings (£28.70). In other words, his effective tax rate was just 
2.1%. This was largely because in the early 1960s the tax allowances given to 
parents with children were, relatively speaking, huge. Today his granddaughter 
suffers far more from “stoppages” than someone in the 1960s. Her take-home pay 
is around £1,600 a month after income tax and national insurance, not helped by 
the £53 a month deduction to cover her student loan. Her effective tax rate is 
around 23%.

That said, she’s just back from a weekend with friends in Budapest – but cheap 
Ryanair getaways are hardly a substitute for housing. Nor is the fact she has 
an iPhone, when my father in 1963 would walk to the end of the street to use a 
telephone box.

Economic growth since the 1960s has been real, but the link between growth and 
personal prosperity has broken down, probably since the 1990s. We can carry on 
pushing for increases in GDP, but it’s meaningless unless it translates into a 
recovery in living standards. If any government really wants to help the 
left-behinds, then cutting house prices and rents must be their first priority.



 