
Abhinav Kongari, 19, a student from India at the University of Sheffield, is 
nervous about playing board games this Christmas. He’s looking forward to 
staying with a local family – something theinternational student committee 
<http://su.sheffield.ac.uk/groups/international-students-committee> at his 
university has organised – but says if they get board games out, he won’t know 
what to do.

 “I never had the experience of playing any,” he says. “So I’ll probably sit 
there with a blank stare, oblivious to everything, trying to understand what’s 
going on. Hopefully they won’t throw me out because of that.”

Caught between two cultures, I'm a not-quite-international student
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/24/caught-between-two-cultures-not-quite-international-student>
Like Kongari, many international students will spend Christmas away from home 
this year. For some, it’s the first time they will experience Christmas in 
another country, and the first time they will take part in British traditions 
such as board games or presents. So what are they up to?

Miriam Jaffe, 20, a student from America at Queen Mary University, will spend 
Christmas in London with a friend from school. She says she’s “toying with a 
lot of different plans” involving Christmas markets and pantomimes.

“I’m looking forward to seeing the air of Christmas here,” she says. Back 
home, her family go to the cinema together on Christmas Day, but this year her 
parents will see the new Harry Potter film without her. So Jaffe says she might 
read a Harry Potter book “just to be doing something vicariously that my 
parents will also be doing”.

Marta Berbel Gallego, 19, a Spanish student at University College London, will 
spend Christmas with her mum, who is flying to London to be with her. She plans 
to take her to see the evensong in Cambridge and to a pantomime.

“In Seville we have no snow,” she says. “So I’m looking forward to seeing a 
London with snow hopefully, as well as the Christmassy spirit in England.” 
Gallego wants her mum to fall in love with the country like she has. “She 
doesn’t like the UK very much,” she says. “I think she thinks of London as the 
city that stole her daughter from her, but I’m going to make sure she has fun.”

It will be different from Gallego’s Christmases back home, where her family 
gathers to watch the King’s Christmas address before a dinner of canapes, 
seafood and lamb. “My grandfather is very keen on the King, so you have to be 
quiet,” she says.

People are definitely mad about Christmas here. They’re very very keen
Marta Berbel Gallego 
Many universities put on festive events for international students, including 
ice-skating and Christmas dinner inNewcastle 
<http://www.ncl.ac.uk/students/wellbeing/about/Christmas.htm>, lunch in Durham 
Castle <https://www.dur.ac.uk/news/newsitem/?id=26709&itemno=26709> and film 
screenings in Southampton.

Meanwhile, Host, a charity that aims to promote cultural exchange, arranges 
for international students to spend Christmas in volunteers’ homes.

The charity has organised for Megumi Yamazaki, 20, a student from Japan at 
Oxford Brookes University, to spend Christmas Day with a married couple in 
Salisbury. “I heard that British people spend Christmas with family, but lots 
of Japanese people spend it with friends,” she says. “My host family said 
they’re preparing typical British Christmas dinner. In my country we don’t 
really have Christmas food, so I’m looking forward to it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Finternational-students-prepare-british-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8599026cb326ba51e091c3fa5e2821f751e28d0%2F33_16_785_471%2F785.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oh%20yes%20they%20are!%20Foreign%20students%20prepare%20for%20a%20British%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Finternational-students-prepare-british-christmas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oh%20yes%20they%20are%21%20Foreign%20students%20prepare%20for%20a%20British%20Christmas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F20%2Finternational-students-prepare-british-christmas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8599026cb326ba51e091c3fa5e2821f751e28d0%2F33_16_785_471%2F785.jpg>
 Host, a charity that aims to promote international friendship, arranges for 
international students to spend Christmas with UK families. Photograph: Host 
Yamazaki isn’t the only one trying new food this year. Kongari says he’s 
looking forward to British Christmas dinner, but he’s heard mixed reviews. “I’m 
just excited and maybe that excitement will pull me through the food,” he says. 
Kongari hopes for snow, but is not expecting it. “I’ve spent a year-and-a-half 
in wet England, so I don’t believe we’ll have snowfall,” he says. “But who 
knows, it might be a Christmas miracle.”

UK considers plans to nearly halve international student visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
Christmas for international students stuck in university halls can be a lonely 
time. Naman Jain, 24, a UCL student from India, says he’ll probably be 
homesick. “I’m in halls and most of the other students won’t be here. So I’ll 
spend time outside and explore the city. I’m just hoping the weather is OK for 
that.” Despite his worries, Jain says he’s looking forward to Christmas and 
hopes to make new friends over the holidays.

Whether from India, America or Japan, students were united in their shock at 
how early British people start celebrating Christmas. “At the beginning of 
November there was Christmas stuff everywhere,” says Jaffe. “But I didn’t mind 
because it’s not throwing Christmas in your face.” But Gallego says perhaps 
celebrations do start a bit too early. “People are definitely mad about 
Christmas here. They’re very very keen,” she says. “But it’s nice.”

Locals have been friendly and full of Christmas cheer, the students say. 
Ifeanyi Austine, 25, a student from Nigeria studying at the University of 
Manchester, says he loves Christmas time back home. “In Nigeria it is something 
else. It’s a time where you come back to your origin and share your 
experiences. It’s a time to reflect, share and eat.”


'They tell me not to speak Polish': students on life after Brexit vote
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/27/international-students-life-after-brexit-universities>
This year he plans to go to Christmas markets and to do lots of sightseeing. 
People have made him feel at home in Manchester, he says, and they are even 
friendlier now it’s Christmas time. “I never expected them to be so nice,” he 
says. “Now I’m noticing it even more. I think it’s the Christmas mood, to be 
more expressive and welcoming.”

Gallego says people are sympathetic towards international students who might 
be alone during the holidays. “It’s fantastic that so many people understand or 
empathise with what it would it be like to spend Christmas in a different 
country.”

Kongari also says locals have been warm and welcoming. “That’s one of the 
reasons I’m staying here and not going back,” he says. He just hopes they stay 
friendly when the Monopoly comes out.


Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 