
In January, many of us resolve to develop better habits – and that’s a good 
idea, because habits are the invisible architecture of our existence. We repeat 
about40% of our behaviour almost daily 
<https://dornsife.usc.edu/assets/sites/208/docs/Wood.Quinn.Kashy.2002.pdf>, so 
if we change our habits, we change our lives.

What’s your New Year resolution? This can be the cruellest question | Linda 
Tirado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-year-eve-resolution-tradition>
There is no shortage of advice about how to change habits. Do it first thing 
in the morning. Start small. Reward yourself. Do it for 30 days. Make a list. 
But sadly – as the majority of us know only too well from experience – there is 
no magic, one-size-fits-all solution.

The most important step – and a step that, oddly, most habits experts ignore – 
is to understand ourselves. Once we recognise the essential aspects of our 
habit nature, we can tailor habits to suit ourselves.

It is easy to assume that if a strategy worked for Steve Jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/05/what-is-steve-jobs-real-legacy>
 or for a neighbour, it will work for us. But that’s just not true. Consider 
this popular tip: “To stick to that [fill in the blank] habit, wake up early 
and do it first thing.” Great advice for morning people; but what about night 
people, who are more energetic and productive later in the day?Night people 
<http://www.hup.harvard.edu/catalog.php?isbn=9780674065857> often fail if they 
try to follow a particular habit early in the morning. Not because they’re lazy 
or undisciplined, but because they’re night people.

Similarly, we’re often advised to indulge in moderation, to allow ourselves 
the occasional “cheat”. But some people (like me) find it much easier to 
abstain altogether from a temptation, like sweets or a video game; for 
abstainers, having some is far harder than having none.

Some people do better by starting small; others, by starting big. Some people 
are simplicity-lovers; others, abundance-lovers. Some people need 
accountability; some defy accountability. Such distinctions matter.

More broadly, in planning for habit change, it is crucial to understand how 
differently we respond to expectations. We all face two kinds of expectations: 
outer expectations imposed on us by others (a doctor’s orders, a work deadline) 
and inner expectations that we impose on ourselves (start meditating, keep aNew 
Year resolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/new-year-eve-resolution-tradition>
.)

In my “Four Tendencies” framework 
<http://www.surveygizmo.com/s3/3163256/Gretchen-Rubin-s-Quiz-The-Four-Tendencies-Fall2016>
, I identify four types of habit natures:

• Upholders respond readily to both outer expectations and inner expectations: 
“I do what others expect of me – and what I expect from myself.” Upholders find 
it fairly easy to change their habits.

• Questioners question all expectations. They meet an expectation only if they 
believe it’s justified, so they follow only inner expectations: “If you 
convince me why, then I’ll comply.” To stick to a habit, they need reasons.

• Obligers respond readily to outer expectations but struggle to meet inner 
expectations: “I don’t let others down, but I often let myself down.” To stick 
to a habit, they need outer accountability.

• Rebels resist all expectations, outer and inner alike: “I want to do what I 
want, in my own way.” To stick to a habit, they need choice and freedom.

Consider a habit that many people want: eating healthier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/12/how-to-trick-your-brain-into-healthy-eating>
. An Upholder succeeds when he decides how he wants to eat; a Questioner 
succeeds when she understands the reasons for a particular eating plan; an 
Obliger, when his partner asks him each day what he ate for lunch; a Rebel, 
when she thinks: “The food companies aren’t going to get me hooked on their 
nasty processed foods.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fold-habits-hard-new-year-resolution-personality-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e56de9b27816dd577d41f3fc8474825f366b83e%2F10_106_1926_1156%2F1926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Old%20habits%20die%20hard.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20change%20your%20life%20in%202017%20%7C%20Gretchen%20Rubin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fold-habits-hard-new-year-resolution-personality-succeed%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Old%20habits%20die%20hard.%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20change%20your%20life%20in%202017%20%7C%20Gretchen%20Rubin&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F29%2Fold-habits-hard-new-year-resolution-personality-succeed%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7e56de9b27816dd577d41f3fc8474825f366b83e%2F10_106_1926_1156%2F1926.jpg>
 ‘A Rebel will only succeed in eating healthier when she thinks, “the food 
companies aren’t going to get me hooked on their nasty processed foods”.’ 
Photograph: Dominic Lipinski/PA 
We’re all different when it comes to mastering our habits. In fact, while I’ve 
identified 21 strategies for habit change, most of these strategies don’t work 
for everyone. A few strategies, however, are almost universally useful.

For instance, we can all use the “clean slate”. When we enter a new situation, 
our old habits are wiped away, and new habits form more easily.New house, new 
job, new school, new romance? 
<http://sites.dartmouth.edu/thlab/files/2010/10/94_Heatherton_Nichols_PSPB_20.pdf>
 It’s a good time to start bringing your lunch to work.

We’re all sensitive to convenience and inconvenience, so make it easy to do 
right and hard to go wrong. Keep healthy snacks at your desk so you don’t use 
the vending machine. Store junk food on a high, out-of-the-way shelf.

When we monitor ourselves, we behave better, even if we’re not consciously 
trying to change. Track your consumption: how many beers, how many cookies, how 
many times you eat fast food in a month.Weigh yourself 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2012/01/08/sunday-review/new-years-resolutions-stick-when-willpower-is-reinforced.html>
 every day. And we all benefit from using “if-then” plans to safeguard our good 
habits. If you go to a party, if you go on vacation, if it’s a holiday, then 
what will you eat? Decide in advance.

If you want to change a habit in 2017, think about yourself. What kind of 
person are you? When have you succeeded in the past? What appeals to you? What 
can you control? Don’t assume that if only you kept your desk clear, you’d be 
as productive as your clutter-free colleague. Don’t force yourself to keep a 
to-do list if you loathe the very idea.

It’s simple to change your habits – when you do it the right way for you.
 