
Every January commuters like me are subjected to the annual increase in the 
cost of train fares – just what we don’t need after an indulgent Christmas when 
our finances are already feeling the pinch.

Over the past 20 years the UK rail network has seen a 116% increase in 
passenger usage and a 34% rise in use for freight. Network Rail’s own market 
analysis expects passenger travel to double again over the next 30 years.

Trains on UK railways more than 20 years old, analysis shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
So how do we ensure that this mode of transport offers a service that is fit 
for purpose? Part of the answer is investment. The UK has one of the safest 
railways in the world, but one that operates on some of theoldest infrastructure
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
 due to decades of a feast and famine approach to funding, which has 
consequently constrained capacity.

Published earlier this week, our report 
<http://www.imeche.org/policy-and-press/reports/detail/increasing-capacity-putting-britain's-railways-back-on-track>
 from the Institution of Mechanical Engineers provides some expert insight into 
what can be done to fill tracks that appear to be empty most of the time with 
more trains, and addresses challenges such as how we can solve overcrowding.

The report suggests how improvements to our network can help shift congestion 
off our roads, and looks to a future where our transport system is truly 
integrated.

Many are asking whether the large amounts of funding required to support 
infrastructure projects such as HS2 are worth it.

Privatised, nationalised, electrified? A guide to the UK's railways
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/04/privatised-nationalised-electrified-guide-uk-railways-network-rail>
The simple answer is: yes. Our report uses the HS2 project in one of four case 
studies looking at the wider picture. The UK’s infrastructure is currently 
ranked at 24th in the World Economic Forum’s Global Competitiveness Report. The 
2016 National Needs Assessment stated that in 2014–15 the UK government 
financed £49bn in infrastructure development from a combination of public and 
private sources. While this investment is welcome, it is nearly 40% short of 
the OECD recommended target of £80bn a year by 2020–21.

However, investing in new infrastructure is not the only answer. There are 
ready-to-implement options to increase capacity on mainlines, and government 
must speed up the roll-out of known solutions, including relieving bottlenecks 
on the mainline infrastructure, reducing the variety of train types on routes 
so they are more like dedicated light rail and metro systems, and creating 
dedicated high-speed lines to allow slower and more frequently stopping 
services and freight trains to utilise the capacity freed up on the remainder 
of the network.

Our railways have the capability to move vast amounts of people and goods in a 
safe, cost-effective, sustainable and reliable way. We believe we should make 
the most of this, within an intelligent and holistic transport system. We 
should find new ways to enhance railway capacity not only to unlock suppressed 
demand for UK rail, but also to facilitate Britain’s exports of novel 
technologies.

To read the report in full please follow this link 
<http://www.imeche.org/policy-and-press/reports/detail/increasing-capacity-putting-britain's-railways-back-on-track>
.

Philippa Oldham is head of transport, Institution of Mechanical Engineers.


Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday. Follow us on Twitter via@Guardianpublic 
<https://twitter.com/guardianpublic>



 