
It is possible to see how the row over Oliver Letwin’s comments  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/oliver-letwin-blocked-help-for-black-youth-after-1985-riots>
on black communities and the motivation behind the riots of 1985 could be 
portrayed as some historical curio. Indeed,that is sure to be the spin in 
coming days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/30/oliver-letwin-memo-race-1985-riots-david-cameron-2011-race-equality>
.

And the historical backdrop is important. When Letwin, then a young 
Thatcherite policy adviser, and Hartley Booth, then the Leaderene’s adviser on 
the inner cities, urged the PM to deny government assistance to black 
communities on the basis that their woes were truly caused by lack of moral 
fibre, they were reflecting the dominant thinking of the time.

Theirs was not a brave stance. They were young men easing themselves up the 
greasy pole by telling the boss what she wanted to hear. The brave voices were 
those who offered a counter-narrative. We know what mincemeat Thatcher 
generally made of them.

Oliver Letwin’s memo on race is not ancient history. It’s current Tory policy 
| Joseph Harker
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/30/oliver-letwin-memo-race-1985-riots-david-cameron-2011-race-equality>
But with the grisly details now in the public domain, and Letwin – exposed by 
the spotlight of a public records release – now spluttering his apologies, 
there is rich irony in the revelation that he fought to deny communities 
government assistance. For if anyone has been the recipient of benevolence in 
British political life, it is him.

The MP for West Dorset has an envied position. He sits in cabinet and is, 
observers say, invaluable to both David Cameron and George Osborne as the man 
who attends to detail. He is denied a Whitehall department of his own, but only 
because he is considered too important: the prime minister’s brain. You can’t 
go, Cameron reportedly told him.“I need you here with me every day.” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/oliver-letwin-is-the-pm-s-i-need-you-with-me-every-day-man-10302335.html>

But consider the track record of the government’s sage. Rewind and we discover 
that while Letwin was guiding Thatcher towards best practice in her dealings 
with inner-city black communities, denying them funding on the basis that they 
would waste it all on “drugs and discos”, he was also persuading her as to the 
merits of the catastrophic policy he strongly supported –the poll tax 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/margaret-thatcher/11316656/David-Camerons-policy-chief-lobbied-for-poll-tax-despite-warnings.html>
.

And what has arguably been the single most ruinous debacle of the Tory years? 
Answer, Andrew Lansley’s criminally wasteful health service reforms. Who, sent 
to investigate, gave them a bill of health so clean that Cameron banished his 
own concerns and pronounced them a key plank of his government’s public service 
revolution?Step forward, Oliver Letwin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/wintour-and-watt/2011/apr/06/nhs-andrewlansley>
.

Oliver Letwin blocked help for black youth after 1985 riots
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/dec/30/oliver-letwin-blocked-help-for-black-youth-after-1985-riots>
Who was obliged to make himself scarce during the 2001 election after his 
meeting with a newspaper as shadow chief secretary to the Treasury resulted in 
widely derided claims that his party could find £20bn of annual spending cutsit 
hadn’t mentioned in their manifesto 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/news/vote2001/hi/english/newsid_1334000/1334380.stm> – a 
claim that derailed the whole campaign?

Who was one of the most influential figures responsible for the payment of 
grants worth £7m to thescandal-hit charity Kids Company shortly before its 
demise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/19/kids-company-oliver-letwin-denies-blackmailed-grant>
? Who overruled the advice of civil servants in so doing? The Mr Magoo of the 
government.

Which honourable gentleman, Cabinet member, people’s representative and privy 
councillor was photographed over several daysthrowing parliamentary and 
constituency correspondence in a park bin 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/oliver-letwin-caught-throwing-away-85337>
? Letwin, Letwin, Letwin, Letwin.

What sticks in the craw is that any of these – or other controversies too 
numerous to mention here – would probably have halted the trajectory of one 
without friends, privilege and favour. But Letwin has all three, and apparently 
they sustain him. By contrast, those he derided, and to whom he denied such 
necessary help, have none.
 