
There are signs that a war may be brewing over President-elect Donald Trump’s 
climate legacy, and the bad guys are winning.


In one corner: Team Ivanka


His daughter Ivanka appears to be establishing a role as the one person who 
might prevent the Trump administration from undoing all ofthe progress made by 
the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/02/barack-obama-is-the-first-climate-president>
 in cutting US carbon pollution, and instead establishing policies that will 
maximize the country’s burning of fossil fuels. According to Politico,Ivanka 
Trump wants to make climate change one of her signature issues 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/ivanka-trump-climate-czar-232031>. She 
recently coordinated meetings between the president-elect andAl Gore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/al-gore-climate-change-threat-leaves-no-time-to-despair-over-trump-victory>
 andLeonardo DiCaprio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/leonardo-dicaprio-donald-trump-green-jobs>
.

DiCaprio in particular wisely focused his presentation on the fact that a 
shift to clean renewable energywould create millions of jobs 
<https://nextgenamerica.org/blog/our-clean-energy-economy/>. The best way to 
help a businessman like Donald Trump appreciate the importance and benefits of 
cutting carbon pollution is to focus on the economic opportunities presented by 
the coming green technology revolution. It’s an opportunity that China is 
poised to seize upon,as UCLA Law School’s Alex Wang noted 
<http://legal-planet.org/2016/11/18/making-china-great-again/>:

Climate change regulation is seen as an economic tool aimed at moving China’s 
economy toward the low-carbon, high-tech, and clean energy industries of the 
future. China would like nothing more than to have the U.S. retreat from clean 
energy innovation and allow it to step into the breach.

The New York Times also reports 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/us/politics/trump-organization-ivanka-trump.html?emc=edit_th_20161208&nl=todaysheadlines&nlid=50260707&_r=0>
 that Trump plans to turn over operational control of the family business to 
his two sons, while Ivanka would take a leave of absence and is considering 
moving to Washington DC. By distancing herself from the business to avoid 
conflicts of interest, Ivanka may be positioning herself to becomethe most 
powerful first daughter in US history 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/03/fashion/ivanka-trump-first-daughter.html>; 
potentiallythe first to serve as an influential presidential policy advisor 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/is-ivanka-trump-a-passionate-political-advocate--or-a-businesswoman-building-her-brand/2016/12/08/5836b854-bd5f-11e6-94ac-3d324840106c_story.html?utm_term=.4f226735f1ae&wpisrc=nl_most&wpmm=1>
.

However, even if her desire to spur action on climate change is sincere, 
Ivanka Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ivanka-trump> faces a 
veritable army of opposition among those already nominated and appointed to 
work in the Trump administration.

In the other corner: Team Big Oil


For those concerned about the tremendous threats posed by climate change, 
Trump’s nominations and appointments to date have beena nightmare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
. Trump selectedlong-time climate denier and oil industry spokesman Myron Ebell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/17/trump-begins-filling-environmental-posts-with-clowns>
 to head his EPA transition team, and as a result, predictablynominated oil 
industry puppet Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/12/07/donald-trump-confirms-climate-science-denier-and-fossil-fuel-industry-stenographer-scott-pruitt-lead-epa>
 as EPA administrator. Pruitt is among the Republican attorneys general who,
after receiving substantial political donations to meet with fossil fuel 
companies 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2016-09-07/battered-coal-companies-courted-state-ags-to-fight-climate-rules>
, sued the EPA to stop itsClean Power Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
. Pruitt quite literallydoes the fossil fuel industry’s bidding 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/07/us/politics/scott-pruitt-epa-trump.html>:

A 2014 investigation by The Times 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/us/politics/energy-firms-in-secretive-alliance-with-attorneys-general.html>
 found that energy lobbyists drafted letters for Mr. Pruitt to send, on state 
stationery, to the E.P.A., the Interior Department, the Office of Management 
and Budget and even President Obama, outlining the economic hardship of the 
environmental rules.

If confirmed (which Senate Democrats are poised to fight 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/12/08/politics/senate-democrats-trump-epa-scott-pruitt/>
), Pruitt will do everything in his power to eliminate the EPA’s efforts to cut 
carbon pollution. He’s joined by the leader of Trump’s Energy Department 
transition team, Thomas Pyle.Pyle is a former lobbyist for Koch Industries 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/thomas-pyle> and other fossil fuel companies. He 
recently released a memo outlining “The Trump Administration’s Energy Plan 
<https://assets.documentcloud.org/documents/3232519/Pyle-What-to-Expect-From-the-Trump-Administration.pdf>
” that’s been described as readinglike a fossil fuel industry wish list 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/12/07/trump-energy-agenda-revealed-thomas-pyle-memo>
, including these policy proposals:

 * Withdrawing from the Paris Climate agreement; 
 * Increasing federal oil and natural gas leasing and lifting the coal lease 
moratorium; 
 * Eliminating the Clean Power Plan; 
 * Moving forward with pipeline projects including the Keystone XL and Dakota 
Access Pipeline; 
 * Rolling back federal fuel economy standards; 
 * Ending the use of the social cost of carbon in agency rulemaking; and 
 * Reconsidering the “endangerment finding” that found greenhouse gases to be 
a threat to public health and welfare. 
For example, Pyle claims that the EPA finding that greenhouse gases endanger 
public health and welfare 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/co2-pollutant-advanced.htm>, which was based 
on the best available science and mandates that the EPA regulate carbon 
pollution, “will be reconsidered and possibly revoked, marking a major blow to 
underpinning for many climate regulations.” The memo also states thatthe 
increased fuel efficiency standards passed by the Obama administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/jul/29/barack-obama-fuel-economy-standards>
 “will either be completely withdrawn or revised and phased out to be closer to 
the current levels of fuel economy.”


In short, the Trump Administration’s energy plan focuses on undermining every 
effort the USA has made to cut its carbon pollution from cars and power plants. 
The Energy Department transition team is also asking forlists of government 
employees who have worked on climate issues 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/donald-trump-administration/2016/12/trump-transition-wants-names-of-energy-department-staff-who-worked-on-climate-232424>
, which would lay the foundation for efforts to eliminating all government 
efforts to cut carbon pollution, and potentially launching witch hunts against 
scientists.


Pruitt and Pyle represent the tip of the fossil fuel industry’s total control 
over Trump’s incoming administration.George Monbiot listed a number of his 
staffers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation>
 who come from fossil fuel industry lobbying or think tanks. Trump’s space 
policy advisorwants to kneecap Nasa’s critical climate research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/30/trump-and-the-gop-may-be-trying-to-kneecap-climate-research>
. His nomination for Secretary of InteriorCathy McMorris has voted against 96% 
of the environmental legislation 
<http://scorecard.lcv.org/moc/cathy-mcmorris-rodgers> that’s come before her in 
the House of Representatives, including voting to bar the EPA from regulating 
greenhouse gases and voting against enforcing limits on carbon pollution. She’s 
a big proponent of increased drilling for oil and gas.

His EPA landing team is full of science deniers 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/12/07/donald-trump-s-epa-landing-team-staffed-climate-science-deniers-and-lawyer-known-harassing-climate-scientists-legal>
 and EPA critics who haveharassed climate scientists 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/12/09/david-schnare-trump/>. His chief 
strategist Steven Bannon used to runBreitbart, which publishes some of the 
worst climate denial imaginable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/05/fake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino>
 (sometimescombined with blatant misogyny 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/12/07/weather-channel-attacks-breitbarts-climate-science-fake-news-climate-change/>
 for good measure). And to top it all off,Trump’s choice for Secretary of State 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/10/us/politics/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump.html?emc=edit_na_20161210&nlid=50260707&ref=cta&_r=0>
 is the CEO ofthe world’s largest oil company 
<http://www.forbes.com/sites/laurengensler/2016/05/26/global-2000-worlds-largest-oil-and-gas-companies/#3e8b951718d9>
, which also is historicallythe biggest funder of climate misinformation and 
denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/nov/25/two-faced-exxon-the-misinformation-campaign-against-its-own-scientists>
 andcontinues to fund climate denial groups 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/07/08/exxonmobil-new-disclosures-show-oil-giant-still-funding-climate-science-denial-groups>
.


Daughter vs. foxes guarding the climate henhouse

On the issue of climate change, Trump resembles a character with an angel on 
one shoulder and a devil on the other. Except in this case, the devil also has 
a horde of demons beside him. Trump has filled every position of power with 
fossil fuel industry allies who have years of experience in undermining 
government efforts to slow human-caused global warming.

Trump certainly listens to and trusts his daughter Ivanka, who in Gore and 
DiCaprio, has wisely invited the counsel of high-profile individuals that are 
well-informed about the subject of climate change. However, it’s difficult to 
imagine that Ivanka’s influence on the president can outweigh the direct 
actions of the climate foes who he has appointed to powerful government 
positions, especially since she’s new to government and policy debates. 
Obviously her counsel to date hasn’t stopped Trump from continuing to make 
these nightmarish appointments.

To apply another metaphor, the farmer’s daughter is warning him that he needs 
to protect the egg supply, but the farmer has put a pack of foxes in charge of 
guarding the henhouse. If she’s sincere about wanting to preserve a safe 
climate, Ivanka Trump faces a tremendous challenge. We can only hope that 
somehow, against all odds, she’s equal to the task.

The winner of this battle will determine whether the Trump name forever 
becomes synonymous with climate heroism or villainy. So far, the villains are 
winningbigly <http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-37483869>.
 