
If a new law proposed this week were already in place, there would be about 
300 women instead of the 192 currently in the House of Commons. Which is why a
new report 
<http://www.edf.org.uk/blog/wec-report-women-in-the-house-of-commons-after-the-2020-election/>
 by its women and equalities committee says the government should ensure that
45% of all parliamentary candidates are female 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/may-urged-to-enact-law-to-ensure-45-of-mps-are-women-by-2030>
.

The 10 best and worst countries for female public leaders – in charts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/mar/06/best-worst-countries-female-public-leaders>
If it seems petty to concentrate on the numbers, consider some of the bills 
that parliament has debated in the past two years – on prostitution, abortion, 
the armed forces, ovarian cancer and sexual offences, to name a few. Such bills 
clearly affect women’s and men’s lives in different ways, and their outcome can 
only be fairly reviewed by a representative parliament. Nevertheless, the 
report was met with typical resistance on the basis that MPs ought to be 
appointed not by gender quotas, but by the “cherished concept of meritocracy 
<http://www.yorkshirepost.co.uk/news/opinion/yp-comment-parties-must-lead-by-example-1-8326011>
”.

But if any group has earned a fair chance to shape society, it is women. Since 
1918 the totalnumber of female MPs Britain has had is 455 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06652>, less 
than the number of male MPs who sit in the Commons today. This has nothing to 
do with merit, and everything to do with age-old power structures. And that’s 
why the equality committee’s demands are urgent and necessary. Women gained 
suffrage, and the legal right to participate in politics, because they demanded 
them. And now we are demanding equal representation.

Part of the problem is the idea that discrimination is only an issue in “
benighted parts of the world 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2017/01/sexism-really-stopping-women-becoming-mps/>
”, as the Spectator’s Melanie McDonagh condescendingly puts it. Interesting 
then, that theUK has a pitiful 48th position 
<https://www.workingmums.co.uk/uk-48th-rankings-percentage-women-mps/> in 
parliamentary equality behind countries such as Zimbabwe, Sudan and Serbia. 
Countries that rank among the top 10 in parliamentary gender equality –such as 
Rwanda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/24/uk-gender-equality-rwanda-women-in-parliament>
 (at first position), Iceland, Senegal, Sweden, Bolivia and Ecuador – all have 
gender quotas in place. Even Afghanistan, one of the mostdangerous countries in 
the world in which to be born a woman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jun/15/worst-place-women-afghanistan-india>
, has implemented quotas: 50% of the Afghan president’s appointees to the 
country’s upper house must be women. This is why, at 53rd position, the country 
ranks only five below the UK.

The use of quotas has transformed national policy in these countries. In 
Senegal, for instance, a greater share of the country’s GDP is allocated to 
education, and through “gender-budgeting mechanisms” more girls are receiving 
an education despite traditional barriers to girls’ education. In Rwanda, laws 
that protect children from violence, and laws that permit women to inherit land 
have been passed. It is hardto measure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2012/nov/15/senegal-gender-parity-law-mps-women>
 the direct role of women MPs, but both Senegal and Rwanda are now among the 
most stable countries in Africa.

In Ecuador, women have been more likely than men to introduce bills related to 
education, health and the environment

In Ecuador, women have been more likely than men to introduce bills related to 
education, health and the environment. In 2008, it was the first country to 
pass agroundbreaking bill <http://www.quotaproject.org/country/ecuador> which 
recognises the rights of nature in its constitution. TheEcuadorian constitution 
<http://www.quotaproject.org/country/ecuador> goes even further than the WEC 
report in its demands: 50% representation or “candidate lists will be rejected 
by the electoral commission”. In Bolivia too, at least half of parliament 
candidates must by law be women.

In the past two years in the House of Commons, bills that protect women – such 
as one preventing and combating violence against women – have beenvehemently 
opposed by male MPs 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/life/philip-davies-mp-draws-criticism-speaking-hour-domestic-violence/>
, while other men have campaigned for bills that could harm women, such as 
providinganonymity to men accused of rape 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/womens-life/11331015/Rape-row-Men-wrongly-accused-of-rape-mustnt-have-anonymity.html>
.

Of course, this does not mean that male MPs don’t propose bills that support 
women’s rights; or, for that matter, that female MPs always support women’s 
issues.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> come from 
different backgrounds and it is inevitable that their views differ.

But there is evidence 
<http://www.ipsnews.net/2015/03/everyone-benefits-from-more-women-in-power/> 
that not only are women in public office more likely to promote bills that 
address the socio-economic and political challenges facing disadvantaged 
groups, but their presence is also key to decreasing corruption and increasing 
political interest among young women. There should be no question about their 
value to all citizens.
 