
The world is shocked that America elected Donald Trump as its 45th president. 
Exit polls <http://www.cnn.com/election/results/exit-polls> show that the 
country is sharply divided on Trump along the same lines as its sharp divisions 
on climate change.

Political ideology was the single strongest determining factor in the 
election. 90% ofRepublicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
voted for Trump, while 89% of Democrats voted for Clinton. Ideology is also the 
primary factor associated with acceptance or denial of human-caused global 
warming, as climate scientist Katharine Hayhoe explained eloquently in this 
video:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm50bYJX2i6I&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm50bYJX2i6I>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dm50bYJX2i6I&media=>
 Global Weirding with Katharine Hayhoe, Episode 4. 
Race was the second-clearest determining factor in the presidential election. 
Trump won white voters by 21 percentage points; Clinton won minorities by 53 
points. Minorities are also far more likelyto accept and be concerned about 
climate change than white Americans 
<http://thebulletin.org/climate-change-generation-gap9351>. As Samantha Bee 
explained, white Americans bear responsibility for electing Donald Trump:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1SaD-gSZO4&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1SaD-gSZO4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Ds1SaD-gSZO4&media=>
 Full Frontal with Samantha Bee. 
The urban/rural divide was the third-strongest determining factor in the 
presidential election. Clinton won urban voters by 24 points; Trump won rural 
voters by 28 points. In many cases,cities are leading the way 
<http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2015/10/16/cities-are-leading-the-way-on-climate-action>
 in taking action to curb global warming.

Fourth, voters younger than 45 went for Clinton by a 12-point margin, while 
older voters preferred Trump by 11 points. Voters under the age of 30 voted for 
Clinton by an 18-point margin. Similarly,young Americans are far more likely to 
be concerned about climate change than older Americans 
<http://thebulletin.org/climate-change-generation-gap9351>.

Finally, there is a gender gap, though it’s smaller than many expected. Despite
accusations from 15 women that Trump groped, kissed, or assaulted them 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/10/12/13265206/trump-accusations-sexual-assault>, and a
recording of Trump bragging about sexually assaulting women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, he only lost the female vote by 12 points – the same margin by which he won 
the male vote, andapproximately the same margin by which Obama beat Romney and 
McCain among women 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/special/politics/2012-exit-polls/table.html>
. White women even favored Trump by 10 points, and white women without a 
college degree by an astonishing 28 points.

Basically, Trump’s misogyny didn’t dissuade women from voting for him. They 
normally favor Democratic presidential candidates by a margin of about 20 
points more than men. That’s alsothe margin by which American women are more 
concerned about climate change than men 
<http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2015/12/02/women-more-than-men-say-climate-change-will-harm-them-personally/>
.

How did America elect Barack Obama and then Donald Trump?

It’s important to remember that as with Al Gore in 2000, more Americans voted 
for Hillary Clinton than her victorious opponent. Al Gore received about a half 
million more votes than George W. Bush.Hillary Clinton will likely receive over 
a million more votes than Donald Trump 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/forecast/president>. Bush and Trump were 
elected because of the antiquated electoral college system 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/9/13572112/trump-popular-vote-loss>
.

Nevertheless, the popular vote was closer in 2016 than in 2012 or 2008. 
Republican voters were willing to forgive Trump’s many disqualifying flaws.They 
didn’t care about his constant lies 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/9/26/13016146/donald-trump-liar-media>
. Eighty-one per cent of evangelicals voted for Trump despite his long history 
of immoral behavior. But many voters weren’t willing to overlook the
media-generated 
<https://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/10/26/study-confirms-network-evening-newscasts-have-abandoned-policy-coverage-2016-campaign/214120>
,Russian hacker-assisted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/14/hillary-clinton-email-hack-russia-cybersecurity>
,FBI director-amplified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/31/hillary-clinton-emails-obama-administration-james-comey>
,faux scandal of Clinton’s emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/07/president-trump-would-make-america-deplorable-again>
.

And much of Clinton’s support was concentrated in areas like my home state of 
California, where she won by over 28 points, while enough rural white Trump 
voters were distributed across swing states to give him narrow victories and 
winner-take-all electoral college votes. Trump won four states with a total of 
75 electoral college votes (Florida, Pennsylvania, Wisconsin, and Michigan)by 
margins of 1.3 points or less 
<http://www.nytimes.com/elections/forecast/president>.

It’s the same reason why Republicans control a large majority in the House of 
Representativesdespite receiving more than a million fewer total votes than 
their Democratic opponents 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1dC1t1lUqkKTDRAWimeq8gN9UN7Zbl3X_3cN2aUkAxj0/edit#gid=0>
: rural, white, Republican voters are more widely geographically distributed 
than urban Democratic voters. America has become a minority-ruled country, that 
minority being rural white Republicans.

Ultimately, explaining the election result is simple – Republicans voted for 
Trump and Democrats voted for Clinton. Clinton received more votes, but Trump 
won most of the states in which the vote was close. Trump won in areas withless 
educated, older, whiter populations with fewer immigrants 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/where-trump-got-his-edge/>. In these 
isolated, insulated regions, people fear their way of life is vanishing, and 
they’re largely right.

The US isn’t a coal burning, manufacturing country anymore. Trump promised to 
change that, but he can’t, andhis policies will hurt his voters 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/9/13572172/donald-trump-white-working-class>
. America is changing and it’s not the fault of Democrats or immigrants, but 
Trump made them scapegoats and made empty promises to turn back the clock. 
Democrats need to find a way to connect with and help these groups who feel the 
government isn’t on their side.

What does this mean for the Earth’s climate?

As John Abraham wrote last week, now that the Republican Party controls the US 
government,they own climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/nov/10/they-elected-trump-now-conservatives-own-climate-change>
.

For years, America was the country most to blame for obstructing international 
efforts to curb climate change. Oursenate refused to ratify the Kyoto Protocol 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kyoto_Protocol#Non-ratification_by_the_USA>. 
President George W Bush refused to take any action to cut US carbon pollution. 
Senate Republicans blocked thecap and trade legislation passed by the House of 
Representatives 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/American_Clean_Energy_and_Security_Act> in 2009. 

Finally, over the past four years, the US has taken action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/25/climate-change-carbon-emissions-president-obama-epa>
 andshown leadership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/nov/14/fact-check-china-pledged-bigger-climate-action-republican-leaders-wrong>
 in tackling climate change. As a result, humans had a slim chance of keeping 
global warming below the dangerous 2C limit.

Trump and congressional Republicans have vowed to reverse that progress. The 
energy page of Trump’s official presidential transition website 
<https://www.greatagain.gov/policy/energy-independence.html> focuses on 
extracting and burning lots and lots of fossil fuels and scrapping Obama’s 
climate plans:

We will end the war on coal, and rescind the coal mining lease moratorium, the 
excessive Interior Department stream rule, and conduct a top-down review of all 
anti-coal regulations issued by the Obama Administration. We will … scrap the 
$5 trillion dollar Obama-Clinton Climate Action Plan and the Clean Power Plan

Trump has already appointed a climate denier 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/trump-picks-top-climate-skeptic-to-lead-epa-transition/>
 who wants to dismantle the Clean Power Plan to lead the EPA’s transition. If 
the Republican party continues on this path, the costs and suffering from 
intensified heat waves, floods, droughts, and hurricanes, sea levels engulfing 
coastal cities, etc – it will be onthe GOP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jun/13/the-grand-oil-party-house-republicans-denounce-a-carbon-tax>
.

What do we do now?

In the meantime, we must continue trying to break through Republican 
politicians’ science denial. Many Republican policymakers are rumored to accept 
human-caused global warming in private; we have to change the political climate 
so that this isn’t a disqualifying position for a party leader to take in 
public.

There is no reason that Republicans have to deny climate science and reality; 
in fact,they’re the only major political party in the world that does 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/05/the-republican-party-stands-alone-in-climate-denial>
, andmost of their voters support climate action 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/01/31/us/politics/most-americans-support-government-action-on-climate-change-poll-finds.html?_r=0>
. We can donate to and volunteer to help bipartisan climate groups like
Citizens’ Climate Lobby <http://citizensclimatelobby.org/>, which is working 
with policymakers from both parties to build the political will to solve the 
climate problem. These groups are now more important than ever.

We probably won’t be able to limit global warming to 2C, 
<http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/11/9/13575684/trump-2-degrees> but 
2.5C is less damaging than 3C, and 3C less than 3.5 or 4C.As the renowned 
climate scientist Lonnie Thompson once said 
<http://www.yaleclimateconnections.org/2010/12/ohio-states-respected-lonnie-thompson/>
, climate change will be a combination of mitigation, adaptation, and 
suffering. It’s never too late to take action to limit the amount of suffering 
our children and grandchildren will face due to climate change.

American cities and states will have to keep leading the way in cutting carbon 
pollution. Americans will have to keep fighting to rid the GOP of the 
intellectual rot that currently plagues the party. And while Americans fight to 
right the ship, the rest of the world will have to pick up the slack and fight 
even harder against climate change. AsHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> said in her gracious 
concession speech:
Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) 
"This loss hurts. But please never stop believing that fighting for what’s 
right is worth it." —Hillary
 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/796394515582095361> November 9, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/HillaryClinton/status/796394515582095361> 
And let’s get to work on Neil deGrasse Tyson’s suggestion:
Neil deGrasse Tyson (@neiltyson) 
Let’s Make America Smart Again
 <https://twitter.com/neiltyson/status/794583175393607688> November 4, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/neiltyson/status/794583175393607688>  