
There’s a lady I’ve been thinking about for the past few days, even though 
we’ve never met. She’s the central character in a true story told by the Europe 
expertAnand Menon <http://ukandeu.ac.uk/2016-a-review/>. He was in Newcastle 
just before the referendum to debate the impact of Britain leaving the EU. 
Invoking the gods of economics, the King’s College London professor invited the 
audience to imagine the likely plunge in the UK’s GDP. Back yelled the woman: 
“That’s your bloody GDP. Not ours.”

Subtle and learned this was not. But in all the squawking over the past few 
days aboutwhat’s wrong in economics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/economists-economic-policy-brexit-crash-failure>
 and with the economy, her brutally simple criticism is closer to the mark than 
are most of the pundit class.

Economists have completely failed us. They’re no better than Mystic Meg | 
Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/economists-economic-policy-brexit-crash-failure>
Consider: the Bank of England’s chief economist, Andy Haldane, admitted last 
week that his discipline is in crisis. The crash of 2008-9 was a “Michael Fish 
moment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/05/chief-economist-of-bank-of-england-admits-errors?page=with:img-1>
” for him and his fellow economists, who hadn’t spotted the great hurricane 
even when black clouds were overhead. Cue much hilarity in the media. Oh, those 
cracked eggheads! There follows some light joshing about forecasts and 
less-than-super modelling, while economists go on the BBC to paw at one another 
like tentatively precoital pandas.

Never mind that the banking collapse was a man-made catastrophe, which will 
come to be seen as one of the hinge-points of the early 21st century; that it 
has produced a global slump and prompted a wave of drastic spending cuts and 
tax hikes everywhere from Aberdeen to Athens; that it has left hundreds of 
millions of Europeans and Americans permanently poorer; that its toxic waste 
still pumps into our politics, in which grotesques such as Nigel Farage, Marine 
Le Pen and Donald Trump now wield influence and even presidential power.

Never mind all that, because the British pundit class is expert at cutesifying 
a crisis, at shrinking any debacle to fit within the confines of an 
eight-minute studio discussion. So it is that Haldane’s chief recommendation to 
avoid another such disaster is for economists to get more data so they can 
produce better predictions. As if the crisis in economics and in our economy 
were really no more than an inability to spy inclement weather.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fblunt-heckler-economists-failing-us-booming-britain-gdp-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee80435a90a0f3427c546e3e7c3c9cc13fb3c8fb%2F0_27_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=One%20blunt%20heckler%20has%20revealed%20just%20how%20much%20our%20economists%20are%20failing%20us%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fblunt-heckler-economists-failing-us-booming-britain-gdp-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=One%20blunt%20heckler%20has%20revealed%20just%20how%20much%20our%20economists%20are%20failing%20us%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fblunt-heckler-economists-failing-us-booming-britain-gdp-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee80435a90a0f3427c546e3e7c3c9cc13fb3c8fb%2F0_27_4919_2951%2F4919.jpg>
 Port Talbot, whose residents voted to leave the EU, and where Andy Haldane 
gave his ‘Whose Recovery?’ speech. Photograph: Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
None of this stacks up, for exactly the reason identified by that geordie 
heckler. The economic crisis and the crisis in economics aren’t about 
technicalities. They are about whose economy, whose recovery and whose GDP the 
social scientists and journalists are discussing. Nearly a decade after the 
crash, and nearly four decades into the devastation of Britain’s industrial 
towns and cities, the UK has become so unequal that it can no longer be talked 
about as one unitary economy.

When I first read that woman’s comment, it reminded me of something I’ve 
picked up in my reporting during the past half-decade. Even while David Cameron 
and George Osborne were boasting on camera of arecord-breaking recovery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/26/george-osborne-economic-recovery-jogs-growth-self-employment>
, on the road I noticed two things: hardly anyone I spoke to outside London and 
the south-east believed that there was any such recovery; and hardly anyone I 
interviewed within the M25 believed the recovery wasbased on much more than 
house prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jun/20/housing-recovery-is-not-real>
 and debt. Whatever else we might talk about, those two themes were constant.

Mention recovery in Newport and locals would laugh at you. Mention it in north 
London and most people would add a seasoning of scepticism, or a jibe about 
estate agents. But in neither place did people believe the recovery was real – 
or that it included them.

And Haldane knows this. A week after residents in the Welsh steel town of Port 
Talbot 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-07-07/a-welsh-steel-town-had-a-lot-to-lose-why-did-it-brexit>
 voted to leave the EU, he gave a speech there calledWhose Recovery? 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech916.pdf>
. He began by mentioning a visit to community groups in Nottingham where, he 
noticed, the “language of recovery simply did not fit their facts”. He went on 
to show why, pulling out one of themost revealing graphs I have seen 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/speeches/2016/speech916.pdf>
 in any discussion of the post-crash economy.
 Andy Haldane’s study of GDP variation: ‘one of the most revealing graphs I 
have seen’. Photograph: Bank of England 
Putting together official figures and the Bank of England’s own calculations, 
it looked at regional GDP per head from the capital up to Scotland. And it 
showed that only two regions of the total 12 were actually richer than they 
were before the credit crunch. Those two regions were London and the 
south-east. Nearly everywhere else was poorer than in 2007 – sometimes, as in 
Northern Ireland, a lot poorer.

In her riposte to the professor, therefore, the woman in Newcastle was 
absolutely right. On statistical aggregates the UK is enjoying a recovery. But 
in reality this has been a recovery for owner-occupiers in London and the 
south-east. It has locked out those without big assets, such as the young, and 
those renting in the capital. It has penalised the poor. And it has 
impoverished those who have been forced on to zero hours or bogus 
self-employment.

To go back to Haldane’s Michael Fish analogy, the problem with economists 
isn’t the failure to foresee the storm; it’s that by concentrating on 
aggregates, they insist it’s sunny outside, when it’s T-shirt weather for a few 
in central London and the rest of the country is getting soaked.

There was nothing accidental about this result. It was precision-engineered by 
Cameron and Osborne: make central and local government deliver the cuts, and 
leave the job of securing a turnaround to the Bank of England with its 
one-size-fits-all monetary policy. Governor Mark Carney can’t set one interest 
rate for Port Talbot and another for Pimlico. That task of progressive 
redistribution falls to the state, and under the Tories it wasn’t on the table.

Cameron’s legacy will be that there is no such thing as an economy

The end result is that the recovery constantly boasted about by the Tories was 
so partial, so patchy and so dedicated to putting money in the pockets of the 
already wealthy that it makes a mockery of Theresa May’s speechifying this week 
about a“shared society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
. As the Centre for Research on Socio-Cultural Change argues, it also renders 
any discussion of unitary issues such as GDP or jobs almost meaningless.

Margaret Thatcher is famous for claiming that “there is no such thing as 
society”. Cameron’s legacy will be that there is no such thing as an economy – 
but a series of regional economies with vastly different prospects. A 
state-subsidised boom for inner London; a neglected pauperism for the Humber.

If there is to be a rebirth of economics and economic policymaking, my guess 
is it won’t come from within the discipline. It’s more likely to come from a 
son or daughter of that woman in Newcastle, looking to fix things after 
realising they’ve been shafted, while others have gained riches simply for 
being the kids of London homeowners.
 