
In a world turned upside down, we still know surprisingly little about our 
government. Ignorance is bliss, as Theresa May soars in the polls. With little 
to go on, people are free to hope and imagine whatever they like. So far we 
have only her well-penned good intentions towards“just managing” families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/29/theresa-may-just-managing-families-worse-off-brexit>
. Next week we shall know her better, when theautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/14/employees-3500-a-year-worse-off-under-tories-says-labour>
 unveils her true direction, alongside a white paper on housing. Governments 
are defined by their taxing and spending, by who gains and who loses.

Crisis, what housing crisis? We just need fresh thinking | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/30/housing-crisis-policy-myth-realities>
All her chancellor has hinted at so far is higher capital investment. Will 
that be in vaunting prestige projects, or what people need most – good housing 
they can afford, easing the item in household budgets that cripples her “just 
managers”?Home ownership has plunged from 70% in 2003 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/02/home-ownership-in-england-at-lowest-level-in-30-years-as-housing-crisis-grows>
 to a 30-year low of 62%. A third of a million fewer under-35s own their own 
homes than five years ago, according to the Labour-commissionedRedfern review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/14/most-renters-feel-theyre-unlikely-to-buy-home-in-next-five-years-review>
. May reconfirmed her party’s manifesto pledge to build a million homes between 
2015 and 2020, but without dramatic public investment next week there is no 
chance. Promised were 200,000 starter homes: none built yet.

Meet the Percys, archetypal “just managers”. I met them in their quiet 
Folkestone suburb, renting a privately owned, 1950s three-bed house: it would 
cost £250,000 to buy. Before right-to-buy led to the loss of a third of council 
homes and meant such families ceased to qualify, they would have spent far less 
on rent in social housing. Private renting used to be rare, especially for 
families, but now more households are private renters than live in social 
housing. This is remarkably damaging.

The Percys’ £750 a month rent takes half of Rob’s earnings as a site manager 
at a local school. Emma knows someone in a rare council home in the area, 
paying just £450 a month. “That would make a very big difference to us,” she 
says, “but the council told us not to bother trying, as we’d never get one.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdecrepit-society-deprive-young-families-home-autumn-statement-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6115e9a5dae11ccec25aedbe3429cce2f6f190d2%2F0_217_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Only%20a%20decrepit%20society%20would%20deprive%20young%20families%20of%20a%20home%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdecrepit-society-deprive-young-families-home-autumn-statement-theresa-may%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Only%20a%20decrepit%20society%20would%20deprive%20young%20families%20of%20a%20home%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fdecrepit-society-deprive-young-families-home-autumn-statement-theresa-may%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6115e9a5dae11ccec25aedbe3429cce2f6f190d2%2F0_217_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The prime minister has reconfirmed her party’s manifesto pledge to build a 
million homes by 2020. Photograph: Ben Birchall/PA 
Social housing would bring much more than lower rent: Emma would know they 
never again need move home or take their children out of school. Theirs is no 
shocking tale ofhomelessness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/28/eviction-by-private-landlord-making-record-numbers-homeless-in-uk>
, but despite being model tenants, never in arrears, not on housing benefit, 
time and again they have been forced to move. Never secure, subject to the 
whims of landlords and rising rents, they are the growing housing precariat.

When their first child was born, 14 years ago, Rob and Emma, who are now both 
34, lived above a pub where Rob worked, but children weren’t allowed in staff 
quarters. Their next home lasted just one six-month let, after which the owner 
took back the flat to sell it. They lived with Emma’s parents for two years, 
until their next child was born. Folkestone council offered emergency 
accommodation in a former Salvation Army hostel but, Emma recalls, “the toilet 
in the flat above leaked down on to us and even so it cost £800 a month”. Their 
next landlord raised the rent by £50 every six months, so they moved on: rents 
rise but pay doesn’t. In one home they had no working boiler for five months. 
They have been in their present home for 18 months and hope they can hold on 
here.

Theirs is an everyday story of modern family life. This is the way a third of 
households, the “just managing”, live now, as the chance of social housing or 
home ownership vanishes. After paying all their bills out of Rob’s pay, the 
couple has £170 a week in tax credits and child benefit for food, clothes, 
schools meals and everything a family of five needs. They are part of the 37% 
of people that housing charity Shelter has found to be just one month’s pay 
away from not being able to pay the rent. Holidays? Emma laughs: there’s never 
money for that. Last summer they had a few days camping a mile away in the 
grounds of the school where Rob works.

Like eight out of 10 people renting, they want more than anything to own a 
home. Emma completes her open university degree next summer, to become a 
teacher. On her starter salary of £22,000 they will save every penny towards a 
deposit and a £1,200-a-month mortgage. “We’d be no better off day-to-day, but 
rent won’t be going into a black hole,” she says. And that’s if house prices 
don’t rise, interest rates stay low and food prices don’t rise more quickly 
than their pay. But if anyone can do it, Emma might.

Even in housing, the Tories stoop to divide and rule | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/01/tories-pay-to-stay-housing-social-rents-tenants-homes>
Since Thatcher’s day, the Tory party has been ideologically opposed to social 
housing, with estates dismissed as ghettos for idlers. Yet for a previous 
generation it was often the route to home ownership, through the right to buy 
or through low rents allowing people to save for deposits to buy elsewhere. 
Emma and Rob would be homeowners by now if they had only paid social rent all 
these years. Instead,this year’s Housing and Planning Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-matters/2016/sep/21/social-housing-fire-government-policy>
 is set to start selling off housing association and more council homes from 
next April.

If the chancellor allowed councils to borrow and build, they would recoup the 
money in 26 years of rent, then turn a profit. Don’t call it national debt but 
a national mortgage with a guaranteed return. Instead, the Treasury may cook up 
yet another wasteful subsidy for richer first-timers. Osborne’s “help to buy” 
pushed up prices and cost a huge deadweight in subsidy for buyers of properties 
worth up to £600,000 who would have bought them anyway.

Housing costs are what cripple the finances of families such as the Percys, 
while older homeowners pay no tax on unearned, property-boom profits. Will May 
andPhilip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> control 
private rents, create secure private tenancies and offer a better chance to 
buy? It’s time to abandon the pretence that homes priced at 80% of market rates 
are “affordable”. Time for a national mortgage to build a new generation of 
social housing.

The young who are priced out should be organising, protesting – and voting. 
Why so passive when armies of the old use their votes to command politicians? 
Get angry: Brexit was swung by those who won’t have to live with the long-term 
damage. Only a decrepit society would lavish property wealth on the old who 
need it least, depriving families.

We don’t know what income level May thinks is “just managing”. I will judge 
her by whether she redirects spending towards people such as the Percys. But I 
am not holding my breath for her to become the champion of the future against 
the past.
 