
Only a third of plastic packaging used in consumer products is recycled each 
year, with almost two-thirds sent to landfill or incinerated, according to new 
research.

Of the 1.5m tonnes of recyclable plastic waste used by consumers in Britain in 
2015 only 500,000 tonnes was recycled, according to the figures compiled by 
Co-op from the Recoup UK HouseholdPlastics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/plastic> Collection survey.

This figure means that the recycling of plastic is considerably below the 
national average for recycling 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/547427/UK_Statistics_on_Waste_statistical_notice_25_08_16_update__2_.pdf>
; currently 45% of recyclable goods are recycled each year.

Recycling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/recycling> groups said the 
problem was largely caused by consumer uncertainty about what items could be 
recycled, as well as the lack of provision of recycling services by local 
authorities.

Seabirds eat floating plastic debris because it smells like food, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/seabirds-eat-floating-plastic-debris-because-it-smells-like-food-study-finds-algae-sulfur>
“Most people recognise a plastic bottle as something you can recycle,” said 
Steve Morgan, technical manager at plastic recycling charity Recoup. “The 
recycling rate is about 60% for plastic bottles but when you start talking 
about other products, plastic pots and tray – a yoghurt pot, a margarine tub – 
the recycling rate is far lower.”

Consumers were most diligent with recycling plastic bottles, with people 
recycling 7.5b out of 13b (57%) plastic bottles used by UK households each 
year. However, only about 30% of all plastic pots, tubs and trays were recycled.


The worst offender was plastic film products, which include carrier bags, 
pasta and rice bags, and the film on ready meals, only about 3% of which were 
believed to be recycled in 2015. This is largely due to the fact that just 80 
Local Authorities around the country (20%) provide a recycling service for the 
collection of these materials.

Iain Ferguson, the environment manager at Co-op, said: “It is shocking that 
such a small percentage of plastic packaging is being recycled, especially 
materials that are already easy to recycle like plastic bottles. We are 
concerned that so much still goes to landfill every year. We need to stop 
thinking about this plastic as a waste and start to use it as a resource.”

Recycled plastic products can be turned into a range of other things including 
plastic furniture, football shirts, sleeping bags, bumpers for cars and 
building products.

“There’s plenty more material that the waster and resources industry want to 
get hold of. This material is increasingly being used as a resource, it can be 
recycled into very high-end products,” said Morgan.

There has been a considerable increase in the amount of plastics recycled 
across the EU in the past decade. Between 2006-2014 there was a 64% increase in 
recycling of plastics and a reduction in landfill caused by plastics of 38%.

“The general message is that the amount of plastic packaging in landfill has 
decreased, it’s a huge success story of the last 20 years,” said Morgan. “But 
so much more can be done. There’s plenty of material that comes through the 
household that ends in the bin.”
 