
A new surface coal mine could be created on the scenic Northumberland coast if 
an application is approved next month.

Banks Mining wants to create a three million tonne (Mt) opencast mine 
<http://www.banksgroup.co.uk/highthorn/project-details/planning-application/> 
which will operate for seven years from an area of 250 hectares at Druridge 
Bay, between Widdrington and Cresswell.


The project has attracted opposition from local residents, Friends of the Earth
 <https://www.foe.co.uk/blog/save-druridge-bay-from-opencast-coal-mine> and the 
Northumberland Wildlife Trust 
<http://nwt.org.uk/sites/default/files/files/NWT%20Highthorn%20Nov%202015.pdf> 
(NWT), which have lodged multiple objections based on its impact on greenhouse 
gas emissions, water and wildlife.

Coal <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> from the Highthorn Mine, 
as it will be known, is likely to be burned locally. The planning application 
states that it would go to coal-fired power stations “and other industrial and 
domestic markets”. Cottan, Ratcliffe on Soar, Drax and West Burton power 
stations are already being supplied with Northumbrian coal from Banks’ existing 
sites at Brenkley and Shotton.

Those opposing the mine say this flies in the face of commitments to cut 
greenhouse gas emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/24/eu-leaders-agree-to-cut-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-40-by-2030>
 and the government’s announcement in November that it willphase out all 
unabated coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/uk-should-shut-down-all-coal-power-plants-two-years-before-2025-pledge>
 by 2025 to meet carbon budgets.

Highthorn would be operational until 2024, but Friends of the Earth expects 
Banks to try to extend this and increase the tonnage in future.Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> campaigner Guy Shrubsole told 
ENDS the original mine proposal was 7Mt but had been reduced to make it more 
acceptable.

The NGO points to the national planning policy framework which states: 
“Permission should not be given for the extraction of coal unless the proposal 
is environmentally acceptable, or can be made so by planning conditions or 
obligations; or if not, it provides national, local or community benefits which 
clearly outweigh the likely impacts to justify the grant of planning 
permission.”

The NGO says the national benefits in the application are “based on 
out-of-date information, given the phase-out of coal and the need to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, and the likely impacts are unacceptable”.

Potential impacts include the visual impact on the designated heritage coast, 
groundwater contamination, damage to local nature sites, displacement of 
species, potential impacts on a proposed marine conservation zone and 
cumulative effects with other mines.

Pink-footed geese and yellow wagtail are among the species that will be 
affected and there is a site of special scientific interest (SSSI) a few 
hundred metres from the site that the NWT is concerned will be affected.

Banks says its biodiversity action plan minimises impacts during operation and 
that target species will be monitored and action taken to “improve 
opportunities for those species”.

It also says it will implement a strong environmental management system to 
“minimise the risk of unacceptable hydrological effects”.

But the NWT says the environmental impact assessment (EIA) does not “provide 
significant assurance that there will not be any detrimental impact” on sites 
or species, “especially those that have international, national protection 
through statute”.

Mark Dowdall, environment and community director at the Banks Group, says he 
is very disappointed with the NGOs’ positions but notes that “no technical 
objections have been made by them to the suitability of the proposed site 
itself for this sort of work”.

Banks has offered to create a new area of wetland and wildlife habitats 
equivalent to the size of 160 football pitches as part of its proposal. Dowdall 
says that the NWT had described the plans as “potentially transformative in 
providing habitat links” and that Natural England had not objected.

“Coal is and will remain an important part of the UK’s energy mix, at least in 
the medium term. In the last year, around 25% of the electricity ... was 
produced through coal, yet over 85% of that coal was imported from overseas,” 
he says.

“It makes far greater sense to support north east jobs, to deliver 
environmental and conservation enhancements and to provide a secure supply of 
energy for the UK by mining our own indigenous coal reserves through 
carefully-planned and sensitively operated schemes such as Highthorn rather 
than relying on imports of coal and gas from potentially unstable overseas 
markets,” says Dowdall.

A decision on the application is expected at the beginning of July.

Planning pipeline

There are a number of proposals in the planning pipeline for opencast coal 
mines in England and Wales, totalling 11Mt:

Nant Llesg, South Wales: 6Mt

Highthorn, Northumberland: 3Mt

Tower Colliery, South Wales: 1.2Mt

Dewley Hill, Newcastle: 800,000t

Hilltop, Derbyshire: 200,000t

In August 2015, Caerphilly council rejected plans for the 6Mt coal mine at 
Nant Llesg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/06/welsh-council-rejects-plans-for-new-opencast-coal-mine>
, citing visual impacts as its reasons for rejection, with a strong 
consideration of the climate change impacts and impact on the local community 
by council members.

Mining firm Miller Argent appealed the decision 
<http://www.endsreport.com/article/51180/miller-argent-appeals-nant-llesg-opencast-coal-refusal>
 on 23 December but the appeal has stalled because the Planning Inspectorate 
Wales is waiting for extra paperwork relating to the environmental statement.
 