
Peter Tunison, a retired architect from Minnesota, was in no doubt. “If this 
was a monument in the US, we wouldn’t have vehicles passing so close by. This is
 theplace to visit in the UK. It’s windy today and you can still hear the 
traffic noise. A tunnel seems a very sensible option. I’d go for it.”

A bitter wind was indeed blowing hard on Friday and yet visitors to Stonehenge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge> could still clearly hear the 
rumble of cars, vans and lorries passing along the A303 a mere 165 metres from 
the one of the most important prehistoric monuments in the world.

Stonehenge tunnel is a monumental error | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/15/stonehenge-tunnel-is-a-monumental-error>
If the government’s plans 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/next-step-in-major-investment-for-south-west-as-a303-stonehenge-plans-published>
 come to fruition, work will begin in 2020 on a tunnel to take the traffic 
underground and not only restore peace and quiet to the temple but reopen an 
ancient ceremonial route to Stonehenge currently cut in two by the A303 and 
give access to a rarely visited landscape south of the monument.

However, the “if” is important. For decades, plans for a tunnel have been 
mooted and then dropped. Over the next two months, local people, 
archaeologists, druids, environmentalists, motoring organisations and 
politicians will pore over the latest proposals.


The debate is bound to be lively. Some believe a tunnel, together with other 
road improvements, will benefit the monument as well as road users. Just as 
many believe the development risks desecrating the area.

“I’d be for it as long as they don’t damage any important archaeology,” said 
Natalie Kroon, who was braving the weather with her husband, Hennie, and three 
young children. “It’s our first time here. The noise hasn’t particularly 
bothered me. You can tune out of it in the same way you do when there’s a fan 
on in the office. I do wonder if there are better things to spend the money on 
these days.”

Lottie Bergen, who was visiting with her friend Anick Gerrits from the 
Netherlands, said she was not wholly against the road as it was. “It is 
spectacular when you drive here and first see Stonehenge. It would be a shame 
to lose that.”

The tunnel plans are part of proposals for a £2bn investment in south-west 
England’s road system. In itscase for the tunnel 
<https://highwaysengland.citizenspace.com/cip/a303-stonehenge/supporting_documents/S160531%20A303%20Stonehenge%20case%20for%20scheme%20DEC_print.pdf>
, Highways England says this section of the A303 was designed for about 13,000 
vehicles a day but carries closer to 24,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fopportunity-or-threat-stonehenge-tunnel-plan-revives-long-running-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55d3980e7ac55c8b16e772a92ed12f4eed5a2f86%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Opportunity%20or%20threat%3F%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20plan%20revives%20long-running%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fopportunity-or-threat-stonehenge-tunnel-plan-revives-long-running-debate%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Opportunity%20or%20threat%3F%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20plan%20revives%20long-running%20debate&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fopportunity-or-threat-stonehenge-tunnel-plan-revives-long-running-debate%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F55d3980e7ac55c8b16e772a92ed12f4eed5a2f86%2F0_167_2500_1500%2F2500.jpg>
 A lorry on the road near Stonehenge. Photograph: Sam Frost for the Guardian 
Highways England describes the scheme as a once-in-a-generation opportunity to 
improve the Stonehenge experience for the 1.3 million people who visit each 
year.

The government has considered building both shorter and longer tunnels. A 
shorter one would succeed in making Stonehenge more tranquil but the siting of 
the portals – the entrances and exits – would damage other important monuments 
within the world heritage site. A longer one – 2.8 miles – is seen as 
prohibitively expensive.

A tunnel of 1.8 miles is now being presented by the government as a good 
balance, delivering benefits to the site but still affordable.

Under the preferred option 
<https://highwaysengland.citizenspace.com/cip/a303-stonehenge/supporting_documents/s160536%20A303%20STONEHENGE%20CONSULTATION%20DOCUMENTS.pdf>
 – though the details are up for discussion – the tunnel carrying the A303 
would be located slightly south of the present course of the road, and so a 
little further away from the monument.

This should mean that at the western end the Normanton Down Barrows, bronze 
age burial mounds, are not affected. At the other end the idea is for the road 
to dive underground east of a feature called the Avenue, which is believed to 
have been a ceremonial approach to Stonehenge from the river Avon.

Finding consensus will not be easy. Among those who have voiced early, 
vociferous objections is David Jacques, a senior research fellow at the 
University of Buckingham, who is working on a Mesolithic site called Blick Mead 
within the Stonehenge landscape.

One of the intriguing recent finds there was evidence of the earliest known 
long-distance walk in British history <http:// 
https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/07/archaelogists-evidence-earliest-known-journey-uk-history-stonehenge-wilsthire-mesolithic-man-dog>
 – a 250-mile trip from York to Wiltshire made 7,000 years ago by a hunter 
gatherer and his dog, unearthed thanks to the discovery of the animal’s tooth.

Jacques believes proposed building associated with the road changes and tunnel 
near Blick Mead could prevent similar finds in the future. “This is arrogant 
and outrageous. It cuts down the chances of people in the future finding out 
more about Stonehenge.”

Some druids who worship at Stonehenge are also deeply worried. Frank Somers, 
of theStonehenge and Amesbury Druids <http://www.stonehenge-druids.org/>, said 
the proposed tunnel came “horrifically close” to the sacred springs of Amesbury 
Abbey.


“This place gave the first spark of spiritual life to the sacred landscape of 
Salisbury Plain 5,000 years before Stonehenge. It is unique,” Somers said. “Its 
sense of spiritual and ancestral presence is stunningly beautiful and pure.”

He also raised concerns that changes to the landscape at the western end of 
the tunnel could obscure the view of the midwinter sunset from Stonehenge – 
what he described as a “very significant solar alignment”.

Many others believe the tunnel would do much to restore the area to some of 
its ancient glory. EnglishHeritage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/heritage>, which manages the site, 
Historic England and the National Trust all said the right tunnel would reunite 
Stonehenge with the landscape.

Mike Pitts <https://mikepitts.wordpress.com/stonehenge/>, the editor of 
British Archaeology, who first directed an excavation at Stonehenge in 1979, 
agreed. “When you visit Stonehenge now you see traffic, you feel traffic,” he 
said. “But the tunnel is not just about that traffic. It will open up an 
extraordinary landscape to the south of the road that is known to only a few 
nutjobs like me. It will change the way we engage with that whole landscape.”
 