
“Let sleeping dogs lie,” they say about Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/burning-injustice-of-orgreave-is-left-smouldering>
. But “sleeping dogs in South Yorkshire police lied, lied and lied again, not 
just about their own conduct but about the victims and other football 
supporters”. These are not my words:they were penned 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thecolumnists/2016/05/nick-timothy-as-with-hillsborough-we-must-get-to-the-bottom-of-what-happened-at-orgreave.html>
 by Nick Timothy, the prime minister’s joint chief of staff, just months ago. 
In the 1980s, the police were politicised, transformed into blunt instruments 
as part of a wider concerted mission to neutralise the British labour movement. 
It was in this context that South Yorkshire police were encouraged to 
dehumanise striking miners, to see them as violent, extremist,“enemy within” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/oct/03/thatcher-labour-miners-enemy-within-brighton-bomb>
 scum. When they violently charged at miners, lied about their behaviour with 
the complicity of the British media, dictated false witness statements and 
tried to stitch up their victims, they began a long march that ended inthe 
Hillsborough disaster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/hillsborough-disaster> and 96 dead 
Liverpool fans. It was class war, and it ended with bodies sprawled inmake-do 
mortuaries <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-merseyside-32136836>.

'Burning injustice' of Orgreave is left smouldering | David Conn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/burning-injustice-of-orgreave-is-left-smouldering>
Allegedly, you cry. Fine: it is a story repeatedly related to me by people who 
were actually at Orgreave and that is borne out by subsequent police 
testimonies, and I believe it both highlights a terrible miscarriage of justice 
and is revealing about how power works in this country. You may disagree, but 
an inquiry would have given the opportunity to settle the issue. And, yes, 
Labour should have initiated its own when it was in office, although it was its 
belated decision to launch the Hillsborough inquiry thatfuelled demands for 
justice for Orgreave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/16/orgreave-inquiry-calls-grow-after-damning-hillsborough-verdict-for-south-yorkshire-police>
. But the home secretary, Amber Rudd,claims one is not necessary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/31/government-rules-out-orgreave-inquiry>
 because there were “no deaths or wrongful convictions”. The police can 
apparently drag victims through the courts under false pretexts, as long as 
they fail to stitch them up effectively. Police can wrongly inflict violence on 
fellow citizens, as long as nobody is killed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=What%20happened%20at%20the%20'Battle%20of%20Orgreave'%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=What%20happened%20at%20the%20%27Battle%20of%20Orgreave%27%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F01%2Fwhat-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer&media=>
What happened at the ‘Battle of Orgreave’? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/01/what-happened-at-the-battle-of-orgreave-video-explainer>
Let’s be absolutely clear about this. South Yorkshire police were violent, 
ideologically driven and corrupt. But they were not stupid. They behaved as 
they did because they believed they had official sanction to do so. They then 
learned a lesson – quite reasonably – that they could act with impunity. 
Counterfactual history is a mug’s game, and it would be wrong to state with 
total certainty that Hillsborough would never have happened if the police had 
been held to account after Orgreave. But it is beyond question that their 
subsequent behaviour was uncannily similar: treating their working-class 
victims as scum, lying in concert with the British media, falsifying witness 
statements, covering up what they did. And this time people did die – in their 
dozens.

Imagine if a Labour government had ruled Britain in the 1980s, deliberately 
run down the financial sector, and sent police officers rampaging through the 
Home Counties to beat up City workers fighting for their jobs and communities. 
The truth is the Tories are soaked in triumphalism. They transformed Britain in 
the 1980s, they are proud of it – fine – and they have no interest in exposing 
the ugly deeds committed in the process. AsNorman Tebbit puts it 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/31/amber-rudd-praised-for-resisting-calls-for-battle-of-orgreave-in/>
, “an inquiry could have been used as a stick with which to beat the Thatcher 
government”. That’s what this is really about: not justice, but defending the 
reputation of a Conservative party that was content to subvert the rule of law 
if that was what it took. To paraphrase George Bernard Shaw, one side preaches 
the class war, the other practises it. But Theresa May’s government should be 
warned. Those driven by justice tend to be persistent – and history judges them 
rather more kindly than those who obstruct them.
 