
Despite repeatedly missing his own targets, George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> has so far done well out 
of his decision to focus attention on the deficit. In keeping the spotlight on 
the public finances, the chancellor has avoided scrutiny of his broader 
economic strategy.

The masterstroke was to convince the public that excessive spending by Labour 
caused the financial crisis. This was an impressive feat of persuasion: when 
the crisis began in 2007, public debt was lower as a share of GDP than when 
Labour took power a decade earlier. Despite finding little support in the 
facts, the story stuck, thanks in part to a media thatfailed to question 
Osborne’s narrative 
<https://mainlymacro.blogspot.co.uk/2015/04/mediamacro-myths-summing-up.html>.

John McDonnell’s announcement of Labour’s fiscal rule 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/page/content/economy-conference/> is a admission that 
the Conservatives have succeeded in framing the economic debate. It is a tacit 
confession that Labour needs to improve its perceived lack of economic 
credibility.

Making things matters. This is what Britain forgot | Ha-Joon Chang
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/18/making-things-matter-britain-forgot-manufacturing-brexit>
The rule commits a Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
government to balancing the budget over each parliamentary term, while 
exempting borrowing for investment. It bears more than a passing resemblance to 
the rule proposed by Ed Balls during the 2015 election campaign, a proposal 
derided at the time as “austerity lite’” by McDonnell. The difference is that 
he appears to be serious about embarking on a major public investment programme.

It is unfortunate that a symbolic gesture of this kind is needed. The rule is 
being adopted for political reasons, not because the economics demands it. A 
balanced current budget is a reasonable aim, but is not something that a 
government can commit to. Budget deficits have a life of their own, as Osborne 
has discovered.

But if the adoption of the rule helps Labour draw a line under the debate on 
the public finances and move on, it will have served its purpose.

Discussion of deficits and austerity has been a diversion from the real 
issues. Successive governments have refused to put forward any serious economic 
strategy, choosing instead to invoke the power of the market.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fgeorge-osborne-uk-economy-deficit-economic-plan-spending-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1f630d1ccb988f93c30131aea3c5414abb88973%2F706_705_2195_1317%2F2195.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Osborne's%20focus%20on%20UK's%20deficit%20deters%20scrutiny%20of%20his%20weak%20economic%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fgeorge-osborne-uk-economy-deficit-economic-plan-spending-labour%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Osborne%27s%20focus%20on%20UK%27s%20deficit%20deters%20scrutiny%20of%20his%20weak%20economic%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Feconomics-blog%2F2016%2Fmay%2F20%2Fgeorge-osborne-uk-economy-deficit-economic-plan-spending-labour%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa1f630d1ccb988f93c30131aea3c5414abb88973%2F706_705_2195_1317%2F2195.jpg>
 John McDonnell has committed Labour to a major public investment programme. 
Photograph: Hannah Mckay/Reuters 
A programme of cuts to government spending – and middle-class taxes – is not a 
long-term economic plan. It is also failing even on its own terms: the latest 
figures show that national debt has is now rising as a share of GDP.

The Conservatives are increasingly isolated in their refusal to engage in 
long-term economic thinking. Elsewhere, there is broad support for a renewal of 
industrial policy. It is clear that McDonell is committed to a more active role 
for government.

In a rare cross-party statement, the former business secretaries Vince Cable 
and Chuka Umunna recentlyexpressed their support for British industrial policy 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/voices/comment/the-deafening-silence-on-the-governments-industrial-strategy-is-ominous-10485216.html>
. Dan Jarvis, who is widely seen as a Jeremy Corbyn stalking horse, hasspoken 
in favour of industrial strategy 
<http://www.demos.co.uk/the-future-of-work-speech-to-demos-by-dan-jarvis-mp/> 
and the need to shift away from corporate short termism.

Labour’s factions should put aside their differences and work together to 
flesh out such a strategy. McDonnell’s proposal has been well received, while 
Osborne’s rule – and his agenda of fiscal austerity and redistribution from 
poor to rich – have been widely criticised by economists. McDonnell’s rule 
should allow Labour to shift the terms of the debate towards more important 
matters.

The list of issues requiring attention is sobering: flat productivity; lagging 
wages; an imbalanced economy reliant on imports, consumer credit and house 
price inflation; an ageing population – currently offset by immigration – and 
potential pressures on jobs from new forms of automation.

Instead of debating whether greater investment expenditure is needed, this 
should be a given. The country can afford it. A more important task is 
outlining how the government can play an effective role in supporting and 
directing the economy.

An obvious first step is to upgrade the UK’s ageing infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/18/oecd-calls-for-less-austerity-and-more-public-investment>
 and begin working on reducing carbon emissions. But this will not be enough. 
The UK is fast becoming a post-industrial nation – a trend that receives little 
serious discussion. Britainneeds to produce goods and services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/11/uk-manufacturing-sector-falls-back-into-recession-steel>
 that the rest of the world wants to buy.

What should industrial policy look like in a post-industrial society? It is 
time for Osborne’s critics to move beyond the anti-austerity message and put 
forward a clear description of a modern economic strategy for the UK.

To his credit, McDonnell has organised a series of events 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/blog/entry/the-new-economics> aimed at opening up 
debate on these issues. Thestate of the economy conference 
<http://www.labour.org.uk/page/content/economy-conference/> on Saturday 
provides an opportunity for the discussion to continue.

Jo Michell is a senior lecturer in economics at the University of the West of 
England.

 