
Hardly anything in Britain is untouched by the Brexit vote. With the country 
angrily wrenched apart, this has caused the greatest political, social and 
cultural rift of our life-time. But in few places is the hurt felt more deeply 
than inside theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

More than 55,000 EU nationals work as doctors and nurses in a health service 
that would collapse without them. In the midst of a severe nursing crisis, what 
inexplicable stupidity not to give a cast-iron guarantee that all those working 
in the NHS can stay for ever, welcoming any more who wish to come. What kind of 
“bargaining card” is the threat to throw out people we absolutely cannot do 
without?

Companies that recruit abroad on behalf of NHS trusts are full of anxiety. Take
TFS Healthcare <http://www.tfshealthcare.co.uk/>, which recruits nurses for UK 
hospitals from Spain, Portugal, Romania, Poland and Italy. Ben Cambage, the 
managing director, says his company is “already seeing the impact of the Brexit 
vote. A lot of nurses from these countries have now been put off coming to the 
UK.” He says it’s “even more concerning” that nurses already placed in UK 
hospitals are seriously considering leaving as they no longer feel wanted or 
welcome. Many feel very passionately about the racially aggravated crimes since 
the referendum vote. “Tensions are high,” he says, and “one of our 
international consultants had to convince one of her Romanian nurses not to 
lead a mass walk-out of EU staff at her hospital.” Add to that a far more 
stringent language test now to be imposed on foreign nurses, and many fewer may 
come.

The future of nursing: bursaries versus loans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/feb/23/the-future-of-nursing-bursaries-versus-loans>
The reason we need so many foreign nurses is that after 2010, the number of UK 
nurse training places was cut, with the gap filled from abroad. Jeremy Hunt
boasts of 10,000 extra nurses employed under his government 
<https://www.nursingtimes.net/news/workforce/hunt-says-he-expects-nhs-to-employ-more-full-time-nurses/7011694.article>
, but that’s thanks to importing nurses to cover for training cuts. In 2015 
Health Education England was training 3,100 fewer nurses than a decade ago, a 
19% cut. The public accounts committee was told that2015 saw the lowest output 
of qualified nurses in recent times 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201516/cmselect/cmpubacc/731/731.pdf>
. Add to that the attrition rate: only 60% of the newly trained enter the NHS, 
as the long-enforced 1% pay cap means they can earn more in other occupations.

Since 2010 nurses’ workloads have risen steeply: there are 31% more hospital 
admissions, 45% more procedures and22% more patients in A&E 
<http://www.pulsetoday.co.uk/news/commissioning/commissioning-topics/emergency-admissions/pressure-on-emergency-services-due-to-soaring-attendance-at-minor-ae-and-walk-in-centres/20005228.fullarticle>
. But the number of nurses has only risen by 9%. After pay, the other reason 
nurses cite for leaving is the pressure of work due to lack of staff, a 
self-perpetuating downward spiral. HEE finds a shortfall of 7.2% nurses, 
midwives and health visitors; their failure to train enough has left the NHS 
relying on foreign recruits.

The John Radcliffe hospital in Oxford is just one of many struggling with the 
nursing crisis. Mark Power, its director of human resources, has written a 
detailed report warning his board that the present 10% vacancy rate in the 
Thames Valley area may worsen following the Brexit vote. In 2015 his hospital 
brought in 448 EU nurses who are now “concerned and uncertain” about their 
future. Inability to recruit and retain EU staff has become “a significant 
strategic risk”. It cost the trust £1.4m last year to recruit from the EU, so 
why risk them leaving now? His report calls for “prompt action at a national 
level” to stop them leaving.

Now add to this crisis the abolition next year of bursaries for nurses in 
training. Like other students, they will have to take out loans and accumulate 
large debts. The government claims this would allow universities to create some 
10,000 more training places: currently they are turning away 37,000 applicants. 
But the fear all through the NHS is that instead new trainees will be deterred.

From a German doctor to a Dutch nurse: NHS workers on their worries after 
Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/from-a-german-doctor-to-a-dutch-nurse-europeans-playing-a-vital-role-in-the-nhs>
The John Radcliffe’s chief nurse, Prof Catherine Stoddart, fears many will be 
discouraged. “I worry about the older ones, as a third of our trainees are 
healthcare assistants who train up for a full nursing qualification. They have 
to give up their pay while they train as it is, and they will be reluctant to 
take on debts as well when they have families and high living costs in this 
area. Those with experience are the most valuable recruits and we can’t afford 
to lose them.”

Another inexplicable act of vandalism is new deep cuts – up to 45% - in 
nurses’ post-registration specialist training. A report by the Council of Deans 
of Health warns how much worse this “short-sighted” closure of courses will 
make already acute shortages in specialisms, such as A&E, intensive care, 
diabetes, cancer and palliative nursing. Professor Stoddart says for her 
hospital, offering specialist training is what helps keep good nurses.

As trusts plunge deeper into debt, they have also been reproved by their 
regulator for the rising pay bill

Ask her about her EU nurses and the way she brims with extravagant praise 
betrays her anxiety following the referendum: “They make a huge contribution 
with very strong skills that lift the standard of our own. Our best nurses have 
worked all over the world.” They’re worried, she says. “Since the vote, we have 
organised special lunches for them to reassure them and say how much we want 
them to stay. There’s a risk they will go home in the present climate. Our 
patients worry too, asking them: ‘Where are you from and are you going home?’”

Hospitals are caught in a crunch: the Care Quality Commission has pressed them 
to increase the numbers of nurses on each ward ever since the2013 Francis 
report into the deaths of more than 400 people who received poor care in Mid 
Staffordshire 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/report-of-the-mid-staffordshire-nhs-foundation-trust-public-inquiry>
. On the day I visited, the CQC suddenly descended for an unannounced 
inspection. Yet, as trusts plunge deeper into debt, they have also been 
reproved by their regulator, NHS Improvement, for the rising pay bill. Last 
week the Health Service Journal asked Hunt how trusts can square this 
impossible circle between safe staffing and balancing the books. He gave one of 
his famous magical replies:trusts need to look beyond that “binary choice”, he 
said <https://www.hsj.co.uk/story.aspx?storyCode=7011625>. How? No one knows.

He could at least demand that the three Brexiteer ministers immediately 
embrace all EU health service staff; tell them they will always be welcome here 
before they up sticks and go home, or follow the trail of British-trained 
nurses already heading to better paid, less stressful jobs in the US and 
Australia.

The alternative is a nursing shortage, caused directly by government cuts 
and strategic failure, turning into another perfect Brexit storm.
 