
While in so many obvious and petrifying ways politics has never been bleaker, 
there is a level on which I have never felt more optimistic. And for better 
reasons than “it is the start of January and optimism is required” or “things 
had to get this broken before energy would be mustered to fix them”.

A huge amount of thinking is starting to crystallise around solutions that 
approach multiple crises at once, in innovations such as locally owned 
renewable energy, a basiccitizen’s income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/universal-basic-income-welfare-employment-scotland-canada-netherlands>
 or a masssocial housing <https://www.theguardian.com/society/social-housing> 
programme. The ideas are there to enact; but that won’t happen without 
sustained and coherent democratic pressure, which in itself is not possible 
unless we reconnect with our democracy. It’s rather an abstract, utopian ideal 
– to fall back in love with institutions, representation, all the process 
involved in the pooling of power. Yet there is exhilaration in the detail.

The broad consensus is that everyone is sick of politicians. On the one hand, 
eminences grises such as Gus O’Donnell (chosen randomly as the most recent 
example) connect living standards to the disenchantment. The more stagnant 
people’s wages, the worse their conditions, the higher their rents, the more 
disillusioned with mainstream politics they’re likely to be. The 
counter-argument is that MPs are simply bad people: witness theexpenses scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/mps-expenses>, or Iain Duncan Smith. Far 
from giving a clear map of the terrain, these perspectives are just features of 
it: bogs and pitfalls.

The young are disillusioned: by bureaucracy, insincerity, and a sense that the 
government doesn’t understand them

The real crisis of faith is not in politicians but in democracy, and this is 
common across the OECD countries. The World Economic Forum details its extent: 
from Sweden to New Zealand, Britain to the US, the percentage of people who say 
that it is“essential” to live in a democracy 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/29/world/americas/western-liberal-democracy.html?_r=1>
 has dropped from around 70% among those born in the 1930s, to around 25% for 
those born in the 1980s.

Part of this is sheer amnesia. People born in the 1930s remember what the 
alternatives to democracy look like; it is ardently to be hoped that the young 
can be reminded by argument, and don’t have to see first-hand the devastation 
of authoritarianism before they believe it. The young are disillusioned, 
according to theGlobal Shapers survey 
<https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/12/charts-that-show-young-people-losing-faith-in-democracy/>
, by bureaucracy, insincerity, lack of action and accountability, and a sense 
that the government doesn’t understand them.

That last point dovetails with the perception of insincerity. There is a 
problem with selection, a sense that politics is a career for insiders, people 
heavily invested in the status quo, who see their job as protecting it from the 
demands of the people. In 2012 a team of Italian physicists, economists and 
political scientistsmodelled a parliament in which some members had been chosen 
at random 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/apr/16/improbable-research-politicians-random-selection>
, like juries, and found the resultant system to be both more efficient and 
better at pursuing broad social welfare – as well as more diverse and thus more 
representative.

Party discipline perverts constructive action, while monolithic structures 
alienate voters with their tribalism and internecine wrangling. To choose all 
MPs at random would be to disconnect voters entirely from the process I prefer 
a significant element of deliberated choice, achieved through open primaries 
either within or across parties, in which voters rather than a party machine 
choose a candidate, based on open debate. The idea is gaining ground with
Crowdpac <https://www.crowdpac.co.uk/>, which, although the brainchild of Steve 
Hilton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/britain-two-party-political-system-voters-democracy-election>
 (whom I did not expect to namecheck in any utopian vision of anything), has a 
progressive pioneer in its chief international officer, Paul Hilder, co-founder 
of 38 Degrees and Open Democracy.

Once candidates are in place, progressives need to build an alliance, as 
championed by thethink-and-do-tank Compass 
<https://www.compassonline.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/11/The-21st-Century-Party-Very-Modern-Prince-2.pdf>
. This is not an idea conceived in despair at the failures of the traditional 
left: it is natural for a modern politics to evolve to build enough consensus 
to cooperate, while accommodating enough disagreement that we don’t feel our 
political identities have been compromised.

Finally, there is an urgent need to reconnect voters to issues, beyond 
politicians issuing mere platitudes and then being amazed when polls come back 
rejecting them. MPs are doing a poor job at making the case for humanity in the 
refugee crisis, higher taxes to fund the NHS, public investment to solve the 
housing shortage. It is not because they are inadequate people – though some 
could use a little more courage – rather, these issues are intricate, and 
cannot survive the over-simplification required when the primary means of 
dissemination are mass media and, if you’re Jeremy Corbyn, rallies.

Citizens’ juries – yet more jury-fication – involve choosing a group at 
random, asking their opinions at the start of a project, giving them a range of 
expert views to cross-examine, then drawing out their conclusions. At close 
range, this experiment canradically change people’s attitudes to a given issue 
<http://www.excludedvoices.org>, but more importantly it creates a sense of 
participation and inclusion.

Britain’s two-party political system isn’t working | Steve Hilton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/britain-two-party-political-system-voters-democracy-election>
I’d also broaden the net of what we think of as democratic action: voting is 
just the endpoint of the process, decision-time. It is given meaning by prior 
elements: the structures we have built together (the NHS); the resources that 
belong to us all (land, rivers, forests, air, schools, universities); the 
systems that we all keep afloat with mutual trust (money creation, social 
security). To take money as one example, even while, plainly, we don’t all have 
the same amount, we all have the same stake in its creation. At the moment, 
give or take a bit of quantitative easing, all money is conjured into existence 
by private banks, 85% of it as loans on existing residential property. It’s a 
recipe for unaffordable housing and unmanageable private debt, but it’s also 
undemocratic: the creation of money, which is essentially the creation of debt, 
affects all of us. There is no reason to surrender it to private banks, whose 
interests tend not to be the public good and whose accountability is pretty 
patchy.

Opinion is divided as to the solution: the economist Ann Pettifor favours 
tighter regulation of banks. This could involve a social benefit duty, forcing 
banks to prove that any debt created contributes to a better future for us all 
– lending to new businesses; lending for skills; lending for new houses ahead 
of existing ones and such like. Fran Boait, head ofPositive Money 
<http://positivemoney.org/about/people/>, favours sovereign money, created by 
the government after public deliberation. The sine qua non is that the citizen 
is invited into the process, and understands enough to make the invitation 
relevant. A survey, now two years old, found that onlyone in 10 MPs understood 
how money was created 
<http://positivemoney.org/2014/08/7-10-mps-dont-know-creates-money-uk/>; 
currently, we can’t even be bothered to educate our own legislature. There is 
an assumption of exclusivity, money as the preserve of the moneyed and nobody 
else’s business, a masonic code that leaves greed in charge.

All that fixed, the democratic to-do list will read: democratise renewable 
energy production; establish proportional representation; devise nationwide 
constitutional conventions; fund broad-based citizen journalism; and then 
arrive at the sunlit uplands.

None of these ideas are even as revolutionary as the “bread and butter” 
business of our current government – destroy trading partnerships, hose money 
at border control, stoke up racial hatred. What is daunting is neither the 
radicalism nor the effort required, but, rather, the hope. Pessimism is 
anaesthetising, and fatalism comforting; optimism leaves you vulnerable to 
every gust of disappointment, but it’s the very first of our civic duties.
 