
For Christmas, I took delivery of a puppy. It was chosen in November and the 
kids wanted to call it Bender, after the robot in the Simpsons-stable cartoon
Futurama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2009/sep/25/futurama-your-next-box-set>
. I said that even if we didn’t live in the gay village of Vauxhall, I wouldn’t 
have a dog called Bender. “Why not?” my son asked. I explained that because as 
well as being a robot, Bender is a derogatory word meaning homosexual. “You’re 
homophobic,” he said, to which I replied: “I’m not homophobic, but other people 
are.” “So, why do you care?” he said.

At which point I dropped arguing in favour of democracy, and suggested we all 
put a name into a hat, giving each of us one right of veto. I’d forgotten that 
there were three of them and only two of us, so after all our vetoes were 
deployed, the dog was still called Bender. So I did what any normal person 
would do: moved the goalposts and said the dog had to keep the name his first 
family had given him, otherwise he’d get confused. That name was Romeo, which 
we could all live with. Unfortunately I’d also forgotten that my daughter is 
called Harper, so now it looks like we have an unholy obsession with theBeckham 
family 
<http://www.makemyfamilytree.com/articles/the_beckham_family_tree_and_biography.html>
. The first person to notice that laughed for approximately 45 minutes.

We weren’t even out of 2016 and I had already forgotten the first two laws of 
Brexit: just because a decision is very important doesn’t mean democracy will 
deliver the right answer; and once the wrong course has been embarked upon, 
positive thinking won’t help – things will be permanently worse for the rest of 
your life or, in Romeo’s case, 15 years.

At a celebratory party thrown for Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage>, he gave a speech that made 
me want to go back to bed and not wake up until I’d emigrated: “For those that 
are here that aren’t particularly happy with what’s happened in 2016, I’ve got 
some really bad news for you – it’s going to get a bloody sight worse next 
year.”

It’s hard to see, from a UK point of view, anything happening in 2017 that is 
as destructive and diminishing as leaving the EU, unless we have another 
referendum on whether or not to bring back the death penalty. Yet it is likely, 
indeed almost certain, that 2017 will contain some political misery – either 
there will be a snap election, and the Labour party will be massacred, and this 
will be taken as proof not that Jeremy Corbyn doesn’t say enough, but that 
liberal values have been vanquished, and people who cling on to them need to 
stop fighting and adjust to a new reality. Alternatively, there won’t be a 
general election, and we’ll have to watch agape as a prime minister nobody 
voted for, with a majority you could fit in an UberXL, marches into 
negotiations of the most profound national consequence, with a plan shewill not 
even divulge to the Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/23/queen-theresa-may-brexit-britain-eu>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecret-weapon-2017-populist-right-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd36400fdad7c2f934a6bb25e65c3e82c5ea71810%2F0_128_5866_3521%2F5866.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20secret%20weapon%20against%20the%20populist%20right%20in%202017%20is%20hope%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecret-weapon-2017-populist-right-hope%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20secret%20weapon%20against%20the%20populist%20right%20in%202017%20is%20hope%20%7C%20Zoe%20Williams&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fsecret-weapon-2017-populist-right-hope%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd36400fdad7c2f934a6bb25e65c3e82c5ea71810%2F0_128_5866_3521%2F5866.jpg>
 ‘At a celebratory party thrown for Nigel Farage, he gave a speech that made me 
want to go back to bed and not wake up until I’d emigrated.’ Photograph: 
Manuta/Getty/iStockphoto 
Farage is right, in other words, and this sentence is so alien to my muscle 
memory, I went through seven typos to get there: those of us who hated 2016 are 
going to loathe 2017.

However, my next year’s self will have some advantage over this year’s, which 
is experience. I’m not going to waste any more time, not one more morning, on 
despair. After the referendum, I spent the whole summer in a limbo of futility, 
but what’s the point arguing with people who have no respect for facts, who 
have no consistency, who change their story halfway through (we can be just 
like Norway, they said, until suddenly Norway was the most outrageous 
compromise; we can save huge amounts of money by leaving the EU, they said, 
until suddenly it was the most expensive decision ever, but somehow it was 
still worth it)? What’s the point engaging on political terrain where a man can 
call Mexicans rapists and educated people will still vote for him? The fact is, 
we re-engage because we have to: the alternative would be nihilism, which is 
not a realistic position to take up late in life. I accept that; I don’t intend 
to waste any more time figuring that out.

The other way I tried to escape political misery was by persuading myself 
things weren’t as bad as they seemed; there is cause for optimism on the 
progressive side, ideas that are starting to come together, groups that are 
starting to cooperate, allies appearing from unexpected places. But the 
politicians ascending on a wave of division and hostility are exactly as bad as 
they seem: Farage as xenophobic, Johnson as self-serving, May as incompetent, 
Gove as narcissistic. But we will not find common ground by moving closer to 
any of these post-Brexit victors, we will just make the job of spreading 
suspicion and narrow-mindedness easier for them.

I never accepted the idea of public opinion as a solid mass that moves as one 
and arrives at a new view of which it cannot be disabused. Yet I sometimes 
relaxed into that interpretation – that the people had spoken on immigration, 
or on the institutions of the EU, and that new reality had to be incorporated. 
This is simply not the case: people responded to the strongest argument, or 
rather, the one most trenchantly put.

The only way to beat it is to make a case that is both substantively stronger 
and relayed with more conviction. Which feeds into my final lesson from 2016, 
which is to respond to the new normal by asking for more, not less: I don’t 
just want human, employee, civil and consumer rights protected as we leave the 
EU and have to build our own frameworks, I want better ones. I don’t just want 
to protect the welfare state, I want a new concept of security that takes in 
the realities of modern precariousness. All those problems that Ukip leverages 
in the generation of anxiety – housing shortages, overstretched public 
services, low wages – are real: the best solutions will be the ones that sound 
audaciously distant from the status quo.

So 2016, in its best possible light, looks like the training montage in Rocky, 
the bit where we lost a few teeth, but learned how to take knocks; 2017 can be 
where that experience starts to count.
 