
Guardian readers calling our telethon to donate to child refugees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/guardian-and-observer-charity-appeal-2016> 
gave more than ever this year. This cause touches a deep chord – not just pity, 
but revulsion and national shame at Britain’s no-room-at-the-inn slamming the 
door on children.

The readers wanted to talk too. There was goodwill, yes, but forget seasonal 
joy, woe was the refrain. What has become of us, what will become of our 
children and grandchildren? How did our world turn upside down in 2016 and 
leave us with no hope? It was becoming a wailathon.

Everything liberal and left that people feel they have striven for all their 
lives seems suddenly to have been grubbed up by the roots and rejected. The 
dark world of Brexit, and the yet darker coming Trump universe, have snuffed 
out our sense of history. One woman said she was almost glad her husband hadn’t 
lived to see this year. All that’s left is individual acts of kindness, giving 
to charity, embracing like-minded people in mutual wretchedness, but we had 
little comfort to offer one another.

Had they been listening in, how those angry Brexit perpetrators – Michael 
Gove, Boris Johnson, Iain Duncan Smith, Liam Fox, Rupert Murdoch, Paul Dacre 
and the rest – would have scorned all this “remoaning”. Christmas cards this 
year – all cheery robins and grinning snowmen on the outside – come with 
handwritten messages inside keening the same despair: can it get worse? Yes, 
next year will be darker still.

The seven deadly things we’re doing to trash the planet (and human life with 
it) | John Vidal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/seven-deadly-things-trash-planet-human-life>
We lament the loss of any glimpse of Jerusalem the golden. Callers who rang to 
offer what they could – some spare cash here, a winter fuel allowance there – 
talked on Saturday about a lifelong belief in progress. We were taught that 
history was an onward march: things would always get better. There were 
backward steps – wars, the depression, the Thatcher years – but surely the path 
to improvement and enlightenment would be found again. History was reassuringly 
inevitable: factory acts, banning boys up chimneys, the universal franchise, 
trade union rights, Lloyd George’s 1911 people’s budget, Beveridge, Roosevelt’s 
New Deal and its British incarnation in 1945. Attlee gave us not just the NHS 
and social security but helped the birth of Nato, the UN and a postwar 
consensus that saw Macmillan build 300,000 homes a year, mostly council houses.

Edward Heath took us into Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2005/jul/18/uk.conservatives1> and opened 
out a little our island mentality. The advantages seemed obvious: holidays, 
football teams, Erasmus, free trade, MEPs together in one European parliament 
must mean friendship with neighbours so like us in culture, history and 
democratic purpose. European differences are endlessly interesting, but 
vanishingly small when we look outside at the rest of the world. Look how 
refugees fleeing despots and those touched by civil wars seek Europe as a haven 
of human rights, peace and democracy. This was ours; this is what we have just 
rejected, spurring ripples of rejection across the continent.

If there was a moment’s hope that Donald Trump would be muzzled by wise 
advisers, we have seen it dissipate with eachnew appointment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/19/vincent-viola-army-secretary-trump>
. Here comes government by billionaires, climate change deniers, truth 
rejecters, human rights debunkers; erratic rule via Twitter at 3am. An alliance 
with fellow strongman Putin? More frightening will be the inevitable clash 
between these turkey-cocks.

Back home, there will be six years of cuts, grinding one public service after 
another. There have been fourprison riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/18/birmingham-prison-riot-government-was-warned-two-months-earlier>
s already.Social care is collapsing 
<https://corporatewatch.org/the-home-care-business>, as private companies 
withdraw from care homes: half the homes owned by the biggest five have been 
rated “unsatisfactory”. Already1.2 million older people are left with care 
needs unmet 
<http://www.ageuk.org.uk/latest-news/12m-older-people-dont-get-the-social-care-they-need/>
, a silent suffering. But there will be no silence from the NHS, entering its 
harshest spending year yet, facing the mass closure of maternity and A&E units.

Come next April, there will be £13bn benefit cuts poleaxing the incomes of 
millions of low-paid families:lone mothers will lose 18% in the universal 
credit squeeze by 2020. 
<http://wbg.org.uk/analysis/afs-2016-full-response-from-the-womens-budget-group/>
Disabled people are being reassessed for reduced personal independence payments;
already 230,000 have had them cut, including 57% of psychosis sufferers 
<http://www.mind.org.uk/news-campaigns/news/over-half-of-people-with-mental-health-problems-have-had-their-benefits-cut-in-the-move-from-dla-to-pip/>
.

There will be disruption as strikes – still minimal by historical standards – 
are called to safeguard jobs, with over a million gone from public service. 
Ministers and the press will condemn them, but do we want a world of automata, 
with no one in post offices, stations or trains; no one keeping our parks, 
minding playgrounds, patrolling or sweeping the streets? Schools will take an8% 
funding cut per pupil 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/england-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary>
 next year, laying off teachers. Meanwhile we will wonder why we score so badly 
on international tables.

The drumbeat for crushing the last breath out of the unions is only resisted 
by No 10 because even ministers fear it presages a post-Brexit abolition of all 
working rights. But those rights are being torn up anyway by Amazon-style gig 
employers who designate their workers as self-employed. Inflation is flagged at
4% next year <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37838087>, with real wages 
falling behind yet again. This is our story: a decade-long drop in living 
standards – the EU’s worst record bar Greece.

Putin and Trump could be on the same side in this troubling new world order | 
Matthew d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/commentisfree/2016/dec/19/trump-putin-same-side-new-world-order>
For most Guardian people there never was a utopian destination, just a 
reasonable hope that things would keep on getting better, fairer, kinder, 
closer. That hope is being dashed as chancellorPhilip Hammond pursues his 
predecessor’s plan to shrink the state back permanently to 35% of GDP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/23/dark-days-civil-servants-autumn-statement-leaves-budgets-shrink>
. That means more cuts for ever, in addition to the deleterious effects of 
Brexit.

Nothing “works for everyone” in any of this, and in every month that Theresa 
May seems unable to shape or lead anything, stuff will happen willynilly. While 
she is consumed by Brexit impossiblisms, all the repercussions will simply 
break over her, wave by wave. One wishes she could find the mettle to step back 
from the abyss and tell the country that Brexit means compromise. But nothing 
in her past suggests a willingness to confront prevailing winds.

Those currents, blasting across the Atlantic and through some of Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, are illiberal, isolationist, 
mean-spirited, inegalitarian, often terrifying – and people know that.

Newspaper columns are supposed to end with solutions, but I’m running low on 
hope. Instead, I’ll leave youwith the reported words of Tory grandee Ken Clarke 
 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-4044738/BLACK-DOG-Burt-buttoned-trousers.html>
and implore you to think of this in the months ahead. “Brexit headbangers have 
made politics nastier than ever, but they are frighteningly well organised,” he 
said. “If we are going to stop them we have to do the same and not be 
intimidated by their wall of hate.”
 