
Going to war is too easy, far too easy. That is the one clear message from the 
Commons report on David Cameron’s 2011 war on Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
. It presents that venture as an ill-conceived vanity project, to dust the 
ingenu prime minister with some “Arab spring” glory. In reality it brought 
untold misery to a country to which Cameron promised peace and democracy.

MPs deliver damning verdict on David Cameron's Libya intervention
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
The immediate purpose of the war was to save “hundreds of thousands” in 
Benghazi from imminent massacre, after their uprising against Libya’s leader,
Muammar Gaddafi <https://www.theguardian.com/world/muammar-gaddafi>. The 
certainty of this massacre was dubious. So too was the legality of Britain’s 
(and France’s) aggression. The military and intelligence communities could not 
see the point. Nor could Barack Obama. Mission creep was inevitable, and the 
outcome was certain to destabilise not just Libya but its neighbours. It was 
none of Britain’s business.

This is not hindsight. Plenty of people said it at the time – clearly not 
loudly enough. As the foreign affairs committee says, Cameron’s defence of the 
intervention was drenched in mendacity: that it was strictly humanitarian, that 
it was just a no-fly zone, that it was not taking sides in a civil war, that it 
was not aimed at regime change. As for his promise to cheering crowds in 
Benghazi, that “we will stand with you as you rebuild your country and your 
democracy” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-africa-14934352>, that was a patent 
lie. Already he could not even visit Libya’s capital, Tripoli, as it was 
plunging into factional fighting and chaos.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fleaders-britain-war-tony-blair-david-cameron-iraq-libya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eae7df5db1f8ac6ef3d84935f7ef34c595158a3%2F0_141_2485_1491%2F2485.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20leaders%20are%20hooked%20on%20the%20narcotic%20of%20glory.%20That%E2%80%99s%20why%20we%20rush%20to%20war%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fleaders-britain-war-tony-blair-david-cameron-iraq-libya%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20leaders%20are%20hooked%20on%20the%20narcotic%20of%20glory.%20That%E2%80%99s%20why%20we%20rush%20to%20war%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F14%2Fleaders-britain-war-tony-blair-david-cameron-iraq-libya%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7eae7df5db1f8ac6ef3d84935f7ef34c595158a3%2F0_141_2485_1491%2F2485.jpg>
 ‘As for Cameron’s promise to cheering crowds in Benghazi, that “we will stand 
with you as you rebuild your country and your democracy”, that was a patent 
lie.’ Photograph: Stefan Rousseau/AFP/Getty Images 
The fallacy of intervention by bombing alone is that it can morally distance 
the aggressor from the consequence of his actions. To bomb a regime out of 
existence has the same outcome as invading it. Those who destroy authority, law 
and order in other people’s countries have an absolute obligation to restore 
them.

The essence of imperial power projection, from the Roman to the British 
empires, was total commitment. Armies came, saw, conquered – and stayed to hold 
the peace. Conquering was easy. It was holding the peace that was hard, and 
eventually bled empires white. As in Baghdad in 2003, so in Tripoli in 2011: 
the destruction of authority was more cataclysmic than any other worst-case 
scenario. Cameron had seen this in Iraq, yet inLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/libya> he cut and run. He sowed the seeds of 
chaos and left anarchy in his wake.

We know, and knew then, that Islamist fanaticism feasts on tribal discord. By 
unlocking the doors of Armageddon, Cameron admitted fanaticism to northAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>. As such he threatened Tunisia, 
Algeria and Mali. He also provided a lawless corridor through which hundreds of 
thousands of refugees could make their way to Europe. He thus ironically fed 
the Brexit cause and his own downfall. He and his advisers must have given some 
thought to this.

The Blair-Cameron interventions since the turn of the 21st century have, with 
American help, destabilised an entire arc of the Muslim world. Millions have 
died and been driven from their ancestral lands, on a scale reminiscent of 
historical human catastrophes in eastern Europe, Russia and China. Of course, 
this “could” have happened anyway, as it happened in Lebanon and in the 
Iran-Iraq war. But it happened far worse after the interventions began.

Much of foreign policy is founded on false parallels. The Libyan venture was 
said to be justified because intervention “worked” in former Yugoslavia. That 
is true. But Yugoslavia was a patchwork of European provinces. The wars worked 
only through massive commitment on the ground, with the two rebel provinces, 
Bosnia and Kosovo, becoming de facto EU protectorates. Bosnia is reputedly the 
most subsidised state on Earth. Libya had no such luck.

The other proclamation is that Syria today “proves” that not intervening is 
even worse. This is madness. Syria was a tragedy of its own making, but it was 
immeasurably prolonged by the west arming President Bashar al-Assad’s enemies 
and enabling a Sunni-Islamic State statelet to arise in Iraq; that and Russia’s 
massive support for Assad. Intervention has been the death of Syria. The idea 
that British bombers and (heaven forbid) ground troops would have prevented 
such internecine strife is absurd. If we want to help Syria, we should welcome 
its refugees.

Five things you may have missed about the Chilcot inquiry | Louise Kettle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/26/five-things-chilcot-iraq-war-inquiry-tony-blair>
What the Commons report does not do, any more than did Chilcot over Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/iraq-war-inquiry>, is ask why Tony Blair and 
Cameron were able to rush to war with so little thought given to consequences, 
and with so little opposition from within the political community.

British leaders of the postwar and cold-war eras were chary of wars of 
intervention. They knew that violence mostly escalates and begets more 
violence. Harold Wilson, Ted Heath and Margaret Thatcher steered clear of 
Vietnam, Congo, Cambodia, Bangladesh and Ethiopia. The present generation is 
more gung ho. The past 15 years have seen Britain fight more wars abroad than 
the previous 50. Not one has involved national security. What changed?

The answer is that these “wars of choice” have been essentially ventures of 
prime ministerial self-esteem. As Chilcot showed, in the case ofIraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq> the decision to send armies overseas 
was regarded by Blair’s colleagues almost as his personal privilege. Cameron 
likewise craved a personal “victory”, and afterwards visited Benghazi to take 
credit. There were reservations from the defence and intelligence chiefs. But a 
feature of bombing intervention is that nobody on “our” side gets hurt. 
Intervention can seem almost an exercise, Olympic Games with whizz-bangs.

In these circumstances, caution has no constituency. During Libya, Britain’s 
much-vaunted national security council concerned itself with legalities and 
logistics. As in Iraq, when war drums sounded and the press was cheering, no 
one had time for the tedious topic of postwar reconstruction. Sceptics were 
dismissed as wimps, appeasers and do-nothings. Everyone was high on the 
narcotic of glory.

It is to Cameron’s credit that, in the case of war on Syria in 2013, he did 
ask for the check of a formal parliamentary vote, to confront what he absurdly 
claimed was “a direct threat to this country”. To parliament’s credit, it 
refused him. That did not stop the Commons last year returning to the fray by 
voting to bomb Syria after all. That has hardly made any difference. But the 
thesis was, as they said of Gaddafi, the old one: that nothing could be worse 
than Assad. Want to bet?
 