
It was a mistake – a monumental, world-class mistake. Cars for everyone was 
one of the most stupid promises politicians ever made. Cars are meant to meet a 
simple need: quick and efficient mobility. Observe an urban artery during the 
school run, or a trunk road on a bank holiday weekend, and ask yourself whether 
the current system meets that need. The vast expanse of road space, the massive 
investment in metal and fossil fuel, has delivered the freedom to sit fuming in 
a toxic cloud as your life ticks by.

The primary aim has become snarled up with other, implicit objectives: the 
sense of autonomy, the desire for self-expression through the configuration of 
metal and plastic you drive, and the demand for profit by car manufacturers and 
fossil fuel producers whose lobbying keeps us on the road rather than moving 
along it.

How to reduce the risks of carmageddon | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/23/how-to-reduce-the-risks-of-carmageddon>
Step back from this mess and ask yourself this. If you controlled the billions 
that are spent every year – privately and publicly – on the transport system, 
and your aim was to smooth the passage of those who use it, is this what you 
would do? Only if your imagination had been surgically excised.

Three-quarters of people living in cities want clean air zones, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/04/three-quarters-of-people-living-in-cities-want-clean-air-zones-poll-finds>
Even in a small, economically mature, densely populated nation like the UK, 
where change is easy, we’re still driving in the wrong direction. The 
government boasts that car use is rising again, after being knocked back by the 
recession. It is spending £9bn of our scarce money on roads every year,70% of 
which is on new capacity 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/514912/road-use-statistics.pdf>
. Thanks to the cuts, bus services supported by local authoritiesreduced their 
mileage by 10% last year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/485296/annual-bus-statistics-year-ending-march-2015.pdf>
.

Over half the car journeys people make in this country are less than five 
miles: this is what policy failure looks like. Why don’t people cycle instead? 
Perhaps because, though the number of motorists killed or seriously injured has 
fallen sharply, the number of cyclists killed or hurt on the roads has climbed 
since 2003. This now accounts for14% of all casualties 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/514912/road-use-statistics.pdf>
, though cycling amounts toonly 1% of the distance we travel 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistical-data-sets/nts03-modal-comparisons>.

The simplest, cheapest and healthiest solution to congestion is blocked by the 
failure to provide safe transit. Last year the transport department crowed that 
it could cut £23m from its budget as a result of an “underspend on the Cycle 
Cities Ambition budget <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-33013567>”. 
Instead of handing this money back to the Treasury, it should have discovered 
why it wasn’t spent, and ensured that it doesn’t happen again.

The undercapacity of the roads arises from the overcapacity of the vehicles 
that use them. Average occupancy of cars in the UK is 1.6; and it seems to me 
that the bigger the car, the fewer people it tends to contain. With a few 
exceptions (such as Mayor Sadiq Khan’s plans for London), almost nothing is 
done to change or challenge this.

When a major feeder road was resurfaced in my home city, I heard people 
complaining that it took them an hour and a half to travel two miles to work. 
They could have walked in half the time, or cycled in one-tenth. The council 
had a perfect opportunity to intervene, with notices beside the road urging 
people to switch to two wheels or two feet. But it sat and watched, as trapped 
in its mindset as people were in their cars.

Our problems are dwarfed by what is happening elsewhere. Global car production 
has almost doubled in 10 years. The number of cars on the planet is expected to 
rise from 1.2bn to 2bn by 2035. Carmageddon beckons: a disaster for the 
climate, public health and our quality of life. Yet it is still treated as an 
indicator of economic success.

We are told that this is about choice. But surely there should be a hierarchy 
of choice: the choice of whether or not to suffer a premature death should take 
precedence over our choice of transport mode.

Our brains are filled with metal particles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/05/toxic-air-pollution-particles-found-in-human-brains-links-alzheimers>
, our children’s lungs and mental development are stunted, and an epidemic of 
heart and lung disease is catalysed – all to grant people the choice of stewing 
in a traffic jam rather than getting there by other means.

In a recent YouGov poll in Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/04/three-quarters-of-people-living-in-cities-want-clean-air-zones-poll-finds>
, 76% of respondents opted for clean air zones in their cities, enforced by 
taxes and charges. Sorry, wrong kind of choice.

So here’s a novel idea: how about a 21st-century transport system for the 21st 
century?Helsinki is making public transport as convenient 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/jul/10/helsinki-shared-public-transport-plan-car-ownership-pointless>
 and flexible as private transport. For example, by aggregating people’s 
requests via a smartphone app, minibus services can collect people from their 
homes and deliver them close to their destinations while minimising their 
routes.Hamburg is building a network 
<http://inhabitat.com/hamburg-announces-plans-to-become-a-car-free-city-within-20-years/>
 of cycling and walking paths so safe, pleasant and convenient that no one with 
the ability to do otherwise would want to take a car.

Let’s set a date by which no new car is manufactured unless it’s electric. 
Let’s set up household charging points, allowing people to plug in without 
having to take their car off the road. Let’s introduce a scrappage payment, not 
to replace old cars with new ones but to replace old cars with no car at all. 
It would take the form of public transport tokens.

How about facilitating “walking buses” to school, with parents taking turns to 
lead a crocodile of children? How about local drop-off points, so that parcel 
companies don’t clog our streets and we never miss deliveries? How about 
providing bikes for hire at stations, and – yes, I believe in miracles – 
synchronising bus and train timetables?

Let’s reopen old rail lines 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/sites/default/files/research-files/reopening-railways-report.pdf>
 closed in the mistaken belief that train travel was on the way out (it has 
grown 74% since 1995) and build new lines to bridge the gaps. Let’s bring train 
services under public control and use the money now spent on road-building to 
make tickets affordable for everyone.

Let’s implement the brilliant plan proposed by Dr Alan Storkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2006/dec/05/comment.politics> for an 
intercity bus network faster and more convenient than car travel, using 
dedicated lanes on the motorways and interchanges at the motorway junctions. 
Let’s build new settlements around public transport hubs – light rail, tram and 
electric bus systems – rather than around the car.

What is difficult about any of this? What technological barriers stand in the 
way? None.Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> is among the 
simplest of our problems to solve. Yet our governments are stuck in a 
20th-century gridlock, still committed to their great mistake.
 