
It’s emblematic of the government’s handling of the mental health crisis that 
when Natasha Devon, the Conservatives’ much-publicised children’s mental health 
tsar, found her roleunceremoniously axed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>
, the government seemed more concerned with face-saving spin than with the 
children in need of help.

Sacked children's mental health tsar Natasha Devon: 'I was proper angry'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/13/sacked-childrens-mental-health-tzar-natasha-devon-i-was-proper-angry>
Hospitalisations from self-harm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/16/teenagersgirls-self-poisoning-uk-alcohol-mental- 
health-self-harm> have doubled in the past three years. Admissions from eating 
disorders are rocketing, according to the charity YoungMinds. Growing numbers 
of teenagers aredeliberately poisoning themselves 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/16/teenagers-girls-self-poisoning-uk-alcohol-mental-health-self-harm>
. But when Devon tried to talk to ministers about “what’s going on” to create 
this scale of distress for young people, she says “it was like talking to a 
brick”. As sheputs it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/13/sacked-childrens-mental-health-tzar-natasha-devon-i-was-proper-angry>
: if the government really wants to solve the children’s mental health crisis, 
it needs to actually acknowledge the causes.

It may want to start by looking close to home 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-views/young-peoples-mental-health-getting-worse-government-doesnt-want>
: “This government and the coalition before them have engineered a social 
climate where it’s really difficult for any young person to enjoy optimal 
mental health,” Devon said shortly before her role was terminated.

“Parents work every hour God sends to make ends meet, meaning reduced quality 
family time spent together. Spiralling poverty means the number of young people 
relying on food banks reached one million as we entered 2015. Schools are 
increasingly being relied upon to give pupils breakfast.”

Poverty puts children at risk of mental health problems. This is not something 
about which any politician can claim ignorance: back in 2012 thechief medical 
officer reported 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/255237/2901304_CMO_complete_low_res_accessible.pdf>
 that children in the poorest households were three times more likely to have a 
mental illness than children in wealthier homes.

What Devon points to is backed up by study after study 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/poor_mental_health_report.pdf>
. Reductions in family incomes – including benefit cuts – are likely to have 
“wide-ranging negative effects” on children’s mental health.

Families struggling with debt and parents trying to get by on low wages are 
both proven factors. The housing a young person lives in – if it’s damp or 
overcrowded – affects them. Even growing up in a cold home is linked to an 
increased risk ofdepression and anxiety 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/poor_mental_health_report.pdf>
.

And what has the government chosen to do? Introduce policies like the benefit 
cap and the bedroom tax, and freeze local housing allowance – so exacerbating 
insecure, low-quality housing – along with changes to benefits, from universal 
credit to personal independence payments, thatpush already struggling families 
into financial hardship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/11/big-benefits-myth-tories-half-families-low-incomes-not-claiming-welfare>
. Benefit cuts don’t exist in a vacuum. Sanction a mother’s jobseeker’s 
allowance or take a father’s sickness benefit after declaring them “fit for 
work” and their children suffer too. Cut an adult’s housing benefit as rents 
rise and social housing is abandoned and it is children who end up sleeping in 
cramped B&Bs.

In light of the cuts already devastating families in this country, experts have
warned 
<http://www.childrenssociety.org.uk/sites/default/files/poor_mental_health_report.pdf>
 about the impact of continual austerity on children’s mental wellbeing.

Mental health champion for UK schools axed after criticising government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/04/mental-health-champion-uk-schools-axed-after-criticising-government-natasha-devon>
But still the government presses ahead. It’s telling that, when asked to 
highlight other leading causes of the mental health crisis (alongside social 
media and school pressure), Devon points to thecuts to child and adolescent 
mental services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/13/sacked-childrens-mental-health-tzar-natasha-devon-i-was-proper-angry>
. That’s £85m gone in six years – and with it social workers, support 
programmes for parents, educational psychologists and targeted mental health 
services in schools.

With one hand the government is damaging children’s wellbeing by slashing the 
benefits their parents rely on; with the other it’s cutting the mental health 
services they then need for support.

No matter how hard parents try to protect their children from reality – 
pretending that they’re not eating dinner because they’re not hungry, rather 
than because the family can’t afford enough food – children notice when their 
mother’s been crying again or the bailiffs have come. And if there is no money 
for rent, there is no money to pay for private doctors and therapists.

Devon’s role has been axed, but the crisis she has highlighted won’t disappear 
as easily – and it could continue to grow without people like her, willing to 
ask the government difficult questions. We’re now rightly comfortable talking 
about theimpact of Facebook and Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/11/teens-social-media-night-risk-harm-mental-health-research>
 on young people or the effect of relentless exams. But when it comes to mental 
health, poverty is still the elephant in the room.
 