
Kiosk photos taken over the years dominate our fridge. I never know where to 
put them, but I love them.

The picture of the volcano was drawn by my husband, Tony, a few years ago. I 
pointed out that there were only four figures running from the volcano and we 
are five. Tony replied: “You’re the volcano.”

Oh yeah, and some wise words from Tim Lott about why siblings are so important.
Jacqueline Chatfield
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02409188d79a78c88783b2a7509e00de34dd93fb%2F68_193_1532_1914%2F1532.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02409188d79a78c88783b2a7509e00de34dd93fb%2F68_193_1532_1914%2F1532.jpg>
 Margaret Cooter’s fridge 
Having an integrated fridge fitted a while back meant no more magnets holding 
down faded children’s artwork. The only one of our children so far to have gone 
to university resolved to learn a new language beforehand. She stuck Post-its 
around the house naming objects in Italian. Her handwritten Post-it for 
“fridge” always made us smile while she was far away studying. Four years on – 
though she’s now graduated and back home – this Post-it is still firmly in 
place so that, even when our daughter’s out, her playful spirit is in the house 
with us.Tony Elston 

Tony refused, in the 22 years we were together, to change the layout of his 
old-fashioned but comfortable kitchen. This meant the fridge had to be of the 
under-the-counter sort. Yet, even beyond middle age, he wasn’t resistant to all 
change, and willingly came along to visit museums and art galleries – a new 
pastime that became our Sunday ritual. In the past decade, his collection of 
arty magnets grew to cover the fridge. Now he has gone, and when the contents 
of the house are dispersed, this collection too will move on.Margaret Cooter

As a single woman living alone, my “family”, as the cliche goes, is a 
three-year-old rescue cat, which occasionally answers to Captain Benjamin 
Perkins but is more regularly referred to as “mummy’s special sausage”. (I 
can’t believe I’m potentially sharing this with the nation!) While on a recent 
cycling holiday, and having arranged for a cousin to look after him, I received 
a message containing the following photograph, containing both my “family” and 
my fridge. As my scrabble letters are more usually displaying the latest rude 
words of the classroom, as assembled by visiting teacher friends, I guess this 
is an improvement.Julianne Joyce 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dc0b29d85e7fb8b8f50b7eebba370a501da366c%2F0_136_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dc0b29d85e7fb8b8f50b7eebba370a501da366c%2F0_136_3024_3780%2F3024.jpg>
 Ajay Desai’s fridge 
The life that is displayed on our fridge is a huge contrast to my childhood in 
1970s Britain, which was difficult in an ethnic minority family that had its 
own internal challenges.

I found life confusing and was not sure where I fitted in. When I married, we 
both thought we would give our children what we lacked when we were growing up: 
a secure, happy, hopeful life with a wealth of experiences and lots of 
affection.

The fridge is like a gallery of us – music, philosophy, politics, art, 
adventures and, of course, love.Ajay Desai 

We have FMOs. This stands for “fridge magnet opportunity”. A family day out, 
the highlight being choosing a fridge magnet at the end. There are rules, 
though. FMOs must involve at least two immediate family members; if not they 
are relegated to holding up the certificates on the fridge door, along with 
those from grandparents’ holidays. An unplanned and unexpected day out, waking 
the kids up with “FMO!”, they are up and dressed in minutes.Clare Biddiss 

Our fridge is a jumble of photos – who has albums any more? It’s the second 
marriage for both of us, and we have four young adults between us and four 
grandchildren aged under four. The high tide mark delineates toddler number 
three’s reach. My favourite images include Mrs A floating in the Dead Sea 
reading a copy of Catworld, D wearing her Minion glasses and A and D sitting in 
my kayak, their favourite spot on the beach. Holding all the pics in place are 
a mix of fridge magnets collected on our travels. My favourite is: “It’s a 
strange world, let’s keep it that way.”John Akehurst 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda33ce598d8f55e30faf52f3b8b3c662f8fab39a%2F50_36_2357_2946%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fda33ce598d8f55e30faf52f3b8b3c662f8fab39a%2F50_36_2357_2946%2F2357.jpg>
 Lucie Saint’s fridge 
Our fridge, the timeline of our life. There’s a photo of our three kids taken 
after my husband had given our youngest, Connie, a terrible haircut. There’s 
George, our son, in his new Arsenal kit. I’ve kept humorous cards including my 
favourite one of the grannies discussing homosexuality. Eleanor’s postcard from 
her first school residential trip away to Wales is very special, plus postcards 
from grandparents and my friend Liz, a keen postcard sender. There are 
mementoes, for example, royal wedding sick bag, fridge magnets and photos from 
friends and family living all over the globe, to help keep them close.Lucie 
Saint

Our three children all went travelling together in their 20s, and it was then 
that we started to fill the fridge with postcards and photos from their 
travels. It was a great daily reminder of them, and helped to explain to 
visitors when they asked: “Well, where are your three now?” So the “siblings on 
tour” collage gradually grew, and we raided old games for extra magnets and 
looked out for them in charity shops. So a record of a time in their lives is 
now complemented by a few extra reminders of our own recent holidays, which 
continue to spark conversations.Gavin Bowler 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86ece43fde19b3c6c0de9452b8508fc0beabccf%2F242_245_2874_1724%2F2874.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe86ece43fde19b3c6c0de9452b8508fc0beabccf%2F242_245_2874_1724%2F2874.jpg>
 Kirstie McLachlan’s fridge 
Our fine collection of fridge magnets shows the Scottish heritage on my dad’s 
side of the family. They include a tartan sheep and bagpipes that play when 
pressed, providing a good opportunity to have a little ceilidh in the kitchen 
when celebrating. The pineapples were my mum’s, and on the fridge of my 
childhood. She picked pineapples on tropical islands while in the Wrens during 
the second world war. My daughter is studying art so we’ve collected arty 
magnets: Munch, Picasso and Ecuadorean artistGuayasamin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/1999/mar/18/guardianobituaries2>. Family 
politics are on display with Che Guevara.Viva la revolución! And when it’s all 
too much, there’s Freud and his couch to talk to about it all.Kirstie McLachlan 

Our fridge has evolved over my whole childhood. From being dragged to art 
galleries on holiday as a child to actually enjoying visiting them nowadays, 
this is our kitchen’s personal art gallery. Each magnet is meticulously placed 
(by Mum) and must be the right size and in the right position. We are slowly 
running out of space, which is why it has now spread to the freezer and sides. 
If any of us go on holiday, we must return with a new magnet from an art 
gallery from any corner of the world to build our growing collection!Fiona 
Hughes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ed30b0b6f4a97b07b071724b5a694c9958a577f%2F0_105_1456_1818%2F1456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ed30b0b6f4a97b07b071724b5a694c9958a577f%2F0_105_1456_1818%2F1456.jpg>
 Maria Kenny’s fridge 
What started as one or two fridge magnets from family breaks in Wales and 
Ireland when our children were younger has turned into a collage that makes us 
look like globetrotters. Each time my children went anywhere they brought 
fridge magnets back. We also have old magnetic leftover letters from the Early 
Learning Centre with which – when the kids were in their teens – they loved to 
make as many rude words as they could. My son travels with his job, and even if 
they are only pitstops, he gets a magnet. I have a strip of photos from my 
friend’s 50th birthday party, in the style of the old-fashioned photo booth 
(she was born the day Kennedy was shot), a precious snap of our children with 
their late grandfather. My husband is a hugeRush <http://www.rush.com/> fan (a 
Canadian rock band) so we have lots of memorabilia, magnets and ticket stubs 
from concerts. There’s also a black-and-white photo of three actors in 
character from On the Buses with a handwritten message from our friend … making 
reference to a couple ofsmashing clippies 
<http://www.onthebusesfanclub.com/id71.html>. I love our collage-covered 
fridge. Occasionally, something will fall off and we just put it back on.Maria 
Kenny

In my opinion there is nothing feng shui about my parents’ cool, large lump of 
white metal, but it is indeed full of our family warmth. The most treasured 
photos are of the entire family, 16 of us with siblings and our own families. 
On the rare occasion that we are all together and get a photo, my mum will 
always say “that’s one for the fridge” – and this expression has stuck. My 
siblings and I now send my parents holiday snaps of the grandchildren titled 
“one for the fridge”. And so, in time, the collection has grown. The duck 
fridge magnet has proved very useful for covering over the head of an 
ex-boyfriend or two who may have got on to the fridge but are no longer on the 
scene when a new partner is brought round for first introductions.Lisa Martin 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F857fc6d5215ca4ddefe136166263939594a2c4d2%2F0_444_2988_3735%2F2988.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Our%20fridge%20magnets%20and%20pictures%20tell%20the%20stories%20of%20our%20lives&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Four-fridge-magnets-and-pictures-tell-the-stories-of-our-lives%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F857fc6d5215ca4ddefe136166263939594a2c4d2%2F0_444_2988_3735%2F2988.jpg>
 Mary Musker’s fridge 
Using Scrabble letters, we place the current month and a selection of the 
activities/places/people/treats/illnesses, etc relevant to that month. Often, 
we run out of letters and have to adapt some. The rules are different from 
Scrabble, as words can bend around in order for them to fit. We have decided to 
photograph each month from January 2017 so that we have a record of our year.
Andrea Allez

This is the fridge at my father’s house. He died in August, and I can’t yet 
bring myself to take the pictures down. It is a reflection of his passions: his 
family, his garden, cricket. A mishmash of children and grandchildren; my 
mother standing in front ofMonet’s Water-Lily Pond  
<https://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/paintings/claude-monet-the-water-lily-pond>
the year before she died; England winning a Test match sometime, somewhere. At 
the top is a copy ofBenjamin Zephaniah’s poem Talking Turkeys 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=v4AgPSjzXkw>, which my father thought was 
hilarious and loved to recite at Christmas dinner, wearing his light-up bowtie. 
I’ve groaned at it in the past but we’ll miss it this year.Mary Musker 
 