
Some of Britain’s world-renowned universities could lose their right to 
recruit as many international students as they want under new Home Office 
plans, vice-chancellors fear. Among those at risk are the London School of 
Economics, King’s College London and Bristol University.

We are competing with universities worldwide – and we are going to lose
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/25/we-are-competing-with-universities-worldwide-and-we-are-going-to-lose>
The home secretary, Amber Rudd, used her maiden speech at the Conservative 
party conference last month to announce acrackdown on the number of overseas 
students 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 coming to study in the UK, which will include different visa rules for “lower 
quality” universities and courses. There are fears it will use the government’s 
controversialnew teaching rankings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/29/english-universities-ranked-gold-silver-and-bronze>
 – expected to grade institutions “gold, silver or bronze” – to judge the 
“quality” of institutions.

The move, which vice-chancellors say they had been fearing since Theresa May 
became prime minister, has caused dismay in universities. According to 
Universities UK, the vice‑chancellors’ umbrella organisation, overseas students 
bring more than £10.7bn to the UK economy and non-EU international students 
make up 13% of universities’ revenues.

Colin Riordan, vice-chancellor of Cardiff University, says: “Trying to 
restrict the numbers of international students coming into this country because 
they contribute to migration numbers makes no sense. TheBritish people don’t 
see students as migrants 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/14/most-britons-do-not-see-foreign-students-as-immigrants-survey-shows>
 – or as a problem.”

He says stopping a university recruiting overseas students would “be an 
absolutely devastating blow”. “It would hugely reduce diversity, which really 
matters. It would reduce standards, as we need to recruit the best students 
wherever they are. And the financial effects would be serious – you would see 
wholesale job losses.”

Anxiety is escalating behind the scenes that the Home Office may want to use 
theTeaching Excellence Framework 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/02/teaching-excellence-framework-university-tef-student-data-higher-education>
 – the new system for ranking universities’ teaching – to decide which 
universities to cut. University heads warn this could have shocking unintended 
consequences, as some world-class research universities are not predicted to 
score well in the new teaching rankings.

Amber Rudd announces crackdown on overseas students and work visas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
The head of one Russell Group university, who asked not to be named, said: 
“Rudd’s speech was all about the quality of courses and institutions. How do 
you measure quality of teaching in a way that isn’t challengeable in the 
courts? You use theTeaching <https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> 
Excellence Framework. But some of the Russell Group do very badly on the TEF. 
And that means there is potentially a very big fight coming.”

Edward Byrne, president and principal of King’s College London, says King’s 
supports the TEF, but says: “There’s no rationale for linking it to the 
regulation of international student recruitment as it was not designed for this 
purpose. It would damage the UK’s attractiveness as a study destination in what 
is a very competitive global market place.”

King’s has high admissions standards that are equally rigorous for domestic 
and international students, he says. “Places at our institution are in great 
demand from students of outstanding quality around the world.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Foverseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3befd870c07a6f1a3ddf9eca7f524470571402b1%2F0_267_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Overseas%20student%20crackdown%20could%20hit%20LSE%2C%20King%E2%80%99s%20College%20London%20and%20Soas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Foverseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Overseas%20student%20crackdown%20could%20hit%20LSE%2C%20King%E2%80%99s%20College%20London%20and%20Soas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Foverseas-students-crackdown-lse-kings-soas-universities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3befd870c07a6f1a3ddf9eca7f524470571402b1%2F0_267_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Lady Amos: ‘Soas is a specialist, niche university. We don’t teach science and 
engineering. We don’t feature in certain rankings because of our size.’ 
Photograph: Katherine Anne Rose 
Riordan says: “The TEF was never designed for this. It would be completely 
wrongheaded. Barely any of it refers to international students, who are mostly 
postgraduates.”

The TEF will rank university teaching based on factors including numbers of 
leavers who land graduate-level jobs and how students rate their institutions 
in theNational Student Survey <http://www.thestudentsurvey.com/>. This last 
measure is likely to hit some members of the Russell Group hard, because they 
have not scored well in the NSS in the past. This year the LSE, which 
consistently ranks highly in other league tables, dropped six percentage points 
in the NSS and was the lowest-performing major university, excluding small and 
specialist institutions. Any move to restrict LSE’s international recruitment 
could have a huge effect, as overseas students make up70% 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/student/news/world-ranked-universities-most-international-students>
 of its student body.

Nick Hillman, director of the Higher Education Policy Institute thinktank, 
says the Home Office probably thinks using the TEF to judge quality is a 
“no-brainer”. Hillman, who negotiated with the Home Office about the importance 
of international students during his time as special adviser to former higher 
education ministerDavid Willetts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/davidwilletts>, says: “They know very 
little about universities. So piggybacking on an existing education department 
measure would seem to make sense.” He says the Home Office is rigidly elitist 
about higher education, and likely to be unaware of the potential impact of 
such a policy on some of Britain’s most famous institutions.

English universities to be ranked gold, silver and bronze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/29/english-universities-ranked-gold-silver-and-bronze>
In her speech, Rudd insisted she was “passionately committed to making sure 
our world-leading institutions can attract the brightest and best”, but added 
that “a student immigration system that treats every student and university as 
equal only punishes those we should want to help”. Hillman, however, comments: 
“The “brightest and best language is really pernicious. They mean: ‘We don’t 
mind future world leaders like Bill Clinton coming here but we really don’t 
want anyone else.’”

Valerie Amos, director of Soas University of London, which is also expected to 
come some way down the TEF rankings because of its NSS results, says that 
although Soas is committed to the student experience and teaching quality, “I 
worry the TEF is a rather blunt instrument”. She adds: “I worry about the 
concept of differentiation. We are a diverse sector.Soas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/school-of-oriental-and-african-studies> 
is a specialist, niche university. We don’t teach science and engineering. That 
means we don’t feature in certain rankings because of our size.”

The Home Office told Education Guardian: “We will be consulting on what more 
we can do to strengthen the system to support the best universities, and those 
that stick to the rules, to attract the best talent. The consultation will 
invite views on how courses and institutions could be differentiated and we 
will use the feedback to inform our decisions.”

Battle lines may be drawn next week when the issue is due to be debated by 
vice-chancellors at a board meeting of Universities UK. There is likely to be 
little schadenfreude. Vice-chancellors fear that if one institution suffers big 
cuts it could harm the reputation of the whole sector abroad, especially if 
that institution is one of the UK’s big hitters.

Dominic Shellard, vice-chancellor of De Montfort University, who has tweeted 
under the hashtag #loveinternational since the EU referendum, called a staff 
meeting after Rudd’s speech to denounce the “disturbing intolerance” coming 
from the Home Office. He warned that relationships were already being soured 
abroad, telling staff that the university’s India office had sent him a local 
news article with the headline “Five reasons to revisit your UK college plan”.

Shellard said: “Last week the Turner prize winning artist and De Montfort 
University graduateDavid Shrigley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/17/david-shrigley-life-lessons-really-good>
 unveiled his newsculpture on Trafalgar Square’s fourth plinth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/29/david-shrigley-really-good-fourth-plinth-trafalgar-square>
: it was a giant thumbs up. After Ms Rudd’s speech it may well appear to the 
world that we are showing a very different finger. Because you can’t use the 
kind of rhetoric that we have seen idly. Words remain.”
 