
The accumulated wealth of Britain’s richest 1% is more than 20 times the total 
of the poorest fifth, making the country one of the most unequal in the 
developed world, according to analysis byOxfam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/oxfam>. 


The anti-poverty charity said the figures suggest that the property, pensions 
and shares owned by around 634,000 of the UK’s richest people are worth 20 
times as much as the assets held by the poorest 13 million.

In a plea to Theresa May, the charity said the government needed to take 
action toclose the gap between the “haves” and the “have nots” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/dec/09/revealed-wealth-gap-oecd-report>
, adding that the UK’s inequality problem was likely to be a contributing 
factor in the vote to leave the European Union.

Significant rises in property prices over the last 20 years, especially in 
London and south-east England, have combined with generous boardroom retirement 
schemes to boost the wealth of the richest, while those who rent and have no 
pension have seen their wealth remain unchanged or decline.

The report said: “The UK is one of the most unequal developed countries in the 
world. Three decades of high-level inequality have had a profound impact, 
leading many people to believe that they have little stake in society and to 
feel locked out of politics and economic opportunity.


“Whatever your views on Brexit, the referendum brought divisions within our 
country to a head, with many people expressing distrust and disconnection with 
political processes and voting for change in the hope that it would improve 
their economic position.”

The report used data from investment bank Credit Suisse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/creditsuisse>, which showed the richest 
10% own more than half of the country’s total wealth. The top 1% own just less 
than a quarter of the total wealth (23%), while the poorest 20% share just 0.8% 
of the country’s wealth between them.

Researchers from Credit Suisse said last year that wealth inequality in the UK 
has risen since 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/13/half-world-wealth-in-hands-population-inequality-report>
 “as the gap in wealth per adult between the lower segment and rest of the 
population has increased”.


The Oxfam paper welcomed the prime minister’s recognition of the need to 
shake-up corporate culture and suggested a four-point action plan for her to 
adopt.


It said the tax system needed to be overhauled so the richest members of 
society and major corporations paid their fair share of tax. It also called for 
curbs on excessive pay, extra funding for skills training and greater worker 
representation on boards.



 