
The oysters in the Hudson River around the Statue of Liberty are some of the 
plumpest and fastest growing Crassostrea virginica in the whole of New York 
harbor. Fitting it should be that way, at least in contrast to the East River, 
between Manhattan and Brooklyn, where untreated effluent is allowed to flow out 
during storms in whatNew York <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> 
authorities describe as a “rain event”.


Lives in the balance: climate change and the Marshall Islands
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/15/marshall-islands-climate-change-springdale-arkansas>
But even plump “liberty” oysters are inedible, says Peter Malinowski, founder 
and director of theBillion Oyster Project 
<https://www.billionoysterproject.org/>, a four-year-old program that hopes to 
restore oysters throughout an estuary that once sustained 220,000 acres of 
oyster beds, producing enough bivalves to sustain early settlers to Manhattan 
island. The mollusk population here used to supply half of the world’s 
harvested oysters.

This bay, nestled in Brooklyn’s Navy Yard, is now one of the most unappealing 
environments for any kind of aquatic life. The city’s treatment facilities are 
able to process 1bn gallons a day. More than a quarter of an inch of rain and 
as much as 66m gallons of untreated waste water from all over Brooklyn flushes 
into the river every 24 hours.

“Same volume as the Empire State Building,” Malinowski offers alarmingly. And 
not just organic material, which settles on the bottom. “Baby wipes, condoms, 
dime bags, plastic bags full of dog shit. Yet the water is safe to swim by 
Environmental Protection Agency standards.”

Malinowski’s sense of outrage is palpable. He lifts a basket of oysters up out 
of the water close to Brooklyn’s main storm outflow. “If you walked into 
Central Park one day and you couldn’t go in because it was full of human shit 
and trash everyone would freak out and it wouldn’t happen again. But because 
there’s not enough people advocating for the water, so it’s OK to pour sewage 
into it.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990a92bde0300e8233e074d8fee16574ac0b32b0%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F990a92bde0300e8233e074d8fee16574ac0b32b0%2F0_0_2000_1333%2F2000.jpg>
 Peter Malinowski, founder and director of the Billion Oyster Project, surveys 
New York Harbor Photograph: Johnny Fogg 
The 34-year-old environmentalist comes from a family of oystermen on Fisher’s 
Island (population 236), a fingerling of land wedged between the eastern end of 
Long Island and Connecticut. It’s his plan – one supported by a variety state 
and federal bodies as well as New York restaurant owners and chefs – to bring 
about the revival of the oyster beds.

The plan of action is to collect oyster shells from the city’s restaurants and 
use them to create reefs for oyster spat – fertilized eggs – to fix one to. 
Without anything to attach to, the microscopic spat simply fall into the mud 
and organic material and perish.

The one thing oyster spat love most to attach to is old oyster shells, which 
New York City restaurants have in abundance. The project runs a service to 
collect oyster shells from restaurants around the city that are used to help 
form habitats.

Chef Kerry Heffernan, who opened Eleven Madison Park 
<http://www.kerryheffernan.com/bio.html> as executive chef, is a keen supporter 
of the project. He is now Executive Chef at Grand Banks, a popular oyster bar 
aboard a fine wooden-hulled oyster schooner, Sherman Zwicker, moored on the 
east side of Manhattan.

Heffernan grows oysters off the end of his dock at home in Sag Harbor. For 
him, like many chefs, sustainability and ecological revitalization have become 
part of a professional passion and personal responsibility. While the New York 
Harbor oysters are unlikely to be edible in the near future – at least until 
the city stops releasing untreated effluent into the harbor – the goal 
currently is habitat rehabilitation and conservation.

“If you’re farming them, every oyster you eat is great for the environment,” 
says Heffernan. Kelp, too, is great – [it] metabolizes life out of minerals and 
sunlight. So marine-based plant life is the next big thing for us, 
incorporating kelp and seaweeds into the American diet.”

Restoring the beds gives other species, from blue crabs to shrimp and 
anemones, a chance to come back too. Without oysters, New York Harbor’s 
ecosystem lacks a crucial element. One way to create beds is to use pieces of 
porcelain that have been recycled from nearly 5,000 toilets from New York 
City’s public schools.

“If you restore the oyster habitats, that supports all the other animals 
native to New York Harbor,” says Malinowski. “It’s slowly getting better, and 
it’s certainly way better than it was 30 years ago and better even than ten 
years ago.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1eecb474b37f752f6f70adb5d96b054f9c749d59%2F859_149_4751_2852%2F4751.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1eecb474b37f752f6f70adb5d96b054f9c749d59%2F859_149_4751_2852%2F4751.jpg>
 Peter Malinowski examines a harvest of mature oysters Photograph: Johnny Fogg 
New York was not alone in allowing its oyster beds to die out, and it’s not 
alone in attempting a large scale restoration. Chesapeake Bay in Maryland was 
once one of the richest producers in the country, until it was allowed to fall 
into ruin as a result of overfishing and pollution. There are similar projects 
in several states that border the Gulf of Mexico.

But unlike Chesapeake Bay or Gulf coast restorations, the New York project has 
no commercial value. But it does have value to the ecosystem.

From Malinkowski’s perspective, the goal to restore the harbor’s ecosystem to 
the point where it sustains wild oysters fit for consumption is not in itself 
desirable.

“I don’t think people should eat wild animals,” he offers. “That part of the 
equation, our relationship to nature, is over. But they have a more important 
job to do – and that’s filtrating water, providing habitat for other animals 
and building the ecosystem.”


But the climb back is steep. Chesapeake’s native oyster population is 
estimated at 1% of historic levels; New York’s is barely a fraction of what 
Henry Hudson would have seen in 1609 when, entering New York Harbor, he had to 
navigate a half moon around the reefs.

The relentless exploitation of the oysters meant that by 1906, New Yorkers had 
eaten every last one. The reefs were dredged up or covered in silt, and the 
water quality was too poor to support any kind of life. The last commercial bed 
closed in 1918. Ironically, it was the construction of a new aqueduct, bringing 
a copious supply of freshwater from the Catskills, that doomed the oyster.

“The aqueduct bringing freshwater from the Catskills brought as much 
freshwater as it wanted, so they flushed as many toilets as they wanted and all 
that went into the rivers,” says Malinowski. “So when they got sick from 
cholera and typhoid they blamed the oysters, not thinking that they were 
putting raw sewage on their food supply.”

The passage of the Clean Water Act of 1968 began the process of cleaning up 
the harbor – a process that may now accelerate as successive city 
administrations recognize the value of the city’s waterways both for 
transportation and as part of a modern city’s responsibility to the environment.

In New York’s case, the urgency is underscored by climate change. As Hurricane 
Sandy in 2012 illustrated, the city is vulnerable, and particularly in 
low-lying reaches in Brooklyn and Queens. Various projects are being pursued, 
including islands and tidal barrages.

Staten Island, once rich with oyster habitats and hit hard by Sandy’s storm 
surge, is to receive a $60m federal grant to construct a 13,000-foot-long 
oyster reef. This so-called “living breakwater” is designed to integrate live 
oysters into its surface. Not only will the oysters filtrate the water, but as 
the breakwaters grow larger, they will provide greater storm protection.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1095f0824f4efb8f4307d28bb35d88f96590707%2F0_0_4482_2691%2F4482.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oysters%20are%20making%20a%20comeback%20in%20the%20polluted%20waters%20around%20New%20York%20City&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Foysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb1095f0824f4efb8f4307d28bb35d88f96590707%2F0_0_4482_2691%2F4482.jpg>
 Peter Malinowski lifts a cage of oysters near the Brooklyn sewage outflow 
Photograph: Johnny Fogg 
But can oysters begin to help redress the natural balance? The bivalves can 
clear dirty water and bring back other species; they can also help to engage 
young people in marine science, as Malinowski hopes to do.

Even as oysters are found non-edible, new uses for them crop up. Such is the 
potential that the concept ofoyster-tecture 
<http://www.scapestudio.com/projects/oyster-tecture/> – the use of oysters as 
an architectural resource – was developed by landscape architect Kate Orff and 
presented in a 2010 exhibition at the Museum of Modern Art.

But while oysters help filter water, they do not themselves consume nitrates 
produced by human effluent or intensive agriculture. They do, however, help 
consume algae that flourish as a result of over-nitrification in the water 
column.

Too good to be true? The Ocean Cleanup Project faces feasibility questions
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/26/ocean-cleanup-project-environment-pollution-boyan-slat>
Founder Alex Pincus, a keen supporter of the oyster project, speeds the 
company speedboat to one of the beds in lower Brooklyn. Pincus notes oyster 
aquaculture is a rapidly evolving business, with the numbers of US growers 
multiplying and techniques for production becoming more sophisticated.

Further afield, out in Jamaica Bay by John F Kennedy airport, the Billion 
Oyster team have added nearly 50,000 adult oysters, making it the largest 
single installation for breeding oysters in the city.

But before the project’s efforts can hope to produce self-sustaining oyster 
beds, the city will have to do more to clean up its harbor. Oysters may not 
object to effluent, but it’s an unnerving aspect of New York life that so much 
of the city’s waste is still dumped into the harbor. (The Clean Water Act only 
banned such discharge “where possible”.)

Thankfully, it hasn’t rained much recently – the Northeast US has been in 
drought since June – and while the greenish water doesn’t look too inviting, it 
is at least still warm.

“When we put the nursery in, the Navy Yard had just found there were no 
complex organisms living in the space. No crabs, no shrimp, no fish: nothing,” 
says Malinowski.

“We put in the nursery in 2013 and within a matter of months it had been 
colonized by all these different animals. Now we get anemones, crabs, 
anthropods, fish, worms, spongers. And the oysters are growing like crazy.”

 * This story was amended on 17 November to correct the title of Chef Kerry 
Heffernan  