
Days after what looked like the end of its use of topless models on Page 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/page-3> sparked celebrations among 
campaigners, Thursday’s Sun seems to have reverted to type.

In what appears to be an attempt to regain control of the narrative 
surrounding the future of the newspaper’s Page 3, the paper again features a 
photograph of a topless model, which appears under a “Clarifications and 
Corrections” header and comes after a front-page panel announces: “We’ve had a 
mammary lapse.”

But others who have long regarded the 44-year-old practice as sexist, 
offensive and anachronistic were dismayed by the move.

“So it seems the fight might be back on,” tweeted Lucy-Anne Holmes 
<https://twitter.com/NoMorePage3/status/558036705920692224>, the founder of the 
No More Page 3 campaign, who added: “Thanks to @TheSunNewspaper for all the 
publicity they’ve given the campaign. See you tomorrow xxx”

No more t*ts in the Sun – a campaign we can all get behind
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/jan/22/page-3-no-more-tits-in-the-sun-campaign-stop-the-asterisk>
The Labour MP, Stella Creasy, also offered her take 
<https://twitter.com/stellacreasy/status/558037728093569025>: “So Sun going 
back to doing #page3? bit like drunken letchy uncle at a wedding who doesn’t 
get the message. Makes everyone uncomfortable.”

Another supporter of the campaign, Julia Churchill, added 
<https://twitter.com/JuliaChurchill/status/558044211464142848>: “After 
#NoMorePage3 it felt like we were taking a good deep breath after being held 
under water, and now, a punch in the face.”

The head of PR at the Sun, Dylan Sharpe, tweeted earlier in the evening 
<https://twitter.com/dylsharpe/status/558030701220864001>: “I said that it was 
speculation and not to trust reports by people unconnected to the Sun. A lot of 
people are about to look very silly ... ”

Nevertheless, commentators were confident that the days of Page 3 are 
ultimately numbered, not least because of opposition from News Corp executive 
chairman Rupert Murdoch,who has declared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2014/sep/10/rupert-murdoch-sun-page-3-old-fashioned>
 that he finds the pictures old-fashioned and solicited the views of his 
followers on social media about the daily feature.

Sources told the Guardian that the Sun had planned for the demise of Page 3 to 
pass under the radar. When the Guardian revealed plans to scrap it on Monday, a 
senior editor quipped privately: “If I were the boss, I’d put in a topless pic 
just to spite everybody.”

The Sun’s stablemate the Times reported earlier this week that the tabloid was 
“quietly dropping” the feature and that Murdoch was understood to have signed 
off on the change of policy.

The paper added that last Friday’s edition of the paper would be the last that 
would “carry an image of a glamour model with bare breasts on that page”.

Topless Page 3 models were introduced by the Sun in 1970, less than a year 
after Murdoch bought the title.

The impact of any change of policy on sales is understood to be a key factor 
in the minds of decision makers at the paper. Publisher News UK has previously 
publicly argued, in the face of mounting opposition from critics including the 
No More Page 3 campaign, that the feature remains popular with its readers and 
those who want rid of it do not buy the paper.
 