
A polarised week in royal news: Kate Middleton’s husband reveals she is a 
devotee of adult colouring books 
<http://www.harpersbazaar.com/celebrity/latest/news/a19144/kate-middleton-loves-adult-coloring-books/>
, while Princess Beatriceaccidentally slices open Ed Sheeran’s cheek 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/tvandshowbiz/2272192/princess-beatrice-slices-open-ed-sheerans-face-with-a-sword-while-attempting-to-knight-james-blunt-as-party-prank-goes-wrong/>
 with a ceremonial sword while trying to knight James Blunt. It should go 
without saying that the Yorks are theonly element of the royal family it is 
acceptable to be spellbound by – and I haven’t even got to Duchess Fergie’s 
turn at the British Curry Awards yet, which is best described as a tumbleweed 
madras.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6acd9d81d700ec89dfba6d1e70ccf8de570fd3%2F0_0_3456_3456%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6acd9d81d700ec89dfba6d1e70ccf8de570fd3%2F0_0_3456_3456%2F3456.jpg>
 Arise Sir Ed. Photograph: Warner Music 
Before we go there, though, a quick recap of the bit where Bea nearly blinded 
Ed Sheeran. It seems that the seventh in line to the throne – now that’s a 
10-part fantasy drama I’d watch, Daldry – threw a party at her father Prince 
Andrew’s house in Windsor. At this event, music’s James Blunt expressed an 
interest in being knighted. Beatrice availed herself of a sword and swung it – 
failing to realise that Ed Sheeran was right behind her. Somehow or other she 
cut Ed’s cheek open, and he was taken to hospital, where he was immediately 
presented with a certificate for Least Rock’n’Roll Duelling Scar Ever.

Meanwhile, this could hardly come at a more unfortunate moment for Princess 
Bea’s prospects. At present, Prince Andrew is pushing hard for his daughters to 
be given full-time royal roles (andbig apartments at Kensington Palace 
<http://www.express.co.uk/news/royal/724136/prince-andrew-requests-princesses-beatrice-eugenie-kensington-prince-charles-queen-william>
). I mean, bless her and everything, but they surely can’t have Bea becoming a 
ribbon-cutting royal now? One minute, she’s about to declare a new building 
open; the next, some poor little girl who only wanted to give a posy is 
undergoing an emergency scissorectomy. Imagine the potential carnage if Bea 
tried to launch a ship. Of course, we knew she wasn’t the sharpest sword in the 
armoury since she was given a BMW with personalised plates for her 17th 
birthday, butleft the keys in the ignition 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/theroyalfamily/4176314/Princess-Beatrices-car-stolen-after-she-left-keys-in-the-lock.html>
 when she and her royal protection officers went off to the shops. Someone who 
technically owned a 1/60 millionth of a share in the vehicle drove off with it. 
Even so, this latest episode does seem to mark an escalation in chumpery, and 
we can only fear the worst for Beatrice’s future in public service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096b552fa23c2ad59aabc51b6142dfaa41fda4a0%2F0_116_2832_2351%2F2832.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F096b552fa23c2ad59aabc51b6142dfaa41fda4a0%2F0_116_2832_2351%2F2832.jpg>
 ‘Sari I’m late’: Fergie at the British Curry Awards. Photograph: Terry 
Scott/Splash News 
And so to her mother’s red-carpet appearance this week at the British Curry 
Awards – “often referred to as the Oscars of the curry industry”, to read most 
of the reports. As is traditional with the phrase “the Oscars of our industry”, 
it appears to have been deployed without irony, but I would very much like to 
see the Academy return the favour, and start conceding that the Oscars are 
“often referred to as the phal of the movie industry”.

Anyway, this year’s British Curry Awards even featured a video message from 
the prime minister. Theresa May wasn’t accepting an award remotely, in the 
manner of Sean Connery not being able to make it to the Baftas in the 1980s and 
sending his tenuously convincing video regrets from beside a pool in Hollywood. 
Instead, she appeared to be using the medium of curry to address some various 
value conflicts in British politics. “Today,” she began, “curry is as close to 
this nation’s heart as fish and chips. Right now, there must be thousands of 
British families sitting down to a spicy meal at home and in local 
restaurants,” the prime minister continued, “and curry is as popular in 
Westminster as it is across the country.”

See? Us and them are not so different. However, Theresa would like it on 
record that the British people have had enough of curry experts. “And what 
makes these awards so special, better than any Michelin star, better than any 
accolade, better than any critic’s write-up,” she explained, “is that they are 
voted for by the public. They are the restaurants loved by local communities 
the length and breadth of Britain.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796644cb543e5e8ccecf4bdaffc2e5e0bac5aeed%2F0_199_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Paging%20Princess%20Beatrice%E2%80%99s%20knight%20in%20shining%20armour&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Fprincess-beatrice-royal-ed-sheeran%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F796644cb543e5e8ccecf4bdaffc2e5e0bac5aeed%2F0_199_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Heston Blumenthal, Fergie’s saviour. Photograph: Steve Parsons/PA 
That seems to have gone down well, but the same cannot be said of Curry Awards 
guest of honour Fergie, who may have lost the audience before she took the 
stage late, which, she said, was due to a problem with her sari. According to 
reports, Fergie found the crowd unresponsive, andsaid things like 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/tvshowbiz/article-3984496/Comedy-gold-Peter-Kay-laugh-accounts-reveal-Car-Share-star-amassed-28million-fortune.html>
: “Well, come on everybody – it was a lousy clap”; and “Will everyone wake up 
and stop being so dull? And have some fun. For heaven’s sake!” Things 
eventually became so excruciating that celebrated chef Heston Blumenthal 
stormed the stage and gave her a cuddle, telling a reporter afterwards: “I just 
wanted to protect her.”

My dear, the drama of it all. If the civil list doesn’t work out for Bea, 
could Heston not consider protecting her by giving her a job in one of his 
kitchens? I can’t imagine what could possibly go wrong, and urge him to 
consider it as a matter of honour.
 