
There are some fossils it’s difficult to get enthusiastic about. Don’t get me 
wrong: as someone whose PhD focussed on the fossil equivalent of tea-leaves, my 
threshold for getting excited is a lot lower than most people. But when you’re 
studying undergraduate palaeontology there’s an awful lot of extinct shelly 
things you must learn about. Contrary to the popular conception of what 
palaeontologists study (dinosaurs!), marine invertebrates with mineralised hard 
parts are the mainstay of working with fossils.

There are some familiar groups that, although they are extinct, we do know a 
fair bit about. Trilobites and ammonites fall into this category: we have a 
good sense of their evolution and diversity through time, and have inferred a 
fair bit about their biology. There are other groups that are less well 
understood. We’ve got lots of shells, but we don’t know what the soft bits of 
the animal looked like, and we don’t know where they fit on the tree of life. 
In short, they are a bit of an embarrassment. Luckily, there are 
palaeontologists who rise to the challenge.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd880d1a9db3f83f8e2d67df83f366d158a47a955%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd880d1a9db3f83f8e2d67df83f366d158a47a955%2F0_0_4608_3456%2Fmaster%2F4608.jpg>
 Joseph Moysiuk showing matching halves of a fossil slab while in Kootenay 
National Park on a Royal Ontario Museum field expedition in 2014. Photograph: 
Joseph Moysiuk 
Hyoliths are (or were) one of these awkward groups of shelly fossils. They 
appear at the base of the Cambrian, about 540 million years ago, where they are 
diverse and abundant, and dwindle away until they disappear in the Permian 
Period, some 300 million years later. They have a small, conical calcium 
carbonate shell, with a lid called an operculum. Happily, the main subgroup, 
the hyolithids, have an additional feature which ensures my attention: a pair 
of rigid, curved spines with a memorable name.

We all tend associate certain qualities to people’s names, usually on the 
basis of people we have known. Helen, for example, is a very sensible name. I 
associate it with practical, dependable people I have known. You can rely on a 
Helen. A quick look at theONS data for girls’ names in England and Wales 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/livebirths/datasets/babynamesenglandandwalestop100babynameshistoricaldata>
 tells me that it reached a high point of number 8 in the list of baby names in 
both 1964 and 1974. It’s also the technical term for a hyolith appendage: a 
hyolithid has a pair of helens. I think this is utterly brilliant.The original 
paper from 1975 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/wol1/doi/10.1111/j.1502-3931.1975.tb01311.x/abstract>
 says “We term these … structures helens because the word has no functional 
connotations, and they were first described under the generic nameHelenia by 
Walcott”. Really? Or did they know a Helen?

Top Fossils of 2016 | Lost Worlds Revisited
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/dec/28/top-fossils-of-2016> 
Hyoliths had traditionally been classified with the molluscs, based on the way 
that the shell material of the cone was accrued, or else stuck in their own 
awkward phylum.New research by Joseph Moysiuk and colleagues 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/vaop/ncurrent/full/nature20804.html#affil-auth>
 has solved the mystery of how they fit in the tree of life, helens and all. A 
study of over 1500 specimens ofHaplophrentis, a mid-Cambrian hyolithid from the 
celebratedBurgess Shale  <http://www.burgess-shale.bc.ca/>in the Canadian 
Rockies and the Spence Shale from Utah, has revealed the details of its soft 
parts. They reconstructHaplophrentis as a suspension-feeder on the sea bed, 
using its helens as stilts to raise its body off the sediment, and using 
tentacles to sweep organic debris from the water into its mouth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0509ad036cf98b8028eba289f1dcdc1368375f1c%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0509ad036cf98b8028eba289f1dcdc1368375f1c%2F0_0_3744_5616%2F3744.jpg>
 Soft tissues associated with theHaplophrentis operculum. Dorsal view of 
specimen, anterior to the top. And just look at the helens on that. Photograph: 
Royal Ontario Museum 
The exceptionally preserved soft tissues of some specimens show an extendable, 
gullwing-shaped, tentacle-bearing organ surrounding a central mouth. They 
interpret this as an organ as a lophophore, the feeding structure found in 
another ancient, but still living, group of marine shelly animals: the 
brachiopods (lamp shells). Like bivalve molluscs (such as clams and mussels), 
brachiopods have a two-valved shell, but their internal biology shows that they 
evolved separately and they form part of a group called the lophophorates, 
along withbryozoans <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bryozoa> and horseshoe worms 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoronid>. The presence of a lophophore, 
combined with other features including a U-shaped gut, means that hyoliths are 
also lophophorates, and not molluscs.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2425ecbdef02e552165a35dc760ac70883a5d6f8%2F0_0_3322_3788%2F3322.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palaeontologists%20solve%20an%20ancient%20tentacled%20mystery%20%7C%20Susannah%20Lydon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2017%2Fjan%2F18%2Fpaleontologists-solve-an-ancient-tentacled-mystery-haplophrentis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2425ecbdef02e552165a35dc760ac70883a5d6f8%2F0_0_3322_3788%2F3322.jpg>
 This illustration shows different views ofHaplophrentis. The shells are 
see-through, allowing the soft tissues within (including the tentacles of the 
lophophore and the U-shaped gut) to be observed. In the upper images, the 
lophophore is retracted. In the lower images, it is shown reaching out to feed, 
with the pair of ‘helens’ rotated downwards to support the body. Photograph: 
Artist: Danielle Dufault. © Royal Ontario Museum 
Yet again, fossil material from the Burgess Shale, a wonderful window on life 
half a billion years ago, has contributed to our understanding of the epic 
evolutionary history of life on our planet. Hyolithids may not be as exciting 
as some of the more weird and wonderful inhabitants 
<http://burgess-shale.rom.on.ca/en/fossil-gallery/view-species.php?id=1> of 
mid-Cambrian seas, but seeing a long-standing palaeontological mystery like 
this being solved is intensely satisfying.
 