
The palm oil industry is one of the world’s biggest, projected to be worth 
$88bn (£70bn) by 2022 
<http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/palm-oil-market-to-reach-88-billion-by-2022-grand-view-research-inc-514882361.html>
. While it has pumped billions into the local economies of countries like 
Indonesia and Malaysia, the aggressive expansion of the industry has also 
become synonymous with widespread environmental and community destruction.

With global demand increasing, Africa has become the new frontier of 
industrial palm oil production. As much as22m hectares 
<http://www.proforest.net/en/news/marrakesh-declaration-signed-at-cop22> (54m 
acres) of land in west and central Africa could be converted to palm 
plantations over the next five years.

As the industry sets its sights on Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>, how can we ensure the mistakes of 
the past are not repeated? Is it possible to establish a sustainable palm oil 
industry that operates in a way that protects environmental and human rights 
and provides local communities with genuine opportunities?

Life in and around a palm oil plantation in Cameroon – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2015/jul/27/life-in-and-around-a-palm-oil-plantation-in-cameroon-in-pictures>
These questions formed the heart of a seminar discussion, hosted by the 
Guardian and supported by the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), that 
brought together a panel of experts from civil society and the private sector, 
chaired by journalist Eliza Anyangwe.

“Investment and expansion in palm oil is growing – and growing fast – in 
Africa,” said Abraham Baffoe, Africa regional director at Proforest, an 
environmental rights and responsible sourcing NGO. “If palm is planned and 
implemented very well then it has the potential to provide jobs and economic 
development – but if planning and implementation is poor, it has the potential 
to create deforestation, loss of habitat and loss of livelihood in local 
communities.”

Last month at the UN climate conference in Marrakesh, ministers from seven 
African countriespledged 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/11/seven-african-countries-pledge-to-protect-their-tropical-forests-from-unsustainable-oil-palm-development/>
 to implement sustainable palm oil production, saying that while Africa was 
open for business, palm oil investment must comply with the principles of 
sustainability, transparency and the protection of human rights.

Baffoe acknowledged this as an important and significant step, but raised 
concerns that the high-level commitments at COP22 are not yet reflected in the 
way large-scale oil palm plantations are being established in countries such as 
Liberia and Cameroon.

A new African model?

The agri-industrial model used by many palm oil producers in south-east Asia 
usually involves companies leasing land from the government. Local people are 
then asked for their consent and offered development incentives and jobs at the 
plantations. This, warned Baffoe, was being unhesitatingly replicated in Africa 
by companies racing to secure concessions without acknowledging the issues it 
could raise at local community level.

“When land is legally owned by the government, communities still have 
traditional-use rights and that is a form of ownership,” he said. In Baffoe’s 
experience, palm oil companies in Africa are striking land deals with the 
government first, before speaking with local communities. “This is how you get 
conflict,” he said.

The concept of Free Prior and Informed Consent (FPIC) is at the heart of the 
sustainability agenda for the palm oil industry. The principle – that a 
community has the right to give or withhold its consent to proposed projects 
that may affect lands that they customarily own, occupy or use – is now akey 
doctrine 
<http://www.rspo.org/files/resource_centre/FPIC%20and%20the%20RSPO%20a%20guide%20for%20companies%20Oct%2008%20%282%29.pdf>
 in international law and central to the RSPO’s principles and criteria.

Tom Lomax, a lawyer and human rights coordinator at NGO Forest Peoples 
Programme, was highly critical of the tactics he had witnessed palm oil 
companies using to secure the consent of local communities in Liberia. “I could 
write a book about palm oil companies’ methods for manipulating consent,” he 
said.

Lomax described examples of palm companies offering local people jobs before 
they had secured the consent of the whole community. “Division within 
communities has been pursued by companies to undermine the principle of 
consent. You can really undermine [the community’s] cohesion, their 
collectability, their ability to make their own decisions as a whole – and once 
this has been done, cohesion is almost irreparable.”

What benefits does palm bring?

In response to the assertion by other panelists that palm oil investment 
brought development and helped lift local people out of poverty, Lomax argued 
thateconomic analysis 
<http://rightsandresources.org/en/publication/view/industrial-oil-palm-development-liberias-path-to-sustained-economic-development-and-shared-prosperity-lessons-from-the-east/>
 (pdf) had shown that the palm oil industry had contributed very little to the 
south-east Asian economy.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a984858b12e70670acd55caed3d686cdfa4118%2F202_19_2568_1786%2F2568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palm%20oil%20boom%3A%20companies%20must%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palm%20oil%20boom%3A%20companies%20must%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F16a984858b12e70670acd55caed3d686cdfa4118%2F202_19_2568_1786%2F2568.jpg>
 A palm oil worker in Riau province in Indonesia’s Sumatra island. Indonesia is 
the world’s biggest producer of palm oil. Photograph: Adek Berry/AFP/Getty 
Images 
“What we need is a palm oil industry [in Africa] based on secure land rights – 
and this is something we don’t currently have,” he said. “We need a palm oil 
industry based on a mixed economy that will satisfy [local people’s] food 
needs, their cultural needs and their income needs. Yes it will take 
investment, but not the extractive kind that treats local land as freely 
available and local people as cheap labour.”

All the panelists agreed that identifying “the community” from which consent 
was required presented serious challenges: both to those groups looking to 
protect local people from exploitation and to the palm oil companies seeking 
approval.

“Often, people who are considered a community [by the palm oil companies] are 
not a community at all,” said Lomax. In places like Liberia, whole 
administrative districts have been labelled as one coherent community by palm 
oil companies, he said, when the people in a potential palm oil concession are, 
in fact, culturally, economically and socially diverse.

Christopher Stewart, head of corporate responsibility and sustainability at 
Singapore-listed agribusiness Olam International, agreed this presented private 
sector companies with a complex challenge: “Companies often have to make very 
difficult decisions and are very pressed internally about how to address these 
very difficult problems [with consent]. The intermediaries that often operate 
between themselves and the communities are not necessarily fully trustworthy 
either.

“It’s very complex. We need to keep an open mind and encourage partnership – 
and encourage local players especially – to participate in this debate.”

However, Stewart insisted that the agri-industrial model could still work to 
the benefit of local communities if sustainable palm oil production remained at 
the heart of a company’s investment model.

From rainforest to your cupboard: the real story of palm oil - interactive
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/ng-interactive/2014/nov/10/palm-oil-rainforest-cupboard-interactive>
He cited the example of Olam’s palm oil operations in Gabon 
<http://olamgroup.com/locations/west-central-africa/gabon/> – where the company 
has planted almost 50,000 hectares of palm – as evidence that sustainable 
production can be implemented in Africa. He pointed out that even though the 
company had leased land from the government of Gabon for 15 years, anyone from 
the local community who didn’t want the land they were using for farming to be 
converted to palm could have it excluded from the concession.

Transforming communities

“We have seen an incredible transformation in the communities we have reached 
out to,” Stewart said, pointing out that when Olam first arrived in one rural 
community it had malnourished children, people subsisting on bushmeat and no 
electricity, healthcare or employment opportunities. When Olam offered the 
local people employment, 95% said yes.

“The town now has a thriving market and Olam is putting $1.6m a month into the 
local community,” said Stewart. “Whatever problems come with palm oil 
development, doing it right can be a win-win situation.”

However, Stewart conceded that the company’s self-proclaimed success 
implementing sustainable frameworks in a country such as Gabon won’t 
necessarily translate to other countries.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe73d958ca6736043de608b060c728f6cde0de570%2F1220_318_2428_1457%2F2428.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Palm%20oil%20boom%3A%20companies%20must%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Palm%20oil%20boom%3A%20companies%20must%20clean%20up%20their%20act%20in%20Africa&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpalm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe73d958ca6736043de608b060c728f6cde0de570%2F1220_318_2428_1457%2F2428.jpg>
 Palm oil workers in northwestern Liberia, where two thirds of the population 
live on less than a dollar a day. Photograph: Anne Chaon/AFP/Getty Images 
Another panelist, Rachel Barré, sustainable sourcing manager at L’Oréal, said 
that the company’s experiences in south-east Asia had convinced her of the need 
for strong leadership from the top of the supply chain. “We rely on these [raw] 
materials to manufacture our products and we are convinced it can contribute to 
the whole economy if it is well done and well managed,” she said.

However, Barré acknowledged that as an “upstream” link in the palm oil supply 
chain, L’Oréal was far removed from the communities affected at plantation 
level.

With more than 40% of global palm oil production coming from smallholder 
farmers, could a focus on developing a smallholder model, instead of just 
rolling out large agri-industrial plantations, work for the expansion of palm 
oil across Africa?

Not without a lot of investment from the private sector, said Baffoe, who 
claimed governments were often not willing to provide the necessary support for 
farmers to participate in the palm oil boom. “Palm oil development has a very 
significant initial cost and that cost has been a constraint for smallholders, 
he said. “Civil society must look at how it can support smallholders in meeting 
the costs of establishing their own plantations.”

Given that average smallholder palm oil yields are significantly lower in 
Africa than in other palm regions, such as Malaysia or Indonesia, smallholder 
farmers in Africa will need support from the private sector if they are to see 
the benefits of palm oil expansion into the continent, said Barré.

“You need to put in the investment and technical assistance so farmers can get 
their palm to the market at the right price in the right conditions,” she said.

With governments keen to continue granting palm oil companies large-scale 
concessions across Africa, the race to ensure that this is an industry that 
develops along sustainable guidelines seems far from won.

On the panel 

 * Eliza Anyangwe (Chair) Freelance journalist specialising in Africa, 
international development and gender, the Guardian

 * Abraham Baffoe Africa regional director, Proforest 

 * Rachel Barré Sustainable sourcing manager, L’Oréal 

 * Tom Lomax Lawyer, strategy lead, legal and human rights coordinator, Forest 
Peoples Programme

 * Christopher Stewart Head of corporate responsibility and sustainability, 
Olam International
 