
Patricia Williams <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patricia-williams>: 
Race and sex stoke deep responses in the American psyche

Many years ago the great oral historian Studs Terkel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2008/nov/01/studs-terkel-usa> recounted a 
story told to him by a woman who’d been molested by a relative as a child. 
She’d tried to tell her mother but no one would believe her. Yet one day when 
she was shopping with her mother and aunt, they spotted a black man far away on 
the other side of the department store. The women gathered the girl close to 
them, worrying aloud about the unbridled lust that that man might harbour 
toward little white girls. The now-grown woman told Terkel that, even as a 
young child, she could see the craziness in that moment: they could not see or 
hear that she was being assaulted by a member of the family, but instead 
marshalled their sexualised anxiety against the distant figure of a black man 
obliviously going about his business.

I have been thinking about that story quite a bit in recent weeks, as I’ve 
pondered the phenomenon of Donald Trump’s peculiar appeal to … well, any 
demographic, but especially a particular stratum of conservative women. I’m 
particularly intrigued by women who worry aloud about his extreme nativism or 
misogyny or careless grasp of foreign affairs – yet who then say that what 
really drives their allegiance is “hatred” of the supposedly murderous and 
licentiousHillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton>
. This is often expressed as a repulsion so strong that, like the little girl’s 
mother and aunt, they are willing to give Uncle Donald a pass in the face of 
multiple allegations of sexual assault, breathtaking racism, unprecedented 
crudity, cruelty, verbal incoherence and globalised, soul-searing mendacity.

While the intensity of vitriol directed at Clinton still mystifies me to a 
great extent, Terkel’s story reminds me that there is an affective dynamic to 
all politics, an emotional narrative that may make sense in an alternate 
universe from which I may be functionally excluded. Race and sex stoke deep 
autonomic responses in the American psyche. Trump began his political career 
more than 20 years ago by taking out afull-page ad in the New York Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/17/central-park-five-donald-trump-jogger-rape-case-new-york#img-2>
, calling for the execution offive teenagers wrongly accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/17/central-park-five-donald-trump-jogger-rape-case-new-york>
 of raping and beating a young white stockbroker who became known as the 
Central Park Jogger. Although DNA evidence pinned the crime to another man, 
Trump has never backed down from his assertion that he was right.

The US has elected its most dangerous leader. We all have plenty to fear | 
Jonathan Freedland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-president-nightmare>
Similarly, throughout the campaign, Trump has evoked old tropes of a ravaged 
America, endlessly at risk fromMexican rapists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-mexico-presidential-speech-latino-hispanic>
, African American thugs andMuslim terrorists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
. Indeed, withendorsements 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/11/01/the-kkks-official-newspaper-has-endorsed-donald-trump-for-president/>
 from the likes of the Ku Klux Klan andGeorge Zimmerman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/george-zimmerman>, Trump has revitalised a 
narrative of warrior masculinity that dates back toDW Griffith’s film Birth of 
a Nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2013/jul/29/birth-of-a-nation-dw-griffith-masterpiece>
 – the trope of strong, pugilistic white vigilantes fighting against corrupt, 
lying and libertine black invaders (literally black voters in that movie) – in 
order to protect the honour of frightened white women. It seems not 
insignificant that Trump has consistently appeared with a backdrop of attentive 
women, blonde women, beautiful women who smile and wave and whom he 
symbolically shelters from rapists and terrorists and the “very bad people” 
from “certain neighbourhoods”.

Like many of us Nasty Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> 
of a certain age and weight, Clinton is not sheltered by such cowboy chivalry. 
In addition, her achievements as secretary of state were slandered or 
obliterated in ways underwritten by suggestions of race-mixing, combined with 
horrendous and ubiquitous caricatures of Barack Obama: the dangerously “alien” 
black man who stole the reins of power and, in a lustily miscegenous union with 
Clinton, supposedly “invented Islamic State”.

In this alternative universe, Trump holds great appeal to those who were only 
recently forced to remove the Confederate flag from government buildings, and, 
in a profoundly felt sense, have never conceded that the American civil war is 
over.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20victory%20a%20'whitelash'%20against%20a%20black%20president%2C%20says%20CNN's%20Van%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20victory%20a%20%27whitelash%27%20against%20a%20black%20president%2C%20says%20CNN%27s%20Van%20Jones%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video&media=>
Trump victory a ‘whitelash’ against a black president, says CNN’s Van Jones – 
video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/trump-victory-a-whitelash-against-a-black-president-says-cnns-van-jones-video>
Robin Morgan <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robin-morgan>: A diseased 
patriarchy is in a battle to the death with women

If you ever underestimated the ferocity with which systemic patriarchy would 
fight a woman attaining serious power, think again. But make no mistake: 
underlying all the other issues in this election – demographic shifts and 
racism, economics and education, globalism and immigration and nativism – at 
the core is a terminally diseased system of male supremacy in a battle to the 
death with women (and some male allies) who are determined to save ourselves 
and this planet.

Hillary Rodham Clinton is hardly perfect, but her flaws are those of a sane 
human being and a politician – not of an orange troglodytic self-proclaimed 
“sexual predator” who thrives on hatred. She could not have committed enough 
crimes, short of genocide, to warrant the 30 years of attacks she’s weathered – 
starting in Arkansas for simply wanting to keep her own name and law career. 
This year’s sexist vitriol came from the left (Bernie bros chanting,“Bern the 
witch” 
<http://www.vocativ.com/296232/bern-the-witch-bernie-sanders-supporter-speaks-out/>
), the right (need I list these?), with, for the hell of it, accused rapist 
Julian Assange, Fox News’s allegedsexual harasser Roger Ailes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/21/roger-ailes-leaves-fox-news-sexual-harassment-claims>
 and the FBI piling on.

Yes, the election polls were wrong. Here's why | Mona Chalabi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/polls-wrong-donald-trump-election>
The Republican party built this coup for years, preying on the fears of white, 
working-class, non-college-educated men terrified of a future filled with 
brown, black and female faces, plus globalisation and technology requiring 
skills they lack. The GOP conjured Trump, their Frankenstein’s creature, for 
decades – then acted as if they were shocked when he rose and walked. 
Hypocritical evangelicals rushed to back this multiply divorced adulterer who 
spews hate speech. Our media was held hostage to ratings and ad buys: Les 
Moonves, head of CBS, proclaimed, “I know Trump’s bad for America, but he’s 
great for CBS, so bring it on!” Not until September did the press grasp the 
gravity of the threat, and it was print media (prematurely proclaimed dead), 
not broadcast media, that broke serious investigatory journalism about Trump – 
though he received nowhere near the scrutiny Clinton has endured for decades. 
And we worked ceaselessly to support her and voted as if there were no tomorrow.

Now? It feels as if there will be no tomorrow. The unimaginable has happened. 
Fascism has come to the republic – no hyperbole.

The world is afraid.

The one thing we know is that women are more than half the US population, and 
the electoral gender gap was a chasm. Moreover, time, and the demographics of 
diversity and youth, are on our side.

We are digging in, and we will outlive them. The planet depends on it.

Kate Harding <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kate-harding>: My country 
hates women, which is bad enough, and pretends it doesn’t, which is worse

I’m not going to give you some “This isn’t the America I know” bullshit. This 
is absolutely the America I know. My country is racist, xenophobic, fearful and 
ignorant. My country hates women, which is bad enough, and pretends it doesn’t, 
which is worse. Having supported Hillary Clinton in both 2008 and 2016, I am 
well aware that enormous chunks of the left – let alone the rusted-out, heavily 
armed right – loathe her beyond all reason. For the last 25 years, I’ve watched 
everyone from trash tabloids to the New York Times to the director of the FBI 
work to assassinate Clinton’s character. I have watched people I used to 
respect buy into every lie ever printed about her, rather than confront their 
own discomfort with ambitious and powerful women.

What can we salvage from the trauma of the US presidential election? | Lucia 
Graves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/08/trauma-presidential-election-2016-turning-point>
“I feel hated,” I tell my husband, sobbing in front of the TV in my yoga pants 
and Hillary sweatshirt, holding my bare neck. “Hated.”

It’s not a new feeling, exactly. I’ve been a public feminist going on 10 years 
now, so I have some experience of being publicly despised. And I’ve been a US 
citizen for 41 years, during which time I have watched in horror as George W 
Bush was elected, fairly and unfairly; as we invaded Iraq and Afghanistan; as 
the religious right clawed away at reproductive freedom, state by state; as the 
Tea Party became a serious force in Republican politics. By now, I have seen so 
many videos of African-American citizens being extrajudicially executed by 
people sworn to serve and protect, I don’t even know what the point of taking 
them is any more. Evidence? What are the chances that the killers will even be 
indicted?

So it’s no real surprise to feel this hated by my country, this alienated from 
my fellow Americans. It’s not even something I will let myself cry about for 
more than a day, because I’ve got it better than most. I will never be a target 
of the KKK. I will never be deported because of my religion. I’ll never have my 
marriage invalidated because of the sex of my partner. For as much as America 
hates me, she’ll never tell me I belong behind a wall.

All I can do now is leverage my relatively privileged position in the fight to 
keep as many of us as possible as safe as possible. I’ll finish crying about it 
tomorrow, but that’s not when the fight starts. It started generations ago. 
Centuries.

Earlier on Tuesday evening, before the unthinkable went thunk, I asked my 
husband: “What has this election taught you about how America sees women?”

“This election has taught me that anyone other than Hillary would have given 
up ages ago, rather than take this relentless, awful abuse,” he said finally. 
“That’s why there’s never been a woman.”

He’s right. There’s never been an American woman who could fully transcend the 
relentless, awful abuse that comes with wanting more for herself, or for her 
country. But so many have died trying. If I have to, I guess I’ll be one of 
them.

Polly Toynbee <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/pollytoynbee>: We need to 
fight back against a tidal wave of dark and dangerous passions

A dark shutter falls across the western world. A macho white supremacist 
bellow has sent generations of progress slamming into reverse. Civilisation and 
basic civility are knocked down with hate, fear, xenophobia and primitive gut 
nationalism. Drain the swamp? He is the swamp.

How did the same country do this, after twice electing not only its first 
African-American president but one of the most decent, serious men ever to 
grace the White House? That effortless elegance of mind, those sublimely 
well-chosen words untainted by the faintest whiff of scandal, is replaced by 
the crass and the corrupt. What a falling-off is there, Hyperion to a satyr.

Globalisation is dead, and white supremacy has triumphed | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/globalisation-dead-white-supremacy-trump-neoliberal>
The super-rich will be in clover with Trump’s massive income tax cuts for them 
and a 20% cut in corporation tax, adding an estimated $5.3tn to national debt, 
according to the Financial Times. Bankruptcy has been his speciality. Hope and 
change, Obamacare – that brought health coverage to 20 million people – will be 
gone, with education and all state functions except defence taking a hard hit.

As Trump’s stubby fingers hover over the nuclear button, this climate change 
denier will fry the planet. Celebrating coal and gas, he calls global warminga 
Chinese-created hoax 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en-gb>, 
stopping all payments to UN global warming programmes. “Making America great 
again” crashes the markets, as he sweeps the Senate, the House with trade deals 
off, walls up and Muslims banned. The leader of what was the free world is an 
erratic sociopath whose attention deficits make him unfit for complex 
decision-making. Pollsters are finished as election lore is upended, the old 
rules of whys and wherefores of voting habits gone, but who cares?

Traditionally, progressives beat themselves up when they lose. But consider 
the “crooked” Hillary, “lock her up” vitriol and the loathsome misogyny. This 
was the victory of ideas – mad, bad and potentially lethal. Naked emotion and 
nationalist Fox News identity politics triumphed over reason, economics, 
self-interest, truth and everything enlightened. Marine Le Pen welcomes a 
“free” America: that’s where we are. We have been here before. No, it’s not 
elitist to fight back against a tidal wave of dark and dangerous passions that 
need resisting at every turn from now on.

Patricia Hill Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/patricia-hill-collins>: I’m disappointed 
but I will keep up the fight

Mercifully, the 2016 campaign is over. Half of America has elected a new 
president while the other half looks on with dismay. This was no ordinary 
campaign. I had hoped that the country could confront the hatred that many of 
its citizens seemingly feel for black people, Latinos, Muslims, undocumented 
migrants and women. I had hoped that an eminently qualified white woman would 
escape the protracted vitriol that confronted our first sitting black 
president. Perhaps Clinton’s race would protect her from the insults she 
endured, in large part, because of her gender. I was wrong.


Clinton fought a good fight, and for this she should be commended. She shows 
us how to fight, lose, and come back to fight again another day. She navigated 
the blatant misogyny that characterised both her opponent’s campaign and 
rallies by many of the voters who put her opponent into office. Few of us have 
Clinton’s courage and fortitude. Yet given the lasting damage that might be 
done by this campaign, we may need it.

Donald Trump is moving to the White House, and liberals put him there | Thomas 
Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-white-house-hillary-clinton-liberals>
Good riddance to this nasty campaign. I’m obviously deeply disappointed that 
Clinton lost, but losing is not new to me. Many of us understand that bringing 
about social change is a lifelong struggle. Because there is no resting place 
for those of us who want to make America better, only the recognition of the 
dignity of struggle, I have to get up every day and find ways to work for the 
America that our children and grandchildren deserve. I have to be prepared for 
whatever comes my way, and that includes defeat. This is not a new lesson for 
me, and based on the tenacious nature of Clinton’s campaign, sadly, it’s an all 
too familiar lesson for her.

I wish she had won. It’s always easier to move forward with the wind at your 
back than it is to advance into a strong headwind, especially one that 
seemingly hates your guts. Once again I’m facing the sobering reality that the 
battle for fairness and decency starts anew each day. But I also know that this 
is one election along the difficult path of protecting and deepening American 
democracy. Commitments to opportunity, equity, civility and fairness are 
hallmarks of strong democracies and in my lifetime, we have made progress. I am 
committed to the promise of America, and now that this nasty campaign is over, 
I will continue to fight for my democracy. There’s simply too much at stake not 
to.

Arwa Mahdawi <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/arwa-mahdawi>: Trump’s 
victory is the last gasp of a desperate white patriarchy


On Tuesday morning I interviewed 96-year-old Esther Diamond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/08/older-voters-hillary-clinton-woman-president>
, who was born before women had the right to vote in the US. Finally, she’d had 
the chance to vote for a woman who looked likely to become president.

I left that interview exhilarated about how much women’s rights had progressed 
in Diamond’s lifetime. Exhilaration was in the air in New York. The ultimate 
glass ceiling was about to be shattered. There was an intoxicating sense that 
women could achieve anything we wanted now. That the future was female.

Less than 24 hours later America voted an unqualified misogynist who has 
spoken about“grabbing women by the pussy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 into the White House. Women can do anything we want now, it seems, unless we 
aim too high.

We can run for president but we’ll be indulged in the endeavour, not actively 
supported. We can rack up decades of experience and have it trivialised in 
seconds. We can speak up about sexual assault and then see our alleged 
assailant elected into the highest office in the country.

Division besets us. But the US must live up to its role in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/division-besets-us-but-the-us-must-live-up-to-its-role-in-the-world>
Trump’s win has trained a spotlight on the extent of the misogyny that runs 
through America. Importantly, however, it also reveals just how far women’s 
rights have come; how much has been achieved; how threatened the denizens of a 
fading America feel. Trump’s victory is the last gasp of a desperate white 
patriarchy. Clinton may have lost the election but that doesn’t mean women lost 
on Wednesday morning. Our fight isn’t over.

Ah, but we also need to be careful not to frame Trump’s victory as a case of 
men versus women. Exit polls show that the majority of white women voted for 
Trump. It seems that upholding white privilege is a bigger priority for many 
women in America than protecting legislation that gives them control over their 
own bodies.

Indeed, if Trump’s win has taught us one thing it’s that we need to stop 
talking about “women’s rights”. We need to stop pretending that women in 
America are a homogeneous group with the same privileges and priorities.Feminism
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> is meaningless unless we talk 
about intersectional feminism. It’s women of colour who should feel the 
angriest today. It’s women of colour who have been most let down. And it’s 
women of colour who have the most to lose.

Suzanne Moore <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/suzannemoore>: Every 
freedom that America’s women have fought for is now under attack

What do we tell our daughters about the future? The big girls who sat up 
waiting to see the horror-show sexist get his comeuppance? Or the little ones 
who we told would see the first female president of America? Do we tell them 
this role is still beyond the reach of any woman? That no woman can meet the 
standards that are required of her?

A qualified woman with flaws has lost to a man whose lies, tax avoidance and 
sexual assault allegations are not flaws enough to bar him from the role, nor 
indeed massive support. Hillary was a prose candidate, not enough poetry. Trump 
didn’t even do prose, just stream-of-consciousness prejudice.

Trump won. Now we organize to block him, every step of the way | Kate Aronoff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/trump-won-us-election-progressives>
All through the night I heard “experts” say people respond negatively to women 
seeking power. They hold them to higher standards. Trump dispensed with 
standards altogether. Women function to service him, as trophies, possessions. 
Their bodies are not autonomous. Allegedly, he needs no consent to grope them. 
This is what your daughters will see now that a man with the lowest possible 
opinion of women has been elected to the highest office. This is what your sons 
will see.

If you are a powerful man in America you can treat women like dirt, refuse 
them the right to make decisions on reproductive rights, basically consider 
women’s lives lesser than yours. The patriarchy is fully restored. And yes, 
some women helped restore it, some women voted for Trump, possibly two thirds 
of white women. For the misogyny around Hillary came from all quarters: the 
Bernie fans who would not vote for her, the many men of the left who said there 
was little difference between Clinton and Trump – because women’s rights are 
low down in their list of priorities. Male privilege spoke on the left and the 
right.

The Nate Silver charts show that if only women voted, Clinton would have won 
easily. The rage of men is so powerful, they will unite around this inadequate 
narcissist. To move back out of the dark ages we are going to need girls and 
boys to go back to basics, to break up this band of old rich white men who have 
battered the soul of America. However heartbroken America’s women are, it is 
they who now have to pick up the pieces. It is they who have to fight for 
themselves because every freedom they have fought for is now under attack.
 