
Parents at a south London primary school have launched a fierce campaign 
against plans for secondary pupils to be brought into the same building for two 
years. In the latest tale of bizarre free school planning, Paxton primary in 
Gipsy Hill, which has already expanded from a one-form to a three-form entry 
primary school, will suddenly see up to 240 year 7s descend on it next year, 
with a further 240 in the offing for 2018-19.

The school has just completed a new building, intended for primary children, 
giving it space for 630 pupils as it grows from its current roll of 300. There 
is temporarily some spare space, until the entry cohort reaches year 6. But the 
secondary pupils could take numbers to 900 within two years, way beyond 
capacity.

The sudden plan seems to have arisen because Gipsy Hill school, a new free 
school (secondary), due to open in 2017, has yet to secure planning permission 
for a site four miles away in Clapham.

Paxton parents collected more than 600 signatures against the proposals within 
10 days of them being announced by Sir Craig Tunstall, the Gypsy Hill 
Federation’s chief executive, at the end of last month. The parents worry the 
site will become cramped, that temporary classrooms will have to be built on a 
playground that is already small and that its special needs facilities aren’t 
equipped to cope. They also fear that the need to separate primary and 
secondary pupils at lunchtimes will leave children rushing meals, and that the 
primary faces three years of disruption just as its building work has finished.

Parents say they knew nothing of the plans before they were announced, and yet 
signs were put up at the primary proclaiming it as the home of the new 
secondary three days later. The federation’s website is already offering 
prospective parents “tours” of the secondary’s “brand new space at Paxton 
<http://www.gipsyhillschool.london/375/our-admissions/one-to-one-meetings>”.

On Friday, the parents wrote to the government calling for the plan to be 
reversed. They have pointed to Lambeth and Southwarkcouncil data [pdf] 
<http://bit.ly/2dR7657> suggesting there will be no shortage of secondary 
places locally next year, and a council document showing there were concerns 
abouttraffic congestion [pdf] <http://bit.ly/2dJr9mb> even when the primary was 
allowed to expand.

Melinda Styles, who has a daughter in year 1, said: “These plans have been 
dropped on us with no warning or consultation. If I’d known this was coming, 
I would never have chosen the school for my daughter.”

It is unclear what planning processes the proposals will have to go through. 
The federation declined to comment.

Dame Rachel brings policy to the people


“For too long, the education debate has taken place among elites in 
Westminster and Whitehall,” saysDame Rachel de Souza 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jul/28/academy-trust-sick-hewett-school-norwich-ofsted-inspiration-trust>
 in her summing-up of why the education world needs a new campaign group she 
has helped to set up, called Parents and Teachers for Excellence (PTE).

“One of the depressing things about the education debate in recent times is 
its politicisation,” says the organisation’s website. “The future of education 
is about our children’s future and it must stand outside of petty political 
debate.”

Who could argue? Yet the group itself appears extraordinarily well connected 
for an organisation seemingly trying to move towards a less “elitist” approach 
to policymaking. And, for an avowedly non-partisan body, its links with the 
Conservative party are remarkable.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb222b64c172ec66ac108e85b6e5bdd7869efda1%2F0_247_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parents%E2%80%99%20fury%20as%20primary%20school%20prepares%20for%20surprise%20influx%20of%20secondary%20pupils&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parents%E2%80%99%20fury%20as%20primary%20school%20prepares%20for%20surprise%20influx%20of%20secondary%20pupils&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb222b64c172ec66ac108e85b6e5bdd7869efda1%2F0_247_3744_4680%2F3744.jpg>
 Rachel de Souza. Photograph: Teri Pengilley for the Guardian 
For on its “advisory council” are Rachel Wolf, recently David Cameron’s lead 
adviser on education policy; James O’Shaughnessy, the Tory peer now running 
free schools who once led Cameron’s policy unit; Jonathan Simons, another 
ex-Cameron staffer, now head of education at the Tory thinktank Policy 
Exchange; and Munira Mirza, a former deputy mayor to Boris Johnson.

O’Shaughnessy and Mirza have both worked for Policy Exchange, as has James 
Frayne, the Tory public relations guru who reportedly helped set up PTE (and is 
married to Wolf).

PTE was set up as a company by De Souza and the venture capitalist and Vote 
Leave campaigner Jon Moynihan. De Souza herself, who is so anti-establishment 
she once sat on the government committee that recommended who among her peers 
should receive honours for services to education, works for the Tory donor and 
Policy Exchange supporterSir Theodore Agnew 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/dec/30/tory-donor-knighted-new-year-honours>
 in her capacity as chief executive of the Inspiration Trust academy chain, of 
which Agnew is the sponsor and chairman.

If this is an attempt to depoliticise policymaking and move it away from an 
“elite”, it seems an odd way of going about it.

Author joins protest at park development


Finally, the author Iain Sinclair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/14/on-my-radar-iain-sinclair-cultural-highlights>
 is among campaigners against plans by the government and an east London 
council to build a “temporary” secondary school on a nature conservation area 
and parkland.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21e1bd2e11fa85ef6de436cf0a7f5c45ad3e44aa%2F2170_449_1011_1263%2F1011.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Parents%E2%80%99%20fury%20as%20primary%20school%20prepares%20for%20surprise%20influx%20of%20secondary%20pupils&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Parents%E2%80%99%20fury%20as%20primary%20school%20prepares%20for%20surprise%20influx%20of%20secondary%20pupils&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fparents-primary-secondary-free-school-paxton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21e1bd2e11fa85ef6de436cf0a7f5c45ad3e44aa%2F2170_449_1011_1263%2F1011.jpg>
 Iain Sinclair. Photograph: Macnaughton/Rex 
We put “temporary” in quotations as the plan is for the new 540-pupil building 
of up to four storeys to stand on a section of Haggerston park in Hackney for 
five years from 2017.

In what seems like yet another chaotic free school plan, the building will 
house pupils from a secondary school that is being built elsewhere in the 
borough, until that is constructed in 2020. Pupils from another planned new 
secondary will be moving in between 2020 and 2022. Both are to be sponsored by 
the City of London academy trust.

Sinclair <http://www.iainsinclair.org.uk/2016/08/23/haggerston-park/> is among 
those who thinks the area should not be used for anything other than a park.

The council has argued the site is a “former park depot” where a temporary 
primary school was built in 2007. But residents say the area has always been 
part of the park and that the development is part of a steady encroachment by 
the council for various education projects.

The school proposal has to be approved by Hackney’s planning sub-committee 
next month. Meanwhile, we have seen a letter from the academies minister, Lord 
Nash, to the local MP, Meg Hillier, in which he seems to admit that the 
temporary building, whose construction will be overseen by the government’s 
Education Funding Agency, might not be perfect. Nash writes that the projects 
must “meet, wherever possible, current guidelines for school buildings. Whilst 
it is recognised that it is not always possible to meet this, particularly for 
temporary sites, the EFA will ensure that the building is suitable”.

As reassurances go, this is perhaps not the strongest.
 