
Donald Trump has said he has an “open mind” over US involvement in the Paris 
agreement to combat climate change, afterpreviously pledging to withdraw from 
the effort 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/may/26/donald-trump-environmental-policy-climate-change-keystone-xl>
.

Donald Trump drops threat of criminal investigation into Hillary Clinton – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-news-transition-hillary-clinton-live>
Asked by the New York Times whether he would pull the US out of the Paris 
climate accord <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>
, which has been signed by 196 nations, Trump said: “I’m looking at it very 
closely. I have an open mind to it.”

The president-elect also wavered on his previously stated position that 
climate change is a “hoax” and just a “very, very expensive form of tax”.

Questioned over the link between human activity and global warming, Trump 
said: “I think there is some connectivity. Some, something. It depends on how 
much.” He added that he was thinking about how the issue “will cost our 
companies”.

Trump’s partial acceptance of the overwhelming scientific view that burning 
fossil fuels is changing the climate, along with his equivocation over American 
involvement in the Paris deal, are subtle departures fromthe position he took 
during the presidential campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
.

Trump has said he would “cancel” the Paris climate agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/paris-climate-agreement>, which was 
ratified earlier this month and requires a three-year notice period to quit. 
The president-elect has said he would also cut all money spent on climate 
change aid to developing nations and slash clean energy funding.

The election of an apparent climate change denier to the US presidency has 
causedconsternation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/11/trump-presidency-a-disaster-for-the-planet-climate-change>
 among scientists and overseas climate negotiators, but some have voiced hope 
that Trump will follow a more pragmatic path that will avoid political fallout 
over the issue.

In Trump’s recent 
<https://assets.donaldjtrump.com/_landings/contract/O-TRU-102316-Contractv02.pdf>
pronouncements <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=waiwbE7OpE8> on his first 100 
days in power he has pledged to cancel money for climate change programs and 
lift restrictions upon fossil fuel exploration on public land, but made no 
mention of quitting the Paris deal.

Michael Brune, executive director of Sierra Club, said of his latest comments: 
“Talk is cheap, and no one should believeDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> means this until he acts upon 
it. We’re waiting for action, and Trump is kidding nobody on climate as he 
simultaneously stacks his transition team and cabinet with climate science 
deniers and the dirtiest hacks the fossil fuel industry can offer. Prove it, 
president-elect. The world is watching.”
 