
Paris has come out on top in the QS best student cities rankings 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/best-student-cities> for the fourth year 
running.

The ranking, compiled by higher education data experts QS, assigns cities 
scores based on the diversity of their student body, quality of life, 
opportunities for graduate employment, affordability and the quality of their 
universities.


Melbourne holds on to second place for the second year, while Tokyo has moved 
into bronze-medal position, from seventh last year.

London’s high cost of living has seen it fall to fifth place, from third last 
year, with Sydney pipping it to fourth.

The only other British cities to feature in this year’s top 75 are Edinburgh, 
Manchester, Coventry, Birmingham and Glasgow.

What makes Paris the best city in the world for students?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/paris-best-city-in-the-world-for-students>
Paris scores well for its low student fees, favourable rank in the Mercer Cost 
of Living index <https://www.imercer.com/uploads/GM/col2015/f123654/index.html>
, the employer recognition and quality of its universities, with 18 
institutions in the top 75 – only London has more at 19. It scores well for 
desirability and has a strong ratio of international students but loses marks 
for its level of tolerance and inclusion.


Anna Greenburgh, an Oxford University graduate who is studying for a master’s 
degree in economics and psychology at the Sorbonne, said: “I’m getting more 
perspectives on issues than I did at Oxford, where the majority of people on my 
course were raised in England.”

Anne Hidalgo, the mayor of Paris, said: “Paris is proud to be ranked as the 
best world student city. Our youth represents our greatest strength and 
incarnates our greatest hope. We carry an ambitious politic to make youth able 
to blossom, be successful, be able to choose and to build its future. We will 
continue to support students by offering them opportunities, in an open, 
dynamic and creative city.”


Speaking about the city’s place in the ranking, which was compiled before last 
month’sterrorist attacks <https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, 
Thierry Coulhon, president of Paris Sciences et Lettres university, said: “I am 
glad to see Paris appearing as the top world student city for the fourth 
consecutive year. After the terrible attacks that this city has experienced, 
Paris is more determined than ever to defend its values of solidarity, freedom 
and creativity.”

Jacques Biot, president of École Polytechnique, said: “The Paris region has 
much to offer to international students – history, arts, culture – on top of 
its academic and scientific excellence. It is a unique place to learn, 
discover, study, engage and exchange, a place where dialogue, fraternity and 
freedom shall always prevail.”

The 10 best cities in the world to be a student in 2016 – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/gallery/2015/dec/01/10-best-cities-in-the-world-to-be-a-student-2016-in-pictures>
To be included in the ranking, a city must be home to at least 250,000 
inhabitants and two or more universities on theQS world university rankings. 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/qs-world-university-rankings> QS considered 112 
such cities.


The US is the most represented nation, with 11 cities on the list, followed by 
the UK (eight) and Australia (seven).

The top 10 student cities

 * (1) Paris 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/paris>

 * (2) Melbourne 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/melbourne>
 * (7) Tokyo 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/tokyo>
 * (4) Sydney 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/sydney>
 * (3) London 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/london>
 * (15) Singapore 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/singapore>
 * (8) Montreal 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/montreal>
 * (5) Hong Kong 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/hong-kong>
 * (16) Berlin 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/berlin>
 * (10) Seoul 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/university-rankings-articles/qs-best-student-cities/seoul>
 * See the full ranking and scores breakdown 
<http://www.topuniversities.com/best-student-cities> 
Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at 
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 