
It’s a party that triumphed in the aftermath of the Scottish independence 
referendum, despite losing the vote, enjoying a five-fold surge in membership 
and a flood of eager activists. It’s now on the brink of its best-ever Holyrood 
election result, with the word from the doorstep that it is picking off 
progressive voters from Scottish Labour. But this isn’t the SNP.

Patrick Harvie <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/harvie-patrick>, 
co-convener of the Scottish Greens, is first to admit that the past months have 
presented an entirely new campaigning experience. Most of the young activists 
knocking on doors for him in Glasgow Kelvin, where the Guardian joined them 
last week, signed up immediately after the no vote in September 2014. Harvie is 
one of two Green candidates standing for a constituency seat in this election: 
another sign of the party’s confidence.

The Scottish Greens are hoping to win at least one MSP in every region, with 
the potential for a couple more along to way, particularly if the support 
around Glasgow holds up. The local organiser proudly shows off his new app for 
recording canvas results: “It’s the first time we’ve not had spread sheets!”

Here the pitch is to yes voters who may consider the SNP to be on a shoogly 
peg, say, on taxing the wealthy, who are still too defined by the 
constitutional question to return to Labour, but see the Greens as a way of 
maintaining pressure on the nationalists to match their progressive words with 
progressive deeds.

“Bold” is the word the Harvie uses when he talks about “pushing the SNP beyond 
their comfort zone”. At the same time, he is clear that the Greens favour 
“constructive opposition”. Harvey has a delicate balance to strike, reflecting 
the dismay felt by more radical voters for example when Nicola Sturgeonrejected 
a new 50p top tax rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/24/nicola-sturgeon-backtracks-on-50p-rate-of-income-tax>
, but without resorting to corrosive SNP-bashing.

Harvie offers a very specific example of the greening of the SNP: “I would 
like to think that the pressure we brought for a good two years to get Alex 
Salmond to kickDonald Trump out of the Global Scot network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/09/petition-calling-for-donald-trump-to-be-banned-from-uk-signed-by-85000>
 had an effect. Eventually after Nicola had taken over she did. I like to think 
we can get the same result in saying that tax exiles shouldn’t be appointed to 
the Council of Economic Advisers.” (Harvie has been a long-time critic of the 
Monacco-based billionaire Jim McColl, andrenewed his calls for him to be dropped
 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14432722.Nicola_Sturgeon_urged_to_drop_economic_adviser_Jim_McColl_in_wake_of_Panama_Papers_row/>
 in light of the Panama Papers data leak.)

“I’d like to think Nicola would take a more principled stance,” he concludes. 
His language when referring to the SNP is emollient - he gently tells me off 
for suggesting thathe “skewered” Sturgeon over council tax in one of the TV 
debates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/30/nicola-sturgeon-scotland-referendum-independence-knife-edge-scottish-tory-leader-ruth-davidson>
 - and he is doubtless mindful that many SNP voters are in the process of 
considering whether to give the Greens their second regional vote.

At the Scottish Greens’ manifesto launch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/12/scottish-green-party-nicola-sturgeon-tax-rich-holyrood-election>
, Harvie promised that taxing the rich to prevent spending cuts would be 
“agenda item one” if the SNP invited his party into talks after the election.

In contrast with the SNP, the SGP has proposed a 60p upper tax band for 
earnings over £150,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/29/scottish-green-party-60-per-cent-tax-high-earners>
, as well as a new residential property tax incorporating land value for the 
first time, to replace the council tax. The SNP has said it will end the 
nine-year freeze on council tax but not undertake more fundamental reform 
called for by local councils.

It is here that Harvie’s exasperation with the SNP’s apparent timidity is 
plain. “I do find it frustrating that three elections in a row there’s been a 
debate about whether to scrap council tax and have something fundamentally 
better. Now they’ve got the political capital and the political cover that come 
with having most other parties wanting to replace the council tax as well, and 
suddenly they’ve got cold feet.”

And he offers his own explanation: “It’s possible that it’s a feature of 
having grown too big. If you’ve managed to achieve a single party majority 
under a PR system, yes that’s hugely impressive but it then makes you much more 
anxious to keep on doing the same thing again, which means being all things to 
all people. Any replacement to the council tax would have losers as well as 
winner.”

Nicola Sturgeon has cited fears that top earners would vacate the country if 
the top rate of tax was raised, but Harvie is blunt: “If a small number of them 
are motivated solely by money, I don’t think that’s an immense loss.”

He continues: “Tax policy isn’t just about raising revenue; it’s about the 
distribution of wealth and income in our society and there is good evidence 
from around the world that having a high top rate of tax suppresses excessive 
pay demands by the super-rich.”


On emissions, he is equally sharp – “We’ve got four missed targets in a row 
and now the SNP’s approach is to raise the targets again. Yet there is no clear 
programme of action.”

He says that he has no concerns about shouting from the sidelines even if the 
SNP, as predicted, win another majority: “I think that could have been a 
concern at the beginning of the last session. I was disappointed only to get 
two seats again. But what we did was get results - on energy efficiency, land 
reform, the fracking moratorium. It’s not enough and we’ll be able to do more 
if people have that sense of boldness and elect a parliament with a good strong 
group of Green MSPs.”

“Can you think of anything more likely to make a land reform minister raise 
their game than seeing [land reform expert, second on the Lothian list]Andy 
Wightman <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/andy-wightman> on the other side 
of the committee table?” he asks with evident anticipation.
 