
Former prime minister Paul Keating has lambasted Donald Trump’s nominee for 
secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, saying his claim that China should be denied 
access to artificial islands it has built in theSouth China Sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-china-sea> threatens to involve 
Australia in war.

He says Australia must tell the Trump administration “from the get-go” that we 
will not be part of such adventurism, “just as we should have done on Iraq 15 
years ago”.

Tillerson, a former ExxonMobil chief executive, told his confirmation hearing 
in Washington 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/12/no-access-rex-tillerson-sets-collision-course-beijing-south-china-sea>
 overnight that China’s control and construction of artificial islandsin waters 
claimed by neighbouring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/17/philippines-to-set-aside-south-china-sea-tribunal-ruling-to-avoid-imposing-on-beijing>
 countries was “akin to Russia’s taking of Crimea”.

Tillerson said China <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> was declaring 
control of territories that did not rightfully belong to it, and it would 
threaten the “entire global economy” if it was allowed to control access to the 
waterway.


Trump risks 'war' with Beijing if US blocks access to South China Sea, state 
media warns
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/13/trump-risks-war-with-beijing-us-blocks-access-south-china-sea-state-media>
“We’re going to have to send China a clear signal that, first, the 
island-building stops and, second, your access to those islands also is not 
going to be allowed,” he said duringhis confirmation hearing 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?421335-1/secretary-state-nominee-rex-tillerson-testifies-confirmation-hearing&live>
 to become America’s top diplomat.

“They are taking territory or control or declaring control of territories that 
are not rightfully China’s. The failure of a response [from the US] has allowed 
[China] just to keep pushing the envelope on this.

“The way we’ve got to deal with this is we’ve got to show back-up in the 
region with our traditional allies in south-east Asia,” he said.

Tillerson did not elaborate on how the US would bar China from the islands.

China claims sovereignty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/jul/12/south-china-sea-dispute-what-you-need-to-know-about-the-hague-court-ruling>
 over almost the entire South China Sea, and has built seven artificial islands 
on reefs and rocks, and outfitted them withmilitary-length airstrips and 
anti-aircraft guns 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/15/images-show-significant-chinese-weapons-systems-in-south-china-sea>
.

Keating issued a public statement on Friday, castigating Tillerson for his 
recklessness.

Paul Keating: Australia's 'dullards' have missed Trump's foreign policy switch
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/nov/25/keating-says-australia-must-realise-trumps-focus-is-solely-on-us>
“When the US Secretary of State-designate threatens to involve Australia in 
war with China, the Australian people need to take note,” Keating said.

“That is the only way Rex Tillerson’s testimony that a ‘signal’ should be sent 
to China that ‘access to these islands is not going to be allowed’, and that US 
allies in the region should be there ‘to show back-up’, can be read.

“We should tell the new US administration from the get-go that Australia will 
not be part of such adventurism, just as we should have done on Iraq 15 years 
ago. That means no naval commitment to joint operations in the South China Sea 
and no enhanced US military facilitation of such operations.

“Tillerson’s claim that China’s control of access to the waters would be a 
threat to ‘the entire global economy’ is simply ludicrous. No country would be 
more badly affected than China if it moved to impede navigation.

“On the other hand, Australia’s prosperity and the security of the world would 
be devastated by war,” Keating said.
 