
He was a lanky, painfully shy kid hiding under a cowboy hat. Walking up to the 
mic at the annual Youth Talent Showdown at the Calgary Stampede, he proceeded 
to belt out a Garth Brooks song, winning the hearts of the judges, the 
spectators and the city. That was in 1992. Twenty years later, Paul Brandt was 
the headline act at the nightly grandstand show at the Calgary Stampede, 
hovering on a transparent stage above 20,000 cheering fans.

Experience the wonder of Alberta – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-cool-canada/gallery/2016/oct/28/experience-the-wonder-of-alberta-in-pictures>
“It was an amazing moment,” he reflects now. “It was a full circle. I hadn’t 
played at the Stampede since I won the contest because we were touring 
internationally the whole time. So when the Stampede asked if I could play 11 
nights to over 200,000 visitors as part of the 100-year celebration I was 
honoured.

“But the coolest thing was this one moment I flashed back to the night I won 
the contest singing a Garth Brooks song, wishing I could be great like him and 
swing out over the audience like he does. Well, there I was, on a clear 
platform, suspended 78 feet in the air looking down on the venue. I looked over 
to the Saddledome where Garth Brooks was performing that night! It was the most 
surreal moment of my life. I know I’m never going to be as great as Garth 
Brooks but I was living my dream – and I still am.”

Brandt is now one of the established darlings of the Canadian music industry, 
with eight Junos (Canada’s equivalent of a Grammy award) and enough other 
awards and gold records to paper the barn at his place on the outskirts of 
Calgary.

He even won over the home of country music, Nashville, but in 2005 he decided 
to part company from his record label there, return home to Calgary, and launch 
his own Brand-T Records. All the albums since have been chart-toppers. Even his 
stage clothes are made in Calgary, by internationally acclaimed fashion 
designer Paul Hardy, as well as his trademark hat, which is by Smithbilt.

“The cowboy hat was a security blanket,” says Brandt, “but I learned to use it 
as a bit of a persona. The first photoshoot, the photographer says: ‘Are you 
sure you want the photos with the cowboy hat? Because once we take this photo 
and put it on the album you are never taking it off.’ And that’s true. I did a 
concert once without the hat and I got letters complaining that I didn’t 
perform as expected. It’s very important for people.”

When he’s not on the road, Brandt keeps busy managing the record label, 
writing songs, having a great time with his two kids of eight and six, 
volunteering with the Bucksprings Foundation and enjoying what Calgary has to 
offer.

“The best thing about Calgary? I have travelled all over the world and I used 
to think I was homesick for family and friends, but I quickly realised it’s 
more than that. I was homesick for what Calgary and Alberta has to offer. It 
has a natural beauty that is accessible, the choices of activities are endless 
and the size of the city isn’t overwhelming.

“I grew up in a place that is simply amazing, but I took it for granted. I had 
to leave to figure that out, and I’m committed to not forget that again.”

Paul Brandt’s Calgary tips

Live music: “There is an emerging live scene here now. I love sneaking into the
Ironwood <http://ironwoodstage.ca/> and the Blues Can 
<http://www.thebluescan.com/> in Inglewood with a group of friends to hear 
artists coming through town. I’m excited to see the newNational Music Centre 
<https://nmc.ca/>, and am working on a project with them.” 

Food: “I love CHARCUT <http://www.charcut.com/#about> and the historic Deane 
House <http://www.deanehouse.com/>, and one of my favourite places is the River 
Café <http://www.river-cafe.com/> on Prince’s Island. To have a restaurant 
somewhere in the middle of a city that you have to park your car, walk across a 
bridge and along a path surrounded by incredible gardens and trees is amazing.”

Fishing: “You can drive down to Pincher Creek and fish on Castle river, or 
just float through Calgary and fish for hours for world-class brown and rainbow 
trout. The mountains are full of great streams where you don’t know what’s 
hiding around the next bend.”

Hiking: “I love to go running on the trails at the Glenbow Ranch 
<http://www.albertaparks.ca/glenbow-ranch.aspx> near Cochrane, and the choice 
of hiking trails inKananaskis Country 
<https://www.albertaparks.ca/kananaskis-country/> is great.” 

The Cowboy Trail: “My most recent obsession is my new R1200GS BMW. The other 
day I went for a five-hour ride on theCowboy Trail 
<http://www.thecowboytrail.com/> along the foothills of the Rockies and it was 
beautiful. We have the best landscape out our back door.”

For more information and inspiration, see explore-canada.co.uk 
<https://uk-keepexploring.canada.travel/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=native_advertising&utm_campaign=uk_2016_p&utm_content=pd_advertising_alberta+influencers+x+3>
 