



Complaints to the financial ombudsman about payday loans have almost tripled 
in a year, despite tougher regulation of the controversial sector, figures show.

The number of consumers unhappy about fee-charging packaged current accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/29/packaged-bank-accounts-good-deal-ppi-scandal-misselling>
 has also soared, with complaints now running at more than 120 a day.


In its annual review covering the 2015-16 financial year, the Financial 
Ombudsman Service <http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk> said payment 
protection insurance (PPI) remained the most complained-about financial 
product. The organisation is still receiving up to 4,000 PPI cases a week, 
though the 188,700 complaints about the controversial insurance notched up over 
the 12-month period is down on the 205,000 seen in 2014-15.


 The biggest increase in complaints was for payday loans, rising by 178%, from 
1,157 in the year ending 31 March 2015 to 3,216 now.


The increase follows a regulatory clampdown on the multibillion-pound sector, 
which the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) began policing in April 2014. 
Payday lenders were required to make tougher affordability checks,their adverts 
now come under greater scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/may/16/fca-loan-credit-companies-break-advertising-rules>
, andprice caps on the loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca> took 
effect in January 2015, resulting in lower borrowing costs for many.


The ombudsman service said the increase in payday loan complaints “reflected 
people’s growing awareness of their rights when things go wrong”, and also the 
high levels of publicity around these products following FCA action to tackle 
unfair practices at some firms.


New complaints about packaged bank accounts more than doubled to 44,244. Banks 
have begun setting aside large sums for potential compensation relating to the 
accounts, which can charge customers up to £204 a year and offer benefits such 
as travel insurance and card protection. Meanwhile, some claims management 
firms have switched their attention from PPI to encouraging people to claim 
compensation for alleged packaged account mis-selling.


Packaged accounts have long been criticised by many commentators – consumer 
organisationWhich? labelled them a “useless financial product” 
<http://www.which.co.uk/news/2010/06/top-10-useless-financial-products--216088/>
. However, the ombudsman service said that in most cases it took the view that 
the extras that came with the account had been useful to the customer or saved 
them money.


The annual review revealed that complaints about all financial products and 
services rose 3.5% to 340,899. It indicated there may have been an increase in 
the number of people ‘trying it on’: the “uphold rate” – where the ombudsman 
finds in the customer’s favour – was 51%, down from 55% in 2014-15.

The ombudsman service also noted that this year it had seen a small number of 
people claiming that a “legal loophole” – which they had usually read about 
online – meant their mortgage was not valid.


It also disclosed it had received “very few” complaints about newer banking 
services such as contactless card and mobile payments.

 