
Payday loan firms and credit card companies could be charged a fee to fund the 
work of teams cracking down on loan sharks, the chancellor has announced.

From April 2017 the work of the Illegal Money Lending Teams 
<http://www.nationaltradingstandards.uk/work-areas/illegal-money-lending-teams/>
 in England and Wales will be funded by a levy on companies offering consumers 
credit, replacing the funding they currently receive from the government.

Since their launch in 2004, teams in England and Wales have prosecuted more 
than 300 illegal money lenders and had £50m of debt written off for consumers. 
But despite their success there were fears they would have their funding cut 
and be forced to reduce their workforce by a third.


The Treasury said the introduction of a levy would “ensure that the perimeter 
of the consumer credit market continues to be enforced, and vulnerable 
consumers remain protected from loan sharks”. Details of which firms will pay, 
and how much the levy will be, are to be consulted on.

In 2015-16 the government paid £3.6m towards running the teams, and it had 
been reported that there were plans to cut that sum by a third. The Treasury 
said the government would protect the team’s funding in 2016-17.

However, city regulator the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> will be 
given the power to introduce a new levy on consumer credit firms from 2017-18, 
replacing the government payment.

The FCA took over regulation of consumer credit providers in 2014. Since then 
it has brought innew rules for payday lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jul/01/payday-lenders-restrictions-borrowers-cash>
, forcing them to check that borrowers can afford to repay loans, banning the 
repeated roll-over of debts andcapping the interest and fees that firms can 
charge <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jan/02/payday-loans-caps-fca>. 


While the crackdown has been good news for many borrowers, in October National 
Trading Standards, which runs the teams, warned that alongside the roll-out of 
the single universal credit benefits payment it could push more people towards 
illegal lenders. It said loan sharks were expected to take advantage of those 
on a low income who may struggle to obtain credit via other means, “seeking to 
exploit them as they get to grips with the changes to their finances”.

We are … ensuring that enforcement teams have the funding, from the industry, 
that they need to protect consumers
George Osborne 
Announcing the levy, the chancellor George Osborne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/georgeosborne> said: “I am absolutely 
determined to protect customers from abuse and sharp practice in the consumer 
credit market.

“That is why I capped the total cost of a payday loan, it’s why we’re taking 
further action today to tackle illegal loan sharks by ensuring that enforcement 
teams have the funding, from the industry, that they need to protect consumers 
from those that would do them harm.”

In 2015, work by the Illegal Money Lending teams resulted in 108 arrests and 
charges against 43 people. In one case a carer who operated a loan shark 
business was jailed for two-and-a-half years after a court heard how a victim 
who took out a £2,000 loan to send to her son in the Philippines ended up 
paying back more than £11,000.
 