
The pictures of President Obama and the prime minister of Japan, Shinzō Abe, 
standing side by side to commemorate the attack on Pearl Harbor 75 years ago (
Obama and Abe in historic joint visit to Pearl Harbor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/shinzo-abe-pearl-harbor-visit-obama-japan>
, 28 December) has me wondering how many people are aware that two momentous 
attacks – not one – took place in the Pacific on 7/8 December 1941 (the actual 
date of the strike on Pearl Harbor). One hour earlier, in real time, Japanese 
transport ships began landing troops on the east coast of Malaya, prior to 
overrunning the peninsula and capturing the “impregnable” British bastion of 
Singapore 10 short weeks later.

The anniversary of the surprise attack on Pearl Harbor, which brought America 
into the European war, is thus also the anniversary of the first strike in the 
unravelling of theBritish empire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/british-empire> in east Asia. The reason the 
US fleet was deliberately attacked by the Japanese was to prevent its warships 
and aircraft from coming to the aid of the British colony, which had virtually 
no air defences. The dramatic devastation at Pearl Harbor was immediately 
blazoned across press billboards back in England – at the same time as a 
blanket of silence descended on the alarming news of the concurrent Japanese 
invasion of Malaya. That silence has remained in place pretty well ever since 
and, with it, the mutual dependence of these two momentous events – both in 
time and intent – has almost been lost to public consciousness. It’s high time 
this fudge of history was corrected.
Patricia Graham
Tonbridge, Kent

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 