
Peers have defeated controversial government reforms of higher education that 
would have made it easier for new profit-making colleges to award degrees and 
become universities.

Labour, Liberal Democrat and crossbench peers in the House of Lords passed an 
amendment to scupper reforms to thehigher education and research bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/31/lords-revolt-tory-plans-free-market-universities>
 by 248 votes to 221, voicing fears that they would unacceptably commercialise 
the sector by allowing private colleges to profit from awarding degrees.

Ministers argued that the bill would raise standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/occams-corner/2016/oct/18/higher-education-research-bill-needs-amended>
 by increasing competition, by “making it easier for new high-quality providers 
to start up and achieve degree-awarding powers, and subsequently secure 
university status”.

Leave state control of universities to China | Chris Patten
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/leave-state-control-of-universities-to-china>
Led by Wilf Stevenson of Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour>, 
peers tabled amendments demanding universities are barred from seeking profit 
and remain autonomous bodies, with entrenched academic and political freedom, 
forcing a rare committee-stage vote. The amendment passed by peers would 
effectively limit the powers of the new providers that the government had 
intended to create. More than 500 in total were tabled.

“The purpose of our amendment is simple: the bill does not define a university 
and we think it is important that it does,”Lord Stevenson wrote 
<http://www.labourlords.org.uk/the_missing_star_of_the_show>. “We do not simply 
itemise some core functions of a university but also scope out the role, with 
implicit ideals of responsibility, engagement and public service.”

University leaders had warned that the bill gave the newly created Office of 
Students the power to revoke acts of parliament or royal charters that led to 
the creation of universities, including historic institutions like Oxford and 
Cambridge.

The changes in the government bill were described by Oxford University 
chancellor Chris Patten, the former Conservative party chair, as “ham-fisted”in 
an article for the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/01/leave-state-control-of-universities-to-china>
. “How can it be right to allow institutions, some of very ancient standing, to 
be abolished with only weak parliamentary scrutiny?” he wrote. “Did Thomas 
Cromwell write this part of the bill?”

The Guardian view on the higher education white paper: the customer is always 
ripe – for fleecing | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-guardian-view-on-the-higher-education-white-paper-the-customer-is-always-ripe-for-fleecing>
Sue Garden, the Liberal Democrat higher education spokeswoman in the Lords, 
said thebill was “not fit for purpose” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/the-guardian-view-on-the-higher-education-white-paper-the-customer-is-always-ripe-for-fleecing>
 and unnecessary when universities were already steeling themselves for 
pressures on their funding and student numbers after thevote to leave the 
European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/nov/11/leaving-eu-would-be-a-disaster-british-universities-warn>
.
“With this vote today we have taken a step to ensure the independence of 
universities, free from the political interference of this and future 
governments,” Garden said.

A Department for Education spokesperson said: “We want more young people to 
have the opportunity to access a high-quality university education, and the 
measures proposed in the higher education and research bill are critical to 
making this possible.

“This bill will drive up the standard of teaching at universities, deliver 
greater competition and choice for students, while safeguarding institutional 
autonomy and academic freedom. While today’s result is disappointing, the 
parliamentary process is ongoing and we look forward to the next stage of the 
bill process.”

 * This article was amended on 10 January 2017 to clarify that it was the 
reforms that were defeated, not the bill itself.
 