
People may be ready to pay an extra penny on income tax to fund the NHS and 
social care, Tim Farron, the leader of theLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>, has said.

Farron said voters had reached the stage of not believing the NHS’s problems 
could be solved through efficiency savings and might be willing to pay more if 
they were convinced it would go to the health service.

He said he did not want to pre-empt the conclusions of an independent panel 
formed by the Lib Dems, which will look at possible taxes to help theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>.

But asked if he believed people would be happy to pay an extra penny on income 
tax to improve health services, Farron said: “Yes, potentially, if people see 
this as the way of solving a problem that is increasingly apparent to people.

Loving the NHS is not enough. We have to want to pay for it too | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/the-guardian-view-on-tim-farrons-health-tax-pledge-its-not-enough-to-love-the-nhs>
“Health and social care personal crises in families are growing by the week. 
If we can convince people this is the way to meet those needs in a tangible 
way, then yes, I think so. I think we’ve gone past the time where we can pull 
the wool over people’s eyes where somehow it can be sorted out by efficiency; 
it can’t.”

Norman Lamb <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamb>, the party’s 
health spokesman, said: “The expert panel I’ve set up is looking at a 
hypothecated health and care tax and whether we need to increase tax. We’re 
prepared to do both if it makes sense to do both.


“One option is to base it on national insurance – to reform national insurance 
to make it more progressive and fair intergenerationally. Another is to base it 
on income tax and separate out the money you need on income tax.”

The Lib Dems became the first major political party to examine a dedicated new 
tax to help rescue the NHS from its deep financial problems at their party 
conference this autumn.


Lamb told delegates the party would examine the wisdom and practicalities of 
introducing a ringfenced tax that would involve a 1p increase in either income 
tax or national insurance.

It has recruited a panel of senior doctors and NHS experts to advise it on how 
a“dedicated NHS and care tax” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/20/lib-dems-will-turn-nhs-into-national-health-and-care-service-says-farron>
 would help ease the health service’s decade-long financial squeeze. It includes
David Nicholson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2013/may/21/sir-david-nicholson-to-quit-nhs>
, the former chief executive of NHS England.

Lib Dems poised to back dedicated tax to help rescue NHS
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/16/lib-dems-dedicated-tax-rescue-nhs>
Speaking after a visit to St Helier hospital in Sutton, south London, Farron 
said it was an example of a hospital that was working effectively with social 
care providers to reduce elderly and vulnerable people staying too long in 
medical care.

But he said more money was needed to solve the problems in the NHS throughout 
the whole country.


“They really are being efficient but there is no way given the crisis in 
social care that really exists that you can provide the care you would do if it 
was properly funded,” he said. “We should be proud of the NHS and the staff in 
it but we don’t have comparable funding now to many other countries we would 
consider to be on a level or even behind us.”

They also highlighted research by ITV News in October suggesting 70% of people 
would happily pay an extra 1p in every pound if that money was guaranteed to go 
to the NHS.

Almost half of those surveyed said that they would pay an extra 2p in the 
pound to bolster NHS funding, according to a survey of 1,000 people conducted 
by Survation.
 