
The usual view of history for left-leaning liberals is that the character of 
the leading protagonists is secondary. The real drivers of history are 
socio-economic forces. Marxist views of history, which I imbibed as an 
undergraduate, take this further: history is determined by material conditions 
– wages, working conditions, social relations. But in moments of crisis, such 
as the EU referendum and its consequences, personality flaws really do matter. 
When events are finely balanced, what this or that individual does can make all 
the difference.

We need a mature Brexit debate – we’re not getting it from Michael Gove | 
Jonathan Portes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/28/change-britain-brexit-michael-gove-eu-referendum>
The consensus about the Brexit vote is that it expressed resentment about how 
politicians had driven forward social changes without the consent of the 
affected communities. So social forces were certainly important. But in an 
extraordinary year where the right gained the upper hand and effective 
opposition disintegrated, what’s striking is how many fatal twists and turns 
were set in motion by misjudgments based on the character flaws of the leaders. 
Without the hubris, arrogance, laziness, disloyalty, connivance and opportunism 
of so many of the key players, we would probably not be in this current state 
of Brexit-induced political mess.

How far back should we go with this idea that misjudgments based on character 
flaws led directly to this mess? A long way. Tony Blair’s hubris about the 
Middle East discredited his centre-left politics. Thefratricidal 
competitiveness of Ed Milliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/11/david-miliband-criticises-brother-ed-labour-blairite>
 helped to deprive Labour of victory and a platform to rebuild the centre-left. 
Also key in the 2015 election was Nick Clegg’s duplicityaround student fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/sep/19/nick-clegg-apologies-tuition-fees-pledge>
. His class chemistry with David Cameron and his evident liking for his 
position caused him to massively disappoint his voters – a move that in effect 
wiped out the Liberal Democrats.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&media=>
2016: How do you report a year that changed the world? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/video/2016/dec/22/2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
This left Cameron unchallenged except by his own right wing. And of all the 
personality flaws in this saga, his proved the most glaring. His laziness and 
lack of attention to detail, characterised by the press as “Dave’s chillaxing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2012/may/22/mrs-camerons-diary-dave-chillaxing>
”, made him supremely confident about the referendum. He thought he could face 
down the right relying on electoral “reasonableness”. This relaxed attitude was 
fatal. The stakes were too high, and the details about the referendum’s status 
really mattered, as the ensuing muddle revealed. Cameron’s failure to see 
danger coming allowed a motivated right wing to define the agenda.

The weeks following the vote was a period many commentators described as a 
Greek tragedy, which is all about character initiating a fatal sequence of 
events. Michael Gove and Boris Johnson appeared motivated more by manoeuvring 
for leadership than deep conviction, as well as being deluded about their own 
strategic cleverness. ButJohnson was rather too good 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/29/eu-referendum-boris-johnson-calls-camerons-argument-baloney>
 at connecting with the popular mood, at turning the perfect phrase, at echoing 
and, to some extent, manipulating the popular press, and got the result he 
almost certainly didn’t want. His stricken face on Brexit morning suggested he 
had really sought to be the “unifying” leader in a close remain vote. Gove’s 
downfall came from opportunism, disloyalty, and an overestimation of his 
ability to outmanoeuvre Johnson.

Trump’s latest tweet about nuclear weapons is both daft and dangerous | Simon 
Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/23/donald-trump-nuclear-weapons>
Of course politicians’ characters are always crucial factors in determining 
the direction of events, and politicians by nature probably have a larger dose 
of personal ambition and cunning than the average citizen. In robust 
circumstances when political checks and balances are working well, where 
attention is given to detail, and where a strong opposition is able to 
articulate public concerns, then leaders’ character traits and even flaws don’t 
matter so much. But the Brexit negotiations are finely balanced, and the public 
is being offered little chance of scrutinising decisions.

The current leaders look even more flawed than those whose misjudgments led us 
to this point. We now have a secretive and controlling prime minister in charge 
of the biggest team of negotiators to be assembled since the 1945 peace 
conferences. For a negotiation unwanted by a significant proportion of the 
electorate, who need to be won over, it doesn’t inspire confidence.

Meanwhile, Jeremy Corbyn in opposition seems the embodiment of a flawed 
character. His vanity prevented him from turning down the leadership, a 
position for which he was clearly unsuited. In less uncertain times, Theresa 
May’s control freakery and Corbyn’s inflexibility might not matter. But they 
matter when what’s needed are leaders who can see the wider picture. Policies 
are vital, but character is more important than ever. Start worrying.
 