
The world’s most widely used insecticides 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/28/two-worlds-top-three-leading-insecticides-harm-bees-study-shows>
 harm the ability of bees to vibrate flowers and shake out the pollen to 
fertilise crops, according to preliminary results from a new study.

Some flowers, such as those of crops like tomatoes and potatoes, must be 
shaken to release pollen and bumblebees are particularly good at creating the 
buzz needed to do this. But the research shows that bumblebees exposed to 
realistic levels of aneonicotinoid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
 pesticide fail to learn how to create the greatest buzz and collect less 
pollen as a result.

The research is consistent with previous work that has shown neonicotinoid 
pesticidesreduce learning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/mar/27/pesticide-bees-scent-food-neocotinoid>
 andmemory <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4644970/> in bees. A 
moratorium on the use of three neonicotinoids on flowering crops wasput in 
place in Europe in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/29/bee-harming-pesticides-banned-europe>
 and will be reviewed next year.

Pesticide manufacturers' own tests reveal serious harm to honeybees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/22/pesticide-manufacturers-own-tests-reveal-serious-harm-to-honeybees>
In many flowers, bees collect pollen by simply brushing it off the anthers 
(the part of the stamen that contains the pollen), but other flowers require 
more work.

“So bees produce a vibration – or buzz – to shake pollen out of these anthers 
like a pepper pot,” said Penelope Whitehorn of the University of Stirling in 
Scotland, who led the study. “The bee lands on a flower, curls her body around 
the anther and grips the base with her mandibles. She then rapidly contracts 
the flight muscles to produce the vibration, without beating her wings.”

The researchers took two colonies of bumblebees in a laboratory setting and 
split the bees in each into three groups. One control group was not exposed to 
the neonicotinoid thiamethoxam, but the other two groups were fed solutions 
containing two parts per billion or 10ppb of the pesticide, doses similar to 
those found in crop fields.

After each visit to the buffalo-bur flowers used in the experiment, the bees 
in the control group learned how to buzz more pollen out of the anthers. But 
those in the 10ppb group did not improve at all.

Whitehorn will present the preliminary results at the British Ecological 
Society’s annual meeting 
<http://www.britishecologicalsociety.org/events/annual-event-2016/> on Tuesday 
and said they were “striking” and statistically significant, and would be 
submitted to a scientific journal next year.

High pesticide levels on oilseed rape crops harm wild bees, scientists prove
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/16/high-pesticide-levels-on-oilseed-crops-harm-wild-bees-scientists-prove>
“The implication is the bees take less pollen back to the colonies and the 
colonies will be less successful, meaning there may be fewer pollinators 
overall,” she said.

The study adds to a large body of evidence from lab- and field-based studies 
that neonicotinoids reduce learning and memory in bees, impair their 
communication, foraging efficiency and immune systems and, crucially,reduce 
their reproductive success 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/27/leading-insecticide-cuts-bee-sperm-by-almost-40-per-cent-study-shows>
 as well as the pollination services that they can provide, Whitehorn said.

“These chemicals do have serious implications for wild bee populations in 
agricultural landscapes but some, notably from the agrochemical industry, still 
promote their use,” she warned.

A spokesman for Syngenta, which manufactures thiamethoxam, said: 
“Crop-measured pollen and nectar residues from thiamethoxam seed-treated 
oilseed rape is typically less than 3ppb. In all our thiamethoxam seed-treated 
oilseed rape field studies we have never recorded a pollen or nectar residue as 
high as 10ppb.”

There is strong evidence that neonicotinoids harm individual bees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/28/strong-consensus-that-neonicotinoids-harm-bees-analysis-shows>
 but only a little evidence to date that this harms colonies. Bees and other 
pollinators fertilise about three-quarters of the world’s food crops and have 
seen widespread declines due to habitat loss, disease and pesticide use.
 