
More than 100 climate and development organisations, along with 70,000 people, 
have called onBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
to help secure the future of the Paris agreement by transferring the remaining 
$2.5bn committed by the US.

The Green Climate Fund was a key aspect of the historic Paris agreement signed 
in 2015, which aims to keep global warming “well below” 2C and aspires to keep 
warming to 1.5C.

Barack Obama bans oil and gas drilling in most of Arctic and Atlantic oceans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/20/barack-obama-bans-oil-gas-drilling-arctic-atlantic>
The fund, established in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/dec/13/cancun-climate-agreement>, 
is financed by wealthy countries andused to assist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/nov/06/uns-climate-fund-release-183m-to-tackle-global-warming>
 developing countries with adaptation and mitigation. It was widely seen as a 
key measure to bring both rich and poor countries to the negotiating table.

The US pledged $3bn towards the fund, making up nearly a third of the $10.3bn 
pledged in total. But so far, it hasonly transferred $500m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/07/obama-administration-pays-out-500m-to-climate-change-project>
.

“This is one of the only things Obama can do now that Trump can’t undo,” said 
Jesse Bragg from Corporate Accountability International, the group that 
organised the petitions. “Once those funds are transferred, Trump won’t be able 
to take them back.”

As of today, 117 organisations including 350.org, Friends of the Earth and the 
League of Conservation Voters have joined with Corporate Accountability 
International to delivera petition 
<http://act.stopcorporateabuse.org/p/dia/action3/common/public/%3faction_KEY=20731>
 signed by more than 70,000 to the Obama administration.

Why can’t poor countries access the climate finance they were promised?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/feb/15/small-island-states-green-climate-fund>
The organisations signed a letter saying 
<http://www.stopcorporateabuse.org/GCForgletter>: “The world cannot afford 
Donald Trump’s steps backward on climate. Right now, people around the world 
are mobilising to counter Trump’s anticipated actions. You can help us protect 
your climate legacy by fulfilling your pledge to contribute $3bn to fund 
climate justice measures in the Global South.”

The petition those organisations delivered said: “Donald Trump plans to do 
everything he can to reverse progress on climate change. His policies threaten 
disaster for people and the planet. But there’s one thing President Obama can 
do before he leaves office that Trump cannot undo.”

Trump has nominated a series of climate deniers to his cabinet, including Rex 
Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
, the chief executive of Exxon Mobil, as secretary of state. He hasalso 
nominated Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, who is known for suing the Environmental Protection Agency, to direct that 
agency.

Tamar Lawrence-Samuel, associate research director at Corporate Accountability 
International, said: “Donald Trump’s administration will be of, by and for the 
fossil fuel industry and if we don’t act now, millions will suffer.”

Obama administration pays out $500m to climate change project
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/07/obama-administration-pays-out-500m-to-climate-change-project>
“President Obama must do whatever it takes to fulfil the US’s commitment to 
the Green Climate Fund before Donald Trump and his Big Oil cabinet take over,” 
she said.

350.org’s founder, Bill McKibben, said: “The debt for the damage inflicted on 
the global climate by American carbon will never be fully repaid – and the 
Trump administration can be counted on to do nothing for the most vulnerable 
people on the planet … so this call makes both practical and moral sense.”

The first $500m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/07/obama-administration-pays-out-500m-to-climate-change-project>
 was transferred through a State Department fund, which Obama could use without 
congressional support. Corporate Accountability International argues that Obama 
could draw from several relevant funds to fulfill his pledge, including those 
within the State Department, Treasury Department, Defense Department and other 
agencies.
 