
At the controls of driverless cars, on the end of the telephone when you call 
your bank or favourite retailer: we all know the robots are coming, and in many 
cases are already here. Back in 2013, economists atOxford University’s Martin 
School <http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/> estimated that in the next 20 years, 
more than half of all jobs would besubstituted by intelligent technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/09/robots-manual-jobs-now-people-skills-take-over-your-job>
. Like the prospect of robot-assisted living or hate it, it is foolish to deny 
that children in school today will enter a vastly different workplace tomorrow 
– and that’s if they’re lucky. Far from jobs being brought back from China, 
futurologists predict that white-collar jobs will be increasingly outsourced to 
digitisation as well as blue-collar ones.

Philosophy isn’t a cure-all for the world’s current or future woes. But it can 
build immunity against careless judgments, and unentitled certitude

How should educationalists prepare young people for civic and professional 
life in a digital age? Luddite hand-wringing won’t do. Redoubling investment in 
science, technology, engineering and maths (Stem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/apr/10/more-students-accepted-onto-stem-courses-hefce-report>
) subjects won’t solve the problem either: hi-tech training has its imaginative 
limitations.

In the near future school-leavers will need other skills. In a world where 
technical expertise is increasingly narrow, the skills and confidence to 
traverse disciplines will be at a premium. We will need people who are prepared 
to ask, and answer, the questions that aren’t Googleable: like what are the 
ethical ramifications of machine automation? What are the political 
consequences of mass unemployment? How should we distribute wealth in a 
digitised society? As a society we need to be more philosophically engaged.

Amid the political uncertainties of 2016, the Irish president Michael D Higgins
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/apr/08/michael-d-higgins-irelands-poet-president>
 provided a beacon of leadership in this area. “Theteaching of philosophy 
<http://www.president.ie/en/diary/details/president-hosts-a-reception-for-members-of-philosophy-ireland>
,” he said in November, “is one of the most powerful tools we have at our 
disposal to empower children into acting as free and responsible subjects in an 
ever more complex, interconnected, and uncertain world.” Philosophy in the 
classroom, he emphasised, offers a “path to a humanistic and vibrant democratic 
culture”.

In 2013, as Ireland struggled with the after-effects of the financial crisis, 
Higgins launched a nationwide initiative calling for debate about whatIreland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> valued as a society. The result is 
that for the first time philosophy was introduced into Irish schools in 
September.

A new optional course for 12- to 16-year-olds invites young people to reflect 
on questions that – until now – have been glaringly absent from school 
curriculums. In the UK, a network of philosophers and teachers is still 
lobbying hard for a GCSE equivalent. And Ireland, a nation that was once deemed 
“the most Catholic country 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Holy_See%E2%80%93Ireland_relations>”, is already 
exploring reforms to establish philosophy for children as a subject within 
primary schools.

This expansion of philosophy in the curriculum is something that Higgins and 
his wifeSabina 
<http://www.president.ie/en/the-president/sabina-higgins/2016-W52>, a 
philosophy graduate, have expressly called for. Higgins’ views are ahead of his 
time. If educators assume philosophy is pointless, it’s fair to say that most 
academic philosophers (unlike, say, mathematicians, or linguists) are still 
territorial, or ignorant, about the viability of their subject beyond the 
cloisters. If educators need to get wise, philosophers need to get over 
themselves.

Thinking and the desire to understand don’t come naturally – contrary to what 
Aristotle believed. Unlike, say, sex and gossip, philosophy is not a universal 
interest.Bertrand Russell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2013/nov/18/bertrand-russell-philosopher-religion-ethics-life>
 came closer when he said, “Most people would rather die than think; many do.” 
While we may all have the capacity for philosophy, it is a capacity that 
requires training and cultural nudges. If the pursuit of science requires some 
cognitive scaffolding, as American philosopherRobert McCauley 
<http://www.robertmccauley.com/> argues, then the same is true of philosophy.

Robots are leaving the factory floor and heading for your desk – and your job
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/feb/09/robots-manual-jobs-now-people-skills-take-over-your-job>
Philosophy is difficult. It encompasses the double demand of strenuous labour 
under a stern overseer. It requires us to overcome personal biases and pitfalls 
in reasoning. This necessitates tolerant dialogue, and imagining divergent 
views while weighing them up.Philosophy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/philosophy> helps kids – and adults – to 
articulate questions and explore answers not easily drawn out by introspection 
or Twitter. At its best, philosophy puts ideas, not egos, front and centre. And 
it is the very fragility – the unnaturalness – of philosophy that requires it 
to be embedded, not just in schools, but in public spaces.

Philosophy won’t bring back the jobs. It isn’t a cure-all for the world’s 
current or future woes. But it can build immunity against careless judgments, 
and unentitled certitude. Philosophy in our classrooms would better equip us 
all to perceive and to challenge the conventional wisdoms of our age. Perhaps 
it is not surprising that the president of Ireland, a country that was once a 
sub-theocracy, understands this.
 