
When does reform become dangerous? Over three years ago the Conservatives 
began to roll outpersonal independence payments 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/2010-to-2015-government-policy-welfare-reform/2010-to-2015-government-policy-welfare-reform#appendix-6-introducing-personal-independence-payment>
 (PIP) – in essence, the mandatory,mass re-testing of disabled and chronically 
ill people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/11/iain-duncan-smith-pip-payments-punish-poor-ill-dying>
 – and the answer is getting stark.

Personal independence payments are a punishment of the poor and ill | Polly 
Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/11/iain-duncan-smith-pip-payments-punish-poor-ill-dying>
A report released today by Muscular Dystrophy UK 
<http://www.musculardystrophyuk.org/app/uploads/2016/06/POL5-D-Disability-report-final.pdf>
 is the latest piece of evidence to expose anadministrative catastrophe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/18/the-guardian-view-on-the-disability-cuts-incompetent-unprincipled-and-unnecessary>
: appointments cancelled at the last minute, lost applications, year-long 
delays. Two in five respondents report being sent to an assessment centre that 
wasn’t accessible for disabled people. That’s in order to be tested for a 
disability benefit.

Make it inside the building and the picture is as dire: widespread reports of 
assessors – employed by private firms hired by the Department for Work and 
Pensions – who showed no respect for disabled people, while some didn’t even 
understand the condition they were testing (one man, with muscular dystrophy, 
pointed out that the word “progressive” means “muscles don’t come back”).

The result of this chaos is anything from rent arrears and credit card debt to 
mental scars. One woman, with a muscle wasting disease, said that she developed 
panic attacks after her assessment. She is now under care of a mental health 
team and doesn’t leave her house.

That the government deliberately built PIP with tightened criteria – and is 
sitting by as the system descends into disarray – becomes grimmer still when 
you consider that this is being done to a benefit tied to other essential 
disability services.

Without PIP a disabled person can’t access anything from carer’s allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/mar/31/carers-deserve-a-livable-income>
 tosevere disability premium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2012/jul/11/benefit-reforms-penalise-disabled-people>
. If that isn’t enough, anyone who is rejected – or bumped down to the standard 
rate – is alsobarred from the Motability scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/06/paralympics-carly-tait-lifeline-car-disability-benefit-cuts>
 for an accessible car or powered wheelchair.

Sarah, a nurse with progressive muscle wasting and weakness, is seven months’ 
pregnant – and has been forced to hand back her Motability car. The 29-year-old 
had been receiving the higher rate of disability living allowance (the 
predecessor to PIP), but after being reassessed she was knocked down to the 
standard rate – despite her condition deteriorating.

Sarah can’t take her fatigue medicine without affecting her pregnancy, and her 
disability means she is at risk of falling when she walks, and permanent 
damage. “That vehicle was a lifeline to me,” she says. “I’ve lost my 
independence.”

Last week Sarah was due at a tribunal to appeal against the decision, but 
found it cancelled with just two days’ notice – and no explanation. She’s been 
in hospital twice this weekend.

The government is skewing the benefits appeals process against disabled people 
| Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/government-skewing-benefits-appeals-process-against-disabled-people>
Will this be making many headlines? It took the resignation of Iain Duncan 
Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/19/iain-duncan-smith-welfare-cuts-morally-indefensible>
 and a budget hole of billions to get the mainstream media to shine a light on 
the disaster of PIP – or many politicians to find a conscience.One cut to the 
benefit is stopped 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/21/stephen-crabb-government-u-turns-disability-cuts-leaves-budget-disarray>
. Anew secretary of state is hired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/19/stephen-crabb-appointed-new-work-and-pensions-secretary>
. And the news cycle moves on. The disabled can’t. For many, things are only 
getting worse.

Between 400 and 500 adapted cars, powered wheelchairs, and scooters are being 
taken away from disabled people 
<http://blog.proridermobility.com/2016/02/24/14000-disabled-people-lose-their-mobility-cars-due-to-government-cuts/>
 every week. Independence gone – with a maximum of seven weeks to hand your 
lifeline back. As an insight into the logic, let alone empathy, in this system, 
that’s notably less time than it takes to go to appeal or even to get the 
results of mandatory reconsideration – meaning the DWP’s ruling can be 
overturned, but the disabled person’s car or wheelchair will already have been 
taken. (At the last count,60% of appeals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/government-skewing-benefits-appeals-process-against-disabled-people>
 against PIP were successful).

Darran uses a wheelchair – and has a degenerative muscle wasting disease – but 
last year was downgraded on PIP and lost his car. In his own words, it left him 
“housebound and isolated”, and he scraped together the deposit for another 
accessible vehicle. The DWP later informed Darran that its decision had been 
“mistaken”, and his old car would be returned. “My £2,000 deposit is 
non-refundable,” he says. “I’ve lost that money.”

This is starting to look like a game with people’s lives. Take away benefits 
and the sick become destitute. Remove a car or wheelchair and disabled people 
become housebound. It’s happening right now – and what’s worse, most of the 
public won’t even know it.
 