
A few days after Russia launched its military intervention in Syria in 
September 2015, Barack Obama said it would “get stuck in a quagmire and it 
won’t work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/02/us-coalition-warns-russia-putin-extremism-syria-isis>
”. Ten months on, that has yet to come to pass. As Russia helps its ally Bashar 
al-Assad try to retake Aleppo, the last strategic urban stronghold of the 
Syrian opposition, there aren’t many signs of the Kremlin’s war machine being 
either hamstrung or stuck. Indeed Russia seems to have registered more 
victories than setbacks in Syria. Hardly anyone remembers that, just last 
March, Vladimir Putin had announced he would begin withdrawing his forces. The 
withdrawal turned out to be as theoretical as Obama’s quagmire.

Russian helicopter shot down as Syrian rebels aim to break Aleppo siege
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/syrian-rebels-launch-operation-to-break-aleppo-siege>
Most attempts to explain Putin’s military operation in Syria have focused on 
the following: 1) allergic to popular uprisings, he wants to prevent regime 
change in Damascus of the sort that happened in 2011 in Tunisia, Egypt and 
Libya; 2) he wants to secure Russia’s last foothold in the Arab world; 3) he 
wants to demonstrate Russia will do what it takes to defend an ally; 4) he 
wishes to divert attention from Ukraine as well as extract western concessions 
such as the easing of sanctions; 5) he is opportunistic and has capitalised on 
American unwillingness to get further involved in the Middle East; 6) he 
believes that by creating chaos, even if there is no clear endgame,Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> shows it can overturn western plans 
; 7) it’s all about Russian domestic politics: nationalism and military 
assertiveness go hand in hand with Putin’s need to safeguard his own power 
structure.

There is probably truth to all of the above. But as Russia’s bombers hammer 
Aleppo’s besieged population in what could be the most decisive battle of 
Syria’s civil war, consider this as another piece to the puzzle of Putin’s 
mind: Syria is where Russia wants to erase the humiliation of theSoviet Union’s 
defeat in Afghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/20/afgantsy-russians-afghanistan-rodric-braithwaite-review>
 in the 1980s.

When Obama predicted a quagmire, he meant a repetition of the Soviet quagmire 
in the Hindu Kush. He was in effect likening Putin to Brezhnevsending his 
forces into Afghanistan in 1979 
<http://justrememberthepast.weebly.com/brezhnev-and-afghanistan.html>, a war 
that ended very badly for the USSR and arguably played a key role in its demise.
Tony Blinken 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2014/12/17/politics/blinken-senate-confirmation/index.html>
, deputy secretary of state and formerly Obama’s national security adviser, 
told reporters the Russians were “making a terrible strategic mistake” in 
Syria, and added: “I think they remember Afghanistan.” Well, the Kremlin does 
remember Afghanistan. Russia’s leadership wants Syria to be the exact opposite 
of that disaster. Syria is meant to restore Russia’s authority as a military 
power.

It is Moscow’s first military deployment outside the territory of the former 
Soviet Union since Afghanistan. Putin joined the KGB in 1975, four years before 
the invasion started. Even if he never served there, that conflict and its 
outcome most certainly left an impact on him. Last year’s winner of the Nobel 
prize for literature, Svetlana Alexievitch, described in one of her books, 
Zinky Boys: Soviet Voices from a Forgotten War, the trauma experienced by a 
whole generation – the stories of war atrocities that fed back into Soviet 
society, despite the censorship.

The war ended in 1989 after Gorbachev ordered his country’s troops out. There 
were propaganda images of cheering soldiers sitting on armoured vehicles as 
they crossed the Amu Darya river back into Soviet territory. But it was a 
devastating humiliation for a superpower to be defeated by a ragtag army of 
Afghan mujahideens to which the CIA had given Stinger missiles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Faleppo-putin-russia-afghan-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc16d90ed236c0473986e5c14c0f305f1a0396f60%2F5_184_2964_1778%2F2964.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pity%20Aleppo%20as%20Putin%20drops%20his%20bombs%20to%20salvage%20Russia%E2%80%99s%20pride%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Faleppo-putin-russia-afghan-syria%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pity%20Aleppo%20as%20Putin%20drops%20his%20bombs%20to%20salvage%20Russia%E2%80%99s%20pride%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F07%2Faleppo-putin-russia-afghan-syria%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc16d90ed236c0473986e5c14c0f305f1a0396f60%2F5_184_2964_1778%2F2964.jpg>
 Soviet troops withdraw from Kabul in May 1988. Photograph: Robert 
Nickelsberg/Getty Images 
About 15,000 Soviet soldiers died in Afghanistan, and an estimated 1 million 
Afghan civilians. Months later, the Berlin wall fell and Soviet power 
unravelled. Afghanistan was to the Soviet Union what Vietnam was to America, 
only with the added consequence that the USSR literally broke up as a state 
shortly afterwards.

Putin needn’t publicly frame his Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> gambit as revenge against America for 
the losses the Soviets suffered decades ago in Afghanistan. But the 
psychological effect of undoing US strategies in the Middle East amounts much 
to the same.

Look at the parallels: when the Soviets entered Afghanistan, Americans seemed 
mired in endless arguments about themselves – first over Vietnam, then over 
Watergate. Today, Russia is pushing its advantage in Syria at a time when the 
US is enmeshed in the Trump era of politics and growing isolationism. In 1979, 
Soviet sympathisers in the west applauded the intervention in Afghanistan (the 
leader of the French communist party, Georges Marchais, said it was aimed at 
ending “feudalism”). Today inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> and the US (and not just among 
the far right) there are voices expressing admiration for Putin’s policies in 
Syria.

There are lessons from the Afghanistan campaign in the 1980s of which Putin 
may well be mindful

The comparison is not exact. The Soviet army carried out a massive ground 
invasion of Afghanistan, which at its peak involved 115,000 soldiers. In Syria, 
Russia has mostly limited itself to an air war, even if it has “military 
advisers” on the ground and mans air defences and artillery. In Syria, Russia 
has a key external ally: Iran. In 1979, by contrast, Iran was seen by 
Moscow as a foe, because Iranian Islamists who had overthrown the Shah had 
started destabilising Kabul’s Soviet-supported pro-communist government.

In 1979, Jimmy Carter said the invasion of Afghanistan was “the most serious 
threat to peace since the second world war”. In 2015, Russia’s move into Syria 
was almost met with a shrug by Obama, even if Washington was completely caught 
off-guard. In 1979, the Soviets attacked on Christmas Eve, as if they hoped it 
would be less noticed. In September 2015, Putin announced the Syria operation 
in a speech at the UN. In 1979, the USSR was raking in huge profits from high 
oil prices. In 2015, Russia launched its war in Syria while it entered a 
recession.

There are lessons from the Afghanistan campaign in the 1980s of which Putin 
may well be mindful. Mission creep is something he will want to avoid in Syria. 
The recent downing of a Russian military helicopter by Syrian rebels (all five 
crew members were killed) may have rekindled painful memories. Just as the 
Soviet army could not “hold” Afghanistan, neither Assad’s forces nor Hezbollah, 
nor the Iranian forces involved in the fighting, can hope to ever control the 
whole of Syria.

Still, Russia has so far successfully shored up Assad by intervening – whereas 
the Soviet Union ultimately failed to save an ally regime in Afghanistan (its 
then proclaimed objective).

It is impossible to say how sustainable Russia’s gains are today. But Putin 
surely remembers how the man he has often tried to imitate, Yuri Andropov, a 
powerful Soviet intelligence chief, said in a politburo meeting in 1979: “We 
cannot lose Afghanistan.” Putin thinks he cannot lose Syria.
 