
America dropped 26,171 bombs in 2016. What a bloody end to Obama's reign | 
Medea Benjamin
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/america-dropped-26171-bombs-2016-obama-legacy>
Eight years ago the world was on the brink of a grand celebration: the 
inauguration of a brilliant and charismatic black president of the United 
States of America. Today we are on the edge of an abyss: the installation of a 
mendacious and cathartic white president who will replace him.

This is a depressing decline in the highest office of the most powerful empire 
in the history of the world. It could easily produce a pervasive cynicism and 
poisonous nihilism. Is there really any hope for truth and justice in this 
decadent time? Does America even have the capacity to be honest about itself 
and come to terms with its self-destructive addiction to money-worship and 
cowardly xenophobia?

Ralph Waldo Emerson and Herman Melville – the two great public intellectuals 
of 19th-century America – wrestled with similar questions and reached the same 
conclusion as Heraclitus: character is destiny (“sow a character and you reap a 
destiny”).

The age of Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> may 
have been our last chance to break from our neoliberal soulcraft. We are rooted 
in market-driven brands that shun integrity and profit-driven policies that 
trump public goods. Our “post-integrity” and “post-truth” world is suffocated 
by entertaining brands and money-making activities that have little or nothing 
to do with truth, integrity or the long-term survival of the planet. We are 
witnessing the postmodern version of the full-scale gangsterization of the 
world.

The reign of Obama did not produce the nightmare of Donald Trump – but it did 
contribute to it. And those Obama cheerleaders who refused to make him 
accountable bear some responsibility.


Barack Obama forever changed black America | Peniel E Joseph
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/barack-obama-forever-changed-black-america>
A few of us begged and pleaded with Obama to break with the Wall Street 
priorities and bail out Main Street. But he followed the advice of his “smart” 
neoliberal advisers to bail out Wall Street. In March 2009, Obama met with Wall 
Street leaders. He proclaimed: I stand between you and the pitchforks. I am on 
your side and I will protect you, he promised them. And not one Wall Street 
criminal executive went to jail.

We called for the accountability 
<https://www.c-span.org/video/?316282-1/activists-examine-drones-around-globe> 
of US torturers of innocent Muslims and the transparency of US drone strikes 
killing innocent civilians. Obama’s administration told us no civilians had 
been killed. And then we were told a few had been killed. And then told maybe65 
or so had been killed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/01/obama-drones-strikes-civilian-deaths>
. Yet when an American civilian, Warren Weinstein, waskilled 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2015/04/23/the-u-s-keeps-killing-americans-in-drone-strikes-mostly-by-accident/?utm_term=.ec6b44c76130>
 in 2015 there was an immediate press conference with deep apologies and 
financialcompensation 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/04/23/politics/white-house-hostages-killed/>. And 
today we still don’t know how many have had their lives taken away.

We hit the streets again with Black Lives Matter and other groups and went to 
jail 
<https://news.vice.com/article/cornel-west-deray-mckesson-and-others-arrested-as-emergency-declared-in-ferguson>
for protesting against police killing black youth. We protested when the 
Israeli Defense Forces killedmore than 2,000 Palestinians 
<https://www.unrwa.org/gaza-emergency> (including 550 children 
<https://www.unrwa.org/gaza-emergency>) in 50 days. Yet Obama replied with 
words about the difficult plight of police officers, department investigations 
(with no police going to jail) and the additional$225m in financial support 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2014/08/senate-approves-israel-aid-109642> of 
the Israeli army. Obama said not a mumbling word about the dead Palestinian 
children but he did call Baltimore black youth“criminals and thugs” 
<http://nypost.com/2015/04/28/obama-calls-baltimore-rioters-criminals-and-thugs/>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Obama's%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Obama%27s%20complicated%20legacy%20on%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fobama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video&media=>
Obama’s complicated legacy on climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/30/obama-climate-change-legacy-global-warming-video>
In addition, Obama’s education policy unleashed more market forces that closed 
hundreds of public schools for charter ones. The top 1% got nearly two-thirds 
of the income growth in eight years even as child poverty, especially black 
child poverty, remained astronomical. Labor insurgencies in Wisconsin, Seattle 
and Chicago (vigorously opposed by Mayor Rahm Emanuel, a close confidant of 
Obama) were passed over in silence.

In 2009, Obama called 
<http://observer.com/2009/04/obama-calls-bloomberg-outstanding/> New York City 
mayor Michael Bloomberg an “outstanding mayor”. Yet he overlooked the fact that 
more than4 million people  
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/nypd-stop-and-frisk-detains-millions-results-article-1.1307179>
were stopped-and-frisked under Bloomberg’s watch. Along with Carl Dix and 
others, I sat in a jail  
<http://www.nydailynews.com/new-york/nypd-stop-frisk-tactics-protested-harlem-princeton-prof-cornel-west-arrested-article-1.965480>
two years later for protesting these very same policies that Obama ignored when 
praising Bloomberg.

Yet the mainstream media and academia failed to highlight these painful truths 
linked to Obama. Instead, most well-paid pundits on TV and radio celebrated the 
Obama brand. And most black spokespeople shamelessly defended Obama’s silences 
and crimes in the name of racial symbolism and their own careerism. How 
hypocritical to see them now speak truth to white power when most went mute in 
the face of black power. Their moral authority is weak and their newfound 
militancy is shallow.


How Michelle Obama expanded the definition of a first lady | Margo Jefferson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/06/how-michelle-obama-expanded-definition-of-first-lady>
The gross killing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/sep/30/anwar-awlaki-extrajudicial-murder>
 of US citizens with no due process after direct orders from Obama was cast 
aside by neoliberal supporters of all colors. And Edward Snowden, Chelsea 
Manning, Jeffrey Sterling and other truth-tellers were demonized just as the 
crimes they exposed were hardly mentioned.

The president’s greatest legislative achievement was to provide healthcare for 
over 25 million citizens, even as another 20 million are still uncovered. But 
it remained a market-based policy, created by the conservative Heritage 
Foundation and firstpioneered 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/itsallpolitics/2015/10/23/451200436/mitt-romney-finally-takes-credit-for-obamacare>
 by Mitt Romney in Massachusetts.

Obama’s lack of courage to confront Wall Street criminals and his lapse of 
character in orderingdrone strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/22/amnesty-us-officials-war-crimes-drones>
 unintentionally led to rightwing populist revolts at home and ugly Islamic 
fascist rebellions in the Middle East. And as deporter-in-chief – nearly 2.5 
million immigrants were deported under his watch – Obama policies prefigure 
Trump’s barbaric plans.

Bernie Sanders gallantly tried to generate a leftwing populism but he was 
crushed by Clinton and Obama in the unfair Democratic party primaries. So now 
we find ourselves entering a neofascist era: a neoliberal economy on steroids, 
a reactionary repressive attitude toward domestic “aliens”, a militaristic 
cabinet eager for war and in denial of global warming. All the while, we are 
seeing a wholesale eclipse of truth and integrity in the name of the Trump 
brand, facilitated by the profit-hungry corporate media.

What a sad legacy for our hope and change candidate – even as we warriors go 
down swinging in the fading names of truth and justice.
 