
One of the world’s most influential rock bands has denounced “rogues and 
scoundrels” selling gig tickets at huge markups, as the UK music industry 
prepares to fight back against touts.

Pixies, cited as an inspiration by Nirvana, Radiohead and Blur, have 
overhauled ticket sales for their current UK tour to loosen the lucrative 
stranglehold that professional touts have on ticket supply. Tickets for their
gigs at London’s O2 Brixton Academy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/jul/08/latitude-lovebox-stevie-wonder-jamie-xx-pixies>
 have appeared online for more than £800, compared with their face value of 
£32.50, after touts hoovered them up for resale via “secondary ticketing” 
websites.

Bands and fans declare war on online ticket touts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/bands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts>
But the band have managed to limit the problem by channelling half of the 
tickets for their London shows via Songkick, a website aimed at music fans that 
uses technology to help stop the harvesting of tickets. “Our fans mean an awful 
lot to us,”Pixies <https://www.theguardian.com/music/pixies> frontman Black 
Francis told theObserver. “The fact that any of them would be taken advantage 
of by rogues and scoundrels trying to fleece them with wildly inflated ticket 
prices is simply not acceptable.

“[Band members] Joey, Dave, Paz, our manager Richard Jones and I intend to do 
everything we can to put a stop to this,” he said. Jones will speak at an 
industry summit in London, when figures from the music world will discuss how 
to beat touts whomake huge profits at the expense of fans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts>.

A government-backed review of ticketing by Professor Michael Waterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
 recommended measures including a licensing system for touts and harsher 
penalties for firms thatflout consumer rights law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
 governing ticket sales.

But the government has yet to respond to the review and Jones said continued 
inaction was allowing touts to do lasting damage to the music scene.

“Scalping [profiteering] has always been around but what has happened recently 
is that it has become institutionalised, very corporate in its mechanics,” he 
said. “If you sell a show out in two minutes, you see three or four hundred 
tickets on a secondary ticket site a few minutes later. There’s obviously 
something sinister and technically organised for that to happen.”

Jones’s view was supported by Friday’s release of tickets to see US rock band 
Green Day <https://www.theguardian.com/music/greenday>, which sold out within 
minutes at their face value of £39.50 but were listed on resale site Viagogo 
that evening for more than £400. “If we charged twice as much for tickets we 
would make more money and could put on a bigger show, but we don’t,” said 
Jones. “We cut our cloth accordingly because we feel that’s the ethically right 
price for our fans to pay. Then you find out 30% of them have spent double face 
value; that doesn’t feel good.”

Jones, who has also managed the Spice Girls, said there was a limited amount 
that artists could achieve without support from politicians: “The fact is for 
this to be changed and for this problem to be dealt with, we have to have 
legislation.”

Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, a supporter of efforts to tackle touting, has 
written to the Department for Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) calling for 
legislation: “When the government continues to sit on their hands and fails to 
support the music industry against ticket touts, it is not surprising to see 
the industry getting on with doing the job themselves of putting fans first.

“However, if we are to see lasting change, then the government needs to ensure 
that they bring forward the necessary support for the music industry and 
consumers at the heart of this matter, through legislation and enforcement,” 
she said.

Digital and creative industries minister Matt Hancock made a speech about 
protecting UK artists 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/minister-for-digital-and-culture-creative-industries-speech>
 last week but did not address ticketing. Fellow Tory MP Philip Davies has 
previously saidthat MPs trying to crack down on touting are “socialists” 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201415/cmhansrd/cm150309/debtext/150309-0002.htm>
 who want to “regulate every aspect of people’s lives”. A DCMS spokesperson 
said: “The government’s response to Professor Waterson’s report will be 
published in due course.”

Like Pixies, several bands have come up with their own measures to ensure as 
many tickets as possible end up in the hands of genuine fans.

Bristolian trip-hop outfit Massive Attack 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/massive-attack> drip-fed 1,000 tickets for 
their hometown show earlier this month to Twickets, a mobile app that allow 
fans to exchange tickets at face value.

The world’s biggest boy band, One Direction, also released tickets via 
Twickets on their last tour. The aim was to scupper touts’ pricing by making 
face-value tickets available at the same time that touts were trying to squeeze 
the highest possible price out of fans.

And music retailer Fopp has also collaborated with Twickets by setting up a 
system that allows fans to pick up and drop off tickets for each other at 
in-store collection points.

Richard Davies, founder of Twickets, said: “We want to make it easier for 
music fans to purchase official gig tickets at face value, and stop them losing 
out to touts and secondary sites selling at inflated prices with exorbitant 
booking fees.”
 