
The pound has plummeted to less than 1.15 against the euro and 1.3 against the 
dollar, the lowest for years. So finding the best foreign exchange provider is 
more essential than ever. But this article is not about holiday money. It’s 
about people who need to send small sums regularly, and those making large 
one-off transfers, such as buying a holiday property. It reveals that some 
providers are great for large sums, but pricey for smaller transfers – and it 
tells you to avoidPayPal <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/paypal>, which 
came out particularly poorly in our price survey.

Consumers should first cut through any nonsense about “no fees” or “no 
commission”. Your key question should be: “After all the charges, how many 
euros/yen/dollars etc will I get for X pounds?” To do this, check how much you 
are offered against the mid-market “interbank rate”, the rate used when banks 
trade between one other. You can check the live interbank rate onXE.com 
<http://www.xe.com>.

Secondly, you can be reasonably certian that the deal offered by your high 
street bank will be pretty lousy, unless you are a “premier” type customer 
transferring very large sums.

James Daley of Fairer Finance says: “Almost all major banks charge a fortune 
for transferring money overseas, and offer a poor exchange rate to boot. The 
good news is that a number of alternatives offer you much better value.”

Our third golden rule is that, if transferring a sizeable sum into a foreign 
account, first send a small sum and check it has been received, as much to 
ensure you have sent it to the right account as anything else. Only then should 
you send the full amount.

Almost all major banks charge a fortune for transferring money overseas, and 
offer a poor exchange rate to boot
James Daley, Fairer Finance 
Finally, remember there is relatively limited protection should things go 
wrong. The currency brokers can be “authorised” by the Financial Conduct 
Authority (FCA) or just “registered”. Authorised firms should keep clients’ 
money separate from the company’s own funds. If a firm is just registered with 
the FCA there’s a risk all the money is in the same pot and could be lost if 
the company went bust.

“Even if a firm is FCA authorised, it’s important to understand that there is 
no protection from the Financial Services Compensation Scheme in this sector,” 
says Daley. “So if a firm goes bust because of a fraud, there’s still a chance 
that you won’t get your money back. However, the risks if you’re using a big 
brand are fairly small.”

In 2010, Crown Currency Exchange, based in Hayle, Cornwall, went bust, leaving 
3,000 people owed £20m <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-cornwall-33112661>
. It used new customers’ cash to pay off existing clients, as well as fund the 
purchase of a luxury home. Three people involved in the scam have been jailed.

What we found

We obtained quotes for moving £200, £2,000 and £150,000 into euros and 
dollars. We conducted the test on 29 July when the pound was fetching €1.19 and 
$1.32 respectively, but sadly it has since fallen further.

Best for small sums When transferring £200 we found UKForex best for euros and 
TransferWise best for dollars. UKForex is FCA authorised rather than 
registered, and is a subsidiary of an Australian group, OFX. TransferWise is a 
peer-to-peer service (see below), headquartered in London and run by Estonians. 
Investors in the business include Richard Branson.

Worst in this bracket were MoneyGram and NatWest, which goes to show why you 
shouldn’t automatically use well-known names. For £200, NatWest would give us 
only $229.31, compared with $260.94 from TransferWise.

Best for mid-size sums When transferring £2,000, the Currency Account (for 
euros) and TransferWise (dollars) were best. The Currency Account is a 
relatively new and small company, formed in 2014, and is authorised by the FCA. 
It describes itself as a “hybrid” peer-to-peer plus direct market access 
company.

Worst for mid-size sums were PayPal (euros) and NatWest (dollars).

Best for large sums We checked rates on moving £150,000, a sum where you would 
be seriously upset if anything went wrong. Again, the Currency Account came top 
for euros, though there was very little between it and the other brokers. HiFX 
came top in the bracket for dollars. HiFX was established in 1998 and is one of 
the largest brokers, having transferred around £100bn since then.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fsend-money-overseas-best-deal-transfer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998a36543413ab0ea54b8e0d25f8747a94f64ba2%2F18_30_1476_692%2F1476.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Planning%20to%20send%20money%20overseas%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fsend-money-overseas-best-deal-transfer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Planning%20to%20send%20money%20overseas%3F%20Here%E2%80%99s%20how%20to%20do%20it&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Faug%2F20%2Fsend-money-overseas-best-deal-transfer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F998a36543413ab0ea54b8e0d25f8747a94f64ba2%2F18_30_1476_692%2F1476.jpg>
Providers

Currency brokers There are loads of currency brokers or money transfer 
specialists. These include MoneyCorp,Currencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/currencies> Direct, CaxtonFX, TorFX, 
HiFX, UKForex, FairFX, Azimo and Xendpay. They pretty much all advertise “bank 
beating” rates, but how do they compare against one another?

A handful of currency comparison sites are available, but they won’t 
necessarily find the best deal. If you’re looking for the most bang for your 
buck you would be better off going to individual companies, getting a quote and 
asking how long the transfer will take. When you see a company offering a good 
deal, check out its reputation by using FXCompared, TrustPilot or a general 
Google search.

We don’t send money overseas, so can cut out the crazy fees that banks charge 
consumers
Taavet Hinrikus, TransferWise 
Established firms are usually, but not always, the most reliable. Some smaller 
brokers and “disruptive” web platforms temporarily stopped trading during the 
EU referendum aftermath.

Peer-to-peer services TransferWise is one of a new breed of peer-to-peer 
operators which cut out the banks and brokers by providing an online meeting 
place for people wanting to buy each other’s currencies. You don’t send your 
money directly, rather to the currency exchange firm which then passes it on.

“Our exchanges are based on free or extremely low-cost local bank account 
transfers. We don’t send money overseas, so can cut out the crazy fees that 
banks charge consumers,” says Taavet Hinrikus, co-founder of TransferWise.

Another peer-to-peer platform, CurrencyFair, works in a similar way, though 
the exchange rates are set by its users. In the event that there are no 
customers providing a decent rate for your exchange, CurrencyFair will step in 
and match with you. The site claims customers typically pay 0.35% of the amount 
exchanged plus a fixed €3 transfer fee.

Other options

If you need to pay in cash or transfer money quickly, Western Union and 
MoneyGram both have branches on the high street – but their services are not 
cheap and only suitable for small amounts. And while the companies themselves 
are legitimate, they are often used by scammers, so be wary of strangers asking 
for payment this way.

PayPal might make it easy to send money overseas, but was the most expensive 
option in half the Guardian calculations. It whacks on a hefty conversion fee 
if you want to pay someone in another currency.

 * This article was amended on 22 August to correct the year in which the 
Currency Account was set up. It should have said 2014, not 2011.
 