
Planting and maintaining trees in a neighbourhood can be a wonderful way to 
bring communities together, helping neighbours become firm friends, and 
enabling people to savour and respect the local environment that they have put 
effort into improving.

A tree-planting campaign is taking root
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/woodland-trust-64-million-tress/2016/sep/22/a-tree-planting-campaign-is-taking-root>
 Trees can deliver much more than just a pleasing, lush outlook. Trees are 
gathering places, the centre of a community. In African villages, the ‘palaver’ 
tree is the place to gather and debate neighbourhood issues, rather than a 
formal hall. Beneath the branches is neutral territory, inviting openness, calm 
and friendship.

 Projects around the world have helped local communities replenish barren land 
and degraded forests, with Kenya’s 20 Million Trees Campaign and the phenomenal 
effort in Utter Pradesh, India. Here nearly 50 million trees were planted in 
less than 24 hours, as part of a $6 billion effort to reforest the country.

 Similar efforts are needed in the UK, to revive our woodlands and prevent the 
loss of our green spaces. With this in mind, the Woodland Trust, the UK’s 
largest woodland conservation charity, is aiming to plant 64-million new trees 
over the next 10 years. You can find out how you can help by signing up for the
autumn discovery pack 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/autumnpack/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
.

Putting down roots

The Woodland Trust has also secured generous funding to provide community tree 
packs 
<http://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/plant-trees/in-your-community/?utm_source=theguardian.com&utm_medium=banner&utm_campaign=autumn2016&utm_content=text>
 to help local groups add much-needed foliage to their landscape. 
Non-profit-making schools and community groups based in the UK are eligible to 
apply to receive native trees suitable to their needs.


You may have a neighbourhood group keen on gardening, a residents’ 
association, a sports club, parish council or scout group happy to pick up 
spades, or you can start a new planting society by seeking volunteers 
door-to-door – the more the merrier! The planning and planting is only part of 
the process, with groups taking continued care of their new woods or hedgerows 
– any excuse for a cup of tea and a chat about mulching.


Your group might opt for all-round colour with the spring flowers and autumn 
red berries of rowan, hawthorn and wild cherry. The elder tree offers a lightly 
fragrant harvest of flowers, which can be used for cordial. Blackthorn tempts 
with sloe berries for flavouring gin, crab apple can be used for jelly or a 
hazelnut tree provides an autumn windfall – if you can pry the nuts from 
squirrels. Enticing wildlife to the neighbourhood is a bonus, with birds, in 
particular drawn to seasonal fruits. Some communities have opted for willow, 
birch and maple for coppicing, to supply wood fuel; others choose to plant a 
hedgerow or copse. Planning for your group’s needs is part of the fun, and the 
Woodland Trust can help you make an informed choice.

Involving the neighbourhood creates a community, and respect for the locality 
reduces levels of vandalism and fosters a local pride. The trees you plant will 
become a focal point and a reminder of what working together can achieve.

 