
Rail passengers will be able to claim compensation when trains are more than 
15 minutes late, under new plans revealed by the Department forTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (DfT).

The policy, Delay Repay 15, will be launched first on Southern trains, which 
have sufferedmonths of disruption over disputes about the role of conductors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern>. It will then feature on other 
Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR) services in the coming months before being 
rolled out across the country.

Existing compensation rules 
<http://www.nationalrail.co.uk/times_fares/ticket_types/121354.aspx> mean 
passengers can claim payouts only when services are delayed by at least 30 
minutes, but one railway regulator estimates just one in five people actually 
do so.

Only three in four GTR trains arrived on time between 21 August and 17 
September, with almost one in 10 cancelled or arriving more than 30 minutes 
late, Network Rail figures show.

A DfT spokeswoman could not give a start date for the scheme but said it would 
apply toSouthern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> services 
“soon”.

The transport secretary, Chris Grayling, said: “We recognise that, above all 
else, passengers want a reliable train service, but when things do go wrong it 
is vital that they are compensated fairly.

“Delay Repay 15 is a major improvement for passengers and we are working with 
train companies to make it as easy as possible for passengers to claim their 
rightful compensation.

“Together with the Consumer Rights Act, this policy shows we are putting 
passengers first and making sure they receive due compensation for poor 
service.”

Under the Delay Repay 15 scheme, the compensation thresholds will be:

• 25% of the single fare for delays of 15 to 29 minutes

• 50% of the single fare for delays of 30 to 59 minutes

• 100% of the single fare for delays of 60 minutes to 119 minutes

• 100% of the total ticket cost (including if it is a return) for delays of 
two hours or more.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02f32f5910df22f5af214c4029e2b0249b3d0f33%2F0_0_2205_3500%2F2205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plans%20to%20allow%20rail%20users%20to%20claim%20compensation%20for%2015-minute%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plans%20to%20allow%20rail%20users%20to%20claim%20compensation%20for%2015-minute%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F13%2Frail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F02f32f5910df22f5af214c4029e2b0249b3d0f33%2F0_0_2205_3500%2F2205.jpg>
 A sign left in front of an information point by commuters protesting against 
Southern rail’s service at Victoria station in London. Photograph: PA 
John Larkinson, director of railway markets and economics at the Office of 
Rail and Road, said: “Our previous research shows around 80% currently don’t 
claim. Train operators need to build on today’s announcement by continuing to 
raise awareness of passengers’ compensation rights and to make sure it is as 
easy as possible to claim.”

Following its introduction on GTR, Delay Repay 15 will be launched across the 
network, starting with the new South Western, West Midlands and Southeastern 
franchises.

Stephen Joseph, executive director of Campaign for Better Transport, said: 
“Southern’s long-suffering passengers deserve more than this, including a 
freeze or even reductions on fares to recognise the horrendous service they’ve 
been getting.

“Poor performance on the railways is not just limited to delays and we welcome 
the fact that the new Consumer Rights Act will cover the quality of rail 
journeys as well.”

GTR runs four services: Southern, Thameslink, Great Northern and Gatwick 
Express. All future DfT rail franchises will include a requirement to introduce 
this policy.

Officials said they would explore opportunities to roll it out for all DfT 
franchises during this parliament.

Charles Horton, chief executive of GTR, said: “We warmly welcome this 
announcement. When passengers are delayed, they deserve compensation and we 
strongly advise all our passengers to make a claim.

“This announcement will be good news for those with shorter journeys who think 
it is unfair they receive nothing for delays under 30 minutes. Now a decision 
has been made, we will work hard to implement this as quickly as possible.”
 