
The use of bank cards to pay for a round of drinks at the bar has increased 
fivefold over the past decade, according to a report.

The UK Cards Association, which represents Britain’s major bank card 
providers, said spending on plastic by British shoppers more than doubled 
between 2005 and 2014 to £566bn – more than the entire Dutch economy last year.

Card spending overtook cash spending in 2004, according to the association, 
and accounts for more than three-quarters of all UK spending. But its figures 
show how our spending patterns have changed in the decade since then.

Pubs appear to have seen one of the most dramatic shifts to plastic. Card 
spending in pubs reached almost £5bn last year, compared with £1bn in 2005.

Richard Koch, head of policy at the UK Cards Association, noted that while 
supermarket spending on bank cards doubled in the decade up to 2014 – reaching 
£99.5bn – the amount spent during each visit had fallen. The average 
supermarket bill dropped from £31 in 2009 to £25 five years later, as consumers 
abandoned the big weekly shop for more frequent visits to a range of shops.

Record shops saw the biggest fall in card spending, down 71% during an era 
when many independent record stores and big chains alike have disappeared from 
high streets. However,vinyl sales have been staging a comeback 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/04/tesco-to-sell-lps-for-first-time-in-its-history>
 to the extent that Tesco has begun stocking LPs for the first time as sales 
are expected to reach a 20-year high.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d9ac5be9d3502c28897e65498c22770dc425b6f%2F0_341_4411_2647%2F4411.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plastic%20fantastic%3A%20debit%20card%20spending%20soars%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plastic%20fantastic%3A%20debit%20card%20spending%20soars%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1d9ac5be9d3502c28897e65498c22770dc425b6f%2F0_341_4411_2647%2F4411.jpg>
 Record shops saw the biggest fall in card spending. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty 
Smaller shops that once only took cash have installed card readers and 
experienced a big leap in card spending over the decade. The amount spent on 
cards at bakers rose from £3m in 2005 to £28m last year.

Other small shops to experience a significant increase include pawn shops and 
even sweetshops, with card transactions at the latter up more than 150% since 
2005.

The rise of contactless payments, which since September have allowed shoppers 
to buy goods up to £30 without using their pin, was also a factor in increased 
card use. The figures showed £2.6bn was spent on contactless in the first six 
months of 2015.

“Today we think nothing of paying for a coffee and a sandwich with a 
contactless payment card or streaming films on a smartphone which is also 
enabled for mobile payments,” Koch said. “This is so different to a decade ago 
when we carried more cash and shopped in high street stores. Even during the 
last recession, the use of cards as a proportion of overall spending continued 
to grow as customers recognised the convenience, ease and security of this 
method of payment.”

The decision by many big retailers, particularly the supermarkets, to stop 
accepting cheques was seen as one of the main reasons that the share of payment 
card spending within the food and drink sector increased significantly over 
this period.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724a3dbff4aacde0bf1f84a541470acc25179ce1%2F0_0_2160_1298%2F2160.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Plastic%20fantastic%3A%20debit%20card%20spending%20soars%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Plastic%20fantastic%3A%20debit%20card%20spending%20soars%20in%20Britain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2015%2Fdec%2F11%2Fplastic-fantastic-debit-card-spending-soars-in-britain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F724a3dbff4aacde0bf1f84a541470acc25179ce1%2F0_0_2160_1298%2F2160.jpg>
 Debit cards accounted for just over half of all card transactions in 2005, a 
decade later that figure had risen to 71%. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA 
The Cards Association also said consumers had increasingly opted to use a 
debit rather than credit card over the decade, possibly reflecting a more 
cautious attitude to spending following the 2008 financial crisis.

Debit cards <https://www.theguardian.com/money/debit-cards> accounted for just 
over half of all card transactions in 2005; a decade later that figure had 
risen to 71%.

While GDP fell in 2008 and 2009, spending on cards increased, by 7% and 5% 
respectively, as more people used cards as their main method of payment.

UK Card Payments said there were 1.3bn online transactions in 2014, worth a 
total of £119bn. Entertainment websites accounted for a quarter of online 
transactions in 2014, the equivalent of 8% of all spending online.

Koch said the increased use of online payments by government agency websites 
such as DVLA had played its part. About 48.5 million people held a debit card 
in 2014, up from 40.8 million 10 years earlier. In contrast, the number of 
credit card holders was broadly unchanged over this period at about 31 million.
 