
Key points

After paying tribute to the late MP Jo Cox and urging those watching to 
download the charity single in her honour,Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> devoted his questions to 
the prime minister to social care. He urged Theresa May to accept that there is 
a crisis, with 1.2 million people not getting the care they need, and asked how 
much was cut from the social care budget in the last parliament. When May 
avoided the question, Corbyn gave the answer – £4.6bn. May responded that the 
last Labour government had vowed to tackle social care when it came to power in 
1997, and despite the delivery of a number of reports had made no progress: 
“Thirteen years and no action whatsoever.”

The Greens’ Caroline Lucas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/caroline-lucas> asked May to consider 
rail travellers in her constituency, Brighton, suffering from the current 
strike. Saying that the transport secretary, Chris Grayling, has no intention 
of dealing with this, Lucas asked whether May would sack him and strip GTR of 
the Southern Rail franchise. May retorted that the union Aslef was solely 
responsible for the strike, and in an earlier exchange on the subject, 
challenged Corbyn to ring them up and get them to call it off.

Snap verdict

Corbyn had the better of the exchange, although not by a lot. His final 
question, the clip that will be used on the news, was clear and powerful and – 
doubtless to many people – unanswerable, too. May seems to have been focusing 
more and more on social care in recent weeks and, whereas she gave the subject 
a brush-off answer just a few weeks ago, on Wednesday she had a reasonably 
substantial answer about the government’s short-, medium- and long-term plans. 
She also, quite rightly, said that both parties had failed to address this 
properly in the past. But her transparent attempt to duck the question about 
social care budgets being cut in the last parliament allowed Corbyn to score a 
direct hit, and, although she promised that her government would be the first 
for decades to “get a grip” and address this properly, nothing the government 
has said (so far) makes this pledge particularly credible.

Memorable lines

In the light of Boris Johnson’s display of foot in mouth disease, does May now 
accept that pencilling FO against his name should have been an instruction not 
a job offer?”

He is doing an absolutely excellent job. He is an FFS – a fine foreign 
secretary.”

Labour MP Peter Dowd and Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> on Boris Johnson’s remarks 
about Saudi Arabia

Mobile phone coverage in the UK is worse than Romania. In the Highlands you’d 
be better off using a carrier pigeon. It’s time to connect the Highlands to the 
rest of the world”

Ian Blackford, SNP, complains about the poor mobile phone reception in the 
Scottish Highlands

 * For more on PMQs and the day’s politics, read our politics live blog with 
Andrew Sparrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/19/pmqs-may-corbyn-hammond-angela-eagle-was-subect-to-homophobic-abuse-after-challenging-corbyn-labour-inquiry-finds-politics-live>
.

 * Click here <https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/series/andrew-sparrow-verdict> to 
read more of Andrew Sparrow’s verdicts on PMQs.  