
Even if Jeremy Corbyn were a much more adept parliamentary performer, today’s 
prime minister’s questions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/18/jeremy-corbyn-labels-theresa-may-the-irony-lady-at-pmqs-video-highlights>
 would have been a tough fixture. And so it proved.

Theresa May arrived in the Commons off the back of a personal success in her 
Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 yesterday. It was full of claims that may not survive contact with the other 
member states – it called to mind Mike Tyson’s comment that all his opponents 
had a plan “’till they get punched in the mouth” – but there is no denying that 
it was a personal success, gotgood press reviews 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/18/theresa-mays-brexit-speech-what-the-national-newspapers-say>
 and pulled her party together. Everything about May’s demeanour today was that 
of a prime minister with fresh authority.

Corbyn’s problem was that he had no alternative but to question May about 
Brexit. This isn’t the Labour leader’s specialist subject on any day of the 
week, but it was the subject of the day. He would much prefer to talk about the 
NHS crisis – as several backbench MPs on both sides of the Commons did – but as 
leader he was compelled to come out of his own comfort zone.

He chose to do this by talking about parliament’s role. How could the prime 
minister who makes such a fuss about British parliamentary sovereignty when 
talking about Brexit not have given her speech in the Commons, he asked. The 
question set Corbyn up for the kind of Commons joke that he is hopeless at. Not 
the iron lady but the irony lady, he called her. It fell as flat as a bad 
performance at the Glasgow Empire.

Related: PMQs verdict: May sees off Corbyn over Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/blog/2017/jan/18/pmqs-verdict-may-sees-off-corbyn-over-brexit>

In fact Corbyn is on to something here, but he failed to make the most of it. 
He should have pressed May on her refusalto publish a white paper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/tory-backbenchers-white-paper-theresa-may-brexit-priorities>
 on the issue, instead of just giving the speech. He could have tried to get 
her to issue the speech as a white paper, which is what parliament seemed to 
expect after the Labour-initiatedBrexit debate in the Commons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/the-guardian-view-on-the-commons-brexit-debate-some-gains-but-not-enough>
 before Christmas. Crucially, this was an issue on which the backbench Tory 
pro-Europeans Anna Soubry and Ken Clarke pushed back against May yesterday. If 
Corbyn had set up a pincer movement – perhaps even enlisting the SNP too – he 
might have won a skirmish.

Instead he simply did what he always does. He pressed on with his scripted 
questions instead of trying to come back at May for her replies. No one 
pretends this is an easy skill to master, and Corbyn is far from alone in his 
inability to think on his feet in the Commons the way that others (not 
including May, generally speaking) often can. But he needs to think in terms of 
winning positional victories – as the SNP’s Angus Robertson sometimes does – 
rather than lecturing May about his own virtuous view of the world when 
compared with hers.

It all doomed Corbyn to a pretty miserable session, in which he got some of 
his facts wrong and in which May was able to treat him with a contempt that 
isn’t pretty, but which accurately reflected the fact that, when it comes to 
Brexit, she knows what she wants and Corbyn doesn’t really know what he wants. 
And it showed.
 