
Key points

This week’s exchange was dominated by fallout from the autumn statement, with 
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> attacking 
Theresa May on the broad economic outlook – “growth down, wage growth down; 
borrowing up, debt up” – the deficit, and more specifically on funding for the 
NHS and social care, neither of which, he said, were mentioned even once in the 
chancellor’s speech last week. On debt, May responded by ridiculing what she 
said was Labour’s policy to increase borrowing by £500bn. She said the 
government had injected an extra £3.8bn in funding into the NHS this year, 
while Labour plans from the last election would have seen it receive £1.3bn 
less. Corbyn accused her of not addressing the problem of 4 million children in 
poverty; May responded that the numbers of families in absolute and relative 
poverty were falling.

Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn at PMQs - Politics live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/30/pmqs-may-corbyn-iraq-blair-brexit-chote-mps-set-to-debate-motion-accusing-blair-of-misleading-them-over-iraq-politics-live>
Snap verdict

A good PMQs for the factcheck brigade – there were statistics aplenty flying 
about – but it was rather less illuminating for everyone else. Corbyn and May 
put in solid, quality performances – I scored it a draw – but they were talking 
across each other, and mostly did not engage with each other’s points.PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pmqs> used to be the highpoint of the 
week in the Commons, but May v Corbyn is starting to feel a bit missable. 
Corbyn was at his best talking about the “disgrace” of 4 million people living 
in poverty, and his response to May’s jibe about Labour borrowing was a good 
one. May seemed most comfortable attacking Labour over welfare, but it was also 
interesting hearing her respond to Corbyn’s question about social care. He 
raised the same issue last week, but this time May seemed more willing to 
acknowledge there was a problem with the system. Corbyn has clearly identified 
a weakness.

Most memorable lines

Next year this government is handing back £650m in corporation tax cuts and 
rising. Could she explain this to the 1 million elderly people and 4 million in 
all on NHS waiting lists why not a penny extra will go to theNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> or social care?


Corbyn on the government’s spending prioritites

One policy that would not deliver is Labour’s to increase borrowing by £500bn. 
It would lead to doubling income tax, doubling council tax, doubling vat and 
doubling national insurance.

May’s riposte on the deficit
 