
With politics as nasty as it is now, it’s the private sphere I look to for 
hope. In particular, I think of some of the people I’ve met over the past year. 
People like John, whoI wrote about 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fit-for-work-disability-cuts-bureaucracy-daniel-blake>
 at the end of October.

In excruciating pain. Unable to sleep. Yet John is still ‘fit for work’ | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/fit-for-work-disability-cuts-bureaucracy-daniel-blake>
One of the great privileges of being a journalist is that you can legitimately 
ask anyone anything. They can tell you to sod off. The government departments 
and big companies will refer you to a PR department. But some people – often 
those with least power, with most to lose – will open up and take you into 
their lives.

That’s how it’s been with John. Over the past few months, our relationship has 
gone from banter on social media to profile in the Guardian to friendship. My 
article on John focused on how he’d just been stripped of part of his 
disability benefits and been deemed fit to work – despite a series of major 
injuries, despite constant pain and sleeplessness, despite very limited 
mobility. His case struck me as a real-life enactment ofI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/20/i-daniel-blake-review-ken-loach-film-benefits-system>
.

But what stood out about John from our very first chats was how dignified he 
was. Here was a man whose weekly income had been slashed, who in his late 50s 
was being batted between benefits call centres and the jobcentre, who was 
suffering what sounded like the symptoms of depression. He is being crushed by 
a system designed to take benefits from people with disabilities.

Understandably, he didn’t want me to publish his real name or some critical 
details. Yet he could tell a joke and take one; recommend novels by Trollope 
and ask me about my life. I’ve met people on six-figure salaries and three 
holidays a year who haven’t got an ounce of the charm shown by this man pushed 
up against a wall.

What is giving you hope for 2017? | Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/what-is-giving-you-hope-for-2017>
Over the past couple of months, things have got even tougher for John. His GP 
wrote a letter saying he was in no state to look for work, so the jobcentre 
took away his jobseeker’s allowance. No regular income comes in now apart from 
thedisability living allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/mar/15/disability-cuts-cutbacks-destroy-independent-living-budget>
. Merely to pay the rent and buy some groceries, John sank heavily into the 
red. On the other hand, an anti-poverty charity contacted me to offer help, and 
one of their advisers has found that the Department for Work and Pensions 
actually owes John money for unpaid benefits.

Through it all, John has maintained his good humour. His appeal against the 
fit-for-work ruling is due in a few weeks.

The first time we met he told me: “I don’t want anybody to see me so weak. I 
just feel beaten.” But whenever I call he’s always ready with some atrocious 
pun. When he can, he blogs – and writes very well. Every Monday, as I’m pulling 
out my hair over my column, he texts encouragement.
 