
Policing needs to abandon a “boss knows best” culture and debate how stretched 
resources are deployed in the face of ever-growing demands, according to one of 
the leading contenders to become thenext Metropolitan police commissioner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/04/metropolitan-police-chief-candidates-promise-to-reform-troubled-force>
.

Sara Thornton, chair of the National Police 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> Chiefs’ Council, told the Guardian that 
a “modernisation of policing” was necessary as police work out how to best help 
the victims of traditional crimes while learning how to contend with newer 
cybercrimes and other offences linked to technology.


She said police leaders needed to move from “a kind of command and control 
leadership model where the boss knows best”because “we need to bring 
everybody’s views to bear on how we solve these problems” when faced by complex 
challenges.

Thornton argued that “very difficult choices” about what what to prioritise 
with limited resources cannot be ducked as “the demands for policing always 
seem to grow”.


Resources needed to be poured into tackling cybercrime and protecting the 
vulnerable, she said. As a result, there needed to be an informed debate about 
whether the same level of focus on traditional crimes such as theft and 
burglary continued. “I do think, sometimes, as politicians and senior leaders, 
we do need to stand up and say the evidence, the data, tells us this, we 
understand that you really want the other, but can we have that intelligent 
conversation?”

Thornton is a frontrunner for the post of Met commissioner, with formal 
interviews for the job due in weeks and an announcement expected in February.


Far-right protests draining police resources, figures reveal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/25/far-right-protests-draining-police-resources-figures-reveal>
Thornton said she would not speak directly about her candidacy to be Britain’s 
next top police officer – and said she was being interviewed only to detail the 
reform plans she is working on in her current role.

Applications closed last week and Thornton said she was working on national 
policing transforming itself and that a debate was needed about what it would 
continue to do and what it would do less of.


Other contenders include the Met’s assistant commissioner Mark Rowley, 
Britain’s most senior counter-terrorism officer the Essex chief constable, 
Stephen Kavanagh, and Simon Byrne, who leads the Cheshire force. Cressida Dick, 
a former counter-terrorism chief who left the Met to join the Foreign Office, 
is also believed to have applied.

In her current role, Thornton is overseeing plans for forces to pool their 
specialist resources such as armed policing and murder investigators, so they 
can be used more efficiently and provide a better service.


The first phase of mergers will cover surveillance, major crime, armed 
policing and dogs. The 43 forces in England and Wales will remain, but will 
merge specialist assets and could then could pay a subscription to use them or 
pay as they needed them.

The changes may be implemented as early as later this year and supporters say 
it will not just use resources more efficiently, but ensure a better service.

Thornton said that since 1829, the year the Met was founded, crime had shifted 
from being committed in public places by people who knew their victim, to 
crimes now committed in private, across national and international borders.

“This isn’t about small, incremental change. We have to make sure we are 
joined up to deal with the modern threats,”she said. “The threats we are 
dealing with are more international then they have ever been.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpolice-need-to-drop-boss-knows-best-leadership-says-met-contender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F844a2a1582ce2aab2d1c71cacfadb2b5fd6d79ff%2F0_122_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Police%20need%20to%20drop%20'boss%20knows%20best'%20leadership%2C%20says%20Met%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpolice-need-to-drop-boss-knows-best-leadership-says-met-contender%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Police%20need%20to%20drop%20%27boss%20knows%20best%27%20leadership%2C%20says%20Met%20contender&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fpolice-need-to-drop-boss-knows-best-leadership-says-met-contender%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F844a2a1582ce2aab2d1c71cacfadb2b5fd6d79ff%2F0_122_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 Metropolitan police commissioner Sir Bernard Hogan-Howe, whose successor is 
expected to be announced in February. Photograph: Oli Scarff/Getty Images 
Thornton started her policing career in the Met and eventually became the 
chief constable of the Thames Valley force, which bordersLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>.

She became the first leader of the National Police Chiefs’ Council in 2015 
after the abolition of its predecessor, the Association of Chief Police 
Officers, a part of the radical police reform seen during Theresa May’s 
six-year tenure as home secretary. As chair of the council, Thornton 
technically holds the rank of assistant commissioner in the Met.

A key requirement for the Met top job will be the ability to work with others 
and lead change in the Met and policing generally. Thornton said of her current 
post: “The role here is very much about working with police and crime 
commissioners to deliver transformation and reform.”

Thornton said the reforms were needed as policing had to be more joined up to 
for the demands of the 21st century. But she was also candid in saying that 
May, while home secretary, had told police chiefs last year she expected them 
to be “self reforming” after a raft of government measures since 2010 that 
shaped modern policing. Thornton said that police chiefs met May a year ago and 
were told: “I’ve done my bit, now it’s over to you.”

Traditionally, policing had been a “command” service where chiefs expected 
their orders to be followed by their juniors, she said; in some cases, it was a 
disciplinary offence not to follow a lawful instruction. It was also a matter 
of personal style and some chiefs had reputations for confusing discussion with 
dissent, leaving those under command fearful of pointing out errors or using 
their experience to innovate and solve problems police come across.


 