
Headline: Towering Trump – the tycoon is big on himself and it has paid 
handsomely, but what can he do for the people?


He sits entirely still, impassive, not a muscle moving, not a wrinkle in his 
perfect appearance, his face as pressed as his suit. He mesmerises his prey 
like a snake about to strike. For underneath that stillness is a demonic power 
and energy waiting to spring.

Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is New York. 
Glitz, greed, glamour and an ambition so colossal that it will probably not 
rest until he rules the world – which one day he just might. At 41 he owns vast 
chunks of Manhattan’s prime real estate, the best hotels, the biggest casinos 
in Atlantic City, huge realms in Palm Beach and much more. He is the toughest, 
the fastest, operator in the city, and probably, says his biography, the world. 
He’s as sharp as a gold-plated razor-blade.

He sells himself, like everything belonging to him, very big indeed. Now his 
autobiography is America’s bestselling book for the last five years. It has 
been number one on the bestseller list since December and his London publishers 
are reprinting already, in publication week. He boasts that other tycoons’ 
books don’t sell. ‘And I want you to know I wrote this book, I myself,’ he says.

But what of Tony Schwartz, his literary collaborator? There is something odd 
about it, for Tony Schwartz, a contributing editor atNew York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/new-york> Magazine, is the writer who 
wrote a great front cover expose of one of Trump’s harsher deals which involved 
the attempted winkling of tenants in a block Trump wanted to redevelop. In the 
book this incident is seen in quite another light. How did Schwartz turn 
poacher? Trump gives just the faintest hint of a shrug, not enough to disorder 
the cut of his shoulders. ‘He has a business ability,’ he explains, which has a 
ring of truth in it. ‘He catches the cadence of my voice.’

Sitting in the foyer before the interview, his high-powered PA has just told 
me that she wants me to know that: ‘Mr Trump is a genuine human being. He is a 
warm and caring person.’ He tells me too how much he does for charity. Indeed, 
he does. The whole of New York society and much of business operates around 
charity. It is the instant way in for the parvenu. What’s good about New York 
is there is no such thing as new money. Money is just money, without the need 
to launder it for a couple of generations. You don’t have to join the 
Freemasons you just buy into Dollars 10,000 a plate dinners for Cerebral Palsy 
or restoration of the Cathedral of St John the Divine.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc806248f8471fd082867ac747997a0f41ae17395%2F0_0_4487_6906%2F4487.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Polly%20Toynbee%E2%80%99s%201988%20interview%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Polly%20Toynbee%E2%80%99s%201988%20interview%20with%20Donald%20Trump%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fpolly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc806248f8471fd082867ac747997a0f41ae17395%2F0_0_4487_6906%2F4487.jpg>
 ‘It’s all a game. I’m young, and I’m just coming up to the best part.’ 
Photograph: Graham Turner for the Guardian 
His book, Trump: The Art Of The Deal, is a fascinating read. It is the story, 
(or more probably, a very small part of the story) of how he made it. It 
describes the deals in which he always comes out top. Even when he seems to 
lose, at the last minute he comes out the winner. It is flamboyantly exuberant 
and it offers the illusion that it’s easy. It seems to tell you how it’s done. 
It turns the entrepreneur into a modern hero, a Wild West pioneer, a 
conquistador, a Cecil Rhodes, told like the Edwardians wrote of the 
empire-builders for schoolboy hero-worshippers. There are no values but 
victory, no goals beyond winning. Trump titillates the greed nerves without 
shame or doubt.

In Britain this will be seen as a rivetting curiosity from an alien culture. 
It is exactly what we think of New York. It will satisfy our sense of moral 
superiority and old-world decency. It makes our new spirit of 
entrepreneurialism look a poor pale bloodless thing. This week it was reviewed 
by John Harvey-Jones, one of our most distinguished and successful 
industrialists. He looked down on Trump with a witty, amused, and very British 
distaste. Trump read the review with some puzzlement.

In one deal in the book, Trump describes the handshake with a real old-world 
gentleman – a handshake that cost the poor gentleman a lot of new world money. 
Harvey-Jones pulls out this incident as an emblem of Trump’s style of doing 
business.

‘I didn’t understand that,’ Trump said, aggrieved. ‘I really respected that 
honorable man. I respect a man of his word for whom a handshake is enough.’ 
But, I point out, it was his honour that did him in on this deal. ‘Look, that 
honorable man is a millionaire a hundred times over, and he’s made more money 
than your Harvey-Jones ever has, so what does he know? Your country’s distaste 
for success is a national disease.’ The whole point of the book and its 
remarkable adventures is that when each deal is struck someone loses out badly. 
‘That’s wheeling and dealing,’ he says with a faint smile.

He lives in the top three floors of Trump Tower, his first great Manhattan 
development, a magnificent mirror-glass 68-floor monument to showy flamboyance. 
It has a gigantic rose-marbled atrium and huge green trees growing up platforms 
on its facade hundreds of feet up in the sky. His wife, Ivana, is an ex-Olympic 
skier, ex-model, something of a Trump tower herself, famed for her astounding 
couture wardrobe. She runs some of his hotels and casinos with a rod of iron 
that is lovingly admired in the book. It is said that for tax purposes he gives 
her only a dollar a year, and all the dresses she can buy. Most of his book, 
and his reputation is built on the property deals he started out with. Now the 
greatest part of his wealth comes from his many casinos.

If I want to be President, then I’ll be President

So what do you do when you’re only 41 and you have made more money than you 
could ever spend? He is lionised in a city of lions. People try to touch him in 
the street, as if some of the gold might come off, the Man with the Midas Fist. 
‘What else is there?’ he asks. ‘It’s all a game. I’m young, and I’m just coming 
up to the best part.’

Maybe now, I naively suggest, he can apply his talents to solving the 
appalling problems of the city he half owns? Even as his ten million dollar 
apartments multiply, just around the corner is the West’s worst squalor, 
danger, decay and disgrace. If he’s looking for new challenges, they are all 
around him. He has, after all, just taken on the renovation of the Wollman Ice 
Skating Rink in Central Park, which had run into such catastrophic problems 
under mismanagement by the city council. He couldn’t bear to watch it out of 
his window, so he did it himself, to resounding applause and adulation. Had 
that given him a taste for taking on New York’s disaster areas?

‘Challenges?’ he said. As people always do, I had underestimated the scope of 
his ambition. It certainly wasn’t centred on solving New York’s housing crisis. 
‘I hate what’s happening to this country,’ he says, with a trace of fervour. 
‘We’re getting kicked around by the Japanese, and they’re making the United 
States look foolish. Our politicians don’t know what they’re doing. Japan is 
shaming us out of our dignity. They are buying up everything. So is Europe and 
the United States is becoming the whipping post of its allies.’ So the 
carefully placed rumours are true, Donald J Trump does want to stand for 
President? The faintest of smiles: ‘Not for a period but I am involved 
politically. You could do it from where I am.’ It is said he once said: ‘If I 
want to be President, then I’ll be President.’

Trump revealed his presidential dream to me in 1988. Now the nightmare begins 
| Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac>
He is beginning now to sound approximately like a politician. What would his 
platform be? ‘Respect,’ he says and pauses heavily. ‘Respect.’ He sounds like 
the Godfather. ‘We’re a second rate economic power, a debtor nation. We’re 
getting kicked around.’ I try to imagine the kind of deals he would make with 
Gorbachev, and fail. I choose an issue. What would he do about Iran, for 
instance? ‘I’d be harsh on Iran. They’ve been beating us psychologically, 
making us look a bunch of fools. One bullet shot at one of our men or ships and 
I’d do a number on Kharg Island. I’d go in and take it. Iran can’t even beat 
Iraq, yet they push the United States around. It’d be good for the world to 
take them on.’

He is enough of a politician to be polite about George Bush. He says, 
politely, that the man is not such a wimp as he’s made out. Bush has been 
unfairly traduced by the media. But he says it in a way that makes it plain 
Bush is still a wimp. Could Trump possibly make it to the White House? Of 
course not, says everyone who knows anything about American politics. It’s a 
bad joke. But then Trump has often done what can’t be done and if the White 
House can take a senile movie star, why not a casino operator?

Trump’s is not a rags to riches story. His father was a small time low-rent 
developer in Queens. But Donald Trump did not enjoy rent-collecting in areas 
where you had to stand the right side of the door in order not to get shot. But 
his father gave him the basic skills, taught him about building, and 
contractors, buying and selling. He was sent to the New York Military Academy, 
where he came out captain of the cadets of his year. He went to Wharton School 
of Finance, where he is now in the Hall of Fame, but says the degree was only 
useful in impressing people with his respectable credentials. He put together 
his first deals by sheer bravado. He had nothing, no office, a tiny shabby 
apartment, but daring and brashness of breathtaking scope, with promises and 
other people’s money.

What is he doing here in London? Certainly not promoting his book, since he 
agreed to only two interviews. Is he going to buy us up, too? ‘It’s a great 
city. It’s beginning to generate some new energy. I’m looking. If the right 
opportunity comes along, I’ll make a move.’
 