
Three-quarters of children between the ages of 11 and 15 believe they would be 
safer if they had age-appropriate sex and relationship education (SRE) in 
school, according to a survey by a leading children’s charity.

Seven in 10 of the children who took part in the poll, which was commissioned 
byBarnardo’s <https://www.barnardos.org.uk/> and carried out by YouGov, said 
the government should ensure that all pupils have SRE lessons, and 14% said 
they had not received any SRE lessons in school at all.

It is thought to be the first time children have been polled on whether they 
think sex and relationships education (SRE) should be made compulsory.

Pressure has been mounting on the government to make SRE compulsory. In 
November five chairs of parliamentary select committees sent a strongly worded 
letter to the education secretarydemanding a change in policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/30/pressure-mounts-on-ministers-to-make-sex-education-compulsory-in-schools>
.


Responding to the poll, the Conservative MP Maria Miller, who chairs the women 
and equalities committee which recently produced adamning report about sexual 
harassment and violence in schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/29/government-not-doing-enough-to-combat-sexual-harassment-in-schools>
, said the case for mandatory SRE had never been stronger.

“These findings underline the importance of ensuring all schoolchildren have 
compulsory lessons on sex and relationships appropriate for their age. It’s 
even more striking that children themselves are calling on the government to 
make sure they receive high-quality SRE lessons so they can help keep 
themselves safe,” she said.

Barnardo’s is one of a growing number of charities, campaigners and 
politicians urging the government to introduce compulsory age-appropriate SRE 
to help address concerns about issuesincluding online pornography and sexting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/10/sexting-becoming-the-norm-for-teens-warn-child-protection-experts>
.

The change could be achieved via an amendment to the children and social work 
bill that is currently making its way through parliament. Ministers are 
understood to be sympathetic to campaigners’ concerns, and the education 
secretary, Justine Greening, has said she is considering the issue.

More than a quarter (28%) of 11-year-olds and 7% of 15-year-olds in the 
Barnardo’s poll said they had not received any SRE lessons in school. Almost a 
fifth of 15-year-olds said the lesson they had received were “bad”, and 26% of 
11- to 15-year-olds said they did not know where to get appropriate information 
about sex education and healthy relationships.

The online survey of almost 1,200 children also addressed concerns about 
digital safety. Almost half (49%) of girls and 37% of boys said they were 
concerned about being approached by strangers online; 12% of girls said they 
would not know what to do if a stranger contacted them online, and 94% said 
they thought it was important to understand the risks of sharing online images 
of themselves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpoll-finds-majority-of-schoolchildren-want-sex-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f9c0925d7dbe60c5e0674c12d816b78da4e333%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Poll%20finds%20majority%20of%20schoolchildren%20want%20sex%20education&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpoll-finds-majority-of-schoolchildren-want-sex-education%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Poll%20finds%20majority%20of%20schoolchildren%20want%20sex%20education&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fpoll-finds-majority-of-schoolchildren-want-sex-education%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F15f9c0925d7dbe60c5e0674c12d816b78da4e333%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Javed Khan: ‘It’s time to listen to children’. Photograph: James Drew 
Turner/for the Guardian 
Barnardo’s chief executive, Javed Khan, said the poll showed children were 
clearly asking for help. “The overwhelming majority of children who answered 
our poll believe they would be safer if they had age-appropriate sex and 
relationships lessons in school,” he said.

“It’s time to listen to children who are clearly telling us that they need 
help in understanding the digital dangers and the risks of sharing images of 
themselves with strangers. Online grooming is a very real danger facing all 
children and nearly half of the girls polled said they were worried about 
strangers contacting them online.

“It’s time for government to make sure we give all children the knowledge that 
will help keep them safe. These children have spoken loud and clear and the 
government must not ignore them.”


Last year a YouGov survey for Barnardo’s explored parents’ views of children, 
sex education and digital safety, and found that 87% of parents thought 
age-appropriate lessons on healthy relationships would help keep their child 
safe.

In addition, 90% of parents said they believed sexting was harmful and made 
their children vulnerable to sexual grooming, but only 40% said they restricted 
their children’s internet devices in the home.


A Department for Education spokesperson said: “Education on sex and 
relationships is compulsory in all maintained secondary schools, and many 
academies and free schools teach it as part of the curriculum. We are actively 
considering what further steps we could take to improve the quality and 
availability of sex and relationships education.”

 