
Many low- and middle-income countries are too scared by the threats and 
misinformation of big tobacco to raise the price of cigarettes, even though it 
would hugely benefit both health and the economy, according to a major new 
report.

The most effective measure to help people stop smoking is to impose high taxes 
on cigarettes, saysthe report by the World Health Organisation <http:// 
https://cancercontrol.cancer.gov/brp/tcrb/monographs/21/index.html> and the US 
National Cancer Institute. But even though smoking costs the world economy 
$3trn (£2.5trn) a year, poorer countries are afraid to tackle it in the most 
effective ways, it says.

“They are scared because of the issues raised by the tobacco industry,” said 
Jeremiah Paul of the WHO’s tobacco control economics unit. The industry warns 
of an increase in smuggling and illicit trade in tobacco, for instance, which 
the WHO and the US NationalCancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> 
Institute, the co-producers of the report, say does not happen.

“They are afraid of being taken to court if they increase tobacco taxes,” said 
Paul. “They [the industry] will scare you that tobacco taxes are anti-poor, 
that government revenue will go down.” But there is no evidence to support any 
of these claims, he said.

How big tobacco lost its final fight for hearts, lungs and minds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/22/big-tobacco-final-fight-cigarette-branding-uk>
Six million people die every year as a result of smoking tobacco and although 
smoking rates are slowly going down, the numbers are increasing as the 
population of the world grows. There are also fears of a big expansion in 
Africa and the Middle East as big tobaccotargets poorer countries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/dec/01/big-tobacco-industry-targets-young-people-poor-countries-smoking>
 now that hardline control measures such as bans on smoking in public places 
have taken effect in wealthier ones.

There are 1.1 billion smokers globally over the age of 15 and already 80% are 
in low- and middle-income countries. Many are already poor – an estimated 226 
million smokers live in poverty. Those are the people who would benefit most 
from stopping, because they are least likely to get good healthcare and most 
likely to suffer from the disabling and economic effects of tobacco, such as 
losing their job.

The monograph says that global tobacco excise taxes generated nearly $269bn 
(£221bn) in government revenues in 2013-2014 – yet less than $1bn was invested 
in tobacco control.

High tobacco taxes raise money for governments while deterring smokers. The 
monograph says annual excise revenues from cigarettes globally could increase 
by 47%, or $140bn, if all countries raised excise taxes by about 80 cents per 
pack. This tax increase would raise cigarette retail prices on average by 42%, 
leading to a 9% decline in smoking rates and up to 66 million fewer adult 
smokers.

Controlling tobacco does not harm economies, the report says. The number of 
jobs dependent on tobacco has been falling in most countries, and when smokers 
quit they spend their money on other sectors of the economy instead. Tobacco 
farmers, who mostly do not earn a good living, can be helped to diversify into 
other crops.

The doctor who beat big tobacco
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/aug/01/the-doctor-who-beat-big-tobacco> 
“Tobacco use remains one of the world’s leading causes of preventable death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
, and increasingly, the health and economic burden is borne by the poorest 
countries and people,” said the WHO’s global ambassador for noncommunicable 
diseases, Michael R Bloomberg, whose philanthropic foundation has invested 
nearly $1bn into tobacco control. “By accelerating the adoption of the many 
cost-effective tobacco control policies available today, we can save millions 
of lives,” he said.

José Luis Castro, chief executive of the global health organisation Vital 
Strategies, warned that the death toll from tobacco will rise if tougher 
controls are not brought in. “While governments are committed to reduce tobacco 
deaths, the lack of effective tobacco control laws in many countries means that 
tobacco will kill one-third more smokers and non-smokers by 2030: 8 million 
deaths every year,” he said.

“This is avoidable. We urge governments to implement strong tobacco control 
policies, particularly high tobacco taxes that have the greatest, fastest 
impact on consumption, while also potentially funding better access to 
healthcare.”
 