
The last time Italian journalist Emiliano Fittipaldi wrote an exposé about 
corruption 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/03/vatileaks-scandal-deepens-resistance-to-papal-reform>
 at the heart of the Roman Catholic Church, it landed him in a Vatican court 
facing a possible jail sentence on charges that he had illegally obtained 
confidential church papers in the course of his reporting.

Now, six months after the 42-year-old reporter was cleared of all charges 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2016/07/07/vatileaks-verdict-in-priest-and-pr-expert-found-guilty-of-leaking-documents/>
, Fittipaldi is taking on the church again. This time in a new book that 
accuses Pope Francis of doing “close to nothing” to stop clerical sexual abuse 
in Italy and around the world, despite the Argentinean pope’s frequent 
assertions thathe has zero tolerance for the abuse of children or those who 
protect abusers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/pope-declares-zero-tolerance-for-sexual-abuse-in-catholic-church>
.

In Lussuria (Lust), which will be released in Italian by publisher Feltrinelli 
on Thursday, Fittipaldi methodically pores over court documents and cites 
interviews with priests and judicial officials to paint a damning picture of 
the first three years of Francis’s papacy. Fittipaldi claims that 1,200 
plausible complaints of molestation against boys and girls from around the 
world have been brought to the Vatican’s attention in that period. In some of 
the twenty cases of alleged sexual abuse by priests inItaly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/italy> in 2016, Fittipaldi writes, priests 
have been convicted of abuse without the church taking any canonical action 
against them.

Fittipaldi also devotes attention to the case of Australian cardinal George 
Pell, who was appointed by Francis to reform church finances andhas remained in 
that senior position 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2016/06/08/cardinal-pell-expected-to-continue-as-vatican-finance-chief-despite-reaching-retirement-age/>
 despite questions over whether Pell protected serial abusers in his 
archdiocese in Australia decades ago. Pell has denied the allegations against 
him but a counsel assisting a royal commission looking at child abuse in 
Australiahas argued that there was evidence that Pell should have taken 
stronger action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/oct/31/cardinal-pell-evidence-abusive-priest-searson-royal-commission-counsel>
 against one paedophile priest whose case has been examined.

Francis, who did not accept Pell’s resignation in June when the Australian 
cardinal reached retirement age, has declined to pass judgement on him. When he 
was asked by reporters about a separate abuse investigation into Pell by 
Victoria state police the pope said “justice has to take its course”. Last 
November, Francis did however decidenot to renew Pell’s membership in a Vatican 
office that handles the church’s liturgical practice 
<https://www.ncronline.org/blogs/ncr-today/vatican-confirms-removal-burke-pell-worship-congregation>
. He was one of several traditionalists whose membership was not renewed.

A spokesperson for Pell called Fittipaldi’s work a piece of “shoddy and dated 
piece of journalism” that stated false allegations and failed to mention the 
work Pell had done to confront clerical sex abuse against minors.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcatholic-church-not-done-enough-to-tackle-abuse-claims-new-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc813b802067e42e574b153da7ef8ae3737e3a7%2F0_0_1193_1800%2F1193.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pope%20has%20done%20almost%20nothing%20to%20halt%20sex%20abuse%2C%20author%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcatholic-church-not-done-enough-to-tackle-abuse-claims-new-book%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pope%20has%20done%20almost%20nothing%20to%20halt%20sex%20abuse%2C%20author%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F15%2Fcatholic-church-not-done-enough-to-tackle-abuse-claims-new-book%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bc813b802067e42e574b153da7ef8ae3737e3a7%2F0_0_1193_1800%2F1193.jpg>
 The author ofLussuria (Lust), Emiliano Fittipaldi. Photograph: AP 
“The principle message of the book – the problem – is that the phenomenon of 
paedophilia is not being fought with sufficient force. Across the world, the 
church continues to protect the privacy of the paedophiles and also the 
cardinals [who protect them],” Fittipaldi said in an interview with the 
Guardian.

“Francis is not directly defending the paedophiles, but he did close to 
nothing to contrast the phenomenon of paedophilia,” he added.

It is not a new charge against the pope. While Francis is popular, especially 
for his strong views in support of poor and marginalised people, groups that 
advocate for survivors of sexual abuse have regularly criticised Francis for 
failing to take concrete steps to prevent and expose abuse, even though he has 
used strong words to condemn sexual violence by priests. A papal commission 
created by Francis early in his papacy has only met three or four times in its 
history, Fittipaldi said. Separately, aVatican proposal to create a tribunal to 
investigate bishops who cover up for abusers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/vatican-department-to-judge-bishops-accused-of-covering-up-child-abuse>
, which was celebrated by advocacy groups when it was announced in 2015, has 
inexplicably been stalled.

The Vatican <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vatican> did not respond to a 
request for comment on the book or the assertion that Francis has not done 
enough to tackle abuse.

Fittipaldi alleges that under Francis’s watch, priests who practice omertà – a 
term that refers to a code of silence, usually by the mafia – have been 
favoured by the church.


Among other incidents, Lussuria delves into the case of Mauro Inzoli, a priest 
who was nicknamed “Don Mercedes” for his rich taste. Inzoli was found guilty of 
molesting children in 2012 by the church body that examines such cases and was 
defrocked by Francis’s predecessor, Pope Benedict. But in 2014, under Francis, 
Inzoli’s punishment was softened and he was able to return to the clergy under 
limited conditions, and to enjoy a life of “humility and prayer”. In the 
meantime, civil authorities in Italy prosecuted him and last year he was 
convicted of abuse. At the time of his conviction, a judge criticised the Holy 
See for not turning over evidence in the case.

Catholic bishops not obliged to report clerical child abuse, Vatican says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/10/catholic-bishops-not-obliged-report-clerical-child-abuse-vatican-says>
“The Vatican refused to give judges documents because it is considered a 
pontifical secret,” Fittipaldi wrote.

Clerical sexual abuse has received close media scrutiny in the US since 2002, 
when the Boston Globe exposed hundreds of abuse cases and brought the issue to 
light. But in Italy, even afterthe success of the film Spotlight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/13/spotlight-reporters-uncovered-catholic-child-abuse-boston-globe>
, which chronicled the Globe’s investigation and won the Academy Award for best 
film last year, the issue is still considered a taboo and has never been viewed 
as an endemic problem.

“In all the Catholic countries, in Italy, Spain, South America, the sexual 
crimes of the priests are hard to tell. There is a kind of auto-censoring, on 
the part of journalists and victims because of the shame and because the 
culture of the church is very strong,” Fittipaldi said.


In Lussuria, he describes dozens of cases that are covered marginally in daily 
newspapers in Italy, as individual tiles that, when put together and seen from 
a distance, create a mosaic.

Fittipaldi was working on Lussuria during his trial for illegally obtaining 
secret documents. Speaking to the Guardian, he recalled:“It was ironic to be 
there, during the trial. I was thinking that many priests and bishops and 
cardinal were involved in sexual abuse and the Vatican does nothing. They 
preferred going after journalists.”
 