
Pope Francis has condemned trafficking and forced labour in the fisheries 
industry, calling for an intensive international push to halt human rights 
abuses in the sector.


At an event co-organised by the Vatican and the UN’s Food 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/food> and Agriculture Organisation 
(FAO), on Monday, the Vatican secretary of state urged action from the 
international community and governments to prevent the “chain of exploitation” 
of vulnerable individuals.

Revealed: how the Thai fishing industry trafficks, imprisons and enslaves
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/thai-fishing-industry-implicated-enslavement-deaths-rohingya>
Cardinal Pietro Parolin presented a new message from the Holy See, in which 
the Pope described human trafficking as a “crime against humanity”.

The message, released for World Fisheries Day, highlighted the “exploitation 
and abuses” of fishermen and condemned “the tragic reality that, within the 
fishing industry, there are hundreds of thousands of internal/transnational 
migrants who are smuggled/trafficked for forced labour on board of fishing 
vessels”.

More than 38 million people 
<http://ilo.org/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_535063/lang--en/index.htm>
 work in the capture fisheries industry around the world, recognised as one of 
the most dangerous types of employment.

In a speech in Rome, Parolin said action was needed across three broad fronts: 
providing aid to exploited fishermen to facilitate their reintegration; 
ensuring compliance with existing international rules on fishing; and fighting 
against trafficking and smuggling to impose the rule of law and human rights 
standards.

“Only by working together and coordinating our efforts will we be able to 
break the chain of exploitation that affects the fishing industry in many 
countries,” he said.

José Graziano da Silva, the director general of the FAO, said that although 
fishing provides food and income for millions of people, “sadly, the same 
industry that offers so many opportunities also victimises the most vulnerable”.

Graziano da Silva said: “We have seen increasing media attention focusing on 
human abuses in the sector, in both developed and developing countries. These 
include instances of labour abuse, forced labour, trafficking, child labour and 
slavery. FAO and the Holy See are calling for collaboration between all 
partners to work together in order to end human rights abuses along the entire 
fisheries value chain.

 “We have to guarantee that the seafood reaching our plates has been produced 
not only in an environmentally sustainable manner; but also in a manner that 
supports the socio-economic wellbeing of those who harvest and process it,” he 
said.

The Guardian has been in the forefront of exposing exploitation within the 
fishing industry worldwide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/jul/20/thai-fishing-industry-implicated-enslavement-deaths-rohingya>
.

 Fisheries support the livelihoods of one out of every 10 people 
<http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/453811/icode/> in the world.

Slavery and trafficking continue in Thai fishing industry, claim activists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/slavery-trafficking-thai-fishing-industry-environmental-justice-foundation>
Father Bruno Ciceri, a representative of the Apostleship of the Sea 
International at the Holy See’s pontifical council for the pastoral care of 
migrants, said: “There are many people who are trafficked by criminal 
organisations, brought by slavery to work on fishing vessels. Many of them 
don’t get paid. Many of them end up killed and thrown into the ocean. This is a 
fight. Pope Frances called this a crime against humanity. The church is calling 
for all international organisations and governments to be united to fight 
against this.”

The FAO and the Vatican highlighted two international agreements, the FAO Port 
State Measures Agreement <http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/414494/icode/> 
(PSMA), the first everbinding treaty targeting 
<http://www.fao.org/news/story/en/item/453811/icode/> illegal and underreported 
fishing, which has been linked to human rights abuses, as illegal vessels are 
often the ones involved in exploitation, as well asconvention 188 
<http://www.ilo.org/dyn/normlex/en/f?p=NORMLEXPUB:12100:0::NO::P12100_ILO_CODE:C188>
. Both of these are designed to help improve conditions for fishing workers.

Last week, in what the International Labour Organisation described as a 
“milestone” for the fishing industry,Lithuania ratified convention 188 
<http://www.ilo.int/global/about-the-ilo/newsroom/news/WCMS_535063/lang--en/index.htm>
: the agreement now has ratification by the 10 countries required for the 
agreement to come into force, from 16 November 2017.


Fishermen globally work on vessels that are typically less than 12m in length. 
The provisions of the convention aim to ensure that vessels are constructed and 
maintained so that workers have decent living conditions on board, suitable for 
the long periods they often spend at sea.
 