
Pope Francis <https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> has ruled out a 
woman ever serving as a priest in the Roman Catholic church.

The declaration is not a change in stance for the Argentinian pope, who has 
always said the door was closed on women being ordained as priests.

But when he was asked and then pressed on the matter by a Swedish journalist 
during a press conference onboard the papal plane, Francis suggested the ban 
would be eternal.

“Saint Pope John Paul II had the last clear word on this and it stands, this 
stands,” Francis said in his initial response, referring to a1994 document 
<https://w2.vatican.va/content/john-paul-ii/en/apost_letters/1994/documents/hf_jp-ii_apl_19940522_ordinatio-sacerdotalis.html>
 stating that women could never join the priesthood.

'Some women disobey': Rome poster campaign challenges Catholic ban on female 
priests
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/rome-poster-campaign-catholic-ban-female-priests>
“But for ever, for ever? Never, never?” the reporter asked in a follow-up 
question, as the papal delegation flew back to Rome from Sweden on Tuesday.

Francis replied: “If we read carefully the declaration by St John Paul II, it 
is going in that direction.”

The pope went on to say women did “many other things better than men”, 
emphasising what has been called the “feminine dimension of the church”.

“People ask me: ‘Who is more important in the theology or in the spirituality 
of the church, the apostles or Mary, on the day of Pentecost?’ It is Mary,” he 
said. He then added: “More.”

But Francis’s praise of women will do little to comfort feminist Catholics who 
want women to have a broader role in the church, including ordination.

The church has always responded to criticism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/pope-francis-female-priests-catholic-church-sexism>
 of theban on women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jul/15/vatican-attempted-ordination-women-grave-crime>
 by pointing out that Jesus only chose men as his apostles. Proponents of a 
change argue, among other points, that the church is facing a shortage of 
priests.

Francis seemed to open the possibility that women might become ordained 
deacons earlier this year, when hecommissioned a study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/12/pope-francis-consider-ordaining-women-female-deacons-catholic-church-commission>
 of the role female deacons played in the early church.

Women have been barred from the priesthood for centuries. Under current rules, 
deacons are ordained similarly to ministers, and are men. While they cannot 
celebrate mass, they are allowed to preach and conduct some ceremonies, 
including baptisms, wakes and funerals.

The pope’s remarks came a day after he signed a joint declaration  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/catholics-lutherans-joint-declaration-pope-francis-christian-sweden>
with Lutherans, which commemorated the Reformation and stated that the two 
Christian traditions had more in common than differences. When he landed in 
Sweden, Francis was greeted by the female head of the Swedish Lutheran church, 
Antje Jackelén.

The issue of women’s inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/rome-poster-campaign-catholic-ban-female-priests>
 in the Catholic church remains a hot topic among activists, despite Francis’s 
position. At a recent gathering, representatives of Catholic priest movements 
and international lay organisations called for reform on issues including 
equality for women and LGBT rights.

In a statement released by organisers, Kate McElwee, the co-executive director 
of the Women’s Ordination Conference, said: “In this space, we wrestled with 
the damaging effects of oppressive structures, knowing that patriarchy and 
hierarchy hurt us all.

“We discovered, time and again, that by sharing as equals and asking hard 
questions, we can transform ourselves, our church and our world.”
 