
In his great inverted sonnet Work Without Hope 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/43999>, Samuel 
Taylor Coleridge paints a contrasting portrait of his despairing self in a 
landscape bursting with the hope of spring, a picture that cumulates in the 
lines that end the poem:

Work without Hope draws nectar in a sieve,
And Hope without an object cannot live.

Ironically, the very existence of the poem undermines the hopelessness that it 
ostensibly represents; Coleridge’s work is his hope, and the making of poems is 
its object. It’s a timely lesson to those of us who might otherwise despair of 
the current global political climate, the rise of intolerance and the temporary 
triumph of unfounded assertion over fact. What the poem shows is that endurance 
is hopeful, and that the smallest act of resistance keeps hope alive.

In his Hope Is a Tattered Flag 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/hope-is-a-tattered-flag/>, Carl Sandburg 
reminds us that hope is to be found everywhere, if we look for it. It is “the 
evening star inviolable over the coal mines”, but equally “the hands of strong 
men groping for handholds”; in short, we can find hope both in the timeless 
world of non-human process and in the finite sphere of our own actions. The 
same hands that dig the dark pit of the mines can also help us climb into the 
light.

For the Australian poet Lee Cataldi 
<http://www.poetrylibrary.edu.au/poets/cataldi-lee/hope-0190005>, hope can 
reside in the shock of recognition, when we meet others just like ourselves: 
people in search of reasons for optimism, survivors. There is hope in our 
shared humanity, even when everything else points towards despair. There’s also 
tomorrow, the promise of hope to come, as even that arch pessimist Thomas Hardy 
recognises in hisSong of Hope 
<http://www.poemhunter.com/poems/hope/page-1/1696344/#content>. The light at 
the end of the tunnel is bright morning sun.

Not that it’s easy. In fact, as Wendell Berry writes, “it’s hard to have hope” 
<http://www.americanswhotellthetruth.org/resources/wendell-berry-reads-a-poem-about-hope-and-place>
. But have it we must. Berry argues that hope grows out of knowledge, the kind 
of knowledge that comes from paying careful attention to the world. In these 
days when environmental catastrophe, present and to come, is one of the great 
enemies of hope, Berry’s poetry is a call to build hope on “on the ground under 
your feet”.

In one of Emily Dickinson’s greatest poems, “Hope” is the thing with feathers 
<https://www.poetryfoundation.org/poems-and-poets/poems/detail/42889>, our 
inner bird, whose song sustains us through storm and frost, asking nothing in 
return. In Dickinson’s image, hope is apparently frail and in need of 
protection but in reality, it is resilient and nourishes anyone who gives it 
shelter.

Langston Hughes lived in what were difficult times for black Americans and he 
confronted the realities of racism in his work. His interest in communism made 
him something of an easy target for the white right and he found himself called 
before Joe McCarthy’s infamous House Un-American Activities Committee. Hughes’s 
work is now perhaps more relevant than it has ever been. HisWalkers With the 
Dawn <http://www.poemhunter.com/poem/walkers-with-the-dawn/> is a song of hope 
grounded in solidarity; short, simple and to the point.

When I wrote the very first Poster poems blogpost in March 2008, I imagined it 
running for a few weeks (it was weekly at first), not eight-and-a-half years. 
And here we are, after 135 instalments, a print anthology and literally 
thousands of original poems on all kinds of themes and in every imaginable form 
(some not previously imagined). But everything has to come to an end sometime, 
and this is the last Poster poems challenge. I just want to thank everyone who 
has ever posted their poetry here. You have all shown that poetry is still a 
living art; my hope is that you will all keep on writing. Thank you, one and 
all.
 