
Walk into a food bank over Christmas or new year and “hope” probably isn’t the 
word that springs to mind. Sadness, yes. Shame, maybe. Or anger that in rich, 
so-called “modern” Britain, such a thing needs to exist. But whenI spoke to Jane
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/15/christmas-food-bank-not-eaten-three-days-paddington-london>
 – a volunteer at a central London food bank – in December, it felt like a bit 
of hope peering out amid the dark.

Things weren’t easy for Jane. Made redundant a year ago, she’d lost a job in 
journalism that she loved and was struggling to find paid work. But like many 
of the people I met last year – from Claire, a mum of threefunding food parcels 
for families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/05/decent-toilet-roll-kids-delighted-hope-for-food>
 at her children’s school, to Louise, an ex-teacherrunning a clothes bank out 
of a local church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/11/britain-clothes-banks-poverty-sharewear>
 – Jane was giving up her time to help strangers who are struggling.

Politics may be nasty. Yet courage and humour abounds in people like John | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/31/politics-courage-humour-adversity-disability-benefits>
Look hard enough and that sort of solidarity is all around us. Take food 
banks. Many of Jane’s fellow volunteers had previously used the service 
themselves and wanted to give something back. Each week, a Citizens Advice 
volunteer comes in to help those needing a food parcel get back on their feet: 
filling in benefit forms or checking eviction notices. A few days after the 
Guardian published the article about her, Jane emailed me, overwhelmed: they’d 
received donations of almost £6,000.

These are in many ways grim times, where the most basic dignities – regular 
meals or a secure home for your kids – are too often out of reach. And with 
each government cut and wage squeeze over recent years has come a gnawing fear 
that as a society – divided, scared, selfish – we’re turning in on ourselves. 
Or worse, against each other. Right now, I think it’s easy to feel that anyone 
suffering is essentially out on their own.

But time and time again, I’m struck by how ordinary people choose to come 
together – and the incredible good that it does. I’ve seen grassroots campaigns 
across the UK such asSisters Uncut 
<http://www.sistersuncut.org/2016/11/24/the-autumn-statement-nothing-but-a-sticking-plaster-for-domestic-violence-services/ 
blocking bridges> fight for long-term funding for domestic violence survivors. 
AndDisabled People Against Cuts <http://dpac.uk.net> – a group that started as 
just ahandful of disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/16/disability-un-investigation-uk-government-violations-human-rights>
 – persuading the United Nations toinvestigate the government’s disability cuts 
<https://www.google.co.uk/amp/s/amp.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/uk-austerity-policies-amount-to-violations-of-disabled-peoples-rights?client=safari>
.

What is giving you hope for 2017? | Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/what-is-giving-you-hope-for-2017>
I’m in awe of community groups rallying with their time and donations, from 
TheBusShelterMK <https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/mkmobilebusshelter> in 
Milton Keynes trying to raise £30,000 to convert a double decker into a shelter 
for homeless people, tothe Biscuit Fund <http://www.biscuitfund.org> – 
anonymous “gifters” who scan benefit forums to find families who need help – 
giving more than £50,000 for anything from freezers to food hampers.

I am inspired by the trade unions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/30/working-people-fairer-share-economic-gains-tuc-head-frances-o-grady>
 starting the year defending decent pay, job security, and workers’ rights 
post-Brexit. Or the pro bono lawyersoverturning social care cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/fighting-back-against-system-hard-possible>
 and the law studentswinning disabled people’s “fit for work” appeals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/patrick-butler-cuts-blog/2015/sep/02/volunteer-law-project-wins-95-of-fit-for-work-test-appeal-cases>
.

No one should have to fight as hard to survive as so many in this country 
currently do. But I find hope in seeing that any struggle gets easier when we 
stand beside each other. Let’s take on 2017 together.
 