
Edward Snowden’s face seems ever present in Berlin, where stickers on doors 
and lamp-posts promise there’s always “A bed for Snowden 
<https://www.campact.de/snowden/ein-bett-fuer-snowden/bestellen/>” and posters 
plug Oliver Stone’s eponymous film.

The whistleblower’s explosive 2013 revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/the-nsa-files> about international 
government surveillance generated some good advertising for Berlin, cementing 
its reputation ashipster technology activist capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/nov/09/berlins-digital-exiles-tech-activists-escape-nsa>
 of the world. The city’s cheap lifestyle and post-second world war aversion to 
surveillance, as well as sympathetic Germany residency rules, have created a 
powerful network of support and infrastructure for its dedicated cyberactivism 
community. We are “poor, but sexy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jan/03/berlin-poor-sexy-silicon-valley-microsoft-google>
”, its residents like to say.

Many of Berlin’s technologists work freelance, employed by anti-surveillance 
projects or secure messaging tools. And some are employed byTor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tor>, a long running web anonymity 
project with something of a cult following.

That community recently met in Seattle 
<https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/wiki/org/meetings/2016SummerMeeting> 
to tackle a new challenge: a long-running saga of allegations of sexual 
assault, bullying and harassment that has ripped Tor’s community apart.

•••

Jacob Appelbaum is one of the world’s most prominent advocates of freedom of 
speech, and an outspoken opponent of government surveillance. He hasspoken to 
the European parliament 
<http://www.pcworld.com/article/2048207/eu-parliament-told-to-expect-more-revelations-about-nsa-spying.html>
 civil liberties committee about government spying, used classified documents 
leaked by Edward Snowden toreport on Nato’s Taliban “kill lists” 
<http://www.spiegel.de/politik/ausland/afghanistan-usa-geben-taliban-zum-abschuss-frei-a-1010629.html>
 andcollaborated 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2015/06/09/opinion/the-art-of-dissent.html> with the 
dissident Chinese artist Ai Weiwei.

His ascent to tech stardom was far from smooth. He was born near San 
Francisco, California, in April 1983 to troubled parents. In aninterview 
<https://archive.is/RMWx5> in 2005, he described a childhood spent dealing with 
<https://archive.is/RMWx5> his father’s heroin addiction and suicide attempts, 
and periods in homeless shelters. He became obsessive compulsive for a time, 
showering up to eight times a day and unable to eat in his own kitchen. As a 
teenager he began to find salvation,as he described it 
<https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://crypto.nsa.org/f-21/blogger-in-the-lions-den.html>
, in sex, and discovered computers at around the same time. Programming and 
hacking, he later told Rolling Stone, began to make him feel “like the world 
was not a lost place 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/culture/news/meet-the-american-hacker-behind-wikileaks-20101201?page=4>
”. At Santa Rosa Junior College he gained recognition forpublicly hacking 
<https://web.archive.org/web/*/http://crypto.nsa.org/f-21/blogger-in-the-lions-den.html>
 a number of his professors, something he claimed “earned him a few A grades 
<https://archive.is/RMWx5#selection-283.480-283.621>”.

You would always notice if Jake entered a room because he simply talks and 
laughs louder than everybody else
Former friend 
Appelbaum started to build credibility through his work as a security 
specialist <https://events.ccc.de/congress/2005/fahrplan/speakers/165.en.html> 
for non-profit organizations includingGreenpeace 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20120305044857/http://weblog.greenpeace.org/intheforest/archives/001473.html>
, theOpen Society Institute <https://www.opensocietyfoundations.org/>, Tactical 
Tech <https://tacticaltech.org/>, the Ruckus Society <http://ruckus.org/>, 
Rainforest Action Network <http://www.ran.org/> and Kink.com 
<http://www.kink.com/>, a San Francisco BDSM porn site. 

Then in 2004 
<https://motherboard.vice.com/read/appelbaum-leaves-tor-project-amid-sexual-misconduct-allegations,%20http://www.exberliner.com/features/people/jacob-appelbaum-on-the-usa-and-nsa/>
, he started volunteering as a developer for theTor Project 
<https://www.torproject.org/>, the prestigious organisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/04/nsa-gchq-attack-tor-network-encryption>
 behind the anonymity tool regarded as one of the crown jewels of the 
information security community. He soon became aprolific public speaker 
<https://www.google.com/search?q=tor+jacob+appelbaum&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&client=firefox-b&gfe_rd=cr&ei=mjJmV-_qJITb8AfIy4HgCA#q=tor+jacob+appelbaum&tbm=vid>
, his profile soaring in 2010 when he stood in for Julian Assange 
<http://gizmodo.com/5589808/wikileaks-keynote-at-hope-2010-no-assange-but-institutional-details-emerge>
 as  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRVDIohWPVM>the keynote speaker at the 
Hackers on Planet Earth (Hope) <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aRVDIohWPVM> 
conference in New York. But the association withWikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> – which has released classified 
documents that triggered several major global news stories – led to him being
held at US airports 
<http://abcnews.go.com/Blotter/wikileaks-activist-jacob-appelbaum-detained/story?id=12619456>
, his apartment being searched and his mother subjected toarbitrary questioning 
<http://www.exberliner.com/features/people/jacob-appelbaum-on-the-usa-and-nsa/>
, and in June 2013 he chose toexile himself in Berlin 
<http://www.exberliner.com/features/people/jacob-appelbaum-on-the-usa-and-nsa/>.

Appelbaum quickly joined the illustrious inner circle of Berlin’s 
cyberactivist scene. Professionally and socially he was the center of 
attention. “You would always notice if Jake entered a room, usually followed by 
a cluster of people, because he simply talks and laughs louder than everybody 
else,” one former friend said, who – like most of the sources the Guardian 
spoke to – did not want to be named. Former colleagues say that Appelbaum acted 
as a gatekeeper forAssange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/17/julian-assange-sweden>, 
controlling access to him through a live stream or on his phone during parties 
or dinners. “It was sociology textbook 101 regarding the distribution of 
informal power and reputation,” says a former friend. “For some in the 
community Julian is still the superhero. Jake, by publicly associating with 
him, increases his own importance. By offering access to himself, he 
distributes the credit points of social value down to others.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc1c5ffbb7f0a6106dea4d598dbb40825f5711f7%2F392_0_2336_2336%2F2336.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcc1c5ffbb7f0a6106dea4d598dbb40825f5711f7%2F392_0_2336_2336%2F2336.jpg>
 Jacob Appelbaum speaking in Berlin. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Appelbaum’s friends say he can be kind, generous and supportive, and that he 
has real power as an evangelist. “He is a great salesman ... as proficient as 
some hackers are, they cannot necessarily sell their ideas very well.” He truly 
believes he is a defender of the small and weak, says the source. Another says: 
“If somebody can be useful to him … then Jake can be very charming.”

Appelbaum has always polarized the community around him. Complaints 
<https://mailman.stanford.edu/pipermail/liberationtech/2013-August/010696.html> 
about his abrasive comments and “alpha male behavior” accompanied his rise to 
fame from the beginning, yet did not seem to harm his reputation within 
WikiLeaks or Tor. For a long time, nobody in the community dared to speak up. 
“If you praise him, he can be your best friend,” says a former co-worker at 
Tor. Another talks of months of distress, afraid to leave the house in case of 
meeting Appelbaum or his followers. A third says: “Wherever he goes, he leaves 
a trail of destruction.”

He has been described as “the perfect bully 
<https://medium.com/@nickf4rr/hi-im-nick-farr-nickf4rr-35c32f13da4d#.6fy39z6cm>
”, and in 2015 Tor suspended him for 10 days for implying that new volunteers 
were recruited in a “sexually charged manner”. “Jake has targeted, abused and 
silenced many close friends of mine,” wrote security specialist Nick Farr. 
“Somehow we all felt powerless to do anything about it.”


Then on 3 June 2016, a website was published at jacobappelbaum.net 
<http://jacobappelbaum.net/> detailing multiple, anonymized allegations of 
sexual assault and bullying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/06/jacob-appelbaum-tor-denies-assault-allegations>
. It included one allegation of rape. After years of rumours and secretive 
allegations in the community, the claims were suddenly very public. “We wanted 
other people to be aware of how Jake behaves,” a statement on the site 
explained. “Open secrets do not protect people ... We have heard lots of 
complaints about his behaviour over the years and have experienced it first 
hand. We want it to stop.”

No one in the community wanted to report the allegations to the authorities, 
blaming a lack of confidence in the police and persistent claims ofsurveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/cifamerica/2011/nov/11/us-justice-department-legally-hacked-twitter>
 andharassment by law enforcement agencies 
<http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/tor-developer-isis-agora-lovecruft-publicly-accuses-fbi-harassment-1558607>
.

Statements of other reputed victims followed, some outing themselves publicly. 
Leigh Honeywell <https://hypatia.ca/about/>, a security engineer from Toronto, 
became the first to publish an account of the alleged sexual assault by 
Appelbaum using her name, claiming he had publicly exposed details of their 
sexual relationship, ignored safewords and turned violent. American journalist
Violet Blue 
<https://medium.com/@violetblue/but-he-does-good-work-6710df9d9029#.vj7d5p2zt> 
and Icelandic politician Ásta Helgadóttir 
<https://twitter.com/asta_fish/status/743165546238189568> both detailed 
accusations against Appelbaum for inappropriate sexual behaviour and public 
shaming.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0e9267ab73def640c6dfecc0dbc7d8451d88b0%2F3_0_4997_3000%2F4997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2c0e9267ab73def640c6dfecc0dbc7d8451d88b0%2F3_0_4997_3000%2F4997.jpg>
 Violet Blue (left) and Ásta Helgadóttir (right) both accused Jacob Appelbaum 
of inappropriate sexual behaviour. Photograph: Courtesy of Pirate Party & 
Violet Blue 
Fellow Tor developer Isis Agora Lovecruft is a former friend of Appelbaum who 
started working with him in 2011. She claims that Appelbaum touched her without 
her consent when she stayed at his apartment in 2014. She spent two years, she
says <https://blog.patternsinthevoid.net/>, alternating between trying to 
inhibit her rage and trying to convince herself that she hadn’t been hurt. But 
in 2016, she began to seek out other victims, and when Appelbaum found out he 
confronted her in an online chat. Lovecruft says she felt he was trying to ruin 
her life for standing up to him: “Attempting to blackmail me into silence 
whilst I was defending others is really not a good look for an ‘anarchist’ 
‘free-speech advocate’.”

Alison Macrina, another Tor volunteer and founder of the anti-surveillance 
Library Freedom Project <https://libraryfreedomproject.org/>, tried to confront 
Appelbaum about her own experience. At his apartment in January 2016, she says 
that he repeatedly pressured her to take a bath with him and eventually pulled 
her into the tub in a kind of “nonconsensual washing”. More than a month passed 
until Macrina was able to talk to a friend about what had happened. When she 
met Appelbaum again in Berlin he insisted that he was the real victim because 
other people were making “false claims” about him. “He put on such a show on 
this little bench we were sitting on. It wasn’t that cold but he ostensibly 
shivered, asking repeatedly why I didn’t want to come over for tea.” Hoping for 
an apology was futile, she realised. “It was all about him trying to get me 
into his thrall with stylizing himself as the victim,” she says.

Tor has changed from being run by cypherpunks to American professional 
activists who care more about securing funding
Tor volunteer 
Yet some female friends 
<https://medium.com/@dhammicmarxist/on-my-experiences-with-jacob-appelbaum-361a11b847f5#.7hr3c3l8l>
, former partners and colleagues, including WikiLeaks editor and journalist 
Sarah Harrison and human rights lawyer Renata Avila, stood up for Appelbaum, 
publishing asite in support of him <https://ourresponse.org/> and claiming he 
had been the subject of “egregious character assassination”. One woman claimed 
that an inaccurate version of her story had been included on the site of 
anonymous allegations without her knowledge. German newspaperDie Zeit claimed 
<http://www.zeit.de/kultur/2016-08/jacob-appelbaum-rape-sexual-abuse-allegations>
 to have discovered inconsistencies in the most serious allegations made 
against Appelbaum, and the Guardian also found some conflicting accounts in at 
least three of the allegations of sexual assault.

Appelbaum himself denies all the accusations 
<http://www.twitlonger.com/show/n_1soorlp> of sexual misconduct, saying the 
claims are “entirely false” and part of a “calculated and targeted attack”. He 
has not said publicly why he might be targeted, or why he is the subject of 
what what his German lawyer describes as “a hate campaign”. “Typically, people 
who come forward with these kinds of allegations are said to be doing it for 
money or fame,” says Anne Roth, psychologist at Berlin’s Lara Rape Crisis and 
Counselling Center. “In fact they gain nothing but negative attention.”

Roth says Berlin’s close-knit cyberactivist community is likely to be no 
different to any other dysfunctional organisation or business that fails to 
properly address allegations of sexual assault and harassment. Sexual violence, 
she explains, is about the exertion of power, whether the power is defined by 
official rank or by social status, and in both cases it isdifficult for the 
victims to speak up <https://www.rainn.org/statistics/criminal-justice-system>. 
“That relies on the goodwill of the aggressor, so without a formal allegation, 
victims often prefer to remain silent.”

•••

The Tor Project <https://www.torproject.org/> began in the mid-1990s at the US 
navy research lab 
<http://www.nrl.navy.mil/itd/chacs/dingledine-tor-second-generation-onion-router>
, which was exploring ways to protect military communications online. Short for 
“The Onion Router”, which describes the layers of anonymity it is able to pile 
on top of a user’s online activity, Tor was spun out into a non-profit company 
in 2006 led by Roger Dingledine <http://www.freehaven.net/~arma/cv.html>, Nick 
Mathewson <http://www.wangafu.net/~nickm/> and six others 
<http://corp.sec.state.ma.us/CorpWeb/CorpSearch/CorpSearchViewPDF.aspx> from 
its base in Massachusetts. By 2014 it hadannual revenue of $2.5m 
<https://www.torproject.org/about/findoc/2014-TorProject-combined-Form990_PC_Audit_Results.pdf>
. Appelbaum began as a volunteer and joined the staff in 2008.

Dingledine and Appelbaum began to work closely together, with Appelbaum 
encouraged to speak as Tor’s public evangelist – marking the beginning of 
Appelbaum’s ascendency into an influential figure in the tech community. He was 
one of only a handful of activists with the confidence and technical knowledge 
to publicly challenge the US government’s pervasive surveillance regime. In 
August 2013, he evenaccepted a Whistleblower Award 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=cW8lRCqYI6U> on behalf of Edward Snowden. “He 
asked me to speak about individuals and about the hope for change,” Appelbaum, 
according toDeutsche Welle 
<http://www.dw.com/en/snowden-did-it-for-all-of-us/a-17057251>. “He said 
everyone had the strength to stand up against corruption, war crimes and lies – 
every day and at any time.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F116e4127aaa512a71563000e5c162554cc520ed1%2F0_245_3875_2325%2F3875.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F116e4127aaa512a71563000e5c162554cc520ed1%2F0_245_3875_2325%2F3875.jpg>
 Jacob Appelbaum at the Chaos Computer Club, a European hacker gathering, 
during a video conference with Julian Assange. Photograph: Angelika Warmuth/AFP 
Allegations against Appelbaum were first brought before the Tor board in March 
2015, when a female employeeapproached her bosses 
<https://www.buzzfeed.com/josephbernstein/sources-tor-project-board-knew-about-allegations-against-jac?utm_term=.pcByo997r#.wq1DAoo0L>
 with concerns about sexual misconduct and bullying. Tor suspended her and 
Appelbaum for 10 days but, sources say, the employee was unable to present any 
evidence to support the claim. The employee then left the company.

When Shari Steele 
<https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2015/04/shari-steele-legacy-digital-rights> came 
on board as Tor’s executive director 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jan/11/shari-steele-tor-encryption-online-anonymity-censorship>
 inDecember 2015 
<https://blog.torproject.org/blog/announcing-shari-steele-our-new-executive-director>
, one of her priorities was to deal with the allegations, Dingledine wrote in an
 internal email <https://cryptome.org/2016/06/dingledine-appelbaum-16-0602.pdf>
. Steele, a trained lawyer, had worked at the Electronic Frontier Foundation 
(EFF) since 1992 and has a reputation for being fair and effective – if a 
little prone to impatience and threats when under pressure, according to former 
colleagues. “Shari’s original plan was to develop a process that we could use 
for these situations: we’d put the new process in place, ask everyone to start 
fresh, and then follow the process moving forward. In the meantime, we have 
been sending concerned people to her, so she can keep track of the big 
picture,” Dingledine told Tor’s inner circle just after the allegations were 
published on jacobappelbaum.net. “Unfortunately, events have overtaken us.”

In February 2016, Lovecruft sent an encrypted email to Tor executives 
detailing more allegations of sexual abuse and harassment she had gathered from 
multiple victims. Tor is said to have consequently banned Appelbaum from its 
developer meeting at the Internet Freedom Festival in Valencia. Appelbaum 
claims that Steele asked him to resign on 25May 
<https://blog.torproject.org/blogs/ssteele>, and later sent him “separation 
agreement <https://cryptome.org/2016/06/tor-appelbaum-separation.pdf>” which 
would remove any liability from Tor. Appelbaum didn’t sign. He says that he had 
also agreed to undertake anti-harassment training, but left Tor before that 
could happen.

Tor announced 
<https://blog.torproject.org/blog/jacob-appelbaum-leaves-tor-project> his 
departure on 2 June and began an internal investigation. When it concluded on 
27 July,Steele <https://blog.torproject.org/blog/statement-0> thanked those who 
had come forward to report Appelbaum’s behaviour. “Many people inside and 
outside the Tor Project have reported incidents of being humiliated, 
intimidated, bullied and frightened by Jacob, and several experienced unwanted 
sexually aggressive behavior from him … I am grateful you spoke up, and I 
acknowledge and appreciate your courage.”

The claims against Appelbaum, as well as Tor’s treatment both of him and of 
the alleged victims, have thrown Tor and its network of staff and dedicated 
volunteers into chaos. Tor has been accused of mishandling the investigation 
and of failing to give information about their process, and of failing to 
protect and support victims as well as some who say they have been unfairly 
implicated as accomplices of Appelbaum. Tor, a small organisation with a laser 
focus on internet anonymity and privacy, seems overwhelmed by the intensity of 
the infighting and lacking the skills to handle the severity of the accusations 
among its staff and volunteers.

Appelbaum told the Guardian that Tor did not speak to him to ask his version 
of events during its internal investigation, while Tor claims he declined to be 
interviewed over the encrypted channels its investigator proposed. Another 
witness to the rape allegation alsoclaims 
<https://yawnbox.com/static/The-Tor-Project-has-lied-to-its-community.html> not 
to have been interviewed by Tor. Some of Appelbaum’ssupporters 
<https://shiromarieke.github.io/tor> feel he was not treated fairly by the 
organisation, and havecalled for a boycott <https://www.oneeyedman.net/?p=2589> 
orstopped <https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/ticket/19690> working with 
the organisation. “Tor has changed from being an organization run by 
cypherpunks to being run by American professional activists, who care more 
about securing funding and their job security than the cause,” says one 
longstanding community member. “People are afraid to speak up in case they are 
ousted like the people interviewed in the investigation,” says another insider. 
“We have very little information from Tor’s leadership about the investigation 
and the nature of the allegations. Rather ironic for an organization promoting 
free speech.”

Long-term community member John Gilmore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2010/aug/01/wikileaks-john-gilmore-guardian-internet>
, who also co-founded EFF, claimed on an internal mailing list that Appelbaum 
had been put through “trial-by-rumour”. “The numerous victims that this process 
creates are not helped at all; the innocent along with the allegedly guilty are 
savaged and rejected without ever getting a chance to defend themselves.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb23da7f09a7d3e63b8cd8cb8841eb1e948c7b46%2F0_133_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Power%2C%20secrecy%20and%20cypherpunks%3A%20how%20Jacob%20Appelbaum%20ripped%20Tor%20apart&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Foct%2F11%2Fjacob-appelbaum-tor-project-sexual-assault-allegations%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdb23da7f09a7d3e63b8cd8cb8841eb1e948c7b46%2F0_133_3712_2227%2F3712.jpg>
 Jacob Appelbaum at a Berlin demonstration in support of press freedom in 2015. 
Photograph: Britta Pedersen/AFP/Getty Images 
In July 2016, shortly before the internal investigation concluded, Dingledine 
and the six other members of Tor’s board of directorsall stepped down 
<https://blog.torproject.org/blog/tor-project-elects-new-board%C2%A0-directors>
. They did not acknowledge the Appelbaum controversy, saying only that Tor 
deserved “the best possible leadership”. “It is time that we pass the baton of 
board oversight as the Tor Project moves into its second decade of operations,” 
Tor wrote on its blog.

In a statement released to the Guardian, Tor said that the investigation had 
been handled “thoroughly and professionally”. “The board’s resignation was part 
of a larger effort on their part to bring more professional leadership to the 
organization. This included hiring Shari Steele to the executive director role 
and bringing on a board with more nonprofit oversight experience.”

When the employee came forward with concerns in March 2015, Tor conducted an 
internal investigation and took action, it says, yet there were no formal 
procedures in place to deal with allegations of sexual harassment among staff 
or volunteers. Tor has since introduced an anti-harassment policy, a conflicts 
of interest policy, procedures for submitting complaints and an internal 
complaint review process.

Many saw the way he treated me and did nothing about it ... so it took me 
years before I realized how abusive he was
Leigh Honeywell 
Tor defended its handling of the second investigation in 2016. “Tor handled 
the investigation carefully and ethically. We posted information about what we 
were doing on our blog, and we have supported and protected victims throughout 
this process.”

Many in the tech community have distanced themselves from Appelbaum. Even the 
San Francisco hackers’ workspace he co-founded hasblocked him online and from 
its building 
<http://blog.noisebridge.net/post/145728465358/noisebridge-statement-on-jacob-appelbaum>
 after implementing a new harassment policy. “Everybody knew that Jake used 
sexually charged language to upset people in work meetings,” says one former 
co-worker. “There were many rumors, but Jake was allowed to win every argument 
and Tor was letting him get away with every little whim.”

Appelbaum says that he has stopped drinking and begun therapy. “I have 
obviously seriously hurt people’s feelings unintentionally and I deeply regret 
this,” he said. He hopes to focus on his doctoral work on cryptography in the 
Netherlands, claiming he can’t return to America because he could be 
investigated overhis work with WikiLeaks 
<https://theintercept.com/2015/06/20/wikileaks-jacob-appelbaum-google-investigation/>
 and Der Spiegel aboutclassified US surveillance 
<http://www.cicero.de/berliner-republik/jacob-appelbaum-der-hacker-der-merkels-handy-ueberwachung-aufdeckte/57465>
.

“I’ve dedicated my life as a journalist, activist, and longtime member of the 
Tor Project to advocating for the transparency of public processes and to 
speaking out about the necessity of privacy, security, and anonymity. These are 
ideals that I will continue to uphold, despite the vicious campaign that is 
currently being waged against me,” Appelbaumsaid 
<http://www.twitlonger.com/show/n_1soorlp>. He told the Guardian that he 
acknowledged the importance of addressing rape culture and violence against 
women. “I have always felt these topics needed to be discussed and that hasn’t 
changed. It is more urgent than ever.”

Jacob’s charisma and authority, wrote 
<https://hypatia.ca/2016/06/07/he-said-they-said/> Leigh Honeywell, make him 
hard to challenge. “Many of our friends and colleagues saw the way he treated 
me and did nothing about it, so it took me years before I realized how abusive 
he was to me.”

Violet Blue claims 
<https://medium.com/@violetblue/but-he-does-good-work-6710df9d9029#.ubmm3amfp> 
that it was Assange and Snowden who helped to elevate Appelbaum to a position 
of power, whether or not they knew about his behaviour. “We need look no 
further for proof that hero worship and the cult of belief is pure poison,” she 
writes. “This didn’t happen because we’re broken as a hacker culture, or 
because we’re hackers and thus too undeveloped to comprehend empathy.”

But others do feel the episode presents a challenge to the tech community. “We 
need to ask ourselves which values we stand for,” says a former friend of 
Appelbaum. “InGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> we used to be 
connected by mutual trust and support, so taking advantage of someone’s 
vulnerabilities damaged this safe space.

“Our priority should be to rebuild it, and concentrate on friendship and doing 
good work rather than hero worshipping.”

 * If you have been affected by sexual assault, you can find support and 
advice atRainn <https://www.rainn.org/> in the US, Rape Crisis 
<http://rapecrisis.org.uk/> in the UK and Lara <http://www.lara-berlin.de/> in 
Berlin  