
The City regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority, has announced a June 2019 
deadline for customers to make claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
 for the mis-selling of payment protection insurance (PPI).

Why is the deadline being imposed? 

The FCA says imposing a deadline would allow banks to draw a line under the 
PPI scandal, which has been dragging on for years. Estimates byNew City Agenda 
<http://newcityagenda.co.uk/> puts the total bill for handling claims at more 
than £37bn while the FCA calculates that £24.2bn has been paid out to consumers 
since 2011, the rest being the cost of tackling claims plus provisions made in 
anticipation of more payouts.

When did the mis-selling of PPI begin?

PPI has been sold alongside mortgages, credit cards and other unsecured loans 
since the 1990s. It was supposed to cover payments on loans if customers fell 
ill or lost their jobs. In 2004,the Guardian reported how Barclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2004/apr/10/loans.jobsandmoney> had been 
making profits from PPI and other examples quickly followed. It received new 
prominence in 2005 when Citizens Advice issued a so-called super-complaint 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2005/sep/13/debt.business> to competition 
watchdogs about what it described as a “protection racket”, starting a series 
of events that led to the compensation payments to consumers and sales of some 
types of PPI being banned.

How many customers are affected?

The now defunct Financial Services Authority told parliament  
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/jt201314/jtselect/jtpcbs/27/27ix_we_j12.htm>
53m PPI policies had been sold. Around 45m of those were sold by banks, worth 
around £44bn. It is not clear how many of these policies were mis-sold – 
initial estimates by the FCA were that 3m people were affected – but by January 
2016 12m customers had received compensation, totalling £24.2bn.

PPI claims to rise again as FCA proposes longer deadline
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/02/city-regulator-fca-proposes-2019-deadline-for-ppi-claims>
Selling PPI was very profitable for banks. In its evidence to parliament, the 
regulator highlighted one PPI policy sold alongside a mortgage which cost the 
customer £20,838 over the loan term even though the maximum they could reclaim 
was £31,000, an illustration of the scale of profits involved which led banks 
to risk mis-selling.

Is the deadline the same for all customers? 

The consumer panel, which represents consumer interests at the FCA, questioned 
the deadline. Inits submission to the FCA  
<https://www.fs-cp.org.uk/sites/default/files/fscp_response_rules_and_guidance_on_payment_protection_insurance_complaints.pdf>
about a time bar, it pointed out that 5.5m customers may already face an 
earlier cut-off. This is because they have already been contacted by their 
banks and, if they are covered by existing rules, will already have the clock 
ticking on a three-year time limit for claims.

How many more claims do the banks face?

Given the cold-calling from claims management companies (CMCs) it might seem 
improbable that anyone who was mis-sold a policy has not already made a claim. 
However, according to the theProfessional Financial Claims Association 
<http://www.pfca.org.uk/> (PFCA), only about half of the sums paid out 
represent refunded payments. The rest is interest, with the banks obliged to 
pay 8% interest on the money being returned. This suggests an even higher bill 
for PPI .

Guy Anker, managing editor at MoneySavingExpert.com, points out that the 
Financial Ombudsman is upholding 70% of complaints rejected by banks. “To go to 
the ombudsman you have to first complain to the bank, so it’s likely banks are 
still wrongly rejecting claims from over half of those who have been mis-sold,” 
said Anker.

Are there any new twists?

A court ruling in the Plevin v Paragon Personal Finance 
<http://ukscblog.com/new-judgment-plevin-respondent-v-paragon-personal-finance-limited-appellant-2014-uksc-61/>
 case also looks likely to add to the PPI bill. The court concluded that if a 
PPI seller failed to disclose to a customer that it had received a large 
commission from the product provider, the sale was unfair under the 1974 
Consumer Credit Act. The case involved Susan Plevin, who found that 72% of the 
£5,780 premium she paid was commission for the lender and the broker that sold 
her the loan, with the rest going to the PPI provider, Norwich Union.

How much will I get if I claim?

That will depend on your circumstances, but the average is £2,000. The BBC has 
reported one caseof a businesswoman from Hertfordshire receiving £65,000 from 
her credit card company MBNA <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-18554478>. 
Moneysavingexpert has one example of an £82,000 payout to a Barclaycard 
customer.

What is happening to claims now?

Lloyds Banking <https://www.theguardian.com/business/banking> Group, which 
sold more PPI policies than any other bank, said claims in the last week had 
reached their lowest weekly level since the highpoint of 2011. It is still 
receiving 6,700 claims a week – down from 10,000 per week in the past. Over the 
past six weeks, PPI complaints fell to 7,500 per week from an average of 8,500 
in the first half of 2016.

What happens next?

 The FCA will run a consultation until 11 October before finalising the rules. 
Consumer experts reckon that CMCs – which the National Audit Office estimates 
have received up to £5bn in commission from PPI payments – will make extra 
efforts to generate claims for consumers. The banks will also have to agree to 
spend £40m on an awareness campaign to ensure customers make claims before the 
deadline.

Anker said customers who had previous claims rejected should contact the 
Ombudsman if they have not already done so. “Banks have been fined for poor 
complaints handling – your bank rejection does not mean you weren’t mis-sold.”
 