
There are “serious risks” of further mis-selling scandals erupting in the 
financial services industry and stronger action is needed to tackle problems 
with the culture of firms, MPs have warned.

Consumer watchdog warns against 2018 deadline for PPI claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/13/consumer-watchdog-warns-against-deadline-ppi-claims>
The public accounts committee (PAC) also said it was a “failure of the system 
of regulation and redress” thatclaims management firms have made up to £5bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/mar/05/claims-firms-ppi-mis-selling-payment-protection-insurance>
 from PPI (payment protection insurance) payouts – the equivalent of £1 in 
every £4 recuperated.

This is compensation that could – and should – have been paid to the victims 
of mis-selling, the report said.

It warned that the pension freedoms introduced last year, which give over-55s 
more choice over how to use their retirement pots,could be a “potential trigger”
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/24/pensions-overhaul-could-trigger-raft-of-mis-selling-claims-warns-watchdog>
 for mis-selling on a mass scale.

The committee also highlighted a recent increase in complaints about 
“packaged” accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/29/packaged-bank-accounts-good-deal-ppi-scandal-misselling>
, whereby consumers generally pay a monthly fee in return for a bundle of 
products and services included with a current account, as a potential area for 
concern about mis-selling.

Claims management firms typically take about a quarter or a third of 
compensation payouts – but people can make a complaint to a firm themselves for 
free.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4f35374cdb981e38d784724b813b6b9d3fb636%2F0_185_2658_3320%2F2658.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PPI%20scandal%3A%20'serious%20risks'%20of%20more%20mis-selling%20in%20financial%20services%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PPI%20scandal%3A%20%27serious%20risks%27%20of%20more%20mis-selling%20in%20financial%20services%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9d4f35374cdb981e38d784724b813b6b9d3fb636%2F0_185_2658_3320%2F2658.jpg>
 Meg Hillier, chair of the public accounts committee. Photograph: Rex 
If they are still unhappy they can go to the free Financial Ombudsman Service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/jul/06/financial-ombudsman-swamped-ppi-complaints>
 (FOS), which resolves disputes between consumers and financial firms, although 
the PAC raised concerns about the service’s backlog of cases.

Meg Hillier, chair of the PAC, said: “The widespread mis-selling of PPI is a 
vivid demonstration of the risks facing consumers in the financial services 
market. The fallout is still with us.

“Many people have waited years for a decision on compensation and, because of 
the way they have pursued their claims, even then they may not receive the full 
amount. Serious risks of further mis-selling remain.”

The PAC urged the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority> (FCA) and 
the Treasury to do more to identify how widespread mis-selling was and which 
activities work best to prevent it.

It said departments and regulators had been “far too passive” in allowing 
compensation that could have been paid to mis-selling victims instead of claims 
managers.

More than 12 million consumers were mis-sold PPI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/mar/06/ppi-misselling-banks-write-customers>
, and firms have paid more than £22bn in compensation since April 2011, the 
report said.

FCA unable to estimate future PPI cost to banks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/26/fca-unable-to-estimate-future-ppi-cost-to-banks>
While it is “straightforward and free” for affected consumers to claim 
compensation, in 2014-15 80% of complaints to the Ombudsman about PPI were made 
through claims management companies.

The report said: “In many cases, these companies merely package up payment 
protection insurance claims, but they typically charge between a quarter and a 
third of any compensation subsequently paid … the public bodies involved have 
been too slow in taking responsibility for this situation, and too passive in 
allowing it to happen.”

The committee said firms’ cultures and the nature of their sales incentives 
have been key factors behind mis-selling.

While the FCA has taken some action, “the risks of mis-selling remain, for 
example pensions freedoms reforms are a potential trigger for future mass 
mis-selling”, the report found. “The FCA has withdrawn a planned review of 
banks’ culture, but has not articulated what culture it expects firms to have. 
There is no guarantee that any improvements in cultures will stick as the 
regulatory spotlight moves away.”

The committee has urged the FCA to outline what it needs to do to improve the 
cultures of financial services firms and to report back in a year on how 
effective this has been.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21275b3c217acba2de3393f521a649027531e430%2F0_0_5638_3383%2F5638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=PPI%20scandal%3A%20'serious%20risks'%20of%20more%20mis-selling%20in%20financial%20services%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=PPI%20scandal%3A%20%27serious%20risks%27%20of%20more%20mis-selling%20in%20financial%20services%20market&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fmay%2F13%2Fmis-selling-ppi-financial-services-market-public-accounts-committee-compensation-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21275b3c217acba2de3393f521a649027531e430%2F0_0_5638_3383%2F5638.jpg>
 The committee also raised concerns that many people were having to wait more 
than two years for a decision on their compensation claims. Photograph: Alamy 
It found a range of causes for products being mis-sold, from incompetent or 
intimidating sales teams to products that were badly designed or unsuitable.

Middle managers in financial services firms were often promoted based on sales 
targets, making it hard to keep the focus on consumers’ needs, the report found.

The FCA should also set out what more it could do to ensure firms check 
consumers’ understanding of the products they buy and their rights to claim 
compensation, the committee said.

The committee also raised concerns that many people were having to wait more 
than two years for a decision on their compensation claims. It said the 
Ombudsman Service should set out a clear timetable for cutting and ultimately 
eliminating the backlog.

It said while the Ombudsman has reduced the number of open PPI cases, it has a 
large backlog of older cases and 45% of open cases were more than a year old, 
while 17% (39,300) were more than two years old. In 2015-16 so far, half of PPI 
cases have taken 15 months or more to close.

 