
Climate myths are like zombies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jun/25/global-warming-zombies-devour-telegraph-fox-news-brains>
 – you shoot them through the heart, walk away thinking they’re dead, and then 
they pop back up behind you and try once again to eat your brain.

So it is with Stage 1 climate denial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/16/climate-change-contrarians-5-stages-denial>
 and the myth that the Earth isn’t warming. It’s so persistent that it’s 
related to the5th <https://skepticalscience.com/global-cooling.htm>, 9th 
<https://skepticalscience.com/global-warming-stopped-in-1998.htm>, and 49th 
<https://skepticalscience.com/global-cooling-january-2007-to-january-2008.htm>
-most popular myths inthe Skeptical Science database 
<https://skepticalscience.com/argument.php>. Climate deniers have been peddling 
the myth ‘no warming since [insert date]’for over a decade 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/comment/personal-view/3624242/There-IS-a-problem-with-global-warming...-it-stopped-in-1998.html>
.

It’s a popular myth among those who benefit from maintaining the status quo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/04/the-similarities-between-trump-support-and-climate-denial>
 because if the problem doesn’t exist, obviously there’s no need for action to 
solve it. And it’s an incredibly easy argument that can be made at any time, 
using thetelltale technique of climate denial 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/22/opinions/cook-techniques-climate-change-denial/index.html>
 known as cherry picking.

I created a video to illustrate this point. The key is that the Earth has 
natural short-term temperature oscillations caused by factors like the El 
Niño/La Niña cycle. El Niño events temporarily warm temperatures at the Earth’s 
surface, while La Niña events cause temporary surface cooling. When you combine 
these up-and-down cycles with a long-term human-caused global warming trend and 
various other noisy influences, you get a bumpy temperature rise that allows 
for cherry picking of periods without warming:
 Artificial data showing that global warming plus natural cycles and random 
noise generates “steps” - periods without warming, and periods of accelerated 
warming. Created by Dana Nuccitelli. 
That’s what it looks like with artificial data. Using real global surface 
temperature data from NASA, I created a popular graphic calledThe Escalator 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=47>, which has been featured 
the PBS documentaryClimate of Doubt 
<http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/film/climate-of-doubt/> and used by Senator 
Sheldon Whitehouseon the Senate floor 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=luArwsZxHUs>. The video below shows The 
Escalator with data updated through 2016:
 The data (green) are NASA GISS monthly global surface temperature anomaly 
data from January 1970 through November 2016, with linear trends for the cherry 
picked time periods of Jan 1970–May 1977, May 1977–October 1979, October 
1979–April 1988, April 1988–March 1997, March 1997–February 2002, February 
2002–October 2009, and October 2009–April 2014 (blue), followed by the linear 
trend for the full time period (red). Created by Dana Nuccitelli. 
No warming since  1998  2016

As The Escalator shows, we’re currently in a particularly hot period. 2014 was 
the hottest year on record, until 2015 broke that record, whichwe just broke 
again in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
. This unprecedented heat has temporarily stopped the ‘no warming’ myth in its 
tracks, but like every zombie climate myth, it will inevitably rise again. Faux 
science journalists have already writtenfake news stories about temperatures 
falling between August and October 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/05/fake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino>
.


It’s only a matter of time before ‘no warming since 2016’ stories become 
common. That’s because there was a strong El Niño event that ended in 2016, 
very similar to the event that ended in 1998. The 1998 El Niño gave birth to 
the “no significant warming in 18 years” myth, which until recently wasa 
favorite argument of deniers like Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/mar/03/ted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter>
. In fact, earlier this weekthe House [anti-] Science Committee Twitter trolled 
“climate alarmists” 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2017/01/04/house-science-committee-s-twitter-account-now-just-another-climate-science-denial-troll>
 by arguing that in satellite data, 2016 wasn’tthat much hotter than 1998.


This myth was accurately critiqued by climate scientist Carl Mears and Admiral 
David Titley, as documented in the video below:
 How Reliable are Satellite Temperatures? Created by Peter Sinclair. 
Coincidentally, there was about 0.25°C global surface warming between 1998 and 
2016, which is why ‘no warming’ warped into ‘no significant warming.’ However, 
because of the record-shattering global heat of the past three years, the myth 
is likely to reset its cherry picked starting point to 2016.

Zombie myth seepage into climate science research

Between 2006 and 2014, the myth of ‘no warming since 1998’ became so pervasive 
on internet blogs and biased media outlets that it began to influence climate 
researchers. In 2015, Stephen Lewandowsky, Naomi Oreskes, and colleagues 
published a paper documenting what they termed“seepage” of this climate denial 
myth into the scientific community 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959378015000515>.

It’s true that in the years following 1998, there were a number of La Niña 
events and other factors that acted to temporarily dampen the human-caused 
global warming trend, as illustrated in the above videos. And these factors 
were certainly worthy of investigation by climate researchers.

However, the volume of research on the subject was a clear indication that the 
denier focus on the subject had seeped into the scientific community. As 
Lewandowsky and colleagues documented in their paper:

across all data sets, the recent change in the rate of warming constitutes a 
notablysmaller deviation from the overall trend than were previous periods of 
accelerated warming.

Approximately 150 scientific papers were devoted to the slowdown, including 
entire special issues of the journal Nature and a discussion in the 2014 IPCC 
report. Similar short-term periods of accelerated warming were virtually 
ignored in the scientific literature.

Moreover, the scientific community adapted the use of inaccurate phrases like 
“hiatus” and “pause” to describe what was simply a short-term slowdown in 
global surface warming. Sometimes these phrases were redefined to refer to an 
apparent short-term discrepancy between models and observations (now resolved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/27/facts-matter-and-on-climate-change-trumps-picks-get-them-wrong>
), which caused widespread confusion – a clear public communications failure.


Starting in 2008, public acceptance of global warming dipped 
<http://www.gallup.com/poll/190010/concern-global-warming-eight-year-high.aspx>
, and has only now recovered eight years later.

Be vigilant for zombie climate myths

In our current post-truth state 
<http://thebulletin.org/truth-vs-post-truth-what%E2%80%99s-causing-our-record-shattering-global-temperatures10241>
, withindividuals hostile to climate science and policy taking control of 
America’s government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
, we’re likely to see a resurgence of zombie climate myths in the coming years. 
To stop them, we have to make it socially unacceptable to resurrect 
long-debunked climate myths. We have to demand that our leaders accept that
facts matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/27/facts-matter-and-on-climate-change-trumps-picks-get-them-wrong>
, and hold them accountable for disseminating myths and misinformation. Seepage 
and appeasement are no longer options.

Fortunately, the scientific community is stepping up to stand up for science 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/16/this-is-not-normal-climate-researchers-take-to-the-streets-to-protect-science>
, evidence, and facts. To beat back the zombies, they’ll need support from the 
rest of the public as well.
 