
John Adams left the White House in a flurry of paperwork, working till 
midnight to fortify the United States against the next president, his political 
nemesis and friend, Thomas Jefferson. Each founder’s legacy was bound up in the 
other’s, setting a precedent for every president who followed them.


“These tensions in the American psyche go all the way back to the revolution,” 
said Barbara Perry, the director of presidential studies at the University of 
Virginia’s Miller Center.

Trump is the inevitable backlash to an Obama presidency | Cornell Belcher
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-election-backlash-obama-presidency-white-voters>
Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> also faces a 
successor radically opposed to his policies, philosophy and personality. Donald 
Trump’s unpredictability has left historians reluctant to say how much of 
Obama’s legacy he could erase, but they largely agree on one point. “Even the 
best-laid plans of presidents, including supreme court appointments, go awry,” 
Perry said.


Ken Mayer, a professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison and author of a 
book on executive power, agreed on this point: “It’s going to be a bumpy ride.”

Presidents who repudiate their predecessors are not new. By the time he won 
the White House, the populist slaveowner Andrew Jackson (president from 1829 to 
1837) had earlier in his lifekilled a duelist 
<http://www.history.com/this-day-in-history/andrew-jackson-kills-charles-dickinson-in-duel>
, invaded Florida and battled the British two weeks after theWar of 1812 
<http://www.history.com/topics/war-of-1812> had ended. He succeeded the 
privileged, charmless John Quincy Adams, who studied at Harvard, crusaded for 
abolition and helped end the wars Jackson fought. Theyhated 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/political-mudslinging-1828-1456874832> each other 
on principle and more.

“I don’t even know if Donald Trump has an ideology,” Perry said. “Since he, as 
a person and personality, seems so unpredictable, it’s really difficult to say 
anything with certainty.”

Trump will be able to quickly reverse some policy. He can immediately rescind 
Obama’s orders on immigration andthe Dakota Access pipeline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/dakota-access-pipeline-standing-rock-protest-trump>
, for instance, just as Obamareversed 
<http://www.cnn.com/2009/POLITICS/01/23/obama.abortion/> a ban on abortion 
funding that had been restored by George W Bush, revoked by Bill Clinton, and 
created by Ronald Reagan. His powers are not limitless, though, as Obama found 
when heordered the closure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/24/obama-guantanamo-bay-closure-republicans>
 of Guantánamo Bay.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62560f52027b2fd804442e19d559d05726f8da76%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor's%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor%27s%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62560f52027b2fd804442e19d559d05726f8da76%2F0_117_3504_2102%2F3504.jpg>
 Barack Obama found closing the Guantánamo Bay prison camp easier said than 
done. Photograph: Brennan Linsley/AP 
Obama found a host of obstacles to closing the prison, including addressing 
the fate of detainees and congressional resistance. “You can’t just say it’s 
closed and not worry about the subsequent issues that arise from closing it,” 
Mayer said. “It gets complicated in a hurry.” The result has been a slow 
reduction of detainees, from 242 to59 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/guantanamo-bay-prisoner-release-cape-verde>
.

Mayer said presidents faced decisions “that are constitutionally legal but 
politically difficult”, noting how in 2001 the Bush administrationbacked down  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2001/11/01/us/epa-to-adopt-clinton-arsenic-standard.html>
from its plan to block rules on arsenic in water. Almost 20 years earlier, 
Reagan’s EPA chiefresigned 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/22/us/anne-gorsuch-burford-62-reagan-epa-chief-dies.html>
 amid accusations that she had mishandled waste cleanup – and after she had cut 
the agency’s budget by a fifth.

Perry said social security, affirmative action and abortion had similarly 
become standards of American life. The supreme court has consistently ruled in 
favor of the latter two, she noted, and justices have cited generations of 
precedent. “Are we really going to be able to turn back this cultural 
phenomenon?”

The healthcare reforms enacted by Obama – and modelled on Republican ideas 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/article/2011/may/18/romneycare-and-obamacare-can-you-tell-difference/>
 – also fall into politically fraught territory, with 20 million people poised 
to lose health insurance. Even Mike Pence, the vice-president elect,embraced 
parts 
<http://www.usnews.com/news/politics/articles/2016-10-04/ap-fact-check-pence-condemns-embraces-obamacare>
 of the law. “They can imagine the blowback,” Mayer said. “They may find it’s 
not politically in their interest.”

For similar reasons, Richard Nixon was unable 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/08/05/the-real-legacy-of-richard-nixon.html>
 to dismantle Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society, and Bushfailed to change 
<https://www.brookings.edu/research/why-the-2005-social-security-initiative-failed-and-what-it-means-for-the-future/>
 social security. Republican Dwight Eisenhower not only left the Democrats’ New 
Deal intact, he expanded social security, raised the minimum wage and began new 
public works.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5048623a8f60dd0adbd1dfe29935a652e115c90c%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor's%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor%27s%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5048623a8f60dd0adbd1dfe29935a652e115c90c%2F0_123_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Republican Dwight Eisenhower, right, maintained and built on much of his 
Democratic predecessor’s approach. Photograph: William J Smith/AP 
Presidents chipped away at their rivals, but usually over decades. Reagan 
eroded the Great Society, Clinton ceded ground to Republicans on welfare and 
justiceshollowed out  
<http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/26/us/supreme-court-ruling.html>the Voting 
Rights Act. Conversely, Nixon supported environmental safeguards and justices 
ruled in favor of healthcare and affirmative action.

Even with Congress behind him, Trump cannot simply undo all regulations. The 
EPA’s findings on greenhouse gases, for instance, went through a long 
regulatory process – internal action, notices, proposed rules, public comment, 
etc; to change final regulations, the agencywould have to return 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/25/science/donald-trump-obama-climate.html> 
through the steps. Trump could, however, suspend guidelines and tentative 
regulations.


Republicans do not have a filibuster-proof majority, meaning that Trump will 
also have to deal with stubborn lawmakers and civil servants. His 
administrators could intimidate, reshuffle and put pressure on them, but laws
protect 
<http://www.fedsmith.com/2014/05/29/know-your-rights-as-a-federal-employee-to-avoid-unfair-treatment/>
 federal employees. “Every president winds up feeling like the executive branch 
employees and cabinet secretaries are not as effective as they’d like,” Mayer 
said.

Trump will have more leeway on foreign policy, as Obama did when he steered 
the US away from Bush’s unilateral actions abroad. “We are looking at the 
potential for really radical changes,” said Paul Musgrave, a political 
scientist at the University of Massachusetts in Amherst.

“In that case, it’s not necessarily what America does as what it does not do,” 
he said. “Even ‘run of the mill’ crises – an eruption between Palestinians and 
Israelis, a global pandemic such as Ebola, or more aggression from China and 
the Philippines and Taiwan – create real dangers of misunderstandings, 
miscommunications and even of intentional escalations.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa32165dfe5a77816683e0e697586127a6b1470e6%2F0_18_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor's%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Presidents%20undoing%20their%20predecessor%27s%20legacy%3A%20an%20American%20tradition&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Ftrump-obama-president-legacy-history%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa32165dfe5a77816683e0e697586127a6b1470e6%2F0_18_4200_2520%2F4200.jpg>
 Donald Trump’s unpredictability may mark a big change from the Obama era. 
Photograph: Kevin Lamarque/Reuters 
Presidents have found it difficult to abandon pragmatism for ideology, 
especially abroad. Eisenhower took up Harry Truman’s philosophy of communist 
containment; Clinton embraced Reagan’s love of free trade; Obama preserved 
Bush’s expanding security state. But Musgrave said that even deals with many 
partners – for instance Nato or the Iran and Paris agreements – would be 
threatened by Trump’s refusal to act in good faith. “Short-term 
unpredictability promotes long-term unpredictability.

“For decades, the assumption has been that the United States is the global 
leader of last resort,” he said. “A lot of the truisms and rules that we have 
come to appreciate over the last 70 years are going to be modified.”

Perry said that some of this uncertainty was by design. “The founders created 
all these entry points,” she said, ways for constituents to impose their 
competing views on government. “It can be frustrating. The founders did not put 
a premium on rapidity.”

She also warned never to underestimate “the fickleness of the American 
electorate”.

“If he is doesn’t satisfy the so-called angry people who voted for him, who he 
ginned up in anger, what’s to prevent them from being angry at him?”


 