
In September, Hillary Clinton came under fire for suggesting that half of 
Donald Trump’s supporters belonged in “a basket of deplorables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/10/hillary-clinton-trump-supporters--bigoted-deplorables>
” consisting of “the racist, sexist, homophobic, xenophobic, Islamaphobic – you 
name it.”


Labeling people in such a disparaging manner is not a constructive approach. 
However, research has shown it’s true that Donald Trump brings out the worst 
characteristics in Americans.Only about half of Trump supporters think global 
warming is real 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/trump-voters-climate-change-poll_us_572a3072e4b0bc9cb0455ee4>
, andtwice as many Republicans are unsure about the evidence 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-may-be-making-republicans-increasingly-doubt-global-warming-f9f5d4461541#.6zop95krr>
 as they were a year ago.Hostility towards women 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-may-be-making-republicans-increasingly-doubt-global-warming-f9f5d4461541#.6zop95krr>
 andracial resentment 
<http://www.vox.com/2016/6/2/11833548/donald-trump-support-race-religion-economy>
 correlate with Trump support almost as strongly as party affiliation.Xenophobia
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/07/donald-trump-ban-all-muslims-entering-us-san-bernardino-shooting>
,misogyny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-sexual-comments-women-leaked-recording>
, anddenial of science and facts 
<http://www.politifact.com/personalities/donald-trump/> are the defining 
characteristics of Donald Trump’s candidacy.

How did we get here?


Journalists have struggled 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/catch-and-kill-at-national-enquirer-gives-media-one-last-black-eye-before-election/2016/11/05/2534d43e-a36c-11e6-8832-23a007c77bb4_story.html?wpisrc=nl_heads-draw6&wpmm=1>
 to treat Donald Trump as something other than a standard presidential 
candidate. Because he constantly spawns new scandals and is lacking in the 
policy department,to normalize Trump and abnormalize Clinton 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/09/the-abnormalization-of-hillary-clinton.html>
, network evening news programs have devoted three times more coverage to 
Hillary Clinton’s emails than all policies combined 
<https://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/10/26/study-confirms-network-evening-newscasts-have-abandoned-policy-coverage-2016-campaign/214120>
, as accurately satirized by Saturday Night Live:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxH6bKNPBIA&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxH6bKNPBIA>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DhxH6bKNPBIA&media=>
 Saturday Night Live opening sketch, 05 November 2016. 
The nightly news programs have devoted zero time to discussing the candidates’ 
climate plans.Media false balance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/feb/27/bbc-false-balance-fox-news-global-warming>
 has struck again.

It’s important to realize that Donald Trump does have a few policy positions 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies>. For example, he wants to burn coal 
indefinitely 
<http://www.courier-journal.com/story/tech/science/watchdog-earth/2016/10/10/trump-looks-burn-coal-1000-years/91850954/>
 becausehe denies the climate change consequences 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en>. Trump 
also wants toeliminate government spending on clean energy and climate research 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-zero-out-federal-clean-energy-56cca794790#.rdszdpyie>
,cut taxes predominantly for the most wealthy 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/09/19/donald-trumps-tax-plan-now-favors-the-ultra-rich-even-more/>
, build acostly and pointless border wall 
<https://www.technologyreview.com/s/602494/bad-math-props-up-trumps-border-wall/>
, engage inexpensive mass deportations 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2015/08/donald-trumps-immigration-tab-166-billion-121500>
, andderegulate the financial industry 
<http://fortune.com/2016/05/18/trump-dodd-frank-wall-street/>. Hillary Clinton’s
extensive policy plans <https://www.hillaryclinton.com/issues/> are effectively 
the opposite 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/3/13318750/hillary-clinton-vision-government>
 of Trump’s.


Many are puzzled that a candidate with such generally unpopular policy plans 
and who has beenendorsed by the KKK 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/11/01/the-kkks-official-newspaper-has-endorsed-donald-trump-for-president/>
 could be supported by over 40% of Americans and have a chance at winning the 
presidency of the United States. Unfortunatelywe seem to have entered a 
post-truth era <http://www.shapingtomorrowsworld.org/lewandowskyTrumpUK.html> 
in which facts simply don’t matter.


The two American political parties have become so different that swing voters 
have virtually gone extinct 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/11/4/13496688/swing-voters-dying-cartoon>
 and most conservatives would vote forMister Ed 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mister_Ed>, were he the Republican Party 
nominee. Political ideology trumps facts, truth, and reality. And Trump’s 
support comes heavily from a single demographic: white men, mostly older and 
without a college degree.


Trump wants to regress to the white male-dominated 1950s


The Trump campaign slogan “Make America Great Again” suggests that he wants to 
return the country to some bygone era. Based on the candidate’s words and his 
supporters’ feelings about science, women, and minorities, that era resembles 
the 1950s.

In the 1950s, only about one-third of women participated in the American work 
force <http://www.bls.gov/opub/ted/2000/feb/wk3/art03.htm>, and 
African-Americans were still fighting for equality inthe Civil Rights Movement 
<http://www.history.com/topics/black-history/civil-rights-movement>. The 
tobacco industry created the playbook followed by the fossil fuel industry 
today: spread misinformation 
<http://tobaccocontrol.bmj.com/content/21/2/87.full> and sow doubt 
<http://www.merchantsofdoubt.org/> to keep the public consuming its deadly 
products. Nearly half of Americans smoked cigarettes 
<http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0762370.html> in the 1950s (as compared to 
under 17% today 
<http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistics/tables/trends/cig_smoking/>). The 
tobacco industryalready knew that smoking caused cancer 
<http://www.who.int/tobacco/media/en/TobaccoExplained.pdf>, but used the denial 
playbook to keep Americans puffing.


These characteristics fit the era that Trump and his supporters appear to 
yearn for – an era in which white men dominated American society. Older, white 
male Americans who comprise the core of Donald Trump’s base are alsothe 
predominant climate science-denying group in the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/04/the-similarities-between-trump-support-and-climate-denial>
. Social scientists theorize this is due to the group’s historical societal 
advantages. They have benefited from the societal status quo, and hence are 
least concerned with risks, especially when addressing those risks would mean 
changing the status quo from which they benefited.

Like it or not, the status quo is changing

White, male Americans are in the process of losing those historical societal 
advantages. As minority populations grow, they’re losing their grip on the 
American majority. The first racial minority president was elected and 
re-elected. Women areapproaching even footing with men in the labor force 
<https://www.dol.gov/wb/factsheets/qf-laborforce-10.htm>. Even social norms are 
changing, for example withgay marriage becoming legal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jun/26/gay-marriage-legal-supreme-court>
.

And of course the Earth’s climate itself is changing rapidly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
 due to human-caused global warming, which iscausing all sorts of negative 
consequences 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/24/the-atmosphere-is-being-radicalized-by-climate-change>
. Climate scientists arepleading with American voters not to make a choice our 
children will regret 
<http://www.realclimate.org/index.php/archives/2016/11/dont-make-a-choice-that-your-children-will-regret/>
:

You have a fateful choice to make. The policies of candidates and parties on 
climate change could hardly be more different. Hillary Clinton would continue 
to work with the international community to tackle the global warming crisis 
and help the transition to modern clean and renewable energies. Donald Trump
denies that the problem even exists 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/michael-e-mann/yes-donald-trump-is-a-thr_b_12299874.html>
 and has promised to go back to coal and to undo the Paris Agreement

Donald Trump would be the only world leader to deny human-caused global warming
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/oct/05/the-republican-party-stands-alone-in-climate-denial>
 and the tremendous risks it poses.His threats to undo the progress 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/may/27/donald-trump-i-would-end-paris-climate-deal-video>
 made to tackle climate change have elicited widespread condemnation from the 
international community, most recently from the Chinese government. When asked 
how his country would work with a Trump administration on climate change,
China’s climate negotiator Xie Zhenhua said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/01/china-criticises-donald-trumps-plan-to-exit-paris-climate-deal>
:

If they resist this trend, I don’t think they’ll win the support of their 
people, and their country’s economic and social progress will also be affected. 
I believe a wise political leader should take policy stances that conform with 
global trends


Americans: don’t vote to reverse half a century of progress

Donald Trump’s goal is to make America Mad Men 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mad_Men> again by reversing the progress we’ve 
made over the past half century and returning the country to a 1950s era-style 
society dominated by white men.

While progress toward racial and gender equality could hypothetically be 
reversed in a Trump presidency, climate change can’t be. Only by continuing the 
progress we’ve made toward cutting carbon pollution can we slow global warming. 
Problems are not solved by denying their existence.

America has many great characteristics; many argue the country is already great
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/obama-hillary-clinton-convention-speech-trump>
. But like every country, there are also dark periods in its past; for example, 
in the treatment of minorities and women as second-class citizens. Donald Trump 
aims to return America to those deplorable periods, and to put the world on a 
path toward a catastrophic future by undoing the progress we’ve made in 
tackling climate change.

The world is counting on Americans not to make a catastrophically wrong choice 
in tomorrow’s election.

 