
I hate to be an alarmist, but Donald Trump could be on course to be elected 
president of the United States – and the decisive moment may well come on 
Monday night. That’s when he facesHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> in what is expected to be 
one of the most watched events in television history. The TV debates are 
perhaps the last chance for her to persuade the American people that this man 
is unqualified for, and unworthy of, the presidency and poses a genuine threat 
to the republic.

If that sounds like panic, then I’m not the only one. Sweaty-palmed nausea has 
become a leading symptom among those who tremble at the prospect of a Trump 
presidency. The latest Slate Political Gabfest podcast is calledThe Time to 
Panic Edition 
<https://player.fm/series/slates-political-gabfest/the-time-to-panic-edition>. 
Number cruncher Nate Silver, who gives Trump a40% probability 
<http://projects.fivethirtyeight.com/2016-election-forecast/?ex_cid=rrpromo> of 
winning, triggered another round of liberal angst this week when he tweeted 
that he had “Never seen otherwise smart people in so much denial about 
something as they are about Trump’s chances. Same mistake as primaries, Brexit.”

Never seen otherwise smart people in so much denial as they are about Trump’s 
chances. Same mistake as Brexit
Nate Silver 
The source of the alarm is not so much the national polls, where Clinton is a 
few points ahead, but surveys from those battleground states where the 
presidency will be decided. In the last week, polls have put Trump in front in 
Ohio, Nevada, North Carolina and, most neuralgic of all, Florida.

So low are expectations for his performance on Monday – where it is assumed 
that his opponent, a seasoned debater, will wipe the floor with him – that if 
Trump manages to speak in vaguely coherent sentences and not deliver a 
misogynist insult to Clinton’s face, his advocates will declare that he looked 
“presidential” and anoint him the winner. If he can somehow persuade wavering 
voters that he is not so ridiculous as to merit automatic disqualification, he 
will have cleared a crucial hurdle.

And for all her experience, Clinton heads towards this first, and therefore 
most important, debate facing some serious obstacles. She’s been advised that 
she mustn’t interrupt too much or talk over Trump: apparently voters react 
badly to seeing a woman act that way. According to aNew York Times report 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/24/us/politics/presidential-debate-hillary-clinton-donald-trump.html?ref=politics>
 well sourced from inside Hillary’s debate preparation team, “she does not want 
to be seen as pushy and play into gender stereotypes”. This was not something 
Barack Obama, or husband Bill, ever had to worry about.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ceb57398dec78af3717d7235a4042894c21f5bd%2F0_730_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=President%20Trump%3F%20There%E2%80%99s%20only%20one%20way%20to%20stop%20it%20happening%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=President%20Trump%3F%20There%E2%80%99s%20only%20one%20way%20to%20stop%20it%20happening%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3ceb57398dec78af3717d7235a4042894c21f5bd%2F0_730_4500_2699%2F4500.jpg>
 Activists in Berlin dismantle what they called a Wall of Hate showing Donald 
Trump in front of the Brandenburg Gate on 23 September. Photograph: Sean 
Gallup/Getty Images 
But Trump himself presents her with an unprecedented conundrum. How does she 
take on a candidate who lies and lies and lies? One reporter following Trump 
has taken to loggingthe falsehoods 
<https://twitter.com/ddale8/status/778227308255641600> he tells each day: no 
small task.

Take two areas where you’d assume that to be caught in untruth would be 
terminal for a presidential candidate. Trump has been exposed forserial lying 
over 9/11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/11/donald-trump-9-11-comments-since-2001?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, falsely claiming to have lost hundreds of friends that day; to have seen 
thousands of Muslims cheering the fall of the twin towers; and to have helped 
in the rescue effort. He even milked cash from a 9/11 relief fund.

This week he was found to have raided $258,000 from the charitable foundation 
that bears his name to settle assorted legal problems. Earlier he dipped into 
that same charity box, filled by others’ donations, to pay for a larger than 
life$10,000 painting 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/09/21/how-a-univision-anchor-found-the-missing-10000-portrait-that-trump-bought-with-his-charitys-money/>
 – of himself. He lies about 9/11. He lies about charity. But on he strides.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff25d5234cdc0433593ffbc7acf34365387d35c99%2F0_302_5356_3214%2F5356.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=President%20Trump%3F%20There%E2%80%99s%20only%20one%20way%20to%20stop%20it%20happening%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=President%20Trump%3F%20There%E2%80%99s%20only%20one%20way%20to%20stop%20it%20happening%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F23%2Fpresident-trump-only-one-way-stop-it-happening-hillary-clinton%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff25d5234cdc0433593ffbc7acf34365387d35c99%2F0_302_5356_3214%2F5356.jpg>
 “But Trump himself presents her with an unprecedented conundrum. How does she 
take on a candidate who lies and lies and lies?’ Photograph: Evan Vucci/AP 
So where can Hillary begin? If she calls him a liar, he’ll hit back over her 
use of a private email server, calling her Crooked Hillary, knowing that some 
60% of Americans believe she’s dishonest. The risk is that he’ll use her 
experience and expertise against her, casting her as the boring know-it-all 
against the freewheeling, entertaining guy who relies on good old gut instinct.

If that sounds familiar, that’s because it’s a show we’ve already seen. In 
2000 Al Gore was clearly the more accomplished, ready-for-office candidate. But 
he came across as impatient and pompous against the looser, backslapping George 
W Bush. Never mind that one was a visionary on the issue of climate change 
while the other would lead the US into the catastrophic invasion of Iraq. On 
the night, Bush came across better on TV.

Which brings us to a core problem facing Hillary Clinton. Polls show there are 
millions of voters, especially young ones, who agree in big numbers that Trump 
is a racist and a sexist, unqualified for America’s highest office – but who 
are refusing to back Clinton. One survey of 18- to 34-year-oldsrecorded dire 
numbers 
<https://www.qu.edu/news-and-events/quinnipiac-university-poll/national/release-detail?ReleaseID=2378>
 for Trump, but still found only 31% supporting Clinton, with 29% preferring 
libertarian Gary Johnson and 15% the Green candidate Jill Stein. If those 
numbers are replicated on election day, Trump will win.

This too stirs queasy memories of 2000. In that year, a small but significant 
bloc on the left voted for Ralph Nader instead of Gore. More than 90,000 voted 
for Nader in Florida, a state Gore was eventually deemed to have lost by just 
537 votes. Had even a tiny fraction of those Naderites decided to hold their 
nose and choose Gore instead, there would have been no Bush presidency – and no 
Iraq war.

The Guardian view on the US presidential debate: Hillary needs a slogan to sum 
up what she stands for | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/the-guardian-view-on-the-us-presidential-debate-hillary-needs-a-slogan-to-sum-up-what-she-stands-for>
I know this is a sore, and contested, point among those who chose Nader, who 
to this day blame Gore for not doing enough to appeal to the left (forgetting 
perhaps that he also had to appeal to centrist voters in order to win the 
election). But the basic case is surely clear. In a two-party system like 
America’s, if you want to stop Trump, then a vote for Johnson or Stein will not 
do it. Only a vote for Clinton can prevent a white nationalist bigot becoming 
the next US president.

You might think this is all so obvious that it barely needs stating. But 2000 
can seem like ancient history to those who don’t remember it. And here, younger 
voters are not to blame. Older liberals haven’t seared the Bush calamity into 
the minds of the next generation. They never turned 2000 into a cautionary tale 
of the cost of third-party indulgence. As theNew Republic 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/136976/liberals-failed-teach-millennials-horror-george-w-bush>
 put it this week, “Liberals have failed to teach millennials about the horror 
of George W Bush.” (Republicans, meanwhile, bang on about the supposedly dismal 
presidency of Jimmy Carter to this day, just as British Conservatives invoked 
the 1979 “winter of discontent” for over three decades. It is the centre-left 
that is oddly reticent about exploiting its opponents’ history of failure.)

So now, even though the hour is late, this is the case Democrats must make. 
That this is an exceptional election becauseDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> represents an exceptional 
menace, to America and to the world. It is indeed a referendum on Trump and the 
only way to vote no in that referendum is to vote Clinton. She may not be the 
candidate of your dreams, but she’s all that stands between you and an American 
nightmare.

You don’t have to love her. You don’t even have to like her. You’re not saying 
she’s flawless (though the current Democratic platform is its most progressive 
in 30 years, thanks in part to the challenge of Bernie Sanders). As Joe Biden 
puts it, “Don’t compare her to the Almighty. Compare her to the alternative.” 
And the alternative is President Trump.

 * This article was amended on 24 September 2016 to clarify the details of the 
Slate podcast.
 