
I’ve got a complicated yardstick for onscreen rapes, a jargon-mired formula: 
“Was that presentation of rape as emotionally vacuous, intellectually decrepit, 
ethically deranged and one-sided – to the point that the victim’s humanity is 
erased – as the worst cinematic rape ever?” Which applies, of course, to the 
one in Sam Peckinpah’s Straw Dogs.

In Poldark last night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/23/poldark-recap-series-two-episode-eight-shame-on-you-ross>
, Ross raped Elizabeth. It wasn’t violent and it wasn’t graphic, but those 
traits can’t be judged in isolation. The lingering nastiness of Straw Dogs is 
that the nudity is designed to titillate and the savagery meshes with it to 
make the whole thing look like tremendous fun. Punching a woman in the face, 
dragging her by her hair, treating her like a carcass might look a bit dicey at 
the start, but it ends in a transport of luscious ecstasy, and really, isn’t 
that a wheeze? When you can’t quite make out whether she’s dead by 
strangulation, or is merely spent by the emotional excesses of getting anally 
raped and discovering to her surprise that it’s not so much a violation as an 
acquired taste, isn’t that what being human is all about? It is not repellent 
for its sadism, but for the fact that it seeks to make sadists of us all, 
asking us to watch the suffering of a woman and enjoy it.

BBC accused of airing 'rape fantasy' scene in hit drama Poldark
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/23/bbc-accused-of-airing-fantasy-scene-in-hit-drama-poldark>
Contrast that to Guillaume Tell at the Royal Opera House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2015/jun/30/william-tell-gang-rape-scene-royal-opera-house>
 last year, which caused booing, hissing, walk-outs, behaviour utterly outside 
the repertoire of opera-goers, for a rape scene in which a woman is stripped 
naked and gang-raped by soldiers. The scene – even the censored version I saw, 
in which she is covered with a sheet – is unimaginably horrible, humiliating, 
nauseating, like the worst account you’ve read of slavery or war.

That’s exactly as it should be: unless you object to the representation of 
sexual violence per se (a position that would take some defending), then to 
represent it as it is is right. Straw Dogs, and so many other scenes like it, 
are culturally noxious in the first instance because when, with lighting and 
artistry, you turn rape into a beautiful act, you refuse to engage 
imaginatively with one of the people involved. The woman’s perspective is 
entirely subjugated, her feelings only relevant in so far as they are perceived 
by and serve the man’s.

In sum, just because, in Poldark 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/poldark>, the rape of Elizabeth has 
been prettified doesn’t make it OK: it makes it better than it could have been, 
had it created violence to luxuriate in. But it makes it worse than it could 
have been, too, that it chose considerations of squeamishness and a censor’s 
version of good taste over the demand of engaging, at a granular level, with 
what forced sex would actually look like. In the interests of sparing our 
blushes, this scene was an amalgam of classic moves: a hard kiss, a breathless 
“no”, he clasping her face in that fantasy space between force and affection, 
her push away turning seamlessly into its opposite, a segue into bed where 
miraculously everything was now cool.

It reminded me of that bit in Friends where Rachel and Monica teach Chandler 
how to have sex with a diagram and some numbers: you could write this as a 
pre-watershed rape formula, a two, a three, a seven, a five, five, five, ending 
in that period drama staple, the unreadable expression. It may not sound like 
the first priority for feminism, to make sure the rape scenes on the BBC are 
fresh, but it is in originality that we see the profound attempt to empathise, 
without which violence is conjured in bad faith.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpoldark-rape-scene-prettifying-it-doesnt-make-it-ok-elizabeth-said-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff32d42dc660dc732bb35ac5458526c1b5444ab5d%2F0_0_4236_2541%2F4236.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prettifying%20the%20Poldark%20rape%20doesn't%20make%20it%20OK.%20Elizabeth%20said%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpoldark-rape-scene-prettifying-it-doesnt-make-it-ok-elizabeth-said-no%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prettifying%20the%20Poldark%20rape%20doesn%27t%20make%20it%20OK.%20Elizabeth%20said%20no&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F24%2Fpoldark-rape-scene-prettifying-it-doesnt-make-it-ok-elizabeth-said-no%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff32d42dc660dc732bb35ac5458526c1b5444ab5d%2F0_0_4236_2541%2F4236.jpg>
 I could live the rest of my life without seeing one more scene in which a ‘no’ 
becomes an unspoken ‘yes’. The fact it, there is no ambiguity Photograph: 
BBC/Adrian Rogers 
 The insult at the root needs none of this detailing: I could live the rest of 
my life without seeing one more scene in which sex is ambiguous, in which a 
“no” becomes a silence, becomes an unspoken “yes”, becomes a spoken one. The 
fact is, there is no ambiguity in this progression: to get to stage two, the 
no-longer audible “no”, the rapist has had to go through stage one, ignoring 
the “no”. The only way this could be construed as a grey area is if a woman’s 
“no” needs extra emphasis before it has weight, needs violent struggle, extra 
decibels, needs to be said a score of times.


It is the western cultural version of Sharia law, not that a woman needs four 
witnesses to be believed, but that she has to say everything four times louder, 
40 times over. Having to explain to the BBC the difference between nuance and 
an old-fashioned criminal act, like having to explain to Ken Clarke that 
“classic rape” isn’t a thing, is becoming simply wearying.
 