
The tide was starting to ebb as I raised two of the windows in the RSPB hide 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/>. This meant I could not only see the mass of birds on 
the saltmarsh but also enjoy the music of their various calls. They seemed to 
be trying to decide just when to leave for the mudflats and the food that would 
be exposed for them by the departing tide.

Curlews walked around 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/may/19/curlew-shilling-ewden-south-yorkshire>
 looking superior on their long legs, drakewigeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/01/wonder-wigeon> whistled in 
their inimitable fashion, and the black and white plumage of the severalshelduck
 
<http://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/s/shelduck/index.aspx>
 stood out in contrast to the brown and grey camouflage of the waders.


Scanning with binoculars, I noticed something odd about a solitary post, about 
1.5 metres high, on the far side of the bay. My telescope revealed the answer. 
It was aperegrine falcon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/16/birdwatch-peregrine-falcon>
 –Falco peregrinus – sitting upright on top of the post, as if it were an 
extension of it. Indeed, the bird of prey blended in so well that the teal and
dunlin 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/d/dunlin/>
 feeding not far away just ignored it.

Life and death on a Highland road
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/03/life-death-highland-road-highlands-country-diary>
By its size I reckoned it was a tiercel, which is smaller than the female 
falcon and therefore relies on smaller prey. I looked back over to the birds on 
the saltmarsh, then suddenly everything went silent. The peregrine was on the 
move. Rapid wings took it high and it wheeled, looking for any movement below.

Then the calling started again, as a cluster of redshank 
<https://www.rspb.org.uk/birds-and-wildlife/bird-and-wildlife-guides/bird-a-z/r/redshank/index.aspx>
 flew up and round the edge of the saltmarsh. The peregrine turned and dived, 
but the flock stayed together, and the predator turned back upwards, wings 
beating fast. Then one of the little red-legged waders took off on its own and 
instantaneously the peregrine stooped.

The redshank was hit in mid-air, and feathers flew as it fell to the mud 
below. Then the tiercel picked up the dead wader and brought it to the post for 
plucking.

Within minutes the mass of birds were back to normal and starting to fly over 
to the rich feed of the freshly exposed mud.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 