
The price of a basket of 20 Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/unilever> products, including Hellman’s 
mayonnaise, Carte D’Or ice cream and Comfort fabric conditioner has risen by an 
average of 5.7% across the UK’s major supermarkets since the Brexit vote, as 
the pound’s post-referendum struggles feed through to shop shelves.


Analysis by the Guardian and price comparison site MySupermarket.com of 20 
everyday items made by the Anglo-Dutch supplier indicates volatility in prices 
since the poll.

Despite the furore over the company’s Marmite, which has become the unlikely 
symbol of the battle between retailers and Unilever over price rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics-blog/2016/oct/13/marmite-unilever-falling-pound-britain-exports-manufacturing-services>
, Bertolli spread saw the most inflation of the 20 products monitored by 
MySupermarket – up 31.5% on average across the UK’s four largest supermarket 
chains.

Birds Eye and Walkers ask supermarkets for up to 12% price rises
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/birds-eye-walkers-supermarkets-price-rise-brexit-vote-pound>
The rising cost of Bertolli and VO5 styling mousse, which was up nearly 15%, 
along with price rises on 14 other items, offset cuts on a handful of items 
including chicken and mushroom Pot Noodle.

Marmite was included in the basket of 20 goods but its price slipped slightly 
overall, by 0.78% on average across the four chains, as a price cut at Asda 
offset a price increase atMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons>. 


The evidence of shop floor price rises for Unilever products comes after it 
emerged that Birds Eye, the fish finger maker, and Walkers crispsare asking 
supermarkets for price rises of up to 12% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/06/birds-eye-walkers-supermarkets-price-rise-brexit-vote-pound>
 as the fall in the value of the pound has pushed up their costs.

The major supermarkets are keen to keep price rises to a minimum as they try 
to hold off competition from the fast-growing discount chains Aldi and Lidl. 
But retailers and suppliers are finding it difficult to absorb price increases 
caused by the14.5% drop in the value of the pound against the euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/03/uk-stocks-rally-as-brexit-fears-fade>
 and 18% against the dollar since the UK voted to leave the European Union.

Analysis by the Guardian indicates that prices on Unilever products have risen 
the most at Morrisons since the Brexit vote, where they rose nearly 9%, closely 
followed by Sainsbury’s, where they were up 8.6%.

Nestlé hints at price rise to offset weak pound
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/20/nestle-hints-at-price-rise-to-offset-weak-pound>
On the basket of 20 Unilever goods, Sainsbury’s is the most expensive 
supermarket, at £40.26 in total, after an average 8.6% rise in the price of the 
measured Unilever goods in the past month alone, the biggest month-on-month 
jump of the big four. Asda is the cheapest on £37.90, followed byTesco 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> on £39.58 and Morrisons on £39.31.

Supermarkets <https://www.theguardian.com/business/supermarkets> said that the 
picture painted by the MySupermarket data was skewed because it does not 
include multibuy deals. The range of 20 products is also just a fraction of the 
dozens of items supplied by Unilever and of the more than 25,000 products 
stocked in a typical supermarket outlet.

A spokesman for Morrisons said: “The figures from MySupermarket almost 
certainly include items where promotional prices have reverted to the everyday 
price and this isn’t a price increase.” It said there had been an almost equal 
number of price cuts to price decreases across all the Unilever products 
Morrisons stocks.

A Sainsbury’s spokesperson said: “We remain focused on providing customers 
with quality and value, offering great prices on the products that matter most 
to them, like Marmite (250g) – £2.50 since July 2014. We sell hundreds of 
Unilever brands and this limited assortment of items, a tiny proportion of the 
total Unilever products we sell, provides neither a fair or accurate 
representation of the value customers find when they shop with us.”

Bank of England warns households to expect sharp rise in inflation next year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
The biggest increase in the price of Bertolli spread, for example, was at Asda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/asda> – 63% – although its price was 
still the cheapest of the big four chains, according to MySupermarket.

The other major price rises were nearly all on health and beauty products. 
True Love Impulse Body Spray, Simple Kind to Skin Hydrating Light Moisturiser 
and VO5 Styling Mousse Extra Body marked double-digit price rises on average 
across the four chains. Solero Exotic ice cream also rose by more than 10% – 
although this was largely down to major price rises at Morrisons and Tesco.

Price changes of Unilever products at major supermarkets since 23 June 

Bertolli Original Spread (500g) +31.5%

Bovril (250g) +0.6%

Carte D’Or Vanilla Ice Cream (900ml) +7.8%

Colman’s Original English Mustard (100g) 0%

Comfort Concentrate Pure Fabric Conditioner (1.5L) + 9.9%

Domestos Extended Germ-Kill Original Blue Power Bleach (750ml) +2.6%

Elmlea Double Cream Substitute (284ml) +3.2%

Flora Light Spread (500g) -2.4%

Hellman’s Real Mayonnaise (400g) +7.3%

Impulse Body Spray – True Love (75ml) +10.4% 

Magnum Classic Ice Creams (4x110ml) +7.2%

Marmite Yeast Extract (250g) -0.8%

Pot Noodle Chicken and Mushroom Flavour (90g) -13.1%

Radox for Men Feel Awake 2-in-1 Shower & Shampoo +1.3% 

Simple Kind to Skin Hydrating Light Moisturiser (125ml) +12.3% 

Solero Exotic Ice Cream (3x90ml) +12.5% 

Stork Original Spread (500g) +7.2%

Sure Women Ultra Dry Anti-Perspirant Deodorant Cotton (250ml) +2.4%

TRESemme Moisture Rich Shampoo (900ml) +8.7% 

VO5 Styling Mousse Extra Body (200ml) +14.8% 

Total +5.7%
 