
The cost of a can of cola, lemonade or Red Bull is likely to rise by about 8p, 
while a two-litre bottle of any high-sugar soft drink will go up by 48p once 
the government’s sugar levy comes into force.

How many bathtubs do we drink each year?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/shortcuts/2016/nov/22/how-many-bathtubs-do-we-drink-each-year>
Details of the levy have just been published, although the exact amount of the 
increases will not be announced until next year. But using figures from the 
Office of Budget Responsibility, experts believe the two tax bands will add 18p 
to the cost of a litre of soft drink containing 5g of sugar per 100ml, and 24p 
to one that has more than 8g of sugar per 100ml.

That would increase the cost of a 330ml can of Coca-Cola 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/cocacola> from about 68p to 76p, although 
it is much cheaper if bought from a supermarket in bulk. A one-litre bottle 
would increase from about £1.25 to £1.49. The diet versions would begin to look 
more attractive if they remain at the lower price.

In the face of strong lobbying from the soft drinks industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/oct/21/soft-drinks-industry-lobbies-government-dilute-scrap-sugar-tax>
,HMRC published the proposals 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/soft-drinks-industry-levy/soft-drinks-industry-levy>
 announced by George Osborne in his final budget in March. They were welcomed 
by health campaigners, who said the move could make inroads into the UK’s 
obesity problem. “After years of campaigning, we are very pleased to see the 
government moving forward with this draft legislation,” said Dr Max Davie, 
assistant officer for health promotion for the Royal College of Paediatrics and 
Child Health.

“The sugary drinks that will be affected by this tax have no nutritional 
benefit and often contain levels of sugar that are above a child’s daily 
recommended limit. These drinks are amajor contributor to the high sugar intakes
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/15/half-of-fizzy-drinks-have-more-sugar-in-one-can-than-adult-daily-limit>
 of children, particularly teenagers, and we are in no doubt that they are, in 
part, contributing to this country’s obesity crisis.”

More than two sugary drinks a day greatly increases diabetes risk, study shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/21/sugary-soft-drinks-increases-diabetes-risk-study-autoimmune>
The Obesity <https://www.theguardian.com/society/obesity> Alliance, a 
coalition of more than 30 health charities, said the measure was necessary. 
“Sugary soft drinks are currently the largest source of sugar for children, and 
this high sugar intake is driving the deadly obesity epidemic which costs our 
health service billions of pounds every year,” it said in a statement. 
“Tackling obesity today will save money tomorrow. We support the soft drinks 
industry levy to help protect our children’s future health, and make healthier 
choices easier for everyone.”

Others questioned whether the levy would raise prices high enough to change 
behaviour. “Because the increased in cost is so small [6p to 8p per 330 ml], it 
is highly unlikely to deter consumption among children and young adults,” said 
Tom Sanders, professor emeritus of nutrition and dietetics at King’s College 
London. “There is much greater variability in price for the same product 
depending on where it is purchased. For example, the price of a 330ml serving 
ranges from 30pwhen bought in bulk at Tesco 
<https://www.mysupermarket.co.uk/brands/Coca_Cola_in_Tesco.html> to about £1.50 
at a railway station. The price is even higher in restaurants; for example, a 
coke is listed as costing £2.65in Jamie’s Italian 
<https://www.jamieoliver.com/italian/menu/drinks/>.”

What would be interesting, Sanders said, was whether these restaurants and 
stalls would pass on the lower cost of sugar-free drinks to their customers, 
which might make them choose the less fattening option.

The levy is also intended as an incentive to companies to reformulate their 
drinks with a lower sugar content.Tesco announced in November  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/07/tesco-cuts-sugar-in-own-brand-drinks-to-avoid-sugar-tax>
that it was cutting the sugar content in all its own-brand soft drinks to less 
than 5g per 100ml, which means it will escape the levy.

Most of the soft drinks manufacturers are continuing to fight the levy. Gavin 
Partington, director general of the British Soft Drinks Association, said: 
“There is no evidence worldwide that taxes of this sort reduce obesity, and it 
is ironic that soft drinks are being singled out for tax when we’ve led the way 
in reducing sugar intake, down over 17% since 2012. We’re also the only 
category to have set a 20% calorie reduction target for 2020.”
 