
Typical of its prodigiously gifted composer, a multi-instrumentalist with a 
ferocious work ethic, the 1984 album Purple Rain, and accompanying 
semi-autobiographical hit movie of the same name, launchedPrince 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/prince>, who has died aged 57, on to the 
global stage. It put him on track to become one of the greatest superstars of 
that decade and beyond.

The chart-topping Purple Rain sold more than 20m copies, delivering two US No 
1 singles in When Doves Cry and Let’s Go Crazy, and winning Prince the 1985 
Oscar for best original song score. The anthemic title song 
<http://www.last.fm/music/Prince/_/Purple%2BRain> could make it only to No 2, 
but it became the calling card of a compelling and glamorous performer who 
continued to dazzle and bewitch audiences.

His career as a hit-maker had begun five years earlier, with the single I 
Wanna Be Your Lover 
<http://www.dailymotion.com/video/x15zj5c_prince-i-wanna-be-your-lover-official-video_music>
, and he followed up Purple Rain with further hugely successful releases 
including Parade, Sign o’ the Times, Lovesexy and Diamonds and Pearls. While 
his profile and commercial fortunes ebbed and flowed over the following 
decades, and he even changed his name temporarily to a mysterious symbol as 
part of an attempt to get out of his contract with Warner Bros, in recent years 
he had regained his grip on his career, and become acknowledged as one of the 
most inspirational artists of his era.

Prince: every album rated – and ranked
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/prince-every-album-rated-and-ranked>
His ability to synthesise an intoxicating mix of musical styles, from funk, 
soul, gospel and rock to jazz, hip-hop and psychedelia, made him unique in rock 
music history, helped by his mastery of studio and audio technology. In 
addition, he presented his music and his persona with dazzling visual flair, 
and was always an enthralling live performer even when his record sales were 
not at their peak. After playing hours-long headlining concerts, he would often 
perform late-night shows with his band at local clubs; these became almost more 
sought after than the “official” performances.

Prince Rogers Nelson was born in Minneapolis. His father, John Nelson, was 
leader of the Prince Rogers jazz trio, and met his wife-to-be, Mattie Shaw, 
when playing at community dances on Minneapolis’s North Side. Mattie joined the 
Prince Rogers trio as vocalist, but dropped out of the group after she married. 
The couple named their son after John’s stage name, though the boy was 
nicknamed “Skipper” when he was growing up. His parents’ musical leanings 
rubbed off on him, and at the age of seven he wrote his first song, Funk 
Machine, on his father’s piano. In 1960 his sister, Tyka, was born.

His parents separated when Prince was 10, and he would alternate between 
living with his father and with his mother – who studied for a master’s degree 
in social work – and her new husband, Hayward Baker. It was Baker who took the 
boy to see James Brown perform, an event that had a profound influence on his 
approach to writing and performing. Prince eventually found a more permanent 
home with neighbours, the Anderson family, and their son Andre (later known as 
André Cymone) became a close friend and a musical partner. While attending 
Minneapolis’s central high school, Prince and Andre joined a band called Grand 
Central, which also included Prince’s cousin Charles Smith on drums. They 
played mostly cover versions, arranged by Prince. The group became Champagne, 
and acquired a new drummer, Morris Day, who later became lead singer with the 
Time and had prominent roles in Prince’s movies Purple Rain andGraffiti Bridge 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xIvPmwse0Iw> (1990).

Prince broke all the rules about what black American men should be
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-broke-expectations-black-american-men-musical-genius-performances>
After making some recordings with Pepé Willie and his band 94 East – released 
in the 1980s as Minneapolis Genius: 94 East – in 1976 Prince made a demo tape 
of his own material with the engineer Chris Moon, which caught the ear of a 
Minneapolis businessman, Owen Husney. He signed Prince to a management 
contract, forming the company American Artists, and funded the recording of 
high-quality demos which attracted interest from several record labels. Prince 
accepted the deal with Warner Bros, which gave him a rare degree of artistic 
control as well as ownership of his publishing rights.

On his first album, For You (1978), the artist wrote and performed everything 
himself. The single Soft and Wet, an early indicator of Prince’s fondness for 
suggestive sexual wordplay, sold 350,000 copies and reached No 12 in the US R&B 
chart. The following January, Prince unveiled his new band at the Capri theatre 
in Minneapolis, a funk-rock ensemble featuring Cymone on bass alongside 
keyboard players Gayle Chapman and Matt Fink, guitarist Dez Dickerson and 
drummer Bobby Z.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7404583944393c73c1f4b886cc0635def6e7473b%2F0_722_2237_1341%2F2237.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7404583944393c73c1f4b886cc0635def6e7473b%2F0_722_2237_1341%2F2237.jpg>
 After Prince fell out with Warner Bros, he made his feelings towards the label 
explicit by writing SLAVE on his cheek whenever he appeared in public. 
Photograph: Brian Rasic/Getty Images 
By the time his second album, Prince, appeared in October 1979, he had 
switched toEarth Wind & Fire 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/05/maurice-white-obituary>’s 
management, Cavallo & Ruffalo. The album reached 22 in the Billboard 200, and 
would eventually sell a million copies as well as generating his first major 
hit withI Wanna Be Your Lover <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FwWBJ3U3THs>. 
The Dirty Mind album followed a year later, reaching the Top 50 in the US while 
provoking some criticism for the blatantly sexual nature of songs such as Head 
and Sister.

Aptly, his next release was the following year’s Controversy, which contained 
more sexually explicit songs, a chant of the Lord’s Prayer, and even an 
intervention in US foreign policy, with a plea to President Reagan called 
Ronnie, Talk To Russia. Prince’s ability to provoke an audience was illustrated 
when he supported the Rolling Stones in San Francisco, and was pelted with 
shoes and chicken’s innards.

Prince a musical legacy like no other
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/prince-musical-legacy-artists-influence-kanye-west-daft-punk-pharrell>
But the music was flowing out of him in an unstoppable torrent, and the 1982 
double album called 1999 gave him his first Top 10 entry as well as hit singles 
with the title track, Delirious, and, above all, Little Red Corvette. The 
last-named benefited from heavy rotation on MTV, one of the first tracks by a 
black artist to receive such intense exposure, so helping to change the 
station’s programming policies. It was also the first album credited to Prince 
and the Revolution, his band now including Mark Brown and Lisa Coleman in place 
of Cymone and Chapman. Prince undertook a six-month tour to promote 1999, where 
he was joined on the bill by his proteges the Time and a new all-female group, 
Vanity 6, the latter seemingly an embodiment of Prince’s sexual fantasies.

Filming of the Purple Rain movie began in late 1983, and took seven weeks on a 
budget of $7m. The Purple Rain campaign got off to a perfect start when the 
first single, When Doves Cry, topped the US charts (the Revolution now had a 
new guitarist, Wendy Melvoin, replacing Dickerson). The movie opened in July, 
the album arrived the following month, and in November Prince embarked on a 
100-date US tour. At one point in 1984, Prince had the No 1 album, film and 
single in the US. Meanwhile he achieved another milestone of sorts when some of 
his lyrics, including those from Purple Rain’s Darling Nikki and his hit 
written for Sheena Easton, Sugar Walls, hit opposition from the newly formed 
Parents’ Music Resource Centre, which campaigned for a warning sticker on 
records containing sexually explicit lyrics.

Prince: a shy, nonconformist, unknowable talent | Alexis Petridis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/21/prince-was-someone-you-just-couldnt-understand>
Intense press scrutiny didn’t seem to agree with Prince, who shunned 
interviews and in 1985 announced his retirement from live performing. This 
didn’t prevent Around the World in a Day from topping the Billboard chart that 
spring and delivering the hits Raspberry Beret andPop Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/21/prince-10-best-purple-rain-1999-when-doves-cry>
. A year later came Parade, along with the chart-topping single Kiss (and 
behind it at No 2 was the Bangles’ Manic Monday, another Prince composition). 
July brought Prince’s new film Under the Cherry Moon, for which Parade provided 
the soundtrack, though the film was a comparative failure. His performing ban 
apparently rescinded, Prince embarked on the Hit n Run – Parade Tour, which 
included three nights at Wembley Arena. This was the end of the line for the 
Revolution, which Prince disbanded at the end of the tour.

Music continued to pour out of him, and the epic double album Sign o’ the 
Times was released in March 1987. This produced a fresh batch of hit singles, 
including the title track, U Got the Look (featuring Easton) and I Could Never 
Take the Place of Your Man. Prince undertook an international touring campaign 
with a new band featuring the drummer Sheila E and dancer/choreographer Cat 
Glover, and a Sign o’ the Times concert film was released in November, though 
with limited commercial success.

Shelving what later appeared as The Black Album – whose mix of lewd funk 
workouts, free jazz and hip-hop Prince suddenly decided was “evil” – he instead 
released Lovesexy (1988), an exercise in spiritually inclined R&B notable 
mostly for its infectious hitAlphabet St 
<http://www.last.fm/music/Prince/_/Alphabet+St.>. The album fared well in 
Europe but poorly in the States, while the lavish Lovesexy world tour lost 
money. Prince’s financial affairs were in some disarray: “He wouldn’t budget, 
he wouldn’t run a business, he just did everything on a whim and a prayer,” 
said one business associate. However, Prince – having co-written and sung on 
Love Song, from Madonna’s 1989 album Like A Prayer – found himself back in 
commercial clover that year with his soundtrack for Tim Burton’s Batman movie, 
a multi-platinum US chart-topper which gave him another US No 1 with Batdance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Lmq6RDn5O8&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Lmq6RDn5O8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1Lmq6RDn5O8&media=>
 Cream (1991) was Prince’s fifth US No 1 hit single 
His profile boosted by Sinéad O’Connor’s version of his song Nothing Compares 
2 U, Prince embarked on another film and music project with Graffiti Bridge. 
The album went Top 10 but the film sank without trace, prompting another 
shake-up in Prince’s backing group. In 1991 he introduced the New Power 
Generation, who backed him on the Diamonds and Pearls album. This reached No 3 
and delivered four hit singles, including his fifth US No 1,Cream 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1Lmq6RDn5O8>.

In 1992 Prince announced a new $100m deal with Warner Bros, but the shine 
faded when he found that the contract deprived him of ownership of his master 
recordings. The Love Symbol Album (which reached No 5 in the US and No 1 in 
Britain) was a harbinger of things to come, since in 1993 Prince changed his 
name to what he called “that symbol on the album” (the so-called “love symbol”, 
combining male and female images). Prince wanted to set a faster pace of album 
releases, but Warners wanted a more controlled flow to permit maximum 
exploitation of singles and touring. Prince, now referred to as the Artist 
Formerly Known As Prince, made his feelings towards the label explicit by 
writing SLAVE on his cheek whenever he appeared in public. Meanwhile the label 
marked time by releasing the triple-CD set The Hits/The B-Sides (1993).

Prince reached a settlement with Warners in April 1996, by which time he had 
also released Come (a collection of material from his vaults), the notorious 
Black Album (1994), and The Gold Experience (1995), the latter providing a 
solid hit with The Most Beautiful Girl in the World. 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KmqSi7lulMM> On Valentine’s Day that year he 
married a 22-year-old backing singer and dancer, Mayte Garcia, but in October 
their son Gregory died one week after his birth because of a rare skull defect, 
Pfeiffer syndrome. It drove the couple apart; they divorced in 2000.

Prince: his 10 greatest songs from Head to Cream (and Purple Rain in between)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/apr/21/prince-10-best-purple-rain-1999-when-doves-cry>
After releasing the contractual obligation album Chaos and Disorder (1996), 
Prince celebrated his escape from Warners with the triple-album Emancipation on 
his own NPG label; it sold 2m copies in the US. Prince now embraced the 
internet era by selling Crystal Ball, a five-CD set of previously unreleased 
tracks, on his website, though the delivery process was chaotic. This won him a 
Webby lifetime achievement award in 2006, as the first major artist to release 
a whole album exclusively online. Rave Un2 the Joy Fantastic (1999) was 
designed to be commercial and accessible, but was a relative flop.

In May 2000, after the expiry of his publishing contract with Warner Chappell 
Music, Prince officially retired the love symbol and became Prince again. He 
now focused on internet distribution via his NPGMusicClub.com site, which 
brought The Rainbow Children, the instrumental album N.E.W.S. and the jazzy 
Xpectation. One Nite Alone ... Live! (2002) was his first live album.

In 2001 he had married Manuela Testolini, whom he met while she was working at 
his charitable foundation. They divorced five years later. In 2001 Prince 
joined Jehovah’s Witnesses, introduced by Larry Graham, who had played bass 
with Sly and the Family Stone and fronted his own band, Graham Central Station.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F945698b8945eb1ab543323eb94a360b1e6ad77fc%2F86_0_1897_2200%2F1897.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20obituary&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2016%2Fapr%2F22%2Fprince-obituary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F945698b8945eb1ab543323eb94a360b1e6ad77fc%2F86_0_1897_2200%2F1897.jpg>
 Prince and Beyoncé performing at the Grammy Awards in 2004. Photograph: Gary 
Hershorn/Reuters 
In February 2004, Prince made a spectacular appearance at the Grammy Awards 
with Beyoncé, performing a medley which included Purple Rain, Let’s Go Crazy 
and Beyoncé’s Crazy in Love. In March Prince was inducted into the Rock and 
Roll Hall of Fame, playing a batch of his own songs before joining inWhile My 
Guitar Gently Weeps as a tribute 
<http://www.pbs.org/newshour/bb/watch-prince-wail-on-while-my-guitar-gently-weeps-2/>
 to George Harrison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2001/dec/01/guardianobituaries.pennyvalentine>
, who had died in 2001.

Musicology (2004) presented a relaxed, optimistic Prince making 
listener-friendly music with a new business model. He arranged distribution 
through Columbia Records, taking no advance payment but retaining complete 
ownership of the album. Anybody who bought a ticket for the Musicology tour 
received a copy of the album, which was also available though the online Music 
Club. “One advantage of writing SLAVE on my face back then is that when I meet 
with a label now, they already know they’re not going to be owning anything,” 
Prince said. “Maybe at one time they could get Little Richard for a new car and 
a bucket of chicken. We don’t roll like that no more.”

He scored his first US No 1 album since Batman with 3121 (2006), and in 
November that year was inducted into the UK Music Hall of Fame. He opened the 
3121 nightclub under a deal with the Rio All Suite Hotel and Casino in Las 
Vegas, and performed there regularly.

In February 2007, at the Super Bowl half-time show in Miami, one of the 
highest-profile showcases a US artist can achieve, he played some Purple Rain 
songs alongside cover versions of pieces by Queen, Bob Dylan, Creedence 
Clearwater Revival and the Foo Fighters.

His Earth Tour brought him to London that summer, to play 21 nights at the O2 
Arena. The Planet Earth album was given away free with the Mail on Sunday, to 
the dismay of music retailers (he was dubbed the Artist Formerly Available In 
Record Stores). In October 2008, he released the live album Indigo Nights, 
comprising music performed after hours at the IndigO2 nightclub, plus a 
matching book called 21 Nights.

Minneapolis celebrates its 'favorite son' Prince with all-night dance party
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/apr/22/first-avenue-club-prince-death-minneapolis-dance-party>
The album 20Ten was released in 2010 as a free covermounted disc with various 
European publications but not available online; he toured the album in Europe 
in two separate legs with different bands. His appearance at the Hop Farm 
Festival in Kent in July 2011 was his debut at a UK festival.

In 2013, Prince formed a new backing band called 3rdeyegirl, which came to 
London on the small-scale Hit and Run Tour in February 2014. Even more 
surprising than his performance at the home of singer Lianne La Havas was news 
that Prince had signed a new deal with Warner Bros after an 18-year gap. The 
label announced the release of a 30th anniversary deluxe edition of Purple 
Rain, and returned ownership of his Warner recordings to the artist.

Prince’s death followed medical treatment during his Piano and a Microphone 
tour. He is survived by Tyka.

• Prince Rogers Nelson, composer and performer, born 7 June 1958; died 21 
April 2016
 