
The environment secretary Andrea Leadsom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom> is under increasing 
pressure to make good on a Tory manifesto commitment to ban the UK ivory trade 
after China announced it would close down its domestic ivory market.

Conservation organisations, including a charity championed by Prince William 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/prince-william>, say that by allowing the trade 
to continue the UK is fuelling the annual slaughter of thousands of rhinos and 
elephants. A recent study suggested that the UK is now the third-largest 
supplier of illegal ivory items to the US.

Boris Johnson, the foreign secretary, a predecessor, William Hague, and a 
former secretary at the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 
Owen Paterson, all support a total ban, which was a Conservative party 
manifesto commitment in 2010 and 2015.

But after coming under pressure from the UK’s auction houses and antique 
dealers, which have mounted a powerful lobbying campaign against such an 
all-out ban, Leadsom has leaned towards a compromise.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fuk-ivory-trade-fuels-poaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bf8ddd613fdf026abf7e8e41a68b0774ba34d0d%2F837_0_2071_2588%2F2071.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Prince%20William%20charity%20urges%20UK%20to%20back%20ivory%20trade%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fuk-ivory-trade-fuels-poaching%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Prince%20William%20charity%20urges%20UK%20to%20back%20ivory%20trade%20ban&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Fuk-ivory-trade-fuels-poaching%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5bf8ddd613fdf026abf7e8e41a68b0774ba34d0d%2F837_0_2071_2588%2F2071.jpg>
 Prince William is patron of Tusk, one of the charities that have linked ivory 
sales in the UK to the slaughter of 30,000 elephants a year in Africa. 
Photograph: Adnan Abidi/AFP/Getty Images 
Under plans announced last September, Defra intends to ban the sale of items 
containing ivory produced between 1947 and the present day. However, a trade in 
works of art and antiques made with ivory and produced before 1947 will be 
permitted, much to the dismay of wildlife protection charities.

In an open letter to the prime minister, Action for Elephants 
<http://actionforelephantsuk.org/letter-to-theresa-may-2017/> said that laws to 
regulate the ivory trade in the UK had proved to be ineffective and unworkable. 
It warned that the police and the courts did not have the resources to monitor 
the trade or prosecute cases where the law was broken, and that the new law 
would only complicate matters. A legal ivory trade, it said, provided cover to 
criminals to launder illegal ivory through the UK.

But both the British Antique Dealers’ Association (Bada) and the Association 
of Art and Antiques Dealers (Lapada) vigorously oppose a total ban. Victoria 
Borwick, Conservative MP for Kensington and president of Bada, used a Commons 
debate on the ivory trade last month to call on the government to make an 
exemption for genuine antiques containing ivory, insisting that there was no 
evidence that they contributed to the sale of poached ivory.

But the announcement by China, the world’s largest market for ivory, that it 
plans to stop all commercial processing and sale of ivory by the end of March, 
and shut down its domestic ivory market by the end of the year, has placed the 
UK’s position under acute scrutiny.

Will Travers, president of the Born Free Foundation 
<http://www.bornfree.org.uk>, said that elephants across Africa were being 
killed by poachers in the tens of thousands so that illegal ivory could be 
laundered by criminal syndicates through legitimate markets. “Strong action by 
China is crucial to the very future of elephants,” Travers said. “So the 
announcement it intends to close down its domestic ivory market within a year 
is therefore very good news.”

Elephant poaching costing African nations millions in lost tourism revenue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/01/elephant-poaching-costing-african-nations-millions-in-lost-tourism-revenue>
Charlie Mayhew, chief executive of the anti-poaching charity Tusk, whose 
patron is the Duke of Cambridge, described China’s announcement as “hugely 
encouraging, very welcome”.

“President Xi Jinping should be applauded for recognising the devastating 
impact that China’s ivory trade has had on Africa’s fast-diminishing elephant 
population,” Mayhew said. “We very much hope that the closing down of China’s 
market will bring much-needed respite to Africa’s elephant population and the 
wildlife rangers who so courageously protect them from poachers.”

Mayhew said the UK had shown leadership on tackling the issue at the Illegal 
Wildlife <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/wildlife> Trade conference in 
London in 2014 but there was now a danger its credibility was slipping away. 
“The government can no longer delay on its own manifesto pledge. China has 
stolen a march on the UK and if we are to have any credibility as the host of 
the 2018 IWT conference, then Andrea Leadsom must enact a total ban here.”

An online petition calling on the government to outlaw a trade responsible for 
the slaughter of 30,000 African elephants a year 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/165905> is approaching 90,000 
signatures, almost the number required for parliament to hold a debate on the 
issue.
 