
The number of people in Britain taking out private medical insurance has risen 
significantly for the first time since 2008, amid fears about theongoing crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-crisis-20-hospitals-declare-black-alert-as-patient-safety-no-longer-assured>
 gripping the NHS.

After falling steeply between 2008 and 2011 and then staying flat, demand for 
private medical insurance cover in Britain rose by 2.1% in 2015 with just over 
4 million people insured.

The figures, compiled by healthcare consultancy LaingBuisson, account for the 
period until the end of 2015. Figures for 2016 are not yet available.

Philip Blackburn, an economist at LaingBuisson, said: “There has been a clear 
rise in interest in private healthcare recently as more and more people are 
dissatisfied with higher waiting on the NHS and increased restrictions onNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> treatment. Private medical cover will 
benefit from this, and there is a wide choice of policy options at different 
prices to attract customers.”

Should you have private health insurance? Try our interactive calculator
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/datablog/ng-interactive/2016/nov/17/should-you-get-private-health-insurance-try-our-interactive-calculator>
The rise in sales of private medical insurance (PMI) comes despite increases in
insurance premium tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-insurance-premium-tax-increased-again>
 (IPT) during the period from 6% to 9.5%, which has made policies more 
expensive. But the private medical industry is still far belowits peak in 2008, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2009/oct/29/private-healthcare-market-labour-laing-buisson>
 when 4.35 million people – 12.4% of the UK population – had private cover. 
After the rise in 2015, a total of 4,022,000 people have cover, or 10.6% of the 
population.

All of the rise in private cover is coming through company schemes, where the 
number of employees with medical insurance rose by 3.4% to 3,070,000 people, or 
76.3% of the total. This suggests that the increased popularity of PMI may be 
down to a recovery in the economy and companies taking more staff, rather than 
fears about the state of the NHS.

The number of individual subscribers to private medical insurance continued to 
decline, dropping by 1.7% to 952,000.

Most are put off by the rising cost of buying cover independently. A typical 
PMI policy for a healthy 35-year-old costs about £650 a year, but this rises 
steeply to £2,300 for those aged 70, when claims are far more likely.

My patient had private health insurance for peace of mind. Then he got cancer 
| Ranjana Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/my-patient-had-private-health-insurance-for-peace-of-mind-then-he-got-cancer>
But the LaingBuisson data suggests that the companies and private hospitals 
selling cover are enjoying bumper profit margins. Companies and individuals 
spent £4.7bn on private medical insurance in 2015, but the total value of 
claims was £3.6bn, leaving the providers with a gross profit of £1.1bn.

LaingBuisson estimated that the total gross profit margin for PMI providers 
rose from 25.9% in 2014 to 26.7% in 2015. But it added that further tax rises 
and Brexit may make 2017 a tough year for the industry.

“A sharp increase in IPT from 6% to 9.5% effective from November 2015, and 
further rise to 10% from November 2016 has loaded significant additional cost 
for all medical insurance customers. A further hike to 12% in June 2017 will 
tighten this ‘taxation straitjacket’, and in an industry where affordability 
has been identified as the primary reason for a lack of growth in demand, this 
hefty additional burden is likely to mean demand for PMI is vulnerable going 
forward,” said Blackburn, adding that “the medical cover sector faces further 
uncertainty from the UK’s impending exit from the European Union.”
 