
If you're looking for somewhere new to live you'll be well aware of the main 
property websites such asRightmove <http://www.rightmove.co.uk/> and Zoopla 
<http://www.zoopla.co.uk/>. But while they carry more than a million listing, 
you may miss out on your perfect home if you make them your only port of call.

If you aren't sure where you want to live, want to take on a renovation 
project or dream of living somewhere truly unique, there are other sites to 
help you in your search. Here are 15 of the best alternatives for buyers and 
tenants.

1. Find a Hood <http://www.findahood.com/> Designed to help you work out where 
to live, this site asks you to describe your "perfect hood" using 10 different 
criteria. For example, a local park and good schools might be your top 
priorities if you've got kids, while low crime may be more important to you if 
you have to travel home late at night. It then shortlists 15 areas within your 
chosen region of England or Wales that it thinks will suit you, based on 
statistical data from official sources. (You can also check this data for any 
postcode in the UK.)

2. Property Network <http://propertynetwork.net/> This site also aims to help 
you find a place to live, this time based on what it can glean about you from 
Facebook. You log into the site via Facebook and it uses information about your 
"likes", "check-ins", education status, work and personal interests to make 
recommendations about neighbourhoods and properties you can buy or rent. You 
can also see information – after it has been anonymised – about your potential 
or existing neighbours.

3. Find Properly <http://www.findproperly.co.uk/> Enter your price range and 
use a map to pinpoint places you regularly commute to or visit (by bike or 
public transport). You can restrict the maximum commute time and, once you get 
your results, filter the neighbourhoods by property type, crime rate, the 
maximum distance to a park and council tax band. You can also restrict your 
search to certain tube zones and areas popular with either students, young 
professionals, families or retired people. The site is limited to London at the 
moment.
 The Stream, Colchester. Photograph: Waterside Properties 
4. Waterside Properties <http://www.watersideproperties.com/> If it's a sea 
view you're after, this site is the place to start – it lists properties for 
sale and rent by water, whether that's a marina, the sea, a river or a lake. 
Meanwhile, tucked away onCanalCuttings <http://canalcuttings.co.uk/> you can 
find properties and moorings by canals for sale. Alternatively, if you're 
feeling rich, search onPrime New Developments 
<http://www.primenewdevelopments.com> for new-builds around the world in the 
"sun and sand" category.

5. Property Snake <http://propertysnake.co.uk/> This lets you search for 
properties in a general area or postcode which have had their prices cut. There 
is a "listing history" showing when the property was reduced in price and by 
how much, as well as the usual estate agent's details.

Zoopla has a similar facility. On its homepage you can "sort by" the "most 
reduced" properties in an advanced search.

6. Tepilo <http://www.tepilo.com/> Set up by the TV presenter Sarah Beeny, 
this site cuts out estate agents and letting agents, allowing vendors to upload 
photos and descriptions for free. The commission saved can potentially be 
passed on to a buyer or tenant as a discount. It is also possible that you will 
have less competition as a buyer if the properties are not being marketed 
outside the site.

7. Whitehot Property <http://www.whitehotproperty.co.uk/> This site, and 
another calledProperty Earth <http://propertyearth.net/>, allow you to buy 
repossessions. The properties listed here tend to be priced for a quick sale by 
mortgage lenders. Bear in mind that any money you save may come at someone 
else's expense.

8. Unmodernised <http://unmodernised.com/> This is a good place to start if 
you're eager for a project. It lists only properties that offer the potential 
for the buyer to add value, usually because they need refurbishment or because 
they already have planning permission for work. Similarly, property blogWreck 
of the week <http://www.wreckoftheweek.co.uk/> publishes a regular round-up of 
homes for sale around the country. You can even put a "wanted" advertisement on 
the site for six months for £4.

9. Propertyauctionaction <http://propertyauctionaction.co.uk/> For those who 
are able to act quickly, buying at auction may be an option. This site lists 
upcoming auctions taking place around the country and has a (limited) search 
function. Alternatively, you could go straight to the auctioneers' sites:Allsop 
<http://www.allsop.co.uk/3/auctions-home>, Must Be Sold 
<http://www.mustbesold.com/>, Savills <http://auctions.savills.co.uk/>, 
Countrywide Property Auctions <http://www.countrywidepropertyauctions.co.uk/> 
andBarnard Marcus <http://www.barnardmarcusauctions.co.uk/> are five of the 
biggest worth checking out.

10. UK Land Directory <http://www.uklanddirectory.org.uk/index.asp> If, on the 
other hand, your dream is to self-build, then the first thing you need is a 
plot of land, ideally already with planning permission. UK Land Directory andUK 
Land and Farms <http://uklandandfarms.co.uk/> are among the few sites that 
allow you to search for plots for free, with most listings stating clearly 
whether planning permission has already been granted. Other sites such as
Plotfinder <http://www.plotfinder.net/> and BuildStore's PlotSearch 
<http://www.buildstore.co.uk/findingland/default.aspx?sid=sb> charge between 
£10 and £20 for one-off access to their listings.
 The Manse in Nairn. Photograph: Church of Scotland 
11. The Church of Scotland 
<http://www.churchofscotland.org.uk/about_us/property_and_church_buildings/properties_for_sale>
 A large number of period churches, chapels and vicarages are being auctioned 
off at bargain prices across Scotland. Many are being sold without the planning 
permission needed to convert them into residential homes, and as they are 
listed buildings it may be difficult to get. What's more, some are in extremely 
rural locations and are not connected to the mains water or electricity supply. 
However, there are residential properties on the site, and you might be able to 
grab a bargain. The Church of England also sells off around 20 "closed 
churches" each year, but doesn't list prices on its website.

12. Unique Property Bulletin <http://uniquepropertybulletin.co.uk/> For buyers 
who want something a bit different, visiting this blog will feel like visiting 
a sweet shop. The hand-picked properties range from old schools and churches to 
tube stations, police stations and nuclear bunkers. TheUnique Property Site 
<http://property.org.uk/unique/> lists equally unusual properties, especially 
under the "odds and sods" category, where you can currently find an old fire 
station in Lincoln, a pump house in Lancashire and a 14th-century tower house 
in Italy.

13. The Modern House <http://themodernhouse.net/> This site lists modern 
properties of architectural note, including many shortlisted for prestigious 
prizes. But don't expect to pay a pittance for someone else's grand design – 
asking prices for the properties currently on its books range from 
£285,000-£6.85m. Cheaper architectural gems in the UK and the US can sometimes 
be found on the property blogWowHaus <http://www.wowhaus.co.uk/>, if you're 
lucky.

14. Period Property UK <http://www.periodproperty.co.uk/> Whether you want a 
thatched cottage, a medieval manor house or any other type of historic home, 
this search engine can help. And if you like the sound of that (and money is no 
object) then you'll loveBritish & Irish Stately Homes 
<http://statelyhomes.wordpress.com/>, which features properties for sale and 
rent, complete with stately prices.

15. SpeedFlatmating <http://www.speedflatmating.co.uk/> If you're sick and 
tired of traipsing around London looking for a room to rent, this site might 
offer welcome relief. Instead of going to a flat, you go to a "flatmate-finding 
party" hosted by the website, where you could meet lots of potential flatmates 
at the same time. Sadly, it won't help if you don't live in the capital.

Spotted any useful alternatives to Rightmove that we have missed? What are 
your favourite property-hunting websites? Tell us about your experiences.
 