
What steps should you take to keep your business safe from hackers? With new 
threats emerging and longstanding ones still an issue, it pays to know. The 
average cost of cyber attacks to a small business was £3,000 over a two-year 
period, according toresearch 
<http://www.fsb.org.uk/docs/default-source/fsb-org-uk/FSB-Cyber-Resilience-report-2016.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
 [pdf] from the Federation of Small Businesses.

During our live Q&A 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/nov/15/cybercrime-how-to-protect-business-attacks>
 on how to protect your business from cybercrime, our panel offered a broad 
range of expertise, from how to recognise a hacking attempt to tips for keeping 
your business safe when you’re on a tight budget.


The first question the panel tackled was how to go about training staff to 
avoid new cybercrime threats. A common example of a new threat is phishing, in 
which hackers send emails to an employee pretending to be from a trustworthy 
source, such as a senior colleague, in order to gain confidential information.


Social engineers expose the fatal flaw in a business
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/oct/04/social-engineers-reveal-biggest-threat-business>
Jamie Randall, chief technology officer of IASME Consortium 
<https://www.iasme.co.uk/>, a company that helps organisations protect their 
information and the founder of The Friendly Nerd, a startup specialising in 
cyber security training, said: “The best tip I can give to staff is always look 
out for the urgent and the unexpected. If an email, a social media post or a 
phone call ticks either of these boxes then it could be suspicious.”


Creating an environment where staff are confident in challenging requests that 
don’t look right is key, said James Snook, deputy director, cyber and 
government security directorate in the Cabinet Office. He suggested some useful 
government resources includingcyber essentials 
<https://www.cyberaware.gov.uk/cyberessentials/> in which accredited 
organisations will assess your business’s cyber security andcyber aware 
<http://cyberaware.gov.uk/>, which gives advice to small businesses and 
individuals on how to protect themselves.


Jenny Radcliffe, an independent security consultant 
<http://jennyradcliffe.com/> who trains businesses in cyber security, added: “I 
think training when [an employee joins] a company is very important and it’s 
something many small businesses don’t do properly.” She said that it didn’t 
need to be formal – small business owners might set up a meeting with new 
staff, for example, where they explain the company’s security policy and pass 
on some basic training.


Of course, staff themselves can pose an unexpected threat. Sophisticated 
hackers could look to find a way into a business’s team in order to get 
information. Radcliffe said that using contractors or temporary staff, who 
might not be put through such a rigorous recruitment process, is always a risk.

Radcliffe added: “Vetting people is problematic because a determined hacker 
will have a good back story that checks out to some extent. I would suggest 
always following up names with contracting companies and using numbers and 
emails found independently, rather than the ones the person gives you, as these 
might be fraudulent.”


Paula Barrett, head of data privacy and partner at Eversheds law firm 
<http://www.eversheds.com/global/en/index.page>, reminded businesses to be 
mindful of data protection laws when vetting new staff. She said: “It’s 
important to remember that vetting itself needs to be managed in a way that 
doesn’t infringe data protection laws. It needs to be necessary and 
proportionate to the role that the individual will have.”


Keeping data as private as possible is a good technique, suggested Cindy Ng, a 
security and privacy expert atVaronis <https://www.varonis.com/>. She said: 
“Eliminate excessive permissions. When staff or contractors are with a company 
a long time, they change departments and jobs and end up with more permissions 
to data than they need.”

Another area for concern in small businesses is online payments. The panel 
were asked how businesses that make or take payments online could better 
protect themselves from attacks and ensure their accounts are secure.


David Jeffrey, product director, fraud and security, at Barclaycard 
<https://www.barclaycard.co.uk/business/news-and-insights> payment solutions, 
said his top tip would be for small businesses to partner with industry experts 
who can support them. He said: “Managing security on your own is near 
impossible for most merchants, particularly the smaller merchants who are the 
most susceptible to attack.”


Snook added: “Everyone should use strong, memorable passwords ... Secondly, 
everyone should keep the software on their computers, tablets and phones up to 
date – out-of-date software can have vulnerabilities that criminals can 
exploit.”


Jeffrey said business owners should always use a secure Wi-Fi network when 
making payments. “It’s also important to consider who you are buying from and 
if they themselves are a reputable company. Always be vigilant and, if in 
doubt, don’t make the payment.”

A question that came in via Twitter <https://twitter.com/catharticsite> from 
social enterprise Cathartic asked: “How does a small business meet enterprise 
security requirements on a tight budget.”

Radcliffe said that a commitment to security, and a continued awareness of it, 
was key. “Leading from within, while taking some expert advice ... needn’t be 
an expensive undertaking, but it does take time, focus and ongoing commitment,” 
she said.

Del Heppenstall, who leads KPMG’s 
<http://www.kpmg.com/uk/en/pages/default.aspx> cyber security teams across the 
southern and Midlands regions of the UK, offered a useful summary of how a 
small business should approach cyber crime. He said: “Think of your response to 
this as being one that covers people, process and technology, and focus equally 
on each.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 