
Public health experts have called for a ban on alcohol advertising in the UK 
in light of new research that claims the industry’s marketing practices 
encourage young people to drink.

Studies into the impact of alcohol advertising around the world found that 
marketing practices often seemed to breach the industry’s own voluntary codes 
of practice, which in any case were not sufficient to protect children.

“It is clear that self-regulation is not working and we welcome calls for 
greater action from governments to protect children from exposure to alcohol 
marketing,” said Prof Sir Ian Gilmore, chair of theAlcohol Health Alliance 
<http://ahauk.org/> (AHA), an umbrella group of more than 40 UK health NGOs, 
including the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges.

“We know that alcohol marketing contains content and messages that appeal to 
children, and that due to exposure to this advertising, children drink more, 
and start drinking at an earlier age.”

The call comes despite recent data showing that levels of youth drinking in 
the UK are the lowest on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/15/smoking-drinking-young-people-lowest-level-on-record-england>
, with only about 17% of children aged eight to 15 admitting to ever drinking 
alcohol.

AB Inbev and Diageo, two of the world’s biggest alcoholic drinks makers, have 
reported ploughing as much of 15% of their annual global sales back into 
marketing, amounting to $7bn (£5.75bn) and £1.6bn respectively. The new 
research, published on Tuesday in the journalAddiction 
<http://www.addictionjournal.org/>, investigated the techniques of alcohol 
marketing and their effects on young people.

The findings of the 14 studies included claims that marketing practices around 
the 2014 Fifa World Cup appeared to breach voluntary codes of practice, that 
young people were increasingly exposed to alcohol marketing through social 
media, and that much of the marketing included content likely to appeal to 
young people.

The lead editor, Prof Thomas Babor from the University of Connecticut, said: 
“No other legal product with such potential for harm is as widely promoted and 
advertised in the world as alcohol. These papers provide a wealth of 
information to support governments in their efforts to protect children and 
other vulnerable populations from exposure to alcohol marketing.”

In the UK, advertising for alcoholic drinks follows a code enforced by the 
Advertising Standards Authority, while the packaging and branding of the 
products is subject to self-regulation. One recent drinks advert judged to be 
in breach of standards wasa promotional film for Captain Morgan rum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/aug/31/captain-morgan-tv-ad-scuppered-for-implying-alcohol-can-boost-confidence>
 featuring a raucous party aboard a sailing ship, which was banned for implying 
alcohol can make you more confident.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpublic-health-experts-call-ban-alcohol-advertising-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e483245ab45fce2c27d29523cfb157c37092e6a%2F0_230_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Public%20health%20experts%20call%20for%20ban%20on%20alcohol%20advertising%20in%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpublic-health-experts-call-ban-alcohol-advertising-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Public%20health%20experts%20call%20for%20ban%20on%20alcohol%20advertising%20in%20UK&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fpublic-health-experts-call-ban-alcohol-advertising-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e483245ab45fce2c27d29523cfb157c37092e6a%2F0_230_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 A man walks past an advert for Captain Morgan rum at the offices of Diageo in 
London. Photograph: Chris Ratcliffe/Bloomberg 
Ian Hamilton, a specialist in problem drug use at the University of York, who 
was not involved in any of the Addiction papers, said alcohol marketing had 
found ways to evade statutory limits, particularly on social media and through 
endorsements of music and sporting events.

“Some of the messages are quite subtle, but they are persistent,” he said. “So 
this idea that alcohol is necessary for social success, or is both a stimulant 
as well as a sedative, that it removes sexual inhibition, that it improves – 
bizarrely – your sporting and mental abilities.

“Of course, the way they do it is they don’t say go and buy Carlsberg, but 
they’ll do endorsed interviews with celebrities or they’ll offer free music 
downloads or notices of events, so they do it in quite subtle and clever ways.”

A spokesperson for the AHA said while a comprehensive ban – similar to one in 
place in Norway – was the ultimate aim, in the meantime the organisation would 
like to see an interim solution that began with stopping sports sponsorship, 
introducing a watershed for alcohol adverts on television, and restricting 
cinema adverts so that they could be shown only before 18 certificate films.

Such a partial ban would still allow adverts in newspapers, billboards and 
radio, but would restrict them to providing basic information including a 
product’s origin, strength and production method, the spokesman suggested. Such 
a framework would be far stronger than the current ASA code of practice, which 
only stipulates what cannot be included in an advert.

“Tighter alcohol marketing regulation in the UK, without industry involvement, 
is desirable, achievable and effective,” said Paul Lincoln, the chief executive 
ofUK Health Forum <http://www.ukhealthforum.org.uk/>, which is a member of the 
AHA.

The claims and recommendations were disputed by the alcohol industry. Dave 
Roberts, the director general of theAlcohol Information Partnership 
<http://alcoholinfopartnership.co.uk/>, an industry-funded group, said levels 
of underage and harmful drinking had been falling year on year in the UK.

He said: “Official data shows the vast majority of people drink in moderation 
and in a convivial manner. A self-regulatory framework and a partnership 
approach have clearly been working.

Children whose parents give them sips of alcohol 'more likely' to drink as 
teens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/children-whose-parents-give-them-sips-of-alcohol-more-likely-to-drink-as-teens>
“The best way to reduce alcohol-related harm is to target programmes and 
policies at harmful drinkers. Instead of restricting companies’ freedom to 
operate and compete it would be better for government to focus on understanding 
what has worked so well over the past decade and encourage more of the same. 
Where there are pockets of harm, intervention should be directed towards those 
communities or age groups.”

Hamilton also warned that a blanket ban on alcohol advertising could be seen 
as “taking a sledgehammer to crack a nut”, with the danger that such a policy 
could give drinking a kind of outlaw prestige that might increase its appeal to 
some.

But, he added, a similar policy on tobacco advertising had apparently proved 
successful in diminishing the appeal of smoking. “I think the state does have 
some kind of responsibility,” Hamilton said. “We can’t have do-it-yourself 
regulation by industry whose prime motive is to find the next generation of 
consumers.”

 