
The world’s first contactless payment, self-service beer pump will be put to 
the test by consumers during the height of pre-Christmas partying in the UK’s 
bars and pubs.

Pay@Pump allows drinkers to order and pour their own pint and pay with a 
contactless card or device touched on a pad at the base of the pump.

The technology has been devised by Barclaycard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/creditcards> – and a prototype designed and 
installed in a Central London pub, Henry’s Café Bar - to help reduce queuing 
time for customers buying drinks during busy periods.

The average waiting time at the bar during the Christmas party season is 12 
minutes per order, according to research carried out for Barclaycard, totalling 
35 minutes per person during a festive night out. Almost one in four (24%) of 
bar-goers admitted they had considered abandoning a drinks purchase because of 
long bar queues, while 20% have gone elsewhere when facing a lengthy wait.

 “I’m sure everyone has been stuck behind the person who orders the most 
complicated cocktail on the menu or a round of 10 drinks for their group of 
friends,” said Tami Hargreaves, the commercial director, digital consumer 
payments, at Barclaycard. “When people told us that waiting time was one of 
their biggest annoyances, we wanted to help solve a common problem with a 
simple solution.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcontactless-beer-pump-worlds-first-london-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb1bb3418934ebb20c5b40647dbb515a3d57750%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Pull%20a%20fast%20one%3A%20London%20bar%20installs%20world's%20first%20tap-and-pay%20beer%20pump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcontactless-beer-pump-worlds-first-london-bar%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Pull%20a%20fast%20one%3A%20London%20bar%20installs%20world%27s%20first%20tap-and-pay%20beer%20pump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fcontactless-beer-pump-worlds-first-london-bar%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcdb1bb3418934ebb20c5b40647dbb515a3d57750%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Beer will only be served following a successful contactless payment. 
Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
The pump incorporates Barclaycard’s contactless technology and electronics to 
allow the beer supply to be regulated and turned on following successful 
payment. It is hoped it will be rolled out nationally next year, not only in 
bars and pubs but also at large music festivals and concerts to help speed up 
service.

One in five card payments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/10/contactless-cards-wave-pay-oyster-london-use>
 by Britons are now contactless, a technology that launched in the UK in 2007. 
At that stage, tap-and-go or touch-and-go was largely confined to coffee shops 
and sandwich chains but is now widely available in shops and bars.
 