
Puppies prick up their ears to human cooing but adult dogs are unmoved by it, 
according to a new study.

Scientists have found that humans use a sing-song cadence, similar to that 
used towards babies, when talking to dogs – regardless of the age of the 
animal. But the tone only draws the attention of puppies: older dogs showed no 
preference over normal human speech.

Dogs understand both words and intonation of human speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/30/dogs-understand-both-words-and-intonation-of-human-speech>
“The use of pet-directed speech is extremely widespread, but its functional 
value has barely been studied,” said Nicolas Mathevon, lead author of the 
research from the University of Lyon at Saint-Etienne.

The research, he adds, could also shed light on human use of baby-talk: both 
might have a common purpose in attempting to engage with a listener that cannot 
speak.


In the first stage of the research, 30 women were each presented with images 
of a puppy, an adult dog and an elderly canine and recorded uttering a sentence 
involving phrases such as “hello cutie!”, “who’s a good boy?” and “come here 
sweetie pie!”. They were also asked to repeat the phrase in their normal tone 
to a researcher.

The researchers found that when talking to dogs, humans typically use 
higher-pitched, slower tempo speech with a greater degree of variation in pitch 
than when talking to each other. The effect was most pronounced when chatting 
to puppies, with participants increasing their pitch by 21% on average compared 
to normal speech.

Mathevon says the results, published in the journal Proceedings of the Royal 
Society B 
<http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/lookup/doi/10.1098/rspb.2016.2429> by 
researchers from the UK, US and France, provide clues as to why humans address 
their pets in a similar way to babies. “The fact that human speakers employ 
dog-directed speech to communicate with dogs of all ages is interesting because 
it could mean that we use this kind of speech pattern when we want to 
facilitate interaction with a non-speaking listener, and not only a juvenile 
listener,” said Mathevon.


The researchers also found that while puppies showed no difference in response 
between puppy-talk over speech directed at adult dogs, they did show a greater 
response to puppy-talk over human-directed speech. Adult dogs, on the other 
hand, showed no difference in their response to the recordings.

That is unexpected, the authors say, and could be down to dogs showing less 
interest in the voices of strangers as they age. Alternatively, the use of 
dog-directed speech might tap into an innate receptiveness to high-pitched 
sounds in puppies – a trait that disappears as they age.

Secret of connection between dogs and humans could be genetic
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/sep/29/secret-of-connection-between-dogs-and-humans-could-be-genetic>
Evan MacLean, evolutionary anthropologist at the University of Arizona, said 
that the research was another piece of evidence of the overlap between 
human-dog and parent-child relationships. “As a result of selection for 
juvenile traits, dogs emit a lot of signals that scream ‘baby’ to humans, which 
can facilitate special kinds of interactions with dogs, normally reserved for 
children,” he said. “The question we don’t have a great answer to is whether 
there are long term functional consequences of interacting with dogs in this 
way (e.g. effects on word learning), or if this is just a byproduct of the 
baby-like cues that dogs inundate us with.”

But Catherine Laing, a researcher in neuroscience at Duke University in North 
Carolina who was not involved in the study, disagreed with the suggestion that 
similarities in the pitch of baby-talk and pet-talk indicates a link to 
non-speaking listeners. She points out that the two forms of speech have many 
differences – not only in the type of words used and how they are articulated, 
but also in the interactions between listener and adult.

 “Baby-talk [or infant-directed speech] is complex and aimed at supporting 
language learning, and we can’t say the same about the observations made in 
this paper,” she said.
 