
Western diplomats have conceded that there are no technical obstacles to a 
plan to deliver airdrops of food and medicine toAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> using a GPS-guided parachute system, 
but the scheme has been stalled in the face of reluctance among military 
commanders and an absence of political will.

Diplomats and military from six governments – including the UK, US, France and 
Germany – have now seen the detailed operational plan proposed by an aid 
agency, which has been circulating among western officials for over a month.

The plan, which has been seen by the Guardian, relies on technology known as 
the theJoint Precision Airdrop System (JPads) 
<http://archive.defense.gov/news/NewsArticle.aspx?ID=1815>, which has been used 
by the US military since 2001 to supply troops in forward-offensive positions 
in areas of Afghanistan too difficult or dangerous to reach by road. It uses 
pallets dropped by parachute and guided by GPS navigation and a rudder.

According to the plan there are three identified feasible landing points 
inside east Aleppo. The main aim is to get some humanitarian supplies into the
embattled and shrinking enclave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/syrian-troops-in-control-of-aleppo-old-city-after-rebels-withdraw>
 to keep people alive in the hope that talks would lead to a longer-term 
solution.

Syria: Assad loyalists take Aleppo's Old City as rebels plead for ceasefire
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/07/syrian-troops-in-control-of-aleppo-old-city-after-rebels-withdraw>
The plan envisaged an initial delivery of 20 pallets and the flights could 
depart from RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus or the Incirlik air base in Turkey. The ICRC 
could potentially verify that packages were for humanitarian purposes alone.

Aircraft would keep within 25km of the Turkish border and always remain over 
opposition-controlled areas. The pallets can be dropped from around 25,000ft 
and have a drift zone of up to 25km, thereby overcoming the main objection to 
air drops: that it would bring Nato planes into range of Syrian and Russian 
jets and air defence systems.

 However, although the plan has been generally embraced by diplomats, there 
has been resistance from western military officers.

“One military was so reticent they denied the capability even existed,” said a 
source familiar with the meetings. While the technology is currently only used 
by theUS military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military>, its 
existence is clearly noted on the manufacturer’s website.

Chris Harmer, retired naval aviator and a senior analyst at the Institute for 
the Study of War, said: “The military has not prioritised getting this out 
there, there’s a sense that the military doesn’t want to get drawn into this 
theatre. And nobody has told them to.”

Aid drops map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2016/12/airdrop-zip/giv-39026m6uavej6G5d>
Discussions about air-dropping food into Aleppo and other besieged enclaves 
have beenunder way for months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/04/us-uk-explore-possibility-aid-airdrops-syria-drones?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 in Washington between US and UK officials, but have been stalled over 
inter-agency disagreements. Meanwhile, rebel-held eastern Aleppo has been 
overrun by pro-regime forces led by Lebanese Hezbollah and Iranian-led Shia 
militias supported by Russian and Syrian regime aerial bombardment. Failure to 
agree an enduring ceasefire has stopped road convoys from getting through for 
more than 150 days.


Overnight on Wednesday about 150 civilians, most either disabled or in need of 
urgent care, were evacuated from a hospital in Aleppo’s Old City – the first 
major medical evacuation from the eastern sector. They had been trapped there 
for days by nearby fighting, a spokeswoman for the International Committee of 
the Red Cross said. Six children, found alone in nearby streets were also 
evacuated.

The UK shadow foreign secretary, Emily Thornberry, said: “The government has 
made clear in the past that it regards air drops as a last resort inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria>, but that is surely now the point 
that we have reached. I would urge the government to make every last effort, 
and explore every last option, to get food and medical supplies to the 
civilians trapped in east Aleppo before it becomes too late.”


In the UK 201 MPs from across the political spectrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/27/aleppo-raf-aid-mps-theresa-may> 
have said they would vote to airdrop humanitarian aid into the city if a 
parliamentary vote was held on the issue.


The foreign office minister Tobias Ellwood stated during parliamentary 
questions on 28 November that there was “the possibility that a British 
aircraft could be shot down”. It is unclear whether Ellwood was aware of the 
JPads proposal when he made the comments to parliament.

It is understood that the UK, France, and Germany all possess the capability 
to launch aid-dropping missions in this way, though the delivery system itself 
is only owned by the US.

Those on the ground have welcomed the call. Syrian Civil Defense maintains an 
active presence and has responded to a call for airdrops with the following 
statement:“The situation in Aleppo is desperate. We have the capacity to 
collect aid and deliver it to humanitarian organisations and hospitals as 
needed. We stand ready to help our people.”

Two engineering graduates from Aleppo University, Abdulrahman and Amr Shayah, 
launchedan urgent appeal 
<http://www.thealeppoproject.com/parachutes-aid-not-bombs-jpads-safe-urgently-needed-besieged-aleppo/?utm_campaign=shareaholic&utm_medium=facebook&utm_source=socialnetwork>
 on Friday for JPads to be used to help the surviving civilians in the city.

“Parachutes have been used by the Russian and Syrian air forces to drop bombs 
… on civilian areas of the besieged city. Parachutes could be used to send 
urgently needed food and medical aid instead,” they said.

 Alison McGovern, chair of Britain’s Syria all-party parliamentary group, 
said: “The government should be exploring all possible options to get aid to 
the desperate civilians on the ground … the government should come back to the 
House of Commons urgently with a plan that delivers the maximum amount of aid 
with the minimum risk to our armed forces.”
 