
In many ways, sex is the most important thing human beings do in our lives: 
the complex emotions and desires that accompany it separate us from primates. 
But there’s a prurient, sniggering prudishness to the British attitude towards 
sex that we can no longer afford. Sex is used to sell us almost every product, 
bar Lego, and it’s essential we refocus on it as a manifestation of all kinds 
of complicated human emotions and needs.Sex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/sex> as the desire for friendship, 
love, excitement; sex just to be transgressive – rather than the explicit, 
pumping sex you see everywhere you look, used to sell us makeup, underwear and 
cars, and always just a few clicks away on your mouse.

My generation had the pleasure of enjoying erotica when we first explored the 
subject of sex but, for many children, their introduction to it is now very 
different, and certainly doesn’t tend to happen in the context of a 
relationship. That’s incredibly worrying. Not all children have sex education 
in schools, but they can all access some of the worst crimes you can imagine 
against women and men, without any real parental control. We are allowing our 
children to go out into a world where pornography is freely available, while 
they are completely ignorant of sex. We separate sex from our daily lives – we 
put it in boxes – separating out pornography and “boring sex” in long-term 
relationships. Society is incredibly conflicted.

Bad writing about sex is excruciating – but great writing about sex is 
wonderful

Part of the reason I’ve put together Desire 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/desire-440621.html> – a compendium of 100 of 
literature’s sexiest stories – is to try to recapture some of the complexity 
around sex. There is abad sex award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/badsexaward> in the UK – and there’s nothing 
wrong with that, bad writing about sex is excruciating – but great writing 
about sex is wonderful. Why isn’t that celebrated? Why not draw attention to 
the captivating stories that put you in a sensory dream world, that ignite 
sensations and emotions?

Erotica is so different from pornography, which is almost exclusively designed 
to cater to men. Any relationship that existed between men and erotica dates 
back to the Victorian era when it was one of the few ways to access the sexy 
stuff. Now the tsunami of pornography has all but obliterated any particular 
interest the majority of men might have had in reading erotica. For women, sex 
is part of a whole sensory experience and I think that is less true of men. If 
you look at the pornography that has been designed to appeal to male viewers, 
particularly in the 21st century, it is very much about the physical act and 
very little else. That is why it is less satisfying for a lot of women.

There’s a huge difference between the perfunctory plots sometimes used in 
pornography and the experience of immersing yourself in a story, characters and 
a considered environment – all those elements of the intellectual exchange 
involved in reading. In pornography, the literal act is simply placed right 
before your eyes. It is skin deep and, increasingly in the modern world, what 
you’re watching is the poor, dispossessed and desperate trying to earn a crust 
in whatever way they can. How many people who participate in porn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/jul/02/gail-dines-pornography> 
do so because that’s what they grew up wanting to do? The sex industry as a 
whole is a bit like the drug industry: it’s an end product that involves an 
awful lot of misery for an awful lot of people along the way.

Erotica offers a different route to explore our sexuality. I hadn’t read much 
of it in the past 35 years, so it was fascinating to see the changing social 
mores in how we write about sex and who is doing the writing.Anaïs Nin 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwi5u46y2tfPAhUHvBQKHeGhCJAQFgggMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fen.wikipedia.org%2Fwiki%2FAna%25C3%25AFs_Nin&usg=AFQjCNEP0453TZ-_Wb0x4NaviUXAq611vg&sig2=oQO4evN-lO8ixOMyzcBX1w>
 was a rare exception when I was a teenager in terms of a woman’s view of the 
sexual and erotic world. She is still a favourite – you stay in thrall to what 
you read in your teens. That heady, opium-den world of 1920s Paris is just such 
a natural environment for deviant behaviour. It’s wonderful, narratively. But 
it’s definitely of its time. Nin’s portrayal of sex is very much influenced by 
the nature of the patriarchal society at the time. While her writing was more 
feminine than any of the other erotica available back then, I still don’t feel 
it reflected female sexuality in the way current writers do.

Morrissey wins bad sex award for love scenes in debut novel List of the Lost
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/dec/01/morrissey-wins-bad-sex-award-fiction-debut-novel-list-of-the-lost>
Recently, erotica has had a resurgence, led by the success of Fifty Shades of 
Grey <https://www.theguardian.com/books/fifty-shades-of-grey>. Apparently 
Desire is doing incredibly well on Kindle, and that’s no surprise – it’s a lot 
easier to read something transgressive, or something you wouldn’t want to 
broadcast, in that subtle and slimline way. And that’s the great thing about 
erotica: you can indulge in fantasies that you would never want to see on 
screen, or to happen to you in real life. You are entering an imaginary world. 
It’s like watchingDeep Impact <http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0120647/>. Nobody 
wants a huge tsunami and a meteorite to hit the world, but you live through all 
those feelings of anxiety in a movie and feel better at the end.

We’re nowhere near the point where we could introduce erotica in schools – and 
my book is certainly not for children – but perhaps as part of a more 
wide-reaching programme certain forms of writing about sex could have a place 
in educating young people about relationships. Young adult writers do touch on 
the erotic –Twilight <https://www.theguardian.com/film/twilight> has lashings 
of it, and vampires are inherently a sexy concept. What we need to leave behind 
is the notion that sex is something either to snigger about, or to be ignored. 
It’s simply naive to believe that, if we just close our eyes and don’t mention 
sex, our kids will be able to effortlessly navigate the sexual world as they 
grow up.

• Desire: 100 of Literatures Sexiest Stories selected by Mariella Frostrup and 
the Erotic Review, published by Head of Zeus, £25
 