
Those left thoroughly disheartened by the week in politics and Monday’s Euro 
2016 football disaster have been invited to reflect back on a happier time, 
when the Beatles were at No 1 in the charts with Paperback Writer, and England 
were about to lift the World Cup for the first (perhaps only) occasion. For it 
was 50 years ago on Wednesday 29 June 1966 thatBarclays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/barclay> launched Britain’s first credit 
card.

Barclaycard kickstarted a revolution in the way we manage and spend our money, 
and played a key role in creating Britain’s £1.5tn personal debt mountain.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed8a187a15bfd0400382f3145c9957812b5b3bb%2F0_0_1467_2131%2F1467.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Put%20it%20on%20the%20plastic%3A%20Barclaycard%2C%20the%20UK's%20first%20credit%20card%2C%20turns%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Put%20it%20on%20the%20plastic%3A%20Barclaycard%2C%20the%20UK%27s%20first%20credit%20card%2C%20turns%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0ed8a187a15bfd0400382f3145c9957812b5b3bb%2F0_0_1467_2131%2F1467.jpg>
 Rowan Atkinson appeared in Barclaycard ads in the 1980s and 90s. 
The card was “born” in a derelict shoe and boot factory 
<https://www.home.barclays/about-barclays/history/barclaycard.html> in 
Northampton that had been converted into Barclaycard’s HQ. At that time cash 
was the most popular form of payment, and the idea of paying by plastic was 
completely alien to most people, some of whom took the view that credit cards 
were an undesirable American import. Barclaycard was based on Bank of America’s
BankAmericard 
<http://about.bankofamerica.com/en-us/our-story/birth-of-modern-credit-card.html#fbid=Uou2U5d6zQR>
, launched in 1958. There was also a widely held view that the credit card was 
an inflationary system that encouraged people to spend money they did not have.


However, the banking group had some weapons up its sleeve. In order to 
generate widespread awareness of the launch it sent out 1m credit cards to 
Barclays customers – a marketing method the card company freely admits would be 
“absolutely unthinkable” today.


Then there were the mini-dress-wearing Barclaycard girls whose job was “to 
help educate and change people’s minds”.


As a spokesman explained: “Fifty years ago there wasn’t any specific credit 
regulation to govern how we went about business, so we had a lot more freedom 
in how we marketed the products.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ba73521465b1be021ef12ecbb3d1d9b39d31964%2F0_121_2136_1282%2F2136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Put%20it%20on%20the%20plastic%3A%20Barclaycard%2C%20the%20UK's%20first%20credit%20card%2C%20turns%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Put%20it%20on%20the%20plastic%3A%20Barclaycard%2C%20the%20UK%27s%20first%20credit%20card%2C%20turns%2050&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fjun%2F29%2Fput-it-plastic-barclaycard-uk-first-credit-card-50-1966%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7ba73521465b1be021ef12ecbb3d1d9b39d31964%2F0_121_2136_1282%2F2136.jpg>
 Barclaycard caravan. 
UK borrowing rises at fastest rate in more than a decade
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/uk-borrowing-rose-at-fastest-rate-in-more-than-a-decade>
From the outset, Barclaycard made enthusiastic use of various advertising 
methods. In 1968, a 60-second cinema advert, Travelling Light, featured a young 
woman out shopping in a bikini with a Barclaycard tucked into the bottom half 
of her swimsuit. (“Every second is worth watching. You will see Barclaycard in 
action, and we mean action!” promised the flyer for the ad.) The company’s TV 
adverts included a series of spoof spy commercials starring Rowan Atkinson in 
the 1980s and 90s.


The arrival on the scene in late 1972 of the Access credit card brand meant 
that at last Barclaycard had some serious competitition. Nevertheless, it 
racked up its 2 millionth cardholder in early 1973. Today it has 10.5 million 
UK customers, which means it accounts for a sizeable chunk of the 59m credit 
cards in circulation.

 A 1966 advert. 
While for millions of people credit cards provide a cost-effective way to 
borrow,they have left many nursing expensive long-term debts. The debt charity
StepChange <https://www.stepchange.org/> said credit cards were now the most 
common type of debt seen by its advisers. “The average credit card debt we see 
is now at £8,403, about half our clients’ average annual take-home pay, and 
there is a clear need for change,” said the charity, which provides free and 
independent debt advice.

Bank of England figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/29/uk-borrowing-rose-at-fastest-rate-in-more-than-a-decade>
 show net borrowing on credit cards rose by £418m during May, and outstanding 
debt on cards is now £1.3bn more than at the beginning of 2016. The data shows 
that consumers’ appetite for borrowing on plastic has picked up markedly since 
the months after the 2008 financial crisis.
 