
While European leaders believe they are edging towards a solution to 
the refugee crisisafter securing a deal with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-strikes-deal-with-turkey-to-send-back-refugees-from-greece>
, another power watches closely from afar: Russia.

A tweet from its foreign ministry spokeswoman said much this week. “The 
migration crisis has been caused by irresponsible attempts to spread 
western-type democracy to the Middle East,” was the message from Maria 
Zakharova, hours before EU leaders were set to convene in Brussels. It didn’t 
just reflect Moscow’s well-known resistance to anything that smacks of 
western-driven regime change – it was also meant as a rebuke.

Russia has been accused of “weaponising” the refugee crisis 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35706238> as a way of destabilising 
Europe – a claim recently reinforced by Nato’s top commander in Europe. That 
assertion may well be disputed. What is beyond doubt is the continuing need to 
know what Russia is thinking, and what goals it might pursue as it watches the 
EU confront multiple crises.

EU strikes deal with Turkey to send back refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/18/eu-strikes-deal-with-turkey-to-send-back-refugees-from-greece>
To get a glimpse into Vladimir Putin’s mind, it’s worth reading the recent 
writings of his foreign minister,Sergei Lavrov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/lavrov>. In a long article published this 
month by the Moscow-based magazine Russia in Global Affairs–translated here 
into English 
<http://www.mid.ru/en/foreign_policy/news/-/asset_publisher/cKNonkJE02Bw/content/id/2124391>
 – Lavrov spells it out with clarity. What Russia wants is nothing short of 
fundamental change: a formal, treaty-based say on Europe’s political and 
security architecture. Until Russia gets that, goes the message, there will be 
no stability on the continent. The key sentence in the article is this: “During 
the last two centuries, any attempt to unite Europe without Russia and against 
it has inevitably led to grim tragedies.”

Lavrov is not a free thinker able to operate independently of his boss, Putin. 
He is a technocrat – post-Soviet Russia’s longest serving foreign minister (he 
has held the job since 2004). He plays the diplomatic instrument to a tune set 
solely by the president. It’s true western officials say Lavrov was privately 
incensed in 2014 by Putin’ssudden decision to annex Crimea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/18/putin-confirms-annexation-crimea-ukrainian-soldier-casualty>
 – a move that flew in the face of Russia’s traditional claims of wanting to 
uphold “international law” – but he stuck to the official script. It is no 
coincidence that Lavrov’s article ran just as Russia was playing for high 
stakes in Syria, and the Europeans were scrambling for a policy on migrants.

To say that Putin has “weaponised” the refugee crisis hands him too much 
control over events, for Russia didn’t start the crisis. But it has capitalised 
on a situation that has deepened Europe’s weaknesses and divisions. And the 
crisis has boosted the far-right European movements thatRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> supports.

Nato’s commander is right to point out that Russia, alongside its protege, 
Bashar al-Assad, has“exacerbated” the refugee crisis 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/middle-east/russia-and-syria-weaponising-refugee-crisis-to-destabilise-europe-nato-commander-claims-a6909241.html>
. The actions of its bomber planes over Syria, especially in the Aleppo region, 
have pushed thousands more desperate families towards the Turkish border. But 
it should be remembered that the day the migrant crisis first seared itself 
into the public consciousness was not in 2015 but on 3 October 2013, when 
hundreds drowned off the island of Lampedusa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/oct/03/lampedusa-boat-tragedy-italy-migrants>
. That was long before Russia launched its military intervention in Syria.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fputin-long-game-omens-europe-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F334a1cb6d00ec069f8911638b583f70322ab8891%2F82_440_4922_2953%2F4922.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Putin%E2%80%99s%20long%20game%20has%20been%20revealed%2C%20and%20the%20omens%20are%20bad%20for%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fputin-long-game-omens-europe-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Putin%E2%80%99s%20long%20game%20has%20been%20revealed%2C%20and%20the%20omens%20are%20bad%20for%20Europe%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F18%2Fputin-long-game-omens-europe-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F334a1cb6d00ec069f8911638b583f70322ab8891%2F82_440_4922_2953%2F4922.jpg>
 ‘Lavrov seems to draw a comparison between Putin and Peter the Great, who 
relied on ‘tough domestic measures and resolute, successful foreign policy’ to 
make Russia a key European player.’ Photograph: Alexander Shcherbak/TASS 
Nevertheless, it’s fascinating to see how Lavrov references European history 
to bolster his claim that without Russia’s cooperation the continent can only 
be exposed to chaos. He points to Catherine the Great (whose chancellor once 
proudly said: “Not a single cannon inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> can be fired without our 
consent”), the Napoleonic wars and the Crimean conflict of 1853-56. He presents 
a sweeping, paranoid version of history, in which “western” Europeans have, 
throughout the ages, conspired to victimise and humiliate Russia.

Lavrov seems to draw a comparison between Putin and Peter the Great, who 
relied on “tough domestic measures and resolute, successful foreign policy” to 
make Russia a key European player “in little over two decades”. He repeats 
Moscow’s mantras about the cold war not being lost by Russia but ending with 
the “unlucky chain of events” that led to the dissolution of the USSR. EU and 
Nato enlargement, he writes, were not about “smaller European countries” going 
from “subjugation to freedom”, but about simply changing “leadership”. The 
result: today, these countries “can’t take any significant decision without the 
green light from Washington or Brussels”. In this wild mix, EU institutions are 
equated to no less than Soviet totalitarianism.

But the centrepiece of Lavrov’s argument is that, after 1991, “we should have 
created a new foundation for European security”, and now is the time to do so – 
if the “systemic problems” that have arisen between Russia and the west are to 
be overcome. This is not a new Russian message, but Moscow is keen to insert it 
into current European debates. Last month,Dmitry Medvedev 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/dmitry-medvedev> made that clear while 
attending the Munich security conference. Russia’s prime minister may have made 
headlines with his talk of a new “cold war” or the dangers of a “third global 
tragedy” – but just as significantly, he bluntly called for a revision of the 
“architecture of Euro-Atlantic security”.

From the Stalinist-style gothic skyscraper of his ministry in Moscow, Lavrov 
has laid out the long game

This year is one that arguably offers Russia an unprecedented window of 
opportunity to push that demand. The refugee crisis threatens key EU 
institutions, a referendum looms on the UK’s relationship to Europe, the 
Franco-German couple is in dire straits, Angela Merkel is politically weakened, 
Ukraine is unstable, populist movements are spreading throughout the continent, 
the Balkans are experiencing new tensions, and the US is busy with an election 
campaign imbued with isolationism.

No doubt, Russia itself is not as strong as it would like to be. Its economy 
is in recession and sanctions are biting. But from the Stalinist-style gothic 
skyscraper of his ministry in Moscow, Lavrov has laid out the long game.

There has been much discussion about Putin’s policies in Syria. Many judge 
that Russia has tried to emerge as a power on a parity with the US, even 
outmanouevring it. And there’s a rationale to that. For by rekindling a 
US-Russia duality reminiscent of the cold war – or at least the pretence of it 
– Putin calculates that the ultimate geopolitical prize will come not in the 
Middle East but in Europe. That is where Russia’s historical obsessions truly 
lie. Reacting to that reality may well be the next struggle for the continent.
 