
Payday lenders QuickQuid and Pounds to Pocket are to write off more than 2,500 
loans to customers and refund almost 1,500 people who were granted loans they 
could not afford to repay.

The lenders’ parent company, CashEuroNet UK, has agreed with the City 
regulator to provide redress worth £1.7m after it found customers were able to 
borrow amounts greater than they could afford to repay.

The firms operate online and offer short-term loans to borrowers. 

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) took over regulation of the payday loans 
sector in April 2014 and has been working with firms to improve their lending 
practices.

The regulator’s investigations have so far unearthed problems with thousands 
of short-term high-cost loans granted by the biggest operators in the sector.

In October 2014, the UKs biggest payday lender, Wonga, was forced to write off 
330,000 loans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/oct/02/wonga-writes-off-customer-debt> 
and to compensate 45,000 other customers. More recentlyThe Money Shop’s owner, 
Dollar Financial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/oct/26/dollar-financial-ordered-to-repay-154m-to-customers>
, was told to refund £15.4m to 147,000 customers.

The FCA sent a skilled person to CashEuroNet in September 2014 to review the 
firm’s lending decisions, who found problems with the way loans were granted.


The firm has now made changes to its lending criteria and has reassessed all 
loans given between 1 April 2014 and 28 February 2015 that were at least 30 
days in arrears.

It found 3,940 customers were lent sums in excess of what they could afford to 
repay. Of these, 2,523 will have their current loan balance written off, 961 
will get a cash refund of interest paid on the unaffordable element of the loan 
and 456 customers will get a cash refund and have their current loan balance 
written off.

Jonathan Davidson, director of supervision – retail and authorisations at the 
FCA, said: “We are pleased that CashEuroNet is working with us to address our 
concerns.

“It is important that firms carry out appropriate affordability checks and pay 
particular attention to the fair treatment of those who have trouble meeting 
their loan repayments.”


CashEuroNet UK said that over the period in question it had issued more than 
210,000 loans and those affected represented around 2% of customers. It added 
that the majority of the loans involved were given between April and August of 
2014 while it was introducing new protocols.

Nick Drew, UK managing director of CashEuroNet, said: “We appreciate the 
opportunity to work with the FCA and the skilled person to review our 
processes, and we are pleased they’ve witnessed how seriously we take our 
regulatory responsibilities and our constant desire to achieve good outcomes 
for our customers.

“We apologise to the 4,000 affected customers and we are pleased to be able to 
address this with the announced redress plan.”

Borrowers who have been affected will be contacted by CashEuroNet by email 
within two days, and it will make repayments within 60 to 90 days.

 