Who owns Southern?  Southern is a joint venture between Arriva UK Trains and 
the MTR Corporation  Govia Thameslink Railway, which in turn is a subsidiary of 
Govia, a joint venture between Go-Ahead and Keolis  Deutsche Bahn  FirstGroup 
Who owns South West Trains?  Stagecoach Group  Arriva UK Trains, a subsidiary 
of Deutsche Bahn  FirstGroup  National Express Group Who owns Virgin East Coast?
 Virgin Group  It's in public ownership  Stagecoach (90%) and Virgin (10%): 
it's a joint venture  SNCF Who owns Virgin West Coast?  Virgin Group  Deutsche 
Bahn  51% Virgin Group and 49% Stagecoach: it's a join venture Who owns 
Scotrail?  Scotland  Abellio, a subsidiary of Nederlandse Spoorwegen, the 
Netherlands' state owned rail company  Capita  Serco Who owns the Caledonian 
sleeper?  It's a subsidiary of ScotRail  Transport Solutions  Serco Previously 
run as part of ScotRail, the Caledonian Sleeper has been operated by Serco 
since April 2015  Deutsche Bahn Who owns Great Western Railway?  Isambard 
Kingdom Brunel  Arriva  Nederlandse Spoorwegen  FirstGroup Previously branded 
as First Great Western, FirstGroup signed an extension to run this franchise 
until 2019 last year Who owns East Midlands Trains?  Stagecoach Group  Virgin 
Group  FirstGroup  Arriva Who owns Northern Rail?  It's a joint venture between 
FirstGroup and Renfe, the Spanish operator  It's a joint venture between 
FirstGroup and Virgin Group  It's a joint venture between Serco and Capita  
It's run by Arriva UK TrainsAbellio and Serco co-ran the Northern Rail 
franchise until it was replaced by Arriva-run Northern in April 2016 Who owns 
Merseyrail  It's in public ownership  It's a joint venture between Abellio and 
Serco  It's a joint venture between Stagecoach and Virgin  It's a joint venture 
between FirstGroup and Renfe, the Spanish operator  You gotâ€¦  Challenge your 
friends Submit answers  