
The Department for Education has revealed that the number of primary school 
children being suspended for racist behaviourhas risen by a third in the past 
few years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/26/rise-in-primary-school-pupils-suspended-for-racist-abuse>
, from 430 incidents in 2014-15 compared with 320 in 2009-10.

This is not a case of “political correctness gone mad”; children as young as 
six 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2477136/hundreds-of-primary-school-children-as-young-as-six-suspended-from-class-for-racial-and-sexual-abuse/>
 are not being routinely suspended for just poor choice of language. The issue 
is more widespread than individual schools and speaks volumes about a society 
where young children mimic racial abuse. Such an increase should come as no 
surprise, given the nature of the Tory-led government’s increasingly racist 
social policy.

There are undoubtedly a variety of reasons for the increase in reported racial 
incidents in schools. A spokeswoman for the DfE explained that the figures 
showed an increase in reporting,“not necessarily that there had been more 
incidents” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/26/rise-in-primary-school-pupils-suspended-for-racist-abuse>
. Due to the Prevent agenda, schools are nowsites of surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/23/prevent-counter-terrorism-strategy-schools-demonising-muslim-children>
 where teachers are expected to report signs of “nonviolent extremism”. In the 
age of hyper-vigilance it is certainly possible that teachers are being more 
sensitive in their reporting.

Schools could, maybe even should, offer a corrective to the corrosive social 
attitudes that children bring in

It is also easy to lay blame at the door of parents for their children’s poor 
behaviour and tie these figures into the wider problem of abuse that teachers 
face in schools. However, the sociologist C Wright Mills warned against seeing 
public issues of society as personal troubles of individuals. If we take the 
figures at face value then a large increase in racist abuse in primary schools 
is a symptom of a wider societal problem. And even adults have to get their 
cues from somewhere. When the“fruitcakes, loonies and closet racists” 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/4875026.stm> of Ukip have become mainstream and 
Nigel Farage is deemed as some kind of lovable rogue, then the well has truly 
been poisoned.

The young child spouting racist abuse is drawing from the toxic environment 
towards immigrants that the Tories have contributed to since coming to power. 
Theresa May, the one constant since 2010, presided over a Home Office that 
thought it appropriate tosend vans round the capital 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/22/go-home-vans-scrapped-failure> 
telling illegal immigrants to “go home”. The vans were just the visible 
expression of her anti-immigration policy which includedrefusing entry to 
parents for their child’s funeral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jan/20/andrea-gada-parents-write-cameron-funeral-visa-plea-rejected>
; illegally deporting almost50,000 foreign students 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/student/news/theresa-may-wrongly-deported-48000-students-after-bbc-panorama-exposes-toeic-scam-a6958286.html>
; andleaving people to drown in the Mediterranean 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/the-government-is-leaving-people-to-drown-in-the-mediterranean-sea-ed-miliband-says-10192380.html>
 as a deterrent to anyone thinking of migrating to Europe.

The vote for Brexit demonstrated the depth of anti-immigrant feeling in 
Britain, as did thesharp rise in racial attacks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 following the referendum. But the truth is that Brexit and its aftermath were 
just the crest of a wave of anti-immigrant sentiment that the Conservatives 
have been riding since 2010. One of the main reasons that a referendum on 
Brexit was offered by the Tories before the last election, was to play to the 
concerns of the electorate about immigration. David Cameron badly miscalculated 
whenhe assumed 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/how-david-cameron-lost-brexit-eu-referendum-prime-minister-campaign-remain-boris-craig-oliver-jim-messina-obama/>
 that people would not “vote themselves poorer because they don’t like the 
Poles living next door”. But as the saying goes, you reap what you sow. You 
cannot spend years stoking the flames of anti-immigrant feeling and then 
complain when they set you alight. The Tories are complicit in creating an 
environment where racist abuse is flourishing.

Rise in primary school pupils suspended for racist abuse
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/26/rise-in-primary-school-pupils-suspended-for-racist-abuse>
Schools could, maybe even should, offer a corrective to the corrosive social 
attitudes that children bring in with them. But the fragmentation of the system 
makes this more difficult to deliver. On top of this, the government’s response 
is to“promote British values” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/sajid-javid-british-values-oath-casey-review-social-integration>
, completely ignoring that this very notion is part of the problem. The logic 
goes that in order to protect these “British” values, which supposedly keep the 
nation together, we need to pull up the drawbridge to prevent society being 
polluted by alien ideas. Notions of Britain as a benevolent force for good in 
the less advanced parts of the world were central to the British empire. 
Unsurprisingly, recycling ideas of colonial supremacy, in the form of “British 
values”, does little to reduce racist incidents in schools.

When the government feeds off anti-immigrant sentiment it is sadly no wonder 
that young children are increasingly bringing racism into the classroom. We 
would be wrong to think that this problem can be solved at a school or 
individual level.Children <https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> act as 
a mirror for the environment they grow up in, and the challenge is to build a 
society we are happy for them to reflect.
 