
Emails released by WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
 show Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel used personal email accounts and a personal 
email domain to communicate with government officials and political figures, 
according to a published report.

WikiLeaks emails: what they revealed about the Clinton campaign's mechanics
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/wikileaks-emails-hillary-clinton-campaign-john-podesta>
Emanuel’s personal account information turned up among the thousands of emails 
from John Podesta, Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton’s campaign 
chairman, theChicago Tribune reported <http://trib.in/2frn1f5>. Clinton has 
come under fire for her use of a private email server while secretary of state, 
because doing so potentially jeopardized classified information.

Emanuel registered his personal email domain, “rahmemail.com”, on 16 May 2011, 
the day he was sworn into office. The hacked emails also turned up evidence of 
Emanuel’s personal Gmail account.

Adam Collins, a spokesman for the mayor, said Emanuel’s use of a customized 
email domain, or name, is common, and that it was created to ensure the mayor 
was not using a government email for personal or political purposes.

He added that Emanuel has not and does not use a private email server like the 
one Clinton used to transfer emails. Collins did not say whether Emanuel has 
used either of the personal email accounts to conduct government business.

The messages included in the WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/wikileaks> leaks were among the first direct 
evidence that Emanuel has used personal email accounts as mayor beyond official 
city government accounts.

Emanuel was sued by the Chicago Tribune last year in a still-pending case 
seeking access to his emails under the state’s open record laws. Under Illinois 
law, government business conducted over email by a public official is subject 
to the state’s open records law, but Emanuel’s office argued that the emails 
sought by the Tribune are not public records.

The newspaper’s Freedom of Information Act requests filed since Emanuel took 
office have turned up little to no email communications from the mayor on his 
government email accounts.

“After the mayor’s election in 2011, the campaign fund set up a new email to 
ensure the mayor was not using government email for private or political use, 
which could violate city ordinance or state law,’” Collins told the newspaper. 
“A dedicated Gmail domain allowed for better security given the growing threat 
of cyberattacks.”

Forget the FBI cache; the Podesta emails show how America is run | Thomas Frank
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/the-podesta-emails-show-who-runs-america-and-how-they-do-it>
Federal records show that since taking office, Emanuel used his custom email 
domain to send at least seven messages on two different strings to Clinton 
while she was secretary of state, the newspaper reported. One involved an 
invitation for a joint appearance in Chicago.

“Sorry, but I’m scheduled to be in the Balkans so would love a rain check for 
next time. All the best, Mayor,” Clinton wrote back.

In June 2014, Clinton made good on her rain check, participating in a special 
Ideas Week interview.

The hacked emails WikiLeaks released also showed Emanuel, a former congressman 
who was briefly Barack Obama’s White House chief of staff, using his 
rahmemail.com domain to contact Podesta. The day after Emanuel was forced into 
a runoff in his re-election bid, Podesta used a Gmail address for Emanuel 
instead of the rahmemail.com account.
 