
If solidarity among British people experiencing a common misfortune could be 
measured, the scientific unit would be the blitz. When train delays are 
announced, sensitive instruments might read the synchronised rolling of eyes on 
station concourses in milliblitzes. Inside a carriage that has stopped between 
stations, there is a steady buildup of centiblitzes, which can, at a certain 
atmospheric density, make strangers talk to each other.

That threshold could be called the Southern point, in honour of the rail 
company <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> that has done so much 
to generate feelings of collective grievance in confined spaces over the past 
year. It is not, of course, a replica of the spirit of endurance that withstood 
aerial bombardment by the Luftwaffe. Southern are not military aggressors. (The 
analogy is doubly inappropriate because the lone upside to oppression by a 
totalitarian regime is supposed to be trains that run on time.)

Rising fares and crowded trains: the misery of Britain's rail users
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/31/rising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users>
Southern’s name is associated with a lesser suffering. People offer 
commiseration when they learn that I rely onthe notoriously unreliable network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/30/southern-rail-passengers-face-new-year-disruption-as-strikes-bite>
, as if told that I have been diagnosed with some untreatable ailment. In a 
properly commercial environment such a company would be finished. Southern’s 
brand is toast.

But market mechanisms for punishing failure do not apply on railways. The 
customer is captive. We pay what we must, and hand over more each year. This 
week’s averagerise, of 2.3% across the network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/03/campaigners-brave-cold-to-protest-at-stations-over-fare-increases>
, is double the rate of inflation. Research by the Campaign for Better 
Transport has found that the cost per minute of some journeyssurpasses the 
extortion of premium-rate telephone calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/03/rail-fares-cost-commuters-up-to-14-of-their-income-says-study>
.

The theory of rail privatisation is that competition functions at the level of 
bidding for the franchises. Efficient providers supplant rotten rivals. It is 
possible that something along those lines has actually happened. We have no way 
to access the counterfactual network where weaker bids succeeded and the 
service is even more of a rip-off.

Nor can we visit the parallel universe where British Rail was not broken up. 
Discounting false memory and ideological commitment to nationalisation, there 
is no reason to imagine that this never-privatised system is a utopia of comfy 
carriages gliding into pristine stations with the precision timing of a Swiss 
watch. Those of us old enough to have used BR recall that the name was as 
synonymous with shabbiness asSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> is today.

The volume of passenger journeys was then about half its current level, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/14/train-journey-numbers-double-since-privatisation-railways-uk-report>
 although it is hard to argue that millions of people were enticed on to the 
railways by the delights of private firms. Housing costs in central London and 
road congestion have shaped commuting patterns on the busiest parts of the 
railway.

Meanwhile, the privatised network is still reliant on public money. On top of 
direct subsidies, private operators are compensated for notionally lost revenue 
caused by maintenance of the track, which is the responsibility of state-owned 
Network Rail. (So when you are stranded by engineering works, the train company 
that sold you the ticket is getting paid twice.)

Rail fares: train operators accused of milking the system as rises kick in
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/rail-fares-train-operators-accused-of-milking-the-system-as-rises-kick-in>
Britain’s railways do not suffer from a shortage of state involvement but from 
the lack of accountability. There is no quick mechanism by which passengers’ 
experience of bad service becomes an incentive for providers to raise their 
game. The old state monopoly was no better. We took what we were given then 
too. If the public is receptive to renationalisation – andopinion polls suggest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/29/labour-promises-to-renationalise-english-railways>
 the idea can be popular – it is because the status quo is miserable enough for 
any radical-sounding alternative to acquire some allure, not because the 
proposed remedy fixes the problem. And if the policy gains wider support it 
will be in spite of trade union enthusiasm, not because of it.

Strikes over plans to put drivers in charge of door-closing have compounded 
commuter discomfort. In recent months, I have been in enough carriages where 
the blitz-o-meter has ticked into the chatting zone to detect a slide in 
sympathy away from the strikers. People like the idea of guards on trains in 
the same way they liked bus conductors. They humanise the service. Despite 
Southern’s offers of job security to existing guards, the suspicion remains 
that the company is seeking to ditch jobs, and no one expects any cost savings 
to translate into cheaper fares.

But the political dynamic being gamed by unions is also well understood: 
passengers must suffer for the government to come under pressure to resolve the 
dispute. Strikes are designed to punish exploitative employers by withholding 
labour, halting production, thus depriving bosses of income. That doesn’t work 
on a privatised rail line. Instead, users of the service soak up the pain.

Desperate commuters, it’s time for a rebellion the government can’t ignore | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/08/commuters-rebellion-government-cant-ignore-southern-rail>
Unions say they are acting in the interests of passenger safety, but that 
argument sounds flimsy whenplenty of lines run securely with guardless trains 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/One-man_operation#United_Kingdom>. Support for 
the Southern strikers relies instead on a vintage notion of solidarity – the 
assertion that rail chiefs and ministers are the common enemy of rail workers 
and passengers. That theoretical alliance isn’t so plausible when the 
passengers feel like hostages to someone else’s contractual dispute. They do 
not care how the conflict started, nor do they dwell on the hierarchy of blame. 
There is enough to go around for unions, train companies and the government.

Commuters’ only fellow-feeling is for each other. Even that is sorely tested 
when a packed train is ready for departure. There is barely a microblitz 
between the lucky ones inside the carriage and those on the platform pointing 
furiously through the windows at spaces in the aisles.

Those scenes are a metaphor for more of British politics than failing 
transport policy. We know, in theory, that limited resources must be shared; 
that the system is designed for others’ needs as well as our own. But it is 
hard to sustain that generous spirit in the rush hour, when stress narrows the 
focus on to our individual journey home.

At that moment, the citizen-passengers are not interested in ideological 
questions of structure and ownership. They are not excited by arguments about 
privatisation. They just want a service that works. But they feel caught in a 
crossfire between polarised forces, and they can’t say with confidence that any 
of the warring parties is really on their side.

• Catch up on our discussion about this article in the Your Opinions thread 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/your-opinions-ivan-rogers-brexit-successor-southern-trains-crisis>
.
 