
The civil servant who awarded Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> its rail franchise made the 
decision to do so while owning a large share in a consultancy that had been 
advising the troubled operator’s parent company.

Peter Wilkinson, who had been hired by the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> (DfT) to act as its franchising 
director, was involved in awarding the Southern, Thameslink and Great Northern 
franchises to Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR) in May 2014.

Govia withholds compensation from delayed rail customers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/11/govia-withholds-compensation-from-delayed-rail-customers>
At the time, he was a director and the joint main shareholder of First Class 
Partnerships, which he continued to be for 20 months after his hiring by the 
DfT in January 2013.

Wilkinson had been managing the consultancy, which styled itself as “a leading 
rail industry boutique consultancy business”, since 2002, but stepped down when 
the government employed him as a contractor under an agreement with FCP.

Govia was a longstanding client of Wilkinson’s company and had been paying it 
for consultancy advice six months before thefranchise was awarded 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/new-rail-franchising-deal-set-to-transform-passenger-services-across-london-and-south-east>
. The government ispaying Govia about £8.9bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/23/firstgroup-loses-thameslink-franchise-go-ahead-joint-venture>
 over seven years to run the three-franchise network, which is thelargest to 
date 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/rail-franchising-thameslink-southern-great-northern>
 in terms of passenger numbers.

Southern rail passengers have experienced months of strikes, delays and 
cancellations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/latest-southern-rail-strike-expected-to-cause-severe-disruption>
 amid a long-running industrial dispute over therole of train guards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
. Drivers on the network are in the middle ofthree days of strikes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-strike-cut-from-six-days-to-three>
 this week, which will be followed byanother three days of action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
 later this month.

Trade unions have accused Wilkinson, who retains a senior post at the DfT, of 
being the hatchet mandriving the Southern rail dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/peter-wilkinson-the-man-the-unions-say-is-driving-the-southern-rail-strike?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_Gmail>
. He was forced to apologise after he told a public meeting last year “we have 
got to break” train drivers and warned that those who resisted government plans 
should “get the hell out of my industry”.

In June 2014, while Wilkinson was franchising director, he was also involved in
awarding a 15-year franchise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/27/essex-thameside-franchise-c2c-awarded>
, Essex Thameside, to National Express-owned c2c.

The operator said it had paid for the services of FCP in the past, but not 
while Wilkinson was in charge of awarding franchises between January 2013 and 
October 2014. When asked to state the last time it used FCP, c2c did not 
respond.

Whitehall documents obtained by the Guardian under freedom of information 
legislation show that in January 2013, Wilkinson declared he was a director of 
FCP and owned shares in the company. He said he was “stepping aside from the 
firm for the duration of this DfT role”. He believed there was a “risk of 
perceived conflict of interest, but should not be one in practice”.


In August 2014, however, DfT officials concluded that Wilkinson had a clear 
conflict of interest between his shares in FCP and his government work. After a 
discussion with the department’s ethics and propriety team, an official wrote 
that the arrangement in which he was seconded from FCP “feels very 
uncomfortable”.

Peter Wilkinson: the man the unions say is driving the Southern rail strike
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/peter-wilkinson-the-man-the-unions-say-is-driving-the-southern-rail-strike>
In October 2014, Wilkinson stepped down as a director of FCP and was forced to 
sell all his shares, cutting his ties with the consultancy. At that time, he 
had accepted another job at the DfT.

He is paid £265,000 a year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/492289/150K_senior_salaries.csv/preview>
 as the department’s managing director of rail passenger services, responsible 
for the national franchising strategy and all aspects of procurement.

Wilkinson and the government also face questions about payments made by the 
DfT to FCP while he was franchising director.

Official data shows that the DfT made 31 payments worth a total of £805,422 to 
FCP between February 2013 and October 2014. At least 12 of these payments, 
amounting to £356,535, related to what the department called “rail 
franchising”, the area of the ministry for which Wilkinson had responsibility.

When Wilkinson was employed as a contractor between January 2013 and October 
2014, the DfT said, his contract included strict procedures to prevent 
conflicts of interest, while FCP implemented measures to ensure that any 
conflicts of interest were avoided.


The department said there were tight controls in place to prevent any conflict 
of interest when payments were made to FCP. A DfT spokesperson said: “The 
department regularly contracts and recruits people with relevant industry and 
commercial expertise, to help it achieve the best result for passengers and 
taxpayers. We have robust safeguards to guard against any conflicts of interest.

“Decisions on franchise awards are taken by the department following a fair 
and open competition. Each franchise award is subject to thorough and 
independent audit.” Wilkinson did not comment.

I work for Southern rail: this is why I am striking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2017/jan/07/southern-rail-train-driver-why-strikes-commuters>
According to the DfT, Wilkinson was recruited after an open and fair 
competition tostart work at short notice 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/peter-wilkinson-appointed-dft-interim-franchising-director>
 as franchising director, initially for six months, with the aim of 
kickstarting a faltering franchising programme.

According to the DfT, his long career in the rail industry had included work 
on the privatisation of British Rail and leading negotiations on both sides of 
franchising.

GTR said it had regularly employed the services of FCP since 2005 at an annual 
fee of about £18,000.

A spokeswoman said it had paid FCP more than £10,000 for general consultancy 
services between September and November 2013, adding “this would have been the 
time when we were working on our bid [for the franchise]”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frail-franchise-boss-peter-wilkinson-gave-southern-contract-client-consultancy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb4beba422554f1cdb19f0c12e9b277c11aab181%2F0_9_2601_1561%2F2601.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rail%20franchise%20mandarin's%20board%20gave%20Southern%20contract%20to%20client%20of%20his%20company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frail-franchise-boss-peter-wilkinson-gave-southern-contract-client-consultancy%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rail%20franchise%20mandarin%27s%20board%20gave%20Southern%20contract%20to%20client%20of%20his%20company&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Frail-franchise-boss-peter-wilkinson-gave-southern-contract-client-consultancy%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbb4beba422554f1cdb19f0c12e9b277c11aab181%2F0_9_2601_1561%2F2601.jpg>
 Southern trains parked at Selhurst station in south London during the latest 
strike action. Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
Govia is partly owned by France’s train operator, Keolis, which is 70% owned 
by the state railway company SNCF. FCP alsolists Keolis as a client 
<http://www.fcpworld.net/clients/>. The Guardian asked Keolis when it had used 
FCP, but the company declined to answer, saying: “We don’t comment on the 
detail of any commercial relationships.”

FCP said it could not answer questions about clients because it was bound by 
strict confidentiality. “Our work is wide ranging and we have always maintained 
comprehensive confidentiality and conflict of interest processes with all our 
clients, in line with public procurement rules,” a spokesman said.


After Wilkinson’s appointment as a permanent civil servant in October 2014, 
“he resigned from First Class Partnerships Ltd and our shareholders bought back 
his shares,” the spokesman added.


Wilkinson apologised for comments 
<http://data.parliament.uk/writtenevidence/committeeevidence.svc/evidencedocument/transport-committee/improving-rail-passenger-experience/oral/35323.html>
 he made to a public meeting in south London organised by a Conservative MP to 
discuss the railways in February last year.He told the meeting 
<http://www.croydonadvertiser.co.uk/dft-official-apologises-telling-train-drivers/story-28785666-detail/story.html>
: “Over the next three years, we’re going to be having punch-ups and we will 
see industrial action, and I want your support.”

He said train drivers were well paid. “I’m furious about it and it has got to 
change – we have got to break them. They have all borrowed money to buy cars 
and got credit cards,” he said.

“They can’t afford to spend too long on strike and I will push them into that 
place. They will have to decide if they want to give a good service or get the 
hell out of my industry.”

 *  If you would like to pass on information in confidence, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>).
 