
The 2.3% average UK rail fare rises 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/02/train-fares-to-go-up-by-23-in-2017>
 for 2017 are being driven by much higher increases on the reprivatised Virgin 
Trains East Coast, where ticket prices set by the operator will far outstrip 
the rate of inflation.

While regulated fares such as season tickets and off-peak returns, which are 
set by the government, are to increase by 1.9%, fares onVirgin Trains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginrail> East Coast will increase by 
4.9% overall.


The rail firm said that would be hiking the fares it controls by an average of 
around 5.5%.

An off-peak single from London to Edinburgh on the east coast line, which now 
costs £128.20, will be £137.20 – 7% more – in January, while a 
London-to-Newcastle single also goes up 7% to £131.70.


Virgin will also be raising the average train fares it controls on its west 
coast intercity service from London to Manchester and Glasgow, with overall 
fares rising by 2.4%.


Fares will also rise by an average of 2.4% on First Group’s Great Western 
Railway. The German-owned Arriva has not responded to confirm the overall fare 
rises on its franchises, but some long-distance anytime fares on its Cross 
Country appear to be rising sharply: for example Bristol to Darlington will be 
4.8% more expensive, at £149 for a single.

On some franchises, such as Govia Thameslink Railway – including Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/southern-rail-govia-thameslink-legal-action-stop-driver-strike>
 – Southeastern, Greater Anglia and National Express’s C2C, fares set by the 
operator will actually slightly trail the government’s increase next year, with 
average fares rising by 1.8% on each. East Midland and South West fares will 
rise by 1.5%. First’s TransPennine Express said it would freeze advance fares, 
meaning an overall rise of 1.4%.

Virgin said it was tackling “historic anomalies” and would be making 10,000 
more discounted advance fares available every week on the east coast line for 
those booking ahead. It said that despite the 2017 rises, “standard anytime” 
tickets on long distance journeys were still 4% cheaper than when Virgin Trains 
took over the franchise in March 2015.


However, it has already been accused of making several “stealth hikes” to 
fares – includingremoving some of the cheapest advance fares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/01/virgin-trains-east-coast-accused-stealth-100-per-cent-fare-increase>
 in the first few months after it took over the franchise.


The rail firm – a partnership between Richard Branson’s Virgin and the 
transport group Stagecoach – won the franchise in March 2015, when it was
controversially reprivatised by the coalition government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/mar/01/east-coast-rail-line-returns-to-private-hands>
 after more than five years of operation in the public sector.

Passenger numbers have not risen in line with projections from the time of the 
bid, leaving the operator struggling to meet the £3.3bn in premiums it has 
promised to pay the Treasury by 2023, with the bulk of that due in the later 
years of the eight-year franchise.


David Horne, the Virgin Trains managing director on the east coast route, 
said: “The changes we’re making on 1 January will see more advance fares 
available, making it easier for those that can book ahead to grab a bargain.”


Train fares across Britain will go up by an average of 2.3% from January, 
according to figures released by the industry body, the Rail Delivery Group.


Lianna Etkind of the Campaign for Better Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> condemned the increase, warning that 
some passengers were “finding themselves priced off the railways”.


She said: “Between 1995 and 2016 passengers have seen average fares increase 
by 23.5%, and much more needs to be done by train operators and the government 
to give them a truly affordable railway.”

Paul Plummer, the chief executive of the Rail Delivery Group, which represents 
train operators and Network Rail, said: “We understand how passengers feel when 
fares go up, and we know that in some places they haven’t always got the 
service they pay for.


“Around 97p in every pound passengers pay goes back into running and improving 
services. Fares are influenced by government policy, either through 
government-regulated fares such as season tickets or as a result of the 
payments train companies make to government.”

But Mick Whelan, general secretary of Aslef, the train drivers’ union, said: 
“It is scandalous that the government is allowing the privatised train 
companies to make even more money for providing an ever poorer service. This 
new price hike – well above the rate of inflation – is indefensible.”

Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said Labour was committed to 
returning franchises to public ownership to “put an end to Britain’s rip-off 
railways”. He added: “Passengers are told that higher fares are necessary to 
fund investment, but vital projects have been delayed by years.Rail fares 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/rail-fares> have risen by 25% on average in 
the last six years alone, whilst real wages remain below their 2008 levels.

 “Money that could be used to keep fares down or reinvested to improve our 
services is instead subsidising the profits of private companies and other 
nations’ railway systems – it’s a scandal.”
 