
Campaigners will be protesting outside train stations in England and Scotland 
this week in response tohigher rail fares coming into effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/rail-fares-train-operators-accused-of-milking-the-system-as-rises-kick-in>
, as commuters return to work after the festive break.

Three campaign groups, We Own It <https://www.facebook.com/WeOwnItcampaign/>, 
Action For Rail <https://www.facebook.com/ActionForRail/> and Bring Back 
British Rail <https://www.facebook.com/bringbackbritishrail/> have joined 
forces and organised two nationwide days of action in England on Tuesday and 
Scotland on Wednesday and are calling for an end to the “rail rip off”.

Protests will take place at more than 100 stations 
<http://actionforrail.org/day-of-action-on-3rd-january-2017-help-us-end-railripoff/>
, with the largest planned for Manchester Piccadilly, King’s Cross in London 
and Glasgow Central station.

The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, is set to join the protest at King’s Cross, 
which will include a musical flash mob accompanied by a string quartet 
organised by another group,Campaign for Better Transport 
<http://www.bettertransport.org.uk/>. 

The Labour party has conducted research into train fares and found that season 
tickets have gone up by an average of 27% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2017/jan/02/rail-fares-train-operators-accused-of-milking-the-system-as-rises-kick-in>
 since 2010, while the TUC found that rail fares had risen at more than twice 
the rate of inflation and wages over the last decade.

While fares in the UK continue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/02/train-fares-to-go-up-by-23-in-2017>
 to rise,cuts to services and staffing are taking place across the network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/31/rising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users>
 with more ticket offices closing, removal of guards from trains, extension of 
driver-only operations and fewer staff at stations to provide help when 
passengers need it.

TUC general secretary, Frances O’Grady, said: “Years of failed privatisation 
have left us with sky-high ticket prices, overcrowded trains, understaffed 
services andout-of-date infrastructure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
. Privatetrain companies are milking the system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/dec/31/train-companies-pocket-millions-delays>
 and the government is letting them get away with it.”

Brian Adcock on rail ticket price hike – cartoon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2017/jan/02/brian-adcock-rail-ticket-price-hike-cartoon>
The UK has the most expensive railway system in Europe. UK workers on average 
salaries will spend 14% of their income on a monthly season ticket from Luton 
to London (£387) or 11% from Liverpool to Manchester (£292). By contrast, 
similar commutes would cost passengers only 2% of their incomes in France, 3% 
in Germany and Italy, and 4% in Spain.

Mick Whelan, the general secretary of Aslef, the union for train drivers and 
operators, said: “It is scandalous that the government is allowing privatised 
train companies to make even more money for providingan ever-poorer service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
.

“We have the most expensive railway in Europe and the train companies, aided 
and abetted by this government, are about to make it even more costly for 
people to travel.”
 