
Railtrack is likely to fail to deliver the much-vaunted west coast mainline 
upgrade, scuppering Sir Richard Branson's plans to start high-speedVirgin Trains
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/virginrail> services between London and 
Glasgow by May 2002, the rail regulator warned last night.

Tom Winsor, the regulator, is threatening legal action against Railtrack for 
falling behind on the £5.3bn upgrade of the west coast main line, and suggested 
that it might not be in a position to complete the project by the agreed date 
for Virgin's 125mph service. He said Railtrack was running into difficulty - 
although the job could "still be done".

Mike Grant, chief executive of the shadow Strategic Rail Authority, later 
joined Mr Winsor in expressing doubts about Railtrack's ability to deliver the 
project, the most crucial improvement in Britain's railways this decade. Mr 
Grant said: "It is important that we are given the confidence that the first 
stage of the operation will be delivered on time."

Upgrading track and signals is crucial to Sir Richard's plans for high-speed 
tilting trains, cutting the journey time between Manchester and London to less 
than two hours. Virgin said that Railtrack was confident of meeting its target, 
but if it failed Virgin would be entitled to compensation.

The new trains ordered by Virgin are on schedule. They will start to appear in 
the summer of 2001. All the fleet will be in place by October 2002.

Robin Gisby, Railtrack's director of network development, said he was 
"obviously disappointed" by Mr Winsor's action. He said that the company was 
"on schedule" to allow Virgin to run 125mph trains in 2002.

Mr Winsor said that exposing Railtrack through the courts would be a 
sufficient deterrent and there would be no fine. He agreed that he had a 
deteriorating relationship with Railtrack and that "it has been a history of 
promises made and not kept". The west coast project was two years behind 
schedule and its cost had climbed from £2.1bn to £5.3bn.

Mr Winsor said he was disappointed by Railtrack: "Like me, the travelling 
public simply will not understand or accept Railtrack's behaviour."

The company suffered another blow last night when an employment tribunal 
upheld an order by the railways inspectorate requiring it to improve 22 signals 
which had been passed when indicating danger.

The order was issued after the Paddington crash last October, but Railtrack 
appealed against it. The order does not affect the infamous signal 109, which 
was taken out of commission.

 Chris Leah, formerly Railtrack's operations director, has been appointed 
director of safety and environment.
 