
My husband, Ralph Innes, who has died aged 97, was one of the influx of 
refugees from Nazi oppression who have enriched the life of tBritain so much.

He was born Rolf Einzig, and brought up in Berlin in a secular Jewish family, 
the son of Bernhard Einzig, the managing director of an overcoat manufacturer, 
and his wife, Eugenia. When it became obvious that there was no future for 
young Jews in NaziGermany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany>, he came 
to Britain in early 1939 with the intention of completing his training in 
knitting technology.

Ralph worked on the night shift in a knitting factory in Manchester but then 
moved to Leicestershire, where he worked in a factory and continued his textile 
education at a college in Hinckley. When France was invaded during the second 
world war, there were scare stories about German paratroopers being dropped 
into the British countryside and many newspapers campaigned to intern German 
refugees. Ralph was taken to the Isle of Man, where hotels in Douglas, the 
capital, had been taken over as internment camps. Later the younger men were 
allowed to volunteer for war work in Australia or Canada and Ralph was sent to 
a hutted camp in Canada.

When Winston Churchill became the prime minister it was decided that refugees 
who wished could join the army. Ralph returned to Britain to sign up with the 
Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/reme/reme.aspx>. He went with his unit to France after 
D-day (when he was advised to change his name) and, at the end of the war, was 
promoted to a sergeant in the Intelligence Corps because he spoke German and he 
interrogated some suspected Nazis.

After the war he worked in a knitting factory and then was employed as a 
lecturer in knitting technology at Derby Technical College. During this period 
he married, and had two daughters, Charlotte and Jennifer, but his wife, 
Bettie, died of pneumonia when the children were four and two and he brought 
them up on his own.

He became a senior lecturer at Leicester Polytechnic (now De Montfort 
University) and was a director of the Institute of Linguists, and the
International Federation of Knitting Technologists 
<http://www.2bfuntex.eu/sites/default/files/event/files/IFKT%202014%20Second%20Announcement.pdf>
. All his life he was a socialist, inspired by the poverty he saw in Berlin 
when he was a boy, and was a long-standing member of the Labour party. He and I 
married in 1989 and lived happily in the Leicestershire village of Croft.

Ralph is survived by me, his daughters, my four children, and his niece, 
Hetty. Ralphâ€™s sister was the painter and illustratorSusan Einzig 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/jan/05/susan-einzig-obituary>, 
who died in 2009.
 