
Eight years after the banking crisis, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) has failed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
 its annual health check. If this were a medical before getting life insurance, 
it would be like a doctor telling the patient to get fit; it is not notice of 
sudden death.

RBS fails Bank of England stress test
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/30/rbs-fails-bank-of-england-stress-test>
So the bailed-out bank – already being kept alive by a £45bn lifeline from the 
taxpayer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/rbs-sale-fred-goodwin-bailout-years-of-losses>
 – is taking another dose of medicine to try to get itself into better shape. 
The prescription involves pulling back from riskier activities, and cutting 
costs. Next year it could get more difficult when thechief executive, Ross 
McEwan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/26/rbs-chief-executive-ross-mcewan-pay-2bn-loss-results-royal-bank-of-scotland>
, is expected to embark on a fresh round of cost-cutting. That may well mean 
more jobs are on the line.

The failure, though, is important. It illustrates the battle McEwan faces in 
getting the bank into a good enough shape so that the government stands a 
chance of selling off the73% stake it still owns in the Edinburgh-based bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/uk-government-starts-royal-bank-of-scotland-sell-off-rbs>
. As the Bank of England put it: “RBS remains susceptible to financial and 
economic stress.”

Why? The lending spree it embarked on before the 2008 crisis has left the bank 
with customers who find it difficult to make repayments when times get tough. 
Some 60% of its loans in Ireland are at risk of not being repaid. The bailout 
in 2008 was regarded by Brussels as state aid and one of the conditions 
attached was thatRBS sell off a 300-branch network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/clydesdale-bank-offer-rbs-royal-bank-scotland-branches>
. That is proving troublesome (and any hope of a profit on the sale seems to be 
long gone). Low interest rates are making it harder to generate profits that 
can be used to help bolster its financial position.

Crucially, it is still confessing its sins from the past. A key reason its 
health check went badly is that the Bank of England asked it to fess up about 
how much it might face in fines and legal costs in the year ahead. The figure 
has not been made public but analysts have calculated that the US Department of 
Justice could demand up to£8bn to rectify a decades-old mis-selling scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/rbs-may-fined-more-than-12bn-settle-us-mis-selling-scandal>
. The Bank of England said it had included “stressed projections of misconduct 
costs”.

RBS may be fined more than $12bn to settle US mis-selling scandal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/rbs-may-fined-more-than-12bn-settle-us-mis-selling-scandal>
In one way, though, the results of the so-called stress tests can be used to 
demonstrate that this is not the RBS of the past. The hypothetical scenario 
that the Bank of England subjected the main lenders to was the toughest yet – 
and not too dissimilar to the backdrop of the 2008 crisis. The test included a 
contraction in the global economy of almost 2%, a plunge in oil prices and 
nose-diving UK house prices.

In 2008 a key measure of its financial strength – its capital ratio – stood at 
4%. RBS went into this assessment with a15% capital ratio 
<http://www.investors.rbs.com/~/media/Files/R/RBS-IR/results-center/annual-report-2015.pdf>
 – the highest of any of the seven lenders tested, apart from Nationwide.

Even so, there is little to cheer for taxpayers. Philip Hammond, the 
chancellor, has already admitted he has abandoned any immediate hope of selling 
any more of the stake. The Office for Budget Responsibility is no longer 
factoring in any sales during the lifetime of this parliament. In March it had 
expected £21.5bn of sales of RBS shares – although given the stake is currently 
worth around £16bn, this projection would have been revised down.

For savers, the picture is the same as before: £75,000 of savings is guaranteed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/03/bank-of-england-cuts-savings-protection-euro-crisis>
 – as it is for all UK banks – by the financial services compensation scheme.

With the sell-off heading further into the distance, the questions about 
whether a new prescription is needed may start to get louder. The New Economics 
Foundation, for instance, thinks a better medicine would be the more radical 
option of turning it into anetwork of local banks 
<http://neweconomics.org/rbs-fails-stress-test-public/>. Ideas in the past have 
included carving out a bad bank or giving away the shares to the public. RBS 
will be hoping that its own medicine will be enough to get it fit for next 
year’s assessment.
 