
Royal Bank of Scotland was the biggest failure in the Bank of England’s annual 
health check 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/27/bank-of-england-announce-stress-tests-uk-banks-fpc-fsr>
 of the UK banking system and has embarked on a new plan to bolster its 
financial strength by £2bn.

The Edinburgh-based bank, which is 73% owned by taxpayers, is to cut costs and 
reduce its exposure to risky assets after the results of the toughest tests yet 
on the banking system were published on Wednesday.

Two other banks, Barclays and Standard Chartered, also struggled in the 
so-called stress tests, which arebased on hypothetical scenarios 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/news/2016/stresstesting.aspx>
 including house prices falling and the global economy contracting by 1.9%. 
Barclays already has a plan in place to bolster its financial position, while 
Standard Chartered said it has not needed to take any action.


Bank of England stress tests released – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/30/bank-of-england-stress-tests-opec-meeting-oil-business-live>
As the Bank announced the results 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2016/nov.aspx> of its 
third annual stress tests it warned of a “challenging period of uncertainty 
around the domestic and global economic outlook”.

Its financial stability report 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/fsr/2016/nov.aspx>, a 
half-yearly update on risks to the financial system, listed domestic risks 
which include the uncertaintycreated by the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brexit-uncertainty-could-hit-investment-in-uk-warns-german-car-chief>
, the commercial property sector,high level of debts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/05/higher-inflation-rising-debt-millions-fall-living-standards>
 in UK households and the potential vulnerability of the economy to areduction 
in foreign investors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/28/fall-uk-living-standards-foreign-investment-brexit-budget-recession>
 buying UK debt.

Mark Carney, the Bank governor, said Threadneedle Street was keeping an eye on 
debt. Households are “drawing down their savings and borrowing for the first 
time since the crisis”, he said. Lending to households increased by 4.1% in the 
year to September, close to the fastest rate since the 2008 crisis.

Global risks were described as “elevated”, with the Bank also warning that 
there could be animpact on global trade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/28/donald-trump-economic-consequences-us-election-growth>
 from Donald Trump’s election as US president. Chinese debt is high and the 
Bank also highlighted risks in some countries using the euro, including those 
caused by areferendum in Italy on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/italy-referendum-all-you-need-to-know-about-renzis-crunch-vote>
.

The Bank also provided its promised update on the health of the residential 
mortgage market and is keeping in place measures announced in 2014 torestrict 
lenders’ ability to help 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/jun/26/bank-of-england-limit-large-loans-housebuyers-mortgage-lenders>
 customers needing to borrow four and half times their income.


Carney said these measures were remaining because of household indebtedness. 
“This will help ensure that underwriting standards don’t slip from responsible 
to reckless as they have during past periods of consumption-led growth,” said 
Carney.

Three other banks, Lloyds Banking Group, HSBC and the UK arm of Santander, as 
well as Nationwide, were subjected to thetests which were introduced after the 
2008 crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/30/bank-of-england-stress-tests-to-include-fears-of-global-crash>
.

The Bank found that in aggregate, the entire banking system was strong enough 
to withstand the test, which is based on a five-year scenario in which £44bn of 
capital is wiped out in the first two years – five times the losses incurred 
during the depths of the financial crisis. Another test will run next year. 
Some of the banks tested this year would have used their bonds to help bolster 
their financial position.

Under this scenario, another £48bn of costs are incurred to pay fines and 
legal costs – more than the £40bn hit the banks took between 2011 and 2015. The 
risk of further penalties was one of the reasons RBS failed to meet the hurdle 
set by the Bank as it awaits a penalty from the US for mortgage bond 
mis-selling before the crisis. RBS shares initially fell 4% but ended the day 
1.3% lower while shares in the other banks tested were higher.

Ewen Stevenson, RBS finance director, said: “We have taken further important 
steps in 2016 to enhance our capital strength, but we recognise that we have 
more to do to restore the bank’s stress resilience, including resolving 
outstanding legacy issues.”

Deeper cuts to costs are expected when RBS reports its results next year which 
could entail job cuts. Analysts at UBS said: “We expect a bigger cost and 
restructuring plan [from RBS] in February.”


Laith Khalaf, senior analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, pointed out “RBS is in no 
immediate danger” although he said the bank was the “weak link in the UK 
banking chain”.

Barclays said it had passed the Bank’s test. Standard Chartered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardchartered> said it “has a strong 
and liquid balance sheet and the results of the stress test demonstrate its 
resilience to a severe global stress scenario”.


 