
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> is scrapping 
bonuses for 20,000 staff in an attempt to avoid future mis-selling scandals.

Instead, those who work in NatWest and RBS branches as well as those who work 
in customer service in call centres are being given pay rises intended to 
compensate them for the loss of bonus potential.

Union officials urged other financial institutions to follow the move by the 
74% taxpayer-owned bank, which like rivals has been embroiled in thepayment 
protection insurance mis-selling scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/may/27/banks-face-bigger-ppi-mis-selling-bill-regulator-compensation-rules-fca-supreme-court>
.

Rob MacGregor, Unite’s national officer for finance, said: “Unite has long 
campaigned to end the hard sell in retail banking and here we see RBS moving 
away from sales target-based bonuses, resulting in a pay rise for the majority 
of retail staff. It is time for other banks to follow suit and end the hard 
sell.”

Packaged bank accounts: a good deal or a new ‘PPI mis-selling scandal’?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/29/packaged-bank-accounts-good-deal-ppi-scandal-misselling>
Bonuses for retail staff do not reach the levels of those working in other 
divisions of the bank and amount to about £2,000.

The move to end bonuses follows an announcement by RBS chief executive Ross 
McEwan in 2014 to end teaser rates on products such as credit cards in an 
attempt to become more customer-centric. Among the changes is thescrapping of 
0% balance transfer deals on credit cards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/feb/27/what-will-rbs-improvements-mean-for-customers>
.

Staff were told about the changes to their pay on Wednesday by Les Matheson, 
head of retail and business banking for RBS and NatWest. “No other big bank has 
done this,” Matheson said.

The sales and bonus culture in banks was highlighted by a £28m fine on Lloyds 
Banking Group in 2013 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2013/dec/11/lloyds-mis-selling-scandal-champagne-bonuses>
, after one employee was found to have been so desperate to ensure he did not 
get demoted or miss out on his bonus that he sold himself one of the financial 
services products.
 