
Royal Bank of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/royalbankofscotlandgroup> has slumped to 
a £2bn half-year loss after taking a fresh hit for legal disputes, as it 
admitted costs will have to be cut to tackle the economic impact of the Brexit 
vote and the dwindling popularity of high street branches.

The bank, which is 73% owned by the taxpayer and is on track for its ninth 
consecutive year of losses, is also abandoning its long-running attempts to 
float the Williams & Glyn branch network - a move the EU demanded as part of 
the bank’s £45bn taxpayer bailout and a key plank of the government’s plans to 
bolster competition on the high street.

Its shares were the biggest fallers on the FTSE 100 after £1.3bn of new 
charges, including £450m for PPI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/economics-blog/2016/aug/02/extension-ppi-payback-period-small-comfort-for-customers-hit-by-mis-selling>
, surprised the City. A year ago, the governmentused the half-year results to 
sell off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/03/uk-government-starts-royal-bank-of-scotland-sell-off-rbs>
 its first tranche of shares at 330p a share. On Friday, they closed at 178p, 
down 7% and well below average price of 502p at which taxpayers bought their 
shares during the financial crisis.

The provisions also include an investigation into tracker mortgages at Ulster 
Bank and an estimated £700m for a legal case brought by shareholders who backed 
a 200p a share cash call in 2008, ahead of the taxpayer bailout.


An attempt to settle the shareholder case in mediation talks on 26 and 27 July 
had not reached a conclusion, the bank said, leaving open the door to a 
long-running court case in which RBS’s former chief executive Fred Goodwin 
could be called to give evidence.

The bank’s losses have now hit £52bn since its bailout and Ross McEwan, its 
chief executive, admitted the share price slide meant a further sale of the 
taxpayer stake was looking more difficult.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Frbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a958f0375c6429a40cd4cd8cd32880af06c9014%2F380_73_2498_1499%2F2498.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=RBS%20posts%20%C2%A32bn%20half-year%20loss%20and%20drops%20Williams%20%26%20Glyn%20flotation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Frbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=RBS%20posts%20%C2%A32bn%20half-year%20loss%20and%20drops%20Williams%20%26%20Glyn%20flotation&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Faug%2F05%2Frbs-blames-2bn-half-year-loss-on-string-of-legal-challenges%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9a958f0375c6429a40cd4cd8cd32880af06c9014%2F380_73_2498_1499%2F2498.jpg>
 Ross McEwan has poured cold water on further sale of taxpayer-owned shares. 
Photograph: Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images 
He appeared to clear the way for job cuts and branch closures as he outlined 
customers’ increasing use of digital banking. The Bank of England’s interest 
rate cut to 0.25% also led analysts to question his targets to cut costs. He 
told them his executive team was working on a plan that would be announced next 
year “for a lower cost base for this organisation”.

McEwan defended the way the bank had handled the EU’s demand to create a new 
branch network of 300 branches – dubbed Williams & Glyn – to create a new 
competitor on the high street. The long-running process is already delayed and 
has cost £1.5bn so far. A trade sale is now being pursued and Santander -which 
pulled out of a deal in in 2012 
<https://viewer.gutools.co.uk/business/2012/oct/12/rbs-branch-sale-santander-falls-through>
 - is thought to have tabled an offer for the operation, which focuses on small 
businesses and employs 5,500 people.

To be a viable standalone business, Williams & Glyn needs a banking licence 
from Bank of England, but the low interest rate environment would make it 
difficult for the operation to be profitable, RBS said. Brexit was not entirely 
to blame for this, it added, because expectations that interest rates would 
stay low had been mounting before the 23 June referendum.

The abandonment of the flotation means RBS is likely to hand millions of 
pounds to the private equity consortium which had been backing the share 
offering. Gary Greenwood, an analyst at Shore Capital, said the costs of W&G 
would mount. “This is likely to result in even more exceptional charges, which 
we think could run into the hundreds of millions of pounds,” he said.

The branches are valued at around £1.3bn, but they are onlylikely to fetch 
around two-thirds of that price if sold to a rival.

RBS’s finance director, Ewen Stevenson, said the banking industry was facing a 
hit to profits as result of the low interest rate environment. He focused on 
the £1bn of profits being generated at its core business every quarter, which 
would eventually allow the bank to pay dividends to shareholders. The first 
payments, thhowever, are not expected until 2018 at the earliest



 