
If you’re looking for a novelty Christmas dinner that will help curb 
greenhouse gases, why not tryeating insects 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/06/will-eating-insects-ever-be-mainstream>
? Conventional meat farming produces massive amounts of greenhouse gases, 
especially fromsheep and cattle belching methane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/dec/20/tax-meat-cut-methane-emissions-scientists>
 – a gas roughly 20 times more powerful as a heat-trapping gas than carbon 
dioxide.

Add to that other culprits, such as nitrogen oxides given off from fertilisers 
and carbon dioxide created in transport and refrigeration. All told, the
livestock industry gives off 18% of all manmade greenhouse gases 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/dec/03/eating-less-meat-curb-climate-change>
. Insects, though, give off far less greenhouse pollutants for the same weight 
of food.

The worm has turned: how British insect farms could spawn a food revolution
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/08/the-worm-has-turned-how-british-insect-farms-could-spawn-a-food-revolution>
Red meat is an even bigger environmental problem. It takes about 3,290 litres 
of water to produce a 150g beef burger – the equivalent insect burger needs 
less than a pint. Livestock uses about a third of the Earth’s croplands to grow 
feed, while insect farming needs very little land and they breed quickly.

Insects are also extremely nutritious, rich in calcium, zinc, omega-3 fatty 
acids <http://umm.edu/health/medical/altmed/supplement/omega3-fatty-acids/> and 
low in cholesterol. They are particularly full of protein – crickets can 
contain more protein than the equivalent weight of beef, and they are 12 to 25 
times more efficient in converting their feed into food for us.

Crickets have been eaten <http://www.aketta.com/aketta-crickets/faq.aspx> for 
centuries, particularly in Asian Pacific region countries, where they are seen 
as a nutritious food.

Two billion people eat insects regularly and about 1,900 insect species have 
been documented as a food source. In Thailand alone there are more than 20,000 
insect farms, yielding around 7,500 tonnes of insects each year.

The biggest problem appears to be that we British are just too squeamish when 
it come to eating insects.
 