
A small group of Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> 
may prove a thorn in Donald Trump’s side through the early months of his 
administration, as he continues to upset conservatives in Congress with his 
positions on Russia and healthcare.

Fear and loathing in Washington DC: progressives dread Trump inauguration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/donald-trump-inauguration-washington-progressives>
Senator John McCain <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/johnmccain>, the 
party’s 2008 nominee for president and a Republican who abandoned Trump late in 
the 2016 race, has led calls for a congressional investigation into Russian 
interference in last year’s election.

Citing intelligence chiefs’ conclusions that Russia orchestrated hacks on the 
Democratic party to sow confusion and help Trump’s candidacy, McCain has 
insisted he will organize an investigation even if his party’s leaders in the 
Senate do not join. McCain has also acknowledged that hepassed an 
unsubstantiated dossier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
, alleging links between the Kremlin and Trump’s campaign, to the FBI last year.

Early in his campaign, Trump ridiculed McCain’s service in the Vietnam war, in 
which he was captured and tortured by the North Vietnamese. “He’s not a war 
hero,”Trump said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
. “He’s a war hero because he was captured? I like people who weren’t captured.”

Trump received five draft deferments 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/02/us/politics/donald-trump-draft-record.html> 
from the war.

Senators Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/marco-rubio> have also actively criticized 
the president-elect’s steadfast interest in making the Russian president, 
Vladimir Putin, a friend of the Trump White House.

In confirmation hearings, Rubio pressed the question of Putin in sharp 
questions to Rex Tillerson, Trump’s choice for secretary of state and an Exxon 
Mobil oil executive who received an “order of friendship” medal from the 
Russian president.

Tillerson told Rubio he would not use the term “war criminal” to describe 
Putin over his bombing campaign in Syria, for which the senator scolded him.

“We can’t achieve moral clarity with rhetorical ambiguity,” Rubio said.

Senator Rand Paul, who like Rubio was defeated by Trump in the Republican 
primary, has suggested he will oppose the president-elect on certain cabinet 
picks. The libertarian-tinged senator was also theonly Senate Republican to 
vote against 
<http://www.wkyt.com/content/news/Sen-Paul-lone-republican-to-vote-no-to-un-do-Obamacare-410490775.html>
 a rapid repeal of the Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama’s healthcare reform 
law.

Paul said he could not reconcile adding $10tn to the deficit with a repeal 
that fails to account for the budget or adequately replace the system.

Five other Republicans have also resisted the immediate repeal of Obamacare: 
Susan Collins, Lisa Murkowski, Bob Corker, Bill Cassidy and Rob Portman. The 
five senators added an amendment this week to give Republicans more time to 
repeal the ACA and write a replacement.

Representative Charlie Dent, meanwhile, told reporters this week that moderate 
Republicans in the House similarly have “serious reservations 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/powerpost/democrats-to-force-tough-votes-in-obamacare-vote-a-rama/2017/01/11/99e3c854-d7fa-11e6-b8b2-cb5164beba6b_story.html?utm_term=.aa5e2c9c18d7>
” about acting without a new healthcare plan.

Few Republicans have criticized the president-elect publicly since the 
election, even thoughdozens said they would not vote for him  
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/10/26/gop-rep-jason-chaffetz-says-his-conscience-wont-let-him-support-donald-trump-just-vote-for-him/>
after, in October, video was released of Trump bragging about groping women 
without consent.

On Saturday the Nebraska senator Ben Sasse was one of the few members of his 
party todefend <https://twitter.com/BenSasse/status/820275834946809857> John 
Lewis, a Democrat in the House, from Trump’s insult that the civil rights 
leader was “all talk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/14/donald-trump-john-lewis-mlk-day-civil-rights>
”.
 