
The destruction of the Assyrian city of Nimrud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/nov/14/nimrud-isis-art-destruction>
 is a catastrophe for Iraq and for our shared cultural history. Peoples come 
and go, drifting in the mists of time. These relics were the rocks of ages. The 
bulldozing by Islamic State ofNineveh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/26/isis-fighters-destroy-ancient-artefacts-mosul-museum-iraq>
, the flattening ofHatra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/apr/05/isis-video-confirms-destruction-at-unesco-world-heritage-site-on-hatra>
, the demolition in Raqqa and now the destruction of Nimrud wipe from the map 
what were the great precursor cities of the European era.

There is no beating about the bush. Nothing in the history of this benighted 
region, no brutal king, no imperial satrap, no Ba’athist rogue, initiated 
anything as horrific as what came in the train of George W Bush’s 2003 invasion 
ofIraq <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iraq>. By deliberately destroying 
order and government in Baghdad and sowing chaos, the American and British 
invaders created a hell on Earth. There is no truer maxim than that a lifetime 
of tyranny is better than a week of anarchy.

In the name of “western values”, hundreds of thousands have been killed and 
millions driven from their homes. Those values have wiped out the oldest 
Christian community in the world. Every church in Mosul has been demolished. 
And all to appease Bush’s lust for revenge against Saddam Hussein’s humiliation 
of his father – and Tony Blair’s infatuation with Bush. At least Donald Trump 
has rightly called it a war crime.

But all is not lost. Yes, the Assyrian remains have been demolished. But what 
is demolished can be replaced. Nimrud and the other sites are the subject of 
records, surveys, films, photographs galore. Every minute detail of the 
sculptures and reliefs is known.

Digital scanning, robot etching and 3D reproduction can recreate these 
monuments, to an exactness unknown to past attempts at such reinstatement. 
Extrusion techniques can rebuild monuments using the dust of the ruins 
themselves. There is no reason why the temples ofPalmyra 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ng-interactive/2016/apr/08/palmyra-after-islamic-state-isis-visual-guide>
, the palace gateway at Nimrud or the sixth-century monastery ofDair Mar Elia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/20/isis-has-destroyed-iraqs-oldest-christian-monastery-satellite-images-confirm>
 (St Elijah) should not rise again, exactly as they were as recently as last 
year. The flattened Nimrud ziggurat was, after all, a mound of earth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5859b3c7d5a14795aa47d19e288bd07ab836e714%2F0_209_4507_2704%2F4507.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebuilding%20Nimrud%20will%20help%20atone%20for%20the%20sins%20of%20the%20west%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebuilding%20Nimrud%20will%20help%20atone%20for%20the%20sins%20of%20the%20west%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5859b3c7d5a14795aa47d19e288bd07ab836e714%2F0_209_4507_2704%2F4507.jpg>
 An Iraqi army officer sits on damaged carved stone slabs that were destroyed 
by Isis at the ancient site of Nimrud. Photograph: Hussein Malla/AP 
The skills and equipment exists. The cost is not great. The moral obligation 
on the United States and Britain to pay is massive. It is to reverse what Isis 
hopes will be its lasting memorial, the visible eradication of a civilisation 
in the land of its birth.

There is, however, an obstacle. It lies in reactionary sections of the art 
historical profession and the archaeology bureaucrats of Unesco. They hold any 
reproduction to be “inauthentic”; that destroyed sites should be “conserved as 
found”; that what happens in wars and natural disasters is “history”, and as 
such should be left in place.

This is sanctimonious pedantry. These people are Isis’s useful idiots. The 
reinstatement of damaged and destroyed buildings is as old as the hills. The 
19th century did not just repair, it reproduced parts or all of the Gothic 
cathedrals of Europe to ensure their survival. Not a medieval castle in England 
would exist if Unesco had its way. Hardly a Tudor wall is 16th century. When a 
stately home goes up in flames, we rebuild it.

Even the monuments destroyed by Isis were, most of them, extensively rebuilt 
by later generations. Part of a Lamassu winged bull of Nimrud looks distinctly 
modern. Much ofPalmyra <https://www.theguardian.com/world/palmyra> was 
re-erected by the colonial French. Just as tourists delight in Arthur Evans’s 
Knossos in Crete, however fake its 20th-century reconstruction, so they delight 
in the temple colonnades of Sicily’s Agrigento, largely built by Mussolini.

The cult of the ruin is now the terrorist’s best friend. He knows that every 
time we gaze on the remains of his deeds, we will be reminded of his message. 
After the Taliban blew up the Bamiyan Buddhas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2001/mar/03/afghanistan.lukeharding> in 
Afghanistan in 2001, the local community pleaded to have them copied and 
reinstated after the Nato invasion. Unesco archaeologists descended on the site 
and declared it out of the question. It would be “brand new” and “inauthentic”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c7163568b8ae1da3761842269d792e6ee03618%2F0_271_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rebuilding%20Nimrud%20will%20help%20atone%20for%20the%20sins%20of%20the%20west%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rebuilding%20Nimrud%20will%20help%20atone%20for%20the%20sins%20of%20the%20west%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F17%2Frebuilding-nimrud-atone-sins-west-isis-destruction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F54c7163568b8ae1da3761842269d792e6ee03618%2F0_271_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 The site of one of the Buddhas destroyed by the Taliban in Bamiyan, 
Afghanistan. When local people wanted to copy and reinstate the Buddhas, 
‘Unesco archaeologists descended on the site and declared it out of the 
question’. Photograph: Shah Marai/AFP/Getty Images 
All they would tolerate was the repositioning of extant blocks of masonry on a 
frame – in effect a memorial to the Taliban. Something calledthe Venice charter 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20160327142510/http://www.icomos.org/madrid2002/actas/189.pdf>
 forbade even the filling in of missing gaps with new material. The locals 
could get lost. “Western values” ruled.

The idea of putting the restoration of Syria and Iraq in the fastidious but 
inert hands of Unesco is utterly depressing. Yet already Damascus museum’s 
saintly director,Maamoun Abdulkarim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/29/they-are-barbarians-meet-the-man-maamoun-abdulkarim-defending-syrias-heritage-from-isis>
, has had to pledge “no modern stones” at Palmyra. Why not? Why not even stone 
reconstituted from the dust of the old stone?

Of course restoration can be done badly. But as the rebuilt churches of Moscow 
and the reconstructed temples of Japan attest, any restoration is better than a 
pile of rubble. The deep pleasure that ordinary people get from old buildings 
is a composite – of the site, the design of a building and the artistry of its 
creators and decorators.

The age of the actual building material is near trivial. The idea that it is 
all that matters, that otherwise a monument is meaningless, is absurd. It is 
rightly dubbed “substance fetishism” by critics. Yet it seems doomed to 
hamstring what should be the greatest effort at historic reinstatement of 
modern times.

Unesco’s various diktats emerged from an understandable need to discipline the 
rebuilding of Europe’s heritage after wartime bombing. Modern technology has 
rendered that out of date. Today, if Europe wants to pickle its ruins and 
entomb their contents in its museums, so be it. But it should be seen as an 
academic cult, not a sensible or universal demand.

The remedy is in the hands of allied governments. If they have any remorse for 
what they have done, they should go into Iraq andSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> as hostilities cease, bringing 
records, diggers, 3D printers and jigs, and start rebuilding.

We should never forget that it was a craving to impose “western values” on 
Iraq that caused this disaster. It would be outrageous if more western values 
were used to keep in place a memorial to the barbarism those values unleashed.
 