
The proportion of students leaving university with top honours has risen in 
the last five years to reach record levels, figures show.


Almost one in four (24%) students who gained a degree graduated with a first 
last year, compared with 17% in 2011-12, according to data published by the 
Higher Education Statistics Agency (HESA).

The figures, which cover UK universities and colleges, are likely to spark 
fresh debate about whether the centuries-old degree classification system is 
still fit for purpose.

Related: What will happen in higher education in 2017? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2017/jan/05/what-will-happen-in-higher-education-in-2017>

In recent years a number of employers have stopped asking for specific degree 
standards, with one expert saying firms do not want to miss out on highly 
qualified candidates simply because they did not gain a certain degree.

In 2015-16 almost three in four students (73%) were awarded at least an upper 
second (2:1), compared with 66% five years earlier.

A breakdown also shows a slight drop in the proportion of students awarded 
lower honours, with 22% of students gaining a lower second (2:2) in 2015-16, 
and 5% graduating with a third.

Martin Birchall, a graduate recruitment expert at High Fliers Research, said 
some employers no longer required a particular degree classification.

“In recent years diversity has become a real issue for many employers and 
they’re keen to have as broad a spread of applicants for their graduate 
programmes as possible,” he said. “That means they don’t necessarily want to 
cut out graduates who did not get a first or a 2:1 but have CVs that are 
jam-packed with other skills and experiences that may be more relevant in the 
workplace.

“A number of employers have realised that if they use a blunt cut-off such as 
a 2:1 or above, they’re missing out on some great people, so degree 
classification has become less important.”

He added: “It’s very hard to understand why more and more students are getting 
these top grades. Degrees are not benchmarked as a national standard, so there 
is no way of telling whether individual universities are becoming more generous 
in the degrees they are awarding or whether standards are genuinely rising.”

Birchall said employers were now looking for much more than just academic 
qualifications in job candidates. But he added: “It makes life harder if almost 
everyone who applies for a graduate job comes with a first or a 2:1 because 
employers can’t use that to differentiate between candidates.”

In 2015 the professional services firm Ernst and Young announced it was to 
remove academic and education details, including degree classifications, from 
its trainee application process and would decide who to interview based on 
candidates’ performance in online tests.

The publishing firm Penguin Random House UK has announced it is scrapping the 
requirement for recruits to have a university degree. It said there was 
increasing evidence that there was no simple link between having a degree and 
performance in the workplace.
 