
Recycling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/recycling> rates in England 
have fallen for the first time ever, prompting calls for a tax on packaging and 
meaning EU targets are now almost certain to be missed.

The amount of rubbish sent to recycling plants by householders had been 
steadily increasing for more than a decade, but more recently flatlined for 
three years. Nownew government figures published on Thursday 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/local-authority-collected-waste-management-annual-results>
 show that the recycling rate in England has dropped from 44.8% in 2014 to 
43.9% in 2015.

The fall back to levels not seen since before 2012 will be an embarrassment 
for ministers,who have pledged 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/farmers-must-do-more-for-environment-says-defra-secretary.htm>
 to lead the first government to leave the environment better than they found 
it.

It also means the UK as a whole is almost guaranteed to miss an EU target of 
recycling at least 50% of its household waste by 2020, as England’s size means 
it accounts for much of the rubbish the country produces.Wales is far ahead of 
England with households recycling 61% of waste 
<http://gov.wales/statistics-and-research/local-authority-municipal-waste-management/?lang=en>
, whileScotland is on 44.2% 
<https://www.sepa.org.uk/media/219489/2015-household-waste-summary-data-with-commentary.pdf>
.
Recycling rates in England 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-15T10:24:20/embed.html>
The waste company Suez, which operates more than a thousand rubbish trucks in 
the UK, called for a tax on packaging manufacturers that would pay to drive up 
recycling rates again. It said the tax could operate on a sliding scale 
depending on how much of a product was recyclable and non-recyclable.

“The UK is at a tipping point and without radical change to improve England’s 
household recycling rates the UK will not meet its EU agreed target of 50% 
recycling rates by 2020,” said David Palmer-Jones, CEO for Suez recycling and 
recovery in the UK.

Kate Parminter, the Liberal Democrat shadow environment secretary, said: “The 
government must act now to reverse this worrying decline. We urgently need 
better incentives to boost recycling and end Britain’s throwaway culture.”

Recycling is primarily the responsibility of local authorities, which have 
suffered dramatic, austerity-driven budget cuts during the years when recycling 
rates have stalled and now declined.

Jakob Rindegren, recycling policy advisor for the Environmental Services 
Association (ESA), said: “2015 was a perfect storm for recycling, combining 
cuts to local authority budgets with declining commodity markets for recycled 
materials. ESA warned at the time that, without policy intervention, England in 
particular would see a drop in the recycling rate.”

Another possible reason for the reversal in recycling fortunes is the huge 
budget cuts in recent years to the government’s main body tasked with cutting 
waste and driving up recycling. Wrap’s budget was cut to £17.9m in 2014, down 
from £37.7m in 2011.

Liz Goodwin, the agency’s former CEO who now works at the US thinktank the 
World Resources Institute, told the Guardian: “I think the drop is caused by a 
number of things. The economic situation has clearly not helped – local 
authority budgets and central government budgets have been very tight for 
several years which mean that there hasn’t been funding available to improve 
infrastructure – but more importantly communicate with householders about the 
value and benefits of recycling.

“Householders in the UK are still confused about recycling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/british-consumers-admit-confusion-over-recycling>
 – what they can put in recycling and what needs to go in the residual bin.”

According to the Office of National Statistics, the total amount of waste 
generated by households was slightly down in 2015, at 22m tonnes in total, or 
407kg per person.

Newham borough in London had the lowest recycling rate in England, at 15%, 
while South Oxfordshire district council had the highest, at 67%.

A Defra spokesman said: “we are recycling four times as much as we were in 
2000, but the slight dip in the household recycling rates clearly shows more 
needs to be done.

“There are some excellent examples of councils improving recycling rates – we 
will work with local authorities and industry to build on these successes and 
encourage best practice across the nation as part of our commitment to protect 
the environment for future generations.”
 