
The British Red Cross description of the NHS as facing a humanitarian crisis 
was “irresponsible and overblown”,Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has said during a prime 
minister’s questions centred on the current problems in the health service.

Pressured repeatedly by Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> about long waits for 
emergency care and patients left in corridors, May conceded there were “a small 
number” of unacceptable incidents, but insisted the problems were mainly caused 
by increased demand.

The Labour leader responded by saying she was being unrealistic. “Our NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs>, Mr Speaker, is in crisis, but the 
prime minister is in denial,” he said.

NHS 'will fail' this winter without cash injection, doctors tell Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-fail-winter-without-cash-injection-hospital-doctors-tell-theresa-may>
May, in turn, said Corbyn’s mixed messages on Tuesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/corbyn-proposes-maximum-wage-for-all-government-contractors>
 about plans for a maximum wage plan showed he would “destroy our economy” and 
thus endanger funding for the NHS if he took power.

Kicking off the pair’s first exchange of 2017, Corbyn focused exclusively on 
health and social care, asking May about long waits at A&E departments and the
British Red Cross description of the problems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/nhs-faces-humanitarian-crisis-rising-demand-british-red-cross>
 faced by the NHS.

“I have to say to him that I think we have all seen humanitarian crises around 
the world,” May answered.

“And to use that description of a National Health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> Service, which last year saw 2.5 
million more people treated in accident and emergency than six years ago, was 
irresponsible and overblown.”


Corbyn pressed the prime minister on the issue, saying that the British 
Medical Association, Royal College of Nursing and Royal College of Physicians 
had all issued warnings about the pressures on health services. “If she won’t 
listen to the Red Cross, who will she listen to?” he said.

Reverting to his occasional practice of taking questions from members of the 
public, Corbyn said he had been contacted by an NHS staff member whose ill 
22-month-old nephew had been treated on two plastic chairs pushed together, 
with a blanket on top.

“I accept there have been a small number of incidents where unacceptable 
practices have taken place,” May replied. “We don’t want those things to 
happen. But what matters is how you then deal with them.”

The prime minister stressed the record numbers of people seeking emergency 
care over the Christmas period, and said the government had not dropped its 
target for all patients to be treated in A&E within four hours. The health 
secretary, Jeremy Hunt, hadseemingly watered this down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/labour-party-jeremy-hunt-nhs-waiting-time>
 earlier in the week.

Corbyn also pressed May also on social care, saying cuts to services were 
“trapping people” in hospital and thus increasing the pressures on the NHS. He 
also questioned her approach on mental health, thesubject of a speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
 she gave on Monday.

The extra £1.25bn committed in 2015 to mental health care should have been 
ringfenced, and not used as “a resource to be raided”, the Labour leader said.

Referring to May’s other new initiative this week, the idea of the so-called 
shared society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/theresa-may-tories-party-social-justice-speech>
, Corbyn said: “Well, we’ve certainly got that. More people sharing hospital 
corridors on trolleys, more people sharing waiting areas at A&E departments. 
More people sharing in anxiety generated by this government.

“Our NHS, Mr Speaker, is in crisis, but the prime minister is in denial.”

May responded by mocking Corbyn for his confused policy announcement on 
Tuesday, saying: “He may find it difficult to believe that someone will say the 
same thing they said a few weeks ago.”

She added: “The last thing that the NHS needs is a cheque from Labour that 
bounces. The only way that we can ensure that we’ve got funding for the 
National Health Service is strong economy.

“Yesterday, the honourable gentleman proved that he’s not only incompetent but 
that he would destroy our economy. And that would devastate our National Health 
Service.”
 