
 * Warning: this article contains some spoilers.

Hated in the Nation

Hated in the Nation is Black Mirror’s excursion into public shame: it takes a 
series of targets who have brought disapprobation upon themselves. One is a 
columnist who slates a disabled person; another, an X Factor style judge who 
scorns a nine-year-old; a protestor who pretends to urinate on a war memorial; 
a politician so closely modelled on George Osborne that it made me feel 
nostalgic for a pre-Brexit age, when he was the summit of Tory obnoxiousness. 
They all find themselves in the eye of a Twitter storm, only this time it’s for 
real – the anger doesn’t crescendo then vanish. Instead, it culminates in 
violence so agonising that a person would slash her own throat with a broken 
bottle of Merlot to hasten it.

There is a poignant description at one point of what it feels like to be in 
the eye of such a storm: “It was like having a whole weather system turn 
against me. If there’s a million people talking about how they despise you, 
it’s like a mental illness.” It’s a morality tale. If you want to hate, 
audibly, you must accept that hatred causes pain. Having done so, you yourself 
are as despicable as the person you despise. It’s a simple and symmetrical 
world, one which sees the age before social media as prelapsarian, and yearns 
for us all to realise so we can return to a better time.

 When you’re actually in a social media storm, you amplify the porousness 
between the virtual and the real. I’ve been in two, once when I failed to 
properly respect breast milk as liquid gold, another time when I defended 
protesters who spat at a Conservative party conference (what I actually said 
was … oh never mind). In both cases, people online were printing public 
appearances I was planning to make, and telling others to throw eggs at me; 
someone published the name of my children’s school and told people to go spit 
at them. It was the wrong school, but the point stood: my children had come 
into play.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9e8c1bc96bb71f6114d740f12ebc5b0828aba1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2f9e8c1bc96bb71f6114d740f12ebc5b0828aba1%2F0_384_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 ‘If there’s a million people talking about how they despise you, it’s like a 
mental illness’ … Hated in the Nation. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/Netflix 
Whenever I described these events, I always underlined the threats at their 
most extreme, even though I knew this confected rage would never result in 
anything. I exaggerated the sabre-rattling, to bring to life how unpleasant the 
experience was. So we were all colluding – they were pretending their violence 
and I was pretending to believe in it – because without the backstop of action, 
they were just hysterics in their underpants and I was oversensitive.

This is the fascinating space of modern shame: precisely, that it has no 
consequence, that the intensity of its spleen is a function of its 
meaninglessness, that the overstatement is partly driven by a suffocating sense 
of inauthenticity. It is to a baying mob what clicktivism is to activism; you 
can’t persuade anyone you’re serious unless you actually turn up. Hated in the 
Nation went to the least interesting place, where sofa hate transmutes by adeus 
ex technica into reality. It would have been more telling to explore the 
intensity generated by its impotence.

Zoe Williams

Men Against Fire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47037b12061924149988fb54840bf87397b9376e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F47037b12061924149988fb54840bf87397b9376e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The soldiers’ language very obviously evokes the arguments used against 
refugees in the real world …Men Against Fire. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/Netflix
“You can’t see them as human,” an army officer says of a group of fugitives, 
shortly before her subordinates kill several. “We’ve got to take them out if 
humankind is going to carry on in this world.”

If it had been made 10 years ago, Men Against Fire could have been a metaphor 
for the way western soldiers dehumanised and alienated local communities during 
the Iraqi and Afghan invasions. But in 2016, it feels more like an examination 
of contemporary discourse on refugees and migrants, and of how governments and 
the media alike use propaganda to turn the public against foreigners.

Men Against Fire centres on a squad of American troops tasked with 
exterminating several hundred outlaws hiding in what seems to be the Dutch 
countryside. To dehumanise their prey, the soldiers uniformly refer to them as 
“roaches”, and describe individual roaches as “it”, rather than her or him. And 
to ensure they never develop any fleeting sympathy for the enemy, the soldiers 
are fitted with special brain implants. On first impression, the setup seems 
far-fetched. But it ends up feeling uncannily close to home.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2720e7f8cd7bbdda215257be08d166fe520ed14%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2720e7f8cd7bbdda215257be08d166fe520ed14%2F0_0_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Feels like deja vu … Men Against Fire. Photograph: Jay Maidment/Netflix 
The soldiers’ language very obviously evokes the arguments used against 
refugees in the real world. “For every roach you save today, you condemn 
god-knows-how-many to misery tomorrow,” says the officer, in what to me felt 
like deja vu. In Hungary last month, ahead of areferendum on refugee policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/hungarian-referendum-slam-door-migrants-new-era-europe>
, I listened to politicians telling villagers that if you let in one refugee 
today, there will be thousands tomorrow. You also hear similar arguments from 
western politicians about rescue missions in the Mediterranean: if you start 
saving people, Home Office ministers have argued, you’ll only attract more of 
them. Even the word “roach” mimics the vocabulary used by Katie Hopkins in the 
Sun.

To some, the idea of hunting migrants might seem too unlikely a metaphor. But 
we already have vigilantes hunting people on the Bulgarian border. During the 
Hungarian referendum, one campaigner suggested shooting migrants arriving from 
Serbia. And once people realise that fences and walls don’t stop migration, I 
am sure there will be more mainstream calls for even more violent responses.

Brain implants certainly sound beyond the realms of current possibility. Then 
again, perhaps our empathy has already been subliminally suppressed by other 
means.In Hungary, the government’s recent anti-refugee ad campaign was the 
largest in the country’s history 
<http://budapestbeacon.com/featured-articles/we-must-stop-brussels-referendum-booklet-warns-hungarians/38777>
. Xenophobic adverts occupied more than a quarter of outdoor advertising space, 
and were even broadcast during the intervals of World Cup matches this summer. 
Who needs robotics when wall-to-wall advertising will do the job?

Patrick Kingsley, the Guardian’s migration correspondent

Playtest
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a7c889a327f0d73d6c437357d2c3985a34756b%2F0_0_4767_2861%2F4767.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc1a7c889a327f0d73d6c437357d2c3985a34756b%2F0_0_4767_2861%2F4767.jpg>
 Would you sign up for this? Playtest, the video game that hacks your most 
private fears. Photograph: Netflix 
There is perhaps a fatal flaw at the heart of Black Mirror’s most explicitly 
video game-related episode. How many people would really, given the chance, 
play an interactive horror experience delivered via a cybernetic implant that 
has to be shot into your neck – an implant that will hack your brain, discover 
your deepest fears and project them in front of you as part of an immersive 
augmented reality nightmare? That seems like a very niche audience. But then, 
five years ago, who would have thought 500 million people would downloada game 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/pokemon-go> that involved chasing 
imaginary creatures down a high street before trapping them in an imaginary 
ball? Charlie Brooker has always taken our consumer technology obsessions to 
the very edges of twisted fantasy – and we usually catch up in the end.

In Playtest, then, American dudebro Cooper Redfield sets off to travel the 
world, a non-stop selfie tour through India, Thailand and Italy, before he 
crashes down in London, bored and alone. Straight after hooking up with tech 
journalist Sonja (Hannah John-Kamen) on a Tinder-like dating app, he finds his 
credit cards have been cancelled (coincidence? Hmm) and needs to make money 
fast – when she spots a job ad asking for volunteers to test a new video game. 
The next thing we know he’s being whisked to the development studio in a 
beautiful manor house. It turns out this is the home of visionary game 
developer Shou Saito (clearly modelled on Metal Gear creatorHideo Kojima 
<http://www.universityherald.com/articles/41750/20160926/hideo-kojima-slams-metal-gear-survive-zombies-game-development-gameplay-demo-vid-gets-22-856-dislikes-fans-agree.htm>
), who is famed for his dark horror adventures. He’s got a new project on the 
go – the aforementioned AR nightmare-fest. Desperate for cash, and clearly not 
too bright, Cooper agrees to be a guinea pig, and Saito’s assistant Katie 
injects the AR device into his spine. She explains that he’ll begin to see 
things that aren’t really there – computer generated figures and objects that 
look real, but can’t touch or hurt him. Sure, whatever.

Charlie Brooker: 'Someone threatened to smuggle a rifle through customs and 
kill me'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/19/charlie-brooker-someone-threatened-to-smuggle-a-rifle-through-customs-and-kill-me>
For extra fun, he’s taken to a nearby hunting lodge. Naturally, he begins to 
experience subtle moments of dread: a painting of the mansion on the wall 
suddenly has a light showing in an upstairs window, then a figure. A spider 
runs across the floor, and Cooper recoils. The system is probing his fears. 
From this point, things get more disturbing: as the AI mines his mind’s darkest 
recesses, we discover that Cooper’s dad recently died from early onset 
Alzheimer’s and his father’s gradual loss of cognitive functions is what really 
terrifies our hero.

It is, at times, genuinely creepy, especially as Cooper’s laddish confidence 
disintegrates as his computer-rendered terrors slowly crush his resolve. It’s 
also a rich tapestry of video game in-jokes. Resident Evil is ever-present: 
Cooper’s surname is Redfield, a reference to the siblings Chris and Claire 
Redfield from the series. Plus, the fact that the whole thing is a human 
experiment in a hunting lodge recalls the mansion laboratory setting of the 
original Resident Evil. The Silent Hill games are here too, in the emphasis on 
hallucination and psychological collapse, and when Katie yells “would you kindly
 open that door” to Cooper, she’s alluding to the dark adventure Bioshock. It’s 
a compelling meta-narrative on gaming conventions and experiences.

But the target is unfocused. Is it AR technology that we are to fear? The 
pseudo-visionaries that peddle invasive technologies as brave new worlds? Or 
the way social media encourages a narcissistic fixation with our own 
personalities? Maybe it’s all of these. But as a cautionary tale, Playtest 
mostly operates like the torture porn series Hostel: dumb young dudes do stupid 
stuff for fun and money, which they should have thought through more carefully 
first.

Keith Stuart, the Guardian’s Games Editor

Nosedive
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b33a24a8b3a79471319c8779d2e05117bcad451%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0b33a24a8b3a79471319c8779d2e05117bcad451%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 A bubble of bullshit that so closely resembles our own world … Nosedive. 
Photograph: David Dettmann/Netflix 
Of all the episodes of this digital dystopia, Nosedive is the most analogous 
with our own world (David Cameron and pigs aside 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/19/charlie-brooker-someone-threatened-to-smuggle-a-rifle-through-customs-and-kill-me>
). Over the course of watching, I was interrupted on my iPhone by a Tinder 
match. Afterwards, I checked Instagram, and beforehand I’d turned on airplane 
mode to avoid constant Twitter notifications.

Nosedive charts the attempts of Bryce Dallas Howard’s Lacie to improve her 
social media ranking in order to live in an exclusive, hip apartment community. 
Except that social media rankings here become IRL rankings, too: a sort of 
caste, or class, system. It’s not a huge jump to think how social media could 
assist in the injustices of our existing hierarchies – some people here are 
downrated just because their ratings are already low.

The ranking system most resembles Instagram, with a little help from augmented 
reality contact lenses. But the real-world impact of one’s star rating most 
closely resembles Uber, for which drivers can have their work terminated if 
their rating drops below 4.6. The sort of pleading seen here for favourable 
feedback feels all too common from an Uber driver swivelling around at the end 
of a trip.

Director Joe Wright 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2011/aug/22/joe-wright-film-director>’s 
universe is all pastel shades, to ram home the sycophancy and saccharine nature 
of so much yoga-posing and so many uneaten cupcakes overlaid with so many Amaro 
filters. And details are perfectly rendered: Lacie snaps a photo of a latte and 
describes it online as “Heaven! x” before she even tries it, then grimaces when 
it touches her lips. The world drawn here is a bubble of bullshit, yet so 
closely resembles our own.

It’s beautifully, dryly observed. A social media reputation consultant remarks 
to Lacie that: “Strangers like you, so that’s a plus.” (Note: that job exists 
in our own world). If treating others differently according to their social 
media prowess seems a stretch, remember the last time you dismissed the opinion 
of someone on Twitter because they had 13 followers.

Hannah Jane Parkinson

San Junipero
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5064f8a87226943aea36f411ec31730f85fedd08%2F0_306_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5064f8a87226943aea36f411ec31730f85fedd08%2F0_306_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The power of love … Mackenzie Davis and Gugu Mbatha-Raw in 80s hedonistic 
haven San Junipero. Photograph: Netflix 
In the 80s The Power of Love was a hit for Huey Lewis and the News (1984), 
Frankie Goes to Hollywood (1984) and Jennifer Rush (1985). They were different 
songs which happened to share a title, but the sentiment was the same. And 
although set in 1987, Charlie Brooker uses the episode San Junipero to riff on 
the same idea: that love can transcend everything.

As the episode opens we meet Yorkie (Mackenzie Davis), a geek with glasses and 
more than a passing resemblance to Molly Ringwald. Getting to know the downtown 
scene of San Junipero for the first time, she heads to the local nightclub for 
a retro night out immediately signposted by the DJs playlist: Belinda Carlisle, 
the Bangles andRobbie Nevil <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CGtf9QfITQw>.

In the pink and blue light of the club she meets Kelly (Gugu Mbatha-Raw), who 
sits next to her to dodge an eager ex-boyfriend. Soon the two are pulling Janet 
Jackson moves on the dancefloor and Kelly is making a pass at Yorkie, which she 
deflects. The next time they see each other, Kelly’s dressed as Madonna in 
Desperately Seeking Susan and the two hook up. Then Kelly disappears.

The closer you look at this rendering of 1987, something seems a bit off. 
Everything points to the spectre of another reality rippling through the neon. 
There are cigarettes which can’t be tasted, mirrors that don’t crack when 
they’re punched. The pop culture that surrounds Yorkie’s 1987 speaks to other 
worlds and split personalities: the Lost Boys, Max Headroom, Fake by Alexander 
O’Neal. And of course the multi-textual 80s we loved inStranger Things 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/aug/05/netflix-hit-stranger-things-highlights-tvs-trend-for-nostalgia>
 is also present (I counted references to Pretty in Pink, Weird Science and The 
Terminator but I’m sure there are more). As Yorkie pursues Kelly through 
different years (1987, 1997, 2002) we realise that time is as illusive as her 
paramour. “Try a different time,” Yorkie is advised by one of Kelly’s ex’s. 
“She’s worth it.”

This is a sci-rom where everyone is anaesthetised against feeling anything, 
except, incidentally, love. But it isn’t the Time Traveller’s Wife: what 
Brooker presents is time travel as a tonic for assisted living. In the present 
day, Yorkie is hooked up to a life support machine and Kelly is a woman in her 
autumn years. Life after death exists as a void without a god. San Junipero is 
instead the hedonistic haven, a virtual reality where the dying hook into a 
Matrix-like motherboard of their Greatest Hits past. Brooker says a lot of 
things here, about atheism, tolerance, euthanasia and the spirit, but it’s his 
ability to capture the purity of new love that stays with you.

Priya Elan

Shut Up and Dance
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bb6a324629d49214960249d07805019db472c5d%2F0_32_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bb6a324629d49214960249d07805019db472c5d%2F0_32_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Terrifyingly plausible … Shut Up and Dance. Photograph: Laurie Sparham/Netflix 
I have some bad news about Shut Up and Dance: it’s not really science fiction. 
It follows Kenny, a young man whose computer is hacked, his webcam gets 
recorded while he’s having a wank, and the trolls start texting him commands 
under the threat of releasing everything they stole. As he follows their 
commands, he meets up with others who’ve been similarly blackmailed, and … 
well. This isBlack Mirror 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/black-mirror>, so it’s not giving 
much away to say that it’s unrelentingly bleak.

But where I was expecting a twist on our world, what I got was a terrifyingly 
plausible version of what already exists. Hackers really do seize control of 
computers – including the webcams – for fun and profit, using tools called 
“RATs” (remote access tools) with names such as DarkComet or BackOrifice. Most 
of the time,they simply trade the pictures among themselves 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/03/rat-breeders-meet-the-men-who-spy-on-women-through-their-webcams/2/>
, hoping for a “slave” to reveal something titillating or profitable.

Sometimes they go further, messing with their targets by briefly taking 
control of the affected computer to do things likeplay “screaming” porn at top 
volume 
<http://arstechnica.com/tech-policy/2013/03/rat-breeders-meet-the-men-who-spy-on-women-through-their-webcams/3/>
 in the middle of the night.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3848e5b77d760860e1a41f8545f764a5c315b917%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Reflections%20on%20Black%20Mirror%20%E2%80%93%20by%20those%20for%20whom%20science%20fiction%20became%20reality&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Foct%2F25%2Freflections-on-black-mirror-by-those-for-whom-science-fiction-became-reality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3848e5b77d760860e1a41f8545f764a5c315b917%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 I have bad news for you: this isn’t really sci-fi. Photograph: Laurie 
Sparham/Netflix 
And sometimes, it’s not a lone hacker, but a rather larger organisation, as 
withthe Philadelphia school district 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/suit-schools-spied-on-students-via-webcam/> sued 
in 2010 for monitoring webcams on laptops provided to schoolchildren. The 
plaintiffs accused the district of capturing students and family members as 
they undressed, among other embarrassing situations.

Blackmail is almost as old as secrets are, so it shouldn’t be surprising to 
find it following in the wake of technologically-enabled breach of privacy. 
Notoriously, thehack of extramarital dating site Ashley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/feb/28/what-happened-after-ashley-madison-was-hacked>
 led to a rash of blackmail letters targeted at former members, demanding 
payment or their spouses would be told of their membership.

None, yet, have gone as far as the mass conspiracy Black Mirror shows. At 
least, none have as far as I know. But how would I tell?

Alex Hern, Guardian technology reporter
 