
Immigration is likely to remain an overarching theme in European politics. And 
for a long time yet. It was at the heart of the UK referendum campaign 
(although this concerned mostly intra-EU migration), and it is set to dominate 
French and German elections next year (focusing on immigration from outside 
Europe). In the summer of 2015Angela Merkel predicted 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/merkel-says-migrants-bigger-challenge-eu-greek-debt-181432878.html?ref=gs>
 that migration and asylum would “in the future preoccupy” Europe “much, much 
more” than financial issues have done. One year on, there is little reason to 
dispute this.

Survey finds 70% of migrants arriving in Europe by boat trafficked or exploited
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/oct/18/70-of-migrants-to-europe-from-north-africa-trafficked-or-exploited-un-united-nations-survey>
A record 3,800 people have perished in the Mediterranean 
<http://www.france24.com/en/20161026-mediterranean-sea-migrant-deaths-2016-record-refugees>
 since the beginning of this year, according to the United Nations. Europe may 
have closed off the Aegean and Balkan routes, but more people are drowning than 
ever before in the central Mediterranean desperately trying to reach Italy.

The migration issue has shaped political discourse in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, and is likely to continue to 
shape it. On one side are liberal internationalists attached to fundamental 
asylum principles or to the dream of a borderless world; on the other are 
xenophobic fence-builders who see migration as a modern version of barbaric 
invasions threatening culture and civilisation. The latter, alas, tend to hold 
sway.

One of the collateral damages of post-truth politics is that not only the 
present gets distorted – the past gets rewritten as well. Racist videos online 
depict fantasies of Europe “before” and “after” migration. “Before” is depicted 
with orderly scenes of 1950s streets, shops and parks where an all-white 
population strolls or plays happily. “After” is groups of dark-faced men 
attacking women, rioting against the police, shouting “Allahu Akbar”.

The essential narrative of bigots is that our European world is collapsing 
under the onslaught of mass arrivals from cultures that we cannot possibly 
mingle with. In France, a theory called the “great replacement 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/worldnews/europe/france/11323557/Enfant-terribles-literary-vision-of-an-Islamic-France.html>
” has spread to large parts of the right and certainly the far-right. It states 
that, as a result of immigration, the nation’s core population is set to be 
replaced by non-European outsiders who will wreck the country’s identity. There 
are also echoes of this inGermany’s Pegida movement, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/27/pegida-germany-anti-immigrant-group-polarising-dresden>
 whose full name is “Patriotic Europeans against the Islamisation of the west”.

Debunking these myths can be hard work. Hatred and passions overtake rational 
approaches and documented facts get swept away. It is even harder when Europe’s 
long history of almost constant population movement and mixing of cultures is 
ignored, untaught or forgotten. For example, it’s often said that the arrival 
of Arabs and Muslims in France started when post-second world war 
reconstruction efforts required a new labour force, or after Algeria became 
independent in 1962. Yet Algerians (especially fromKabylie 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kabylie>) have been in France for at least a 
century. TheFrench historian Benjamin Stora 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/29/world/europe/a-life-spent-remembering-a-war-france-has-tried-to-forget.html?_r=0>
 says the real challenge of immigration is “the challenge of knowing the other” 
– and it goes both ways.

The 2015 refugee crisis has held up a mirror to Europeans: it’s forced them to 
ask themselves who they are, how they define themselves and their actions. The
1.3 million people <http://time.com/4434720/1-3-million-migrants-2015-pew/> who 
reached the continent last year represented only0.2% of the EU’s total 
population <http://www.stand.ie/refugee-crisis-are-the-numbers-really-that-big/>
. It should have been manageable. Germany alone took in roughly800,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/20/germany-raises-estimate-refugee-arrivals-800000>
. That’s equivalent to1% of its own population 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/aug/20/asylum-seekers-eu-comparison-germany-datablog>
, and is the same number it absorbed in 1992 when people fled the Balkan wars 
and ethnic Germans left the former Soviet Union..

Bigots claim that Europe is collapsing under mass arrivals from cultures we 
cannot possibly mingle with

If there was a crisis in 2015, it had less to do with the refugees – who knew 
what they were fleeing and where they wanted to go – and much more to do more 
with European governments and societies who did not all step up to the plate. 
In fact, Europe isn’t confronted with a refugee and migrant crisis. It’s the 
refugees and migrants who are confronted with a crisis of Europe. The scandal 
is that, in the Mediterranean, they have been paying with their lives.

Demographers point out that the pivotal migration year for Europe was 2014. 
That’s whenEurope for the first time surpassed the US as a destination for 
immigrants, according to the French demographer François Héran 
<http://www.college-de-france.fr/site/colloque-2016/symposium-2016-10-14-14h30.htm>
. Around1.9 million legal immigrants 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php/Migration_and_migrant_population_statistics>
 came to the EU (population 508 million) and1 million to the US 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2013/11/06/us/immigration-statistics-fast-facts/> 
(population 319 million). With that, the European ratio became 3.7 legal 
immigrants per 1,000 inhabitants, while the US’s was 3.1. This is the new, 
transformative reality many Europeans have yet to acknowledge.

Historically, Europe exported its population, whether to distant colonial 
possessions for conquest and domination, or to the New World as a consequence 
of poverty, persecution or war. Now, it has become the foremost magnet and 
refuge for those who seek safety and a better life. We are simply much richer 
and more stable than many other parts of the world.

And our diversity is set to grow, but not in the “great replacement” scenario. 
Europe needs immigration as an injection of youth and dynamism if in the 
decades to come it wants to address its workforce and pension problems.

Europeans were once the huddled masses on boats reaching Ellis Island, in New 
York, orPier 21 in Halifax <http://www.pier21.ca/home/>, Canada’s gateway for 
immigrants – both now museums. I visited Pier 21 a few years ago, and spent 
some time looking at pictures of Hungarian refugees who had fled the repression 
of the1956 Budapest uprising and celebrated their arrival 
<http://time.com/3878232/the-hungarian-revolution-of-1956-photos-from-the-streets-of-budapest/>
. PerhapsViktor Orbán 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2014-07-28/orban-says-he-seeks-to-end-liberal-democracy-in-hungary>
, Hungary’s self-avowedly “illiberal” prime minister, who shuns refugees, 
should take a look. Perhaps other European politicians should too.

Canada and the US are countries whose creation derived from the movement of 
people to faraway shores; European nations are rooted otherwise. But Europe 
could draw inspiration from the capacity to form a positive narrative that 
embraces migration instead of treating it mainly as a threat. Europe, as the 
new continent of immigration, will increasingly need that narrative.
 