
Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> has blocked BT and its mobile 
arm EE from bidding for more spectrum in an auction of airwaves that will allow 
faster downloads for 4G users.

The ban is an attempt to halt the group’s increasing dominance in the mobile 
market but, at the same time, the regulator has allowedBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/btgroup> to bid for airwaves critical to 
rolling out future 5G services, a move that has angered rival operator Three.

The UK communications regulator has launched a consultation into the proposed 
auction of the spectrum, which will be critical in helping to meet demands for 
mobile broadband as well as future 5G mobile services.


BT – which last year paid £12bn to buy EE 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/feb/05/bt-to-buy-ee-4g-broadband>, 
Britain’s largest mobile phone network – currently holds 45% of the UK’s usable 
mobile spectrum. This compares with 28% for Vodafone, 15% for O2 and 12% for 
Three UK.


[Ofcom] has allowed BT and Vodafone to stockpile valuable mobile airwaves and 
put choice for consumers at risk
Dave Dyson, Three UK 
Ofcom has blocked BT/EE from bidding for any more new spectrum in the 2.3GHz 
band, which could be used to boost existing 4G capability meaning faster 
downloads and internet browsing for consumers.


“Ofcom is concerned that, if these immediately usable holdings were to become 
more unbalanced, this could harm competition in the next few years,” the 
regulator said. “If BT/EE were to acquire all the 2.3GHz being awarded, it 
would have almost half of the immediately usable spectrum in the market.”


However, BT/EE will be allowed to bid for the second chunk of spectrum to be 
auctioned, the 3.4GHz band that is considered critical for the rollout of 5G 
services across Europe.


Ofcom’s decision to allow BT/EE to bid for 5G spectrum has angered 
Hutchison-owned Three, which last year had its£10.25bn takeover bid for O2 
blocked by competition regulators 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/11/three-takeover-of-o2-blocked-by-european-commission-on-competition-concerns>
. Three has called for BT/EE to be completely stopped from bidding for the sale 
of the spectrum.


“Ofcom exists to promote competition and protect consumers but it has once 
again shown it is not willing to make the big decisions needed to deliver the 
best outcome for the UK,” said Dave Dyson, chief executive of Three UK.

“It has allowed BT and Vodafone to stockpile valuable mobile airwaves and put 
genuine choice for consumers at risk. A 30% cap on total spectrum ownership and 
a spectrum reservation for smaller operators are the only measures that will 
preserve competition for the benefit of UK mobile consumers.”


Ofcom defended its move, which will be consulted upon after responses on the 
proposals close on 30 January 2017. It said the spectrum for 5G was not 
“immediately useable” and that it is “important that operators are given an 
opportunity to acquire this spectrum so they are able to consider early 
development of 5G services”.


“The UK has long benefited from strong mobile competition,” said Philip 
Marnick, spectrum group director at Ofcom. “We are designing the auction to 
ensure everyone benefits from a market that continues to innovate and serve 
them well. “Spectrum is the essential resource that fuels the UK’s economy. 
This auction can help ensure that UK consumers can access the mobile data 
services they need, and that operators can continue to innovate and build for 
the future.”

 