
An upsurge in new wind, solar and hydro plants and capacity saw renewable 
energy smash global records last year, according to a report on new supply.

Some 147 Gigawatts of renewable electricity came online in 2015 - the largest 
annual increase ever and as much as Africa’sentire power generating capacity 
<https://www.irena.org/DocumentDownloads/Publications/Prospects_for_the_African_PowerSector.pdf>
.

Clean energy investment increased to $286bn (£198bn), with solar energy 
accounting for 56% of the total and wind power for 38%.

Overall, more than twice as much money was spent on renewables than on coal 
and gas-fired power generation ($130bn in 2015),the REN21 global status report 
<http://www.ren21.net/status-of-renewables/global-status-report/> found.

Global clean energy employment rose 5% in 2015, figures show
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/25/global-clean-energy-renewable-employment-rose-5-in-2015-figures-show>
Christine Lins, REN21’s chief, said: “What is truly remarkable about these 
results is that they were achieved at a time when fossil fuel prices were at 
historic lows, and renewables remained at a significant disadvantage in terms 
of government subsidies. For every dollar spent boosting renewables, nearly 
four dollars were spent to maintain our dependence on fossil fuels.”

For the first time, emerging economies outspent richer nations in the green 
energy race, with China accounting for a third of the global total. Jamaica, 
Honduras, Uruguay and Mauritania were among the highest investors, relative to 
their GDP.

African and Latin American countries also set some of the world’s most 
ambitious targets for clean energy deployment last year, the report says.

But the renewables revolution stuttered in many developed countries, with the 
significant exception of the US 
<http://www.renewableenergyworld.com/articles/2016/02/renewables-provides-two-thirds-of-new-us-generating-capacity-in-2015-3-500-times-more-than-coal.html>
. In Europe, investment plummeted by 21% after the withdrawal of policy 
supports, such asclean energy subsidies  
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:52014XC0628(01)>and 
binding targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/20/bp-lobbied-against-eu-support-clean-energy-favour-gas-documents-reveal>
.

Despite this, renewables still provide 44% of the EU’s electricity capacity, 
and15% of its final energy consumption 
<https://ec.europa.eu/energy/en/news/eu-track-meeting-20-renewable-energy-target>
.

 Jean-François Fauconnier of Climate Action Network Europe said the report 
should be a “wake up call” to the European commission, spurring increased 2030 
renewable goals in a review later this year. “The EU is at risk of missing the 
ongoing energy revolution and lagging behind other leading economies for 
decades,” he said.

 The UK saw a 25% rise in renewable energy investments last year, the paper 
finds. Butfigures for the first quarter of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/apr/08/solar-installation-in-british-homes-falls-by-three-quarters-after-subsidy-cuts>
 suggest this may not survive cuts to solar subsidies and a slowdown in onshore 
wind planning approvals.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Frenewable-energy-smashes-global-records-in-2015-report-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5896fa44b04e2a046d89c2c49fc013892b2316%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Renewable%20energy%20smashes%20global%20records%20in%202015%2C%20report%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Frenewable-energy-smashes-global-records-in-2015-report-shows%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Renewable%20energy%20smashes%20global%20records%20in%202015%2C%20report%20shows&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F01%2Frenewable-energy-smashes-global-records-in-2015-report-shows%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde5896fa44b04e2a046d89c2c49fc013892b2316%2F0_0_3508_2480%2F3508.jpg>
 Global new investment in renewable energy by technology. Photograph: REN21 
Industry reactions to the REN21 paper were buoyant, with the Global Wind Energy
 <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Council (GWEC) hailing news 
that 173 countries now have renewable energy targets.

Steve Sawyer, GWEC’s secretary general said: “A record 63.5 GW of wind power 
was installed worldwide in 2015, demonstrating the maturity of the sector; and 
showing how renewables are supplying competitive, reliable and clean energy to 
fuel economic growth and cut CO2 emissions.”

Around the world, 8.1million people are now employed in the clean energy 
industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/25/global-clean-energy-renewable-employment-rose-5-in-2015-figures-show>
 - excluding hydropower - 3.5 million of them in China. In the US,more people 
now work in the solar industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/12/us-solar-industry-employees-grows-oil-gas>
 than in oil and gas extraction.

While employment in the clean energy sector grew by 6% in 2015, jobs in the 
oil industry contracted by 18%,according to the International Renewable Energy 
Agency <https://next.ft.com/content/7da1638a-2293-11e6-aa98-db1e01fabc0c>.

 But the fast-maturing renewables sector still has to overcome storage 
limitations, and the world’s dependence on infrastructure systems geared 
towards fossil fuels.

 Arthouros Zervos, the chair of REN21 said: “The renewables train is barreling 
down the tracks, but it is running on 20th-century infrastructure – a system 
based on outdated thinking where conventional baseload is generated by fossil 
fuels and nuclear power.”

 A build-out of decentralised and community-based generation was urgently 
needed to accelerate the clean energy transition, he said.
 