
The number of hate crimes reported to police has jumped by nearly a fifth, 
figures show.

There were 52,528 such offences recorded by forces in England and Wales in 
2014-15 – an increase of 18% compared with the previous year, according to Home 
Office data.

More than 80% were classed as race hate crimes, with others involving 
religion, disability, sexual orientation andtransgender victims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/sep/08/-sp-trans-pride-brighton-lgbt-equality>
.

The actual scale of hate crimes is likely to be higher than the number drawn 
from police records.


Officials calculated that, based on combined data from the Crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Survey for England and Wales between 
2012-13 and 2014-15, there were an estimated 222,000 hate crimes each year.


The latest figures follow a trend in 2013-14, when offences involving 
religious hatred soared by 45% and race hate crime by 4% afterthe murder of 
soldier Lee Rigby <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/woolwich-attack>. 

A report published alongside the data pointed to improved recording of crime 
over the past year, particularly for offences involving violence.It added: 
“Together with a greater awareness of hate crime, and improved willingness of 
victims to come forward, this is likely to be a factor in the increase in hate 
crimes recorded by the police in 2014-15 compared with the previous year.”

Police told to treat anti-Muslim hate crimes in same way as antisemitic attacks
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/13/police-must-record-anti-muslim-hate-crimes>
David Cameron has also announced that anti-Muslim hate crimes are to be 
recorded as a separate category 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/oct/13/police-must-record-anti-muslim-hate-crimes>
 for the first time.


Statisticians found that, contrary to reports, there was no “clear spike” in 
offences around the times of the independent inquiry intochild sexual 
exploitation in Rotherham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/jun/24/rotherham-child-sexual-exploitation-inquiry-300-suspects>
 in August last year, or theCharlie Hebdo terrorist shooting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/sep/18/je-suis-charlie-film-hebdo-attacks-cartoons-free-speech-toronto-film-festival>
 in Paris in January.

A hate crime is defined as “any criminal offence which is perceived, by the 
victim or any other person, to be motivated by hostility or prejudice towards 
someone based on a personal characteristic”.

There were increases in reported offences for all five of the monitored hate 
crime strands between 2013-14 and 2014-15.

Police <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/police> recorded 42,930 race hate 
crimes – an increase of 15% on the previous year. Offences linked to victims’ 
religion increased by 43% on 2013-14 to 3,254, while the number has more than 
doubled in the past three years.


Hate crimes involving sexual orientation (5,597), disability (2,508) and 
transgender identity (605) saw annual rises of 22%, 25% and 9% respectively.


An analysis of hate crimes logged by 22 police forces found that 59% were 
public order offences while three in 10 involved violence, of which 30% led to 
injury.


Despite the rise in hate crimes recorded by police, the crime survey shows a 
“statistically significant” fall of 28% between 2007-09 and 2012-15.

Let’s up the ante on disability hate crime | Peter Lewis
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/jan/13/disabilty-hate-crime-vigilance-crown-prosecution-service>
Based on data from the 2012-13 to 2014-15 survey, it was estimated that there 
were an average of 106,000 incidents of racially motivated crime a year, while 
38,000 involved religion.


The poll also indicated that Muslims were more likely to be targeted in 
religiously motivated crimes.


Karen Bradley, minister for preventing abuse and exploitation, said: “Crimes 
motivated by hatred or hostility towards someone because of their race, 
religion, sexual orientation, gender-identity or because they are disabled are 
absolutely abhorrent and this Government will do everything to eradicate them.


“The increase in recorded hate crime shows that more victims have the 
confidence to come forward and that the police are improving the way they 
identify and record hate crimes. We welcome this.”


Asst Ch Con Mark Hamilton, the National Police Chiefs’ Council lead for hate 
crime, said it “damages society and undermines the diversity and tolerance we 
should instead be celebrating”. He added: “The police are working hard to 
reduce its impact by listening to victims and supporting the most vulnerable, 
however, it is also vital that communities and partner agencies come together 
to challenge hatred wherever they see it.”
 