
Leading Republicans broke with Donald Trump on Wednesday after the 
president-elect appeared to put more faith in WikiLeaks founderJulian Assange 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/julian-assange> than in US intelligence 
agencies.


The sharp differences on a highly charged national security issue are the 
latest sign that matters of intelligence and policy towardsRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> reflect a deep fault line in Trump’s 
relationship with the Republican party establishment.

Julian Assange gives guarded praise of Trump and blasts Clinton in interview
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/24/julian-assange-donald-trump-hillary-clinton-interview>
The House speaker, Paul Ryan, called Assange “a sycophant for Russia 
<http://thehill.com/policy/international/312632-paul-ryan-calls-assange-sycophant-for-russia>
” on a conservative radio show and GOP Senator Tom Cottontold MSNBC 
<http://www.washingtontimes.com/news/2017/jan/4/tom-cotton-i-have-more-faith-us-intelligence-peopl/>
 that he had “a lot more faith in our intelligence officers serving around the 
world … than I do in people like Julian Assange ”.


The comments followed tweets from Trump on Wednesday morning in which he 
approvingly repeated Assange’s claim that the Russian state was not the source 
of the hacked emails from the Democratic National Committee and the Clinton 
campaign chairman, John Podesta, published by Wiki Leaks during the election.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frussia-meddle-political-system-republican-paul-ryan-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russia%20clearly%20tried%20to%20meddle%20in%20US%20political%20system%2C%20says%20Paul%20Ryan%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frussia-meddle-political-system-republican-paul-ryan-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russia%20clearly%20tried%20to%20meddle%20in%20US%20political%20system%2C%20says%20Paul%20Ryan%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Frussia-meddle-political-system-republican-paul-ryan-video&media=>
Russia clearly tried to meddle in US political system, says Paul Ryan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/05/russia-meddle-political-system-republican-paul-ryan-video>
 “Julian Assange said ‘a 14 year old could have hacked Podesta ’ – why was DNC 
so careless? Also said Russians did not give him the info! ” one Trump tweet 
said. Another quoted Assange as describing US media coverage on the issue as 
“very dishonest”. Trump added: “More dishonest than anyone knows.”

The tweets referred to an interview with Assange 
<http://insider.foxnews.com/2017/01/03/wikileaks-editor-julian-assange-alleged-russian-hacking-clinton-emails-donald-trump>
 conducted by Fox News commentator Sean Hannity, a vocal Trump supporter, in 
the Ecuadorean embassy in London, where the Australian computer expert and 
transparency advocate has been living for more than four years, sincesexual 
assault <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/dec/17/julian-assange-sweden>
allegations were made against him in Sweden. He denies the allegations and has 
not been charged with any crime.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuyCOy25GdjQ&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuyCOy25GdjQ>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DuyCOy25GdjQ&media=>
 Julian Assange tells Sean Hannity: Russia was not our source 
Assange is also under US criminal investigation for the publication of large 
numbers of classified US documents by WikiLeaks, an act characterised for many 
years by Republican and many Democrat leaders as an act of aggression against 
the US.

In the interview, Assange said: “Our source is not the Russian government and 
it is not a state party.” US intelligence agencies have suggested that Russia 
passed the hacked material to WikiLeaks through intermediaries.

Asked about the Trump tweets, the president elect’s spokesman, Sean Spicer 
said the president-elect “was stating what Assange is stating publicly and 
looking forward to [a forthcoming intelligence] briefing to discuss all of 
these matters.”

Last month Obama deported 35 Russian diplomats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
 in response to the election hacking, in a move criticised as premature by the 
Trump team. Thepresident elect praised Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 for not taking retaliatory measures, saying: “I always knew he was very smart!”

Trump has said he would make public new facts over election hacking known only 
to him 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-unfair-blame-russia-election-hacking-interference>
 either on Tuesday or Wednesday this week.

The spat is being played out at a time when one investigation into Russian 
hacking of the US election is nearing completion and another is just beginning. 
Both have the potential to undermine the legitimacy of the Trump presidency.

An intelligence community review of the evidence is expected to be delivered 
to Obama on Thursday and will form the basis for a briefing for Trump from top 
intelligence officials on Friday. Meanwhile, hearings begin on Russian 
cyber-attacks on Thursday in the Senate Armed Services Committee, chaired by 
John McCain, a Republican with hardline views on Russia.

McCain called the alleged Russian cyber-attacks “an act of war” on Wednesday. 

“I’m not saying it’s an atomic attack,” he said. “I’m just saying that when 
you attack a nation’s fundamental structure, which they are doing, then it’s an 
act of war.”

Trump’s support for Assange has not led to break with all his Republican 
allies. Sarah Palin said on Wednesday that she now regretted her attacks on 
Assange in 2010 after he published leaked documents from her time as governor 
of Alaska.


“He is an anti-American operative with blood on his hands. His past posting of 
classified documents revealed the identity of more than 100 Afghan sources to 
the Taliban,” she said at the time.

 “Why was he not pursued with the same urgency we pursue al-Qaeda and Taliban 
leaders?”

Palin now says she has changed her mind since WikiLeaks published Democratic 
Party emails.

 “The media collusion that hid what many on the Left have been supporting is 
shocking. This important information that finally opened people’s eyes to 
democrat candidates and operatives would not have been exposed were it not for 
Julian Assange,” shewrote on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/sarahpalin/photos/a.10150723283643588.424640.24718773587/10154916952353588/?type=3&theater>
.

The Republican foreign policy establishment however, has been more resistant 
to such whiplash changes in views and allegiances. Many senior figures are 
uneasy about Trump’s open feud with the US intelligence community.

 On Tuesday, the president elect trolled the US agencies, going so far as 
putting the word intelligence in quote marks.

 “The ‘Intelligence’ briefing on so-called ‘Russian hacking’ was delayed until 
Friday, perhaps more time needed to build a case. Very strange!” he said on 
Twitter.

 In response, intelligence officials briefed correspondents that the plan had 
always been for the Russian briefing to take place on Friday, and referred to 
his remarks as “adversarial”.
 