
There can be no greater relief than that felt by the 10 children who are being 
pulled out of the rotting stench of the camp in Calais tojoin their families 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/uk-to-take-small-group-of-children-from-calais-refugee-camp>
 in the UK. For months now pressure has been put on the British government to 
help these unaccompanied minors, who have been living in squalor an hour away. 
They have risked death by getting on lorries to come here because their lives 
are hardly lives at all.

It is small relief in the grand scheme of what needs to be done to help the 
immigration crisis, though. They will be taken to Croydon to register and see 
their families for the first time in churches. The church at least recognises 
our moral obligation to these people as the French and British government turn 
away.

UK to take small group of children from Calais refugee camp
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/16/uk-to-take-small-group-of-children-from-calais-refugee-camp>
These children – who are mostly teenage boys – have been fast-tracked by the 
Home Office as having a right to stay in the UK. Fast-tracking is hardly the 
right phrase, as so many of these refugees have been festering in squalid 
conditions for months. Lily Allenburst into tears 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-37607774> when she saw what was 
happening recently, not because she is a popstar but because she is a human 
being.

To see other human beings live like this is partly shocking because this 
humanitarian crisis is unrecognised by the UN, and one of the most frightening 
things about the camps is their lack of structure. There is a desperate 
lawlessness with no protection for women or children and unaccompanied minors. 
There is simply a patchwork of different voluntary groups doing whatever they 
can for traumatised, ill and depressed people. When I was there I saw kids as 
young as 10 totally alone with men who claimed to be their “protectors” lurking 
in the background.

This “fast-tracking” – because the camp is be torn down very soon – did not 
come fast enough for many. Volunteers have estimated that there are about 400 
unaccompanied minors in Calais. Some have disappeared and others are dead.
Raheemullah Oryakhel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/24/refugees-children-calais-bulldoze>
 was 14 and had the legal right to come to England and join his brother in 
Manchester. His friends said that he lost faith that this would happened. He
died last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/15/very-scared-death-teenage-stowaway>
 falling off a lorry.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Refugees'%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Refugees%27%20hope%20and%20despair%20in%20Calais%20camp%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Frefugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video&media=>
Refugees’ hope and despair in Calais camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/oct/17/refugees-hope-and-despair-in-calais-camp-video>
In March, when the south section of the camp was demolished, 129 children went 
missing. What will happen when the whole camp goes? Officials talk of 
“dispersal”, as if they are clearing vermin. A fortune is being spent on a 
wall. It is as though nothing has been learned.

Sangatte 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/may/23/immigration.immigrationandpublicservices1>
 was closed in 2002, following pressure form David Blunkett. Nicolas Sarkozy 
had promised that there would be no more migrants. Those people relocated to 
the woods or started sleeping on the streets – and here we are again but in 
even greater numbers.

'He was very scared': the death of a teenage stowaway
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/15/very-scared-death-teenage-stowaway>
Just as the Calais camp is about to be cleared, a team has been sent there to 
identify the children who are eligible to come here: children that we have 
known existed for months. While the Home Office has been dragging its feet,
Stella Creasy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/18/call-to-bring-child-refugees-in-calais-under-uk-safeguarding-rules>
,Yvette Cooper 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/21/uk-mps-demand-urgent-help-for-unaccompanied-children-at-calais-camp>
 andLord Dubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/05/disgrace-to-europe-former-child-refugee-lord-dubs-calais-camp>
 have been trying to speed up the process. When you are there you realise there 
is no one to help these kids process their asylum claims.

The language around migrants as we know it has become so debased we cannot 
even see these youngsters as children. Until they are dead. Then we hear how 
they wanted to be an engineer or a footballer. When you chat to them you see so 
clearly that behind the big dreams are tiny hopes: a home, shelter, family, 
safety.

The French interior minister Bernard Cazeneuve has said he is merely asking 
“Britain to assume its moral duty”. Our moral duty is bigger than 10 children. 
More may come next week. I hope so. I hope we see their smiling curious faces 
on our TV screens. I hope that we welcome them. I hope they find home here.
 