
Fancy a five-bed, four-bath lakeside villa with a swimming pool in Florida, 
less than 20 minutes drive to Walt Disney World – on the market for $259,900 
(£154,500) compared to the $360,000 it fetched just after construction in 2005?

Or how about a two-bed, two-bath villa in the Spanish countryside, not far 
from the beaches of Murcia: now £89,500 compared to £135,000 in 2006?
 Calasparra, Murcia, Spain. 
International estate agents are talking up the property market in holiday 
hotspots, promising that the collapse in prices is over and that buyers need to 
act now to bag a bargain. But figures from Eurostat, the EU's data agency, show 
that prices continued to fall throughout 2013 across much of Europe, while 
boom-time developments inSpain <https://www.theguardian.com/world/spain>, 
particularly those far from the coast, may never find buyers at any price.

The British are the biggest foreign buyers of properties in Spain, owning an 
estimated 170,000 homes in the country, mostly along the Costas. But unlike 
Britain, the long fall in house prices that began in 2007 is not over; in 
March, Spain'sInstituto Nacional de Estadistica 
<http://www.ine.es/en/daco/daco42/ipv/ipv0413_en.pdf> said they tumbled another 
1.3% in the last three months of 2013, and that the annualised rate of price 
inflation was -7.8%. In Murcia, the south-east corner of the country, where 
over-building was most rife, prices are still falling at a rate of 12%-15% a 
year, with many homes at half of 2008 levels. At the peak of the frenzied 
construction boom, Spain was building 700,000 homes and apartments a year – 
around four times the volume in Britain – but after the developers went bust, 
many are now in the hands of the country's banks and cajas.
 Valverde: 20 minutes from Alicante. Built 2007, sold €198,000. Now for sale 
at €99,000. 
For anyone retiring and wanting a place in the sun, is now the time to buy? 
The head of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde, thinks the 
country's economy is returning to health. "Spain has turned the corner," she 
said, predicting economic growth this year of 0.9% and of 1% in 2015. Spanish 
property valuer Tinsa reckons the glut of homes on the market should largely be 
cleared by 2017, and that new building programmes will begin next year as 
shortages emerge in high-demand areas.

Even if prices are not recovering much, transactions are, says Richard Way, 
editor at theOverseas Guides Company <http://www.overseasguidescompany.com/>, a 
specialist in overseas property buying. The number of properties sold in the 
Valencia region, which includes the Costa Blanca, was up 17% in 2013, he says.

Buyers who are really focused on price can pick up very low prices if they go 
inland, says Paul Payne of Masa, a Costa Blanca estate agency. "If you are 
prepared to be away from the coast, savings are a lot bigger."

Prices are frequently half of what they used to be. He says he is "flying out 
more Britons in the next eight weeks than in the last two years" for viewings 
about 30 minutes away from Alicante at beachside Torrevieja and more inland 
near Orihuela.

Savills highlights Sotogrande, a purpose-built resort in Andalucia some 40 
miles along the coast from Marbella, as "benefitting from heavily discounted 
prices, some 30-40% below their former peak values". At the very bottom of the 
range, SpainProperty <https://www.theguardian.com/money/property> Portal throws 
up 210 properties under the sales price of €50,000, including many flats in 
Murcia, Alicante and Jaen.

So what are the drawbacks? In a report last year, the OECD (Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) said Spanish property prices were still 
overvalued by more than 10% – although it added that French prices were around 
20% too high while British houses are 31% overvalued.

Don't expect to pick up a beautiful villa, in a desirable location, for 
peanuts – the big falls were in the off-centre developments that were arguably 
absurdly over-priced in the first place. For example, in the fashionable resort 
of Sitges, outside Barcelona, asking prices forseafront flats are £500,000 or 
more <http://www.idealista.com/en/inmueble/27603544/> – not far off their 
pre-crash peak – while in rather less sought-after Roquetas de Mar in Murcia, 
which saw rampant over-building, prices for a similar-sized flatstart at around 
£25,000 <http://www.idealista.com/inmueble/26887550/>.
 Europe price rises and falls 
Legal issues remain a big barrier. Solicitor Peter Esders of Welwyn-based 
lawyers and conveyancers Judicare, says he has seen "several different 
scenarios" of failure – from corrupt town officials selling bogus planning 
permissions, to the illegal building of properties to overstretched 
construction companies. "Most clients don't want to talk about it," he says. 
"They're too embarrassed."

Finance remains a significant problem. Overseas mortgage broker Simon Conn of 
simonconn.com <http://www.simonconn.com> says you will need a deposit of at 
least 30%, lending rates are around 4-5%, and you will be assessed on all your 
borrowings, including any UK mortgage. Total borrowings can't exceed one-third 
of your monthly take home pay, and the banks won't take lettings income into 
account.

Remember to add 11-14% to the purchase price to cover transaction fees, such 
as charges for notaries.

Buyers can release equity from their home in their UK to help finance a 
property purchase abroad, although new affordability criteria coming into force 
on 26 April may make it tougher to convince a lender you can really finance the 
payments from your income. Any earnings from letting the property while you are 
not there are also taxable.

Be careful about falling into the trap of using pricey English-only property 
websites. Spain's equivalent of Rightmove, with the widest selection of 
properties, is calledIdealista.com <http://www.idealista.com>.

The major Spanish banks also have sites offloading repossessed developments. 
Santander'sAltamirainmuebles.com <http://www.altamirainmuebles.com> lists 
thousands – for example a three-bed 118m2 new-build house outside Alicante for 
£73,000. Bankia, a collection of seven failed banks rescued with a €19bn 
government bailout, sells its repossessed properties throughBankiaHabitat 
<https://www.bankiahabitat.es/en/inicio>.

Servihabitat <http://www.servihabitat.com/haznostuoferta/index-en.html>, the 
site for properties owned by La Caixa bank, tells buyers "you set the price … 
we'll give you an answer in 24 hours". If reports from property agents are 
true, put in silly offers and see if the bank bites.
 