
Donald Trump’s decision to nominate the head of the biggest oil company in the 
world as America’s top diplomat on Tuesday triggered widespread alarm among 
environmentalists and critics of Russian influence.

The president-elect named Rex Tillerson, the president and chief executive of 
ExxonMobil <https://www.theguardian.com/business/exxonmobil>, as his nominee 
for secretary of state after an intensive and very public search.

The pick appeared to divide Republicans and dismay Democrats, setting up an 
early battle of wills between Trump and Congress. Senators from both parties 
haveraised concerns 
<https://twitter.com/marcorubio/status/807962818272235521?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
about Tillerson’s lack of government experience and close ties to the Russian 
president, Vladimir Putin.

Russia and conflicts of interest: Rex Tillerson embodies quandaries for Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
Trump hailed Tillerson as “among the most accomplished business leaders and 
international deal makers in the world” in a statement released on Tuesday by 
his transition team. “His tenacity, broad experience and deep understanding of 
geopolitics make him an excellent choice for secretary of state. He will 
promote regional stability and focus on the core national security interests of 
the United States.”

The announcement of the oil executive for the role came after a selection 
process, played out in front of TV cameras, that considered figures including 
the former presidential candidate Mitt Romney and the former CIA director David 
Petraeus.


But Tillerson’s confirmation hearings are likely to be a bitter and emotional 
struggle. He is arecipient of Moscow’s Order of Friendship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, having grown close to Putin and his circle while working on oil exploration 
in Russia, which wasfrozen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
 when the US imposed sanctions in 2014. He may also face questions over the 
potential benefits to ExxonMobil from US foreign policy if sanctions imposed on 
Russia after its annexation of Crimea were lifted.

Republican hawks have made clear the ExxonMobil boss would have to convince 
them he would be tough on Russia and supportive of Nato to get through 
confirmation in the Senate, where the defection of only threeRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> would be sufficient to block 
the appointment and hand Trump an early setback. Already, three Republican 
senators have expressed misgivings: John McCain, Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio.

Rubio, a senator for Florida who ran against Trump in the presidential 
primaries, said: “WhileRex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rex-tillerson> is a respected businessman, 
I have serious concerns about his nomination. The next secretary of state must 
be someone who views the world with moral clarity, is free of potential 
conflicts of interest, has a clear sense of America’s interests, and will be a 
forceful advocate for America’s foreign policy goals to the president, within 
the administration, and on the world stage.”

Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina senator who also ran against Trump, added: 
“Based upon his extensive business dealings with the Putin government and his 
previous opposition of efforts to impose sanctions on the Russian government, 
there are many questions which must be answered. I expect the US-Russian 
relationship to be front and center in his confirmation process.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Frex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde3ee6f46cf51ea11f02d79bffaac5b7d17d9dcf%2F0_114_4672_2803%2F4672.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rex%20Tillerson%20nominated%20as%20Donald%20Trump's%20secretary%20of%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Frex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rex%20Tillerson%20nominated%20as%20Donald%20Trump%27s%20secretary%20of%20state&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Frex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde3ee6f46cf51ea11f02d79bffaac5b7d17d9dcf%2F0_114_4672_2803%2F4672.jpg>
 Republican senators John McCain, left, and Marco Rubio. Both have expressed 
unease with the idea of Rex Tillerson serving as secretary of state. 
Photograph: Alex Brandon/AP 
But in an early sign of faultlines within the party, Trump loyalists rallied 
around the selection. Speaking at the conservative Heritage Foundation 
thinktank in Washington, Newt Gingrich, a former speaker of the House, goaded 
critics: “I’m going to confess up front here, Tillerson has a huge problem. 
He’s successful. Being successful in the largest corporation in the world, he’s 
actually been involved in making money.”

As the audience burst into laughter, Gingrich continued: “Now, if you’re John 
Kerry or Hillary Clinton or the entire state department, and your entire 
career’s been one of going around the world unsuccessfully negotiating 
non-agreements, Tillerson is horrifying. I mean, what if he actually 
effectively represents America? What if we actually get good deals that make 
big jobs in America? What if he’s actually able to explain Trumpism to the 
world?”

Gingrich, delivering an address entitled The Principles of Trumpism, added: 
“He’s going to be so well received around the planet that, combined with 
[defence secretary] Jim Mattis, he automatically changes who people think Trump 
is.”

There was also support from Condoleezza Rice 
<https://www.facebook.com/condoleezzarice/?hc_ref=PAGES_TIMELINE&fref=nf>, a 
former secretary of state who refused to endorse Trump for president. She said: 
“I know Rex as a successful businessman and a patriot. He will represent the 
interests and the values of the United States with resolve and commitment. And 
he will lead the exceptional men and women of the state department with respect 
and dedication.”

Senior Democrats, however, promised Tillerson a rough ride in the confirmation 
process. The party’s incoming Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, said the 
businessman would be “asked the most serious questions about his relationship 
with Russia, his disturbing opposition to sanctions onRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, the Paris climate agreement, and 
how he views Putin”.

The House minority leader, Nancy Pelosi, told MSNBC: “The coziness with 
Vladimir Putin is very alarming and should have eliminated him, frankly. Right 
now, his approach to the sanctions on Russia, because of their aggression in 
Europe, should be enough to say: perhaps another relationship with the 
administration, but not secretary of state.”

Senator Chris Coons, a Democrat on the Senate foreign relations committee, 
said Tillerson would receive a “fair and open” hearing but he expected the 
businessman would face tough questions from senators of both parties about his 
priorities as the country’s top diplomat.

“It troubles me greatly that Mr Tillerson would have reason to advocate for 
the rolling back of sanctions because that would in the best interest of his 
company,” the Democrat from Delaware told reporters on Tuesday.

As an indication of where lawmakers on Capitol Hill stand on Russia, Coons 
noted that the Kentucky Republican Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, 
convened a breakfast las week with a dozen senators and the ambassadors and 
legislators from Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania.

Tillerson’s relationship with Putin would be less of a concern, Coons said, if 
the president-elect hadn’t exhibited a soft spot for the Russian leader 
throughout the campaign.

“If we saw a national security team, a group of senior advisers, who were 
clear-eyed about Russia’s sustained efforts – overt and covert – to undermine 
Democracy across central and western Europe, I would be less concerned about 
this particular piece of Rex Tillerson’s business leadership,” said Coons.

The nomination came shortly after a CIA assessment that Russia sought to 
meddle in the election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 on Trump’s behalf. Adam Schiff, the ranking member of the House permanent 
select committee on intelligence, said: “There was celebrating in the Duma on 
the night Donald Trump was elected president; with this choice, the celebration 
in Moscow goes on.”

The White House noted that Tillerson’s Order of Friendship award chimed with 
Trump’s repeated calls for warmer relations with Russia. Press secretary Josh 
Earnest said he expected lawmakers from both sides would ask probing questions. 
“Mr Tillerson is a seasoned business executive and he’s got some skills in 
answering tough questions in public, and I suspect he’ll have to put them to 
use in the spring.”

Tillerson, who has spent the past 41 years at Exxon, was due to retire next 
year. According to regulatory filings, he retains a huge financial interest in 
the oil company, owning $151m in company stock. In 2015, Tillerson’s total 
compensation, including salary, bonus and new share awards, was worth $27.3m.

ExxonMobil has operations in more than 50 countries and has partnered 
<http://corporate.exxonmobil.com/en/company/worldwide-operations/locations/qatar/about/overview>
 with Qatar’s state oil company, Qatar Petroleum, on a project to build a 
natural gas terminal on the Gulf of Mexico. The company is alsounder 
investigation 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/20/science/exxon-mobil-fraud-inquiry-said-to-focus-more-on-future-than-past.html>
 for misleading investors about what it knew about climate change.

Greenpeace UK’s executive director, John Sauven, said: “So a real-life JR 
Ewing becomes America’s chief diplomat asDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> does away with the usual 
intermediaries and directly outsources foreign policy to the fossil fuel 
industry. We spent years warning that Exxon was too close to the US government. 
Now they are the government.”


It was also reported on Tuesday that Trump would pick former Texas governor 
Rick Perry as his energy secretary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rick-perry-department-of-energy-trump-administration>
. The irony was not lost on political observers who recalled a 2011 Republican 
primary debate in which Perry said: “It’s three agencies of government, when I 
get there, that are gone – commerce, education and the, um, what’s the third 
one there? Let’s see.” He later clarified that he meant to say energy.


Additional reporting by Dominic Rushe and Alan Yuhas
 