
Who could resent the captain of the British women’s hockey team, Kate 
Richardson-Walsh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/20/olympic-medal-wife-hockey-team-gb-gold>
, carrying the flag at the Olympic closing ceremony in Rio? Her wife Helen, who 
was also on the team, had played a pivotal role in their win (on receiving 
their golds, they became the first same-sex married couple to win Olympic 
medals). The entire GB team worejackets 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-lancashire-37120326> that said “thank 
you” to Brazil in Portuguese and “hello” to Tokyo where the next Olympics takes 
place. I’m not a sports fan, butas a nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2016/aug/05/rio-olympics-2016-medal-table-and-results-in-full>
 we have been pretty fantastic and it seems entirely appropriate to celebrate 
the achievements of these athletes and to feel, dare I say it … a little bit 
proud.

Oh, but here come the begrudgers. We certainly could win a gold for 
self-loathing whinging. We only got so many medals because of the money thrown 
at sports through thenational lottery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/aug/06/charities-demand-return-olympics-london-2012-lottery-cash>
. We must not get all puffed up and nationalistic because that is a bad thing. 
Sport has nothing to do with our place in the world, it merely reveals many of 
the existing inequalities, and on and on it goes. But surely the fact that in 
1996 we came 36th in the medal table, below North Korea, and now we have pipped 
China, has given some much-needed uplift to a divided country?

Of course, being good at physical jerks does not suddenly make post-Brexit 
Britain a happy place. We know that the dreamlike quality of the 2012 games, 
kicked off byDanny Boyle’s bonkers and brilliant opening ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/charlottehigginsblog/2012/jul/28/olympics-2012-danny-boyle>
, where everyone went mad for Mo Farah and felt the love, did not last. 
Anti-immigrant and out-and-proud racist discourse has absolutely flourished in 
the intervening years.

But again in Rio we saw that winners come in all sizes, shades and sexualities 
and when they do brilliantly everyone gets behind them. I am not always fond of 
folk wrapping themselves in flags but nationalism is always an imaginary 
concept that can be mobilised in whichever way we choose. This nationalism – 
inclusive, warm, sentimental, hardworking – is the one the left should embrace, 
but is too often embarrassed about. So it leaves nationalism for others to 
remake in their own brutal image.

The refusal of so many people to understand that globalisation does not work 
out for everyone, or that mumbling at rallies about internationalism makes few 
hearts sing, is precisely why so many were out of touch with the result of the 
EU referendum. Yes, some of it was about Little England, but some of it was 
about how we define ourselves as a nation. Can we go it alone? Can we punch 
above our weight? Is this just a post-empire hangover? The answers are complex. 
The nation represented at the Olympics was at ease with multiple identities – 
sometimes Andy Murray is Scots, sometimes British. Bradley Wiggins, Nicola 
Adams and Mo Farah all belong together as champions here.

Telling people that nationalism is wrong and infantile seems to me to 
misunderstand the mood. Right now we need to ask what kind of country we want 
to be. As Albert Camus once said, “I should be able to love my country and 
still love justice”. Surely that is possible. After the ugliness in the run-up 
to the Brexit vote and immediately afterwards, we were reminded of the best of 
ourselves in Rio. That is a real victory.
 