
Fares for despairing train passengers, many of whom have suffered some of the 
worst rail delays and disruption for years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/09/train-firms-fail-arrive-on-time-punctuality-figures-railways>
, will rise on Monday by an average of 2.3% – and in some cases by as much as 
7%.

Against a backdrop of continued strikes on one major route 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
 and very poor service on a number of others, an army of season ticket holders 
on routes into London will pay about £80 more a year to take the train to work.

Each year, January’s regulated train fare increases are pegged to the previous 
July’s RPI inflation figure, which this summer was 1.9%. Regulated fares 
include season tickets and off-peak InterCity tickets, and are capped by the 
government. However, unregulated fares, such as off-peak leisure tickets, can 
go up by as much as the train companies wish.

An annual season ticket from Cambridge to London rises from £4,692 to £4,780 a 
year – or £6,084 if tube travel is included. Passengers who travel from St 
Albans to St Pancras each day (a 20-mile journey) will soon be paying £3,380 a 
year for their gold card. Residents of Tunbridge Wells in Kent will pay £5,156 
a year to get to central London.

Perhaps the hardest price increase to stomach is being imposed on those who 
use the Govia-run franchises: the company is increasing prices by 1.8%. 
Passengers who travel to London from Brighton via Victoria will see their 
season tickets rise from £4,452 to £4,536 a year if they require the 
underground once they get to the capital. An off-peak Travelcard on the same 
line rises 40p to £23.10 a day.

Passengers on Govia’s Great Northern route, which runs from Cambridgeshire and 
Hertfordshire into King’s Cross, face the same 1.8% increase. This line has 
suffered severe reliability problems this year with 70% of all trains into the 
capital arriving late in the run-up to Christmas. Across the network, 
punctuality in the south-east has markedly deteriorated since 2012, despite 
promises from ministers that fare hikes would fund service improvements. 
Overall, half of all UK trains that ran in November and December failed to 
arrive as timetabled.

Southern Railway is failing customers again and again. That’s why I spoke out 
| David Boyle
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/20/southern-railway-failing-customers-cancellations-staff-shortages-delays>
While London-bound commuters pay the biggest fares, it is users of Virgin 
Trains East Coast – which runs its tired-looking trains from Edinburgh to 
London – who face the biggest fare hikes in January. The rail firm said it 
would be upping the fares it controls by an average of around 5.5%.

An off-peak single from London to Edinburgh on the east coast line, which now 
costs £128.20, will be £137.20 – 7% more – in January, while a 
London-to-Newcastle single also goes up 7% to £131.70.

The company also has very poor reliability scores and is second bottom of the 
Network Rail performance table – only Govia is worse.

‘I pay £2,700 a year for poor service and overcrowding’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a9c4c2565e5427222da5967f70b4b095cd11beb%2F1194_0_2337_2922%2F2337.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a9c4c2565e5427222da5967f70b4b095cd11beb%2F1194_0_2337_2922%2F2337.jpg>
 James Savill Photograph: Linda Nylind for the Guardian 
Earlier this year insurance executive James Savill helped stage a protest at 
London’s Fenchurch Street station to complain about the poor service and 
overcrowding on his 50-minute journey from his home in the Essex town of 
Stanford-le-Hope.

He and other passengers mounted a Twitter campaign to try to improve conditions
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/09/london-commute-finally-reached-breaking-point-rail-transport-mayor-tfl>
, which were so bad one passenger was unable to get through the crush to the 
toilets with highly embarrassing consequences.

“In fairness the train company c2c responded and we do have new trains which 
have helped to partly ease the overcrowding, but the service still struggles to 
cope with the demand.”

He says the service on his line should be one of the best in the country – and 
it has been in the past – partly because it operates solely on its own 
dedicated lines.

“Because I’m one of the first on, I get a seat in the morning, but those who 
get on as we get closer to London don’t. Coming home, it is still a seat 
lottery – the problem is that the demand on this line is outstripping the space 
on the trains.”

He says that while the trains themselves have improved, passengers are now 
suffering new disruptions. “We are seeing more decisions to terminate the 
service early at Barking. This week and last, the service has been fine, but 
the week before I was late for work on four out of the five days – it’s very 
frustrating.”

He warns further housebuilding in east London and into Essex is only going to 
exacerbate the problems.

“So many new houses are being built, and people buying them will all want to 
work in London. The trains are already bursting at the seams. I see more 
problems down the line.”

‘My journey is a complete shambles’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3477650223b137dfa42479173173451bffa24d1d%2F0_664_1625_2030%2F1625.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3477650223b137dfa42479173173451bffa24d1d%2F0_664_1625_2030%2F1625.jpg>
 Anna Kere 
Anna Kere uses the Southeastern service to travel from Hither Green on the 
southern fringes of London into the centre each day. “My trains are regularly 
late or cancelled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/21/southern-passengers-confront-rail-boss-service-problems-victoria-station>
, and it is an utter mystery how the train company manages to claim a 70% 
customer satisfaction rate.”

Kere, who works in public affairs, says the trains themselves are in a 
horrible state, “often very dirty and very old”, and completely packed by the 
time they arrive at her station.

“I’ve never had the pleasure of sitting during my commute. Not even on the 
floor. The trains are always late but annoyingly rarely late by more than 30 
minutes, which makes claiming under Delay Repay impossible. And even when I can 
claim it, I receive just £2.20 back, which feels like a further insult.

“It makes me sad and incredibly angry that I’m paying £146 a month for this 
joke of a service. I am absolutely livid about the upcoming fare increases. I 
think that bill should be met by the Southeastern executives.

“Literally no other business could get away with such a poor service – the 
only reason they can is that passengers simply have no alternative.”

‘Just one terribly cramped train an hour into Leeds’

Sophie Hemy, a graduate engineer, travels from Headingley to Leeds every day – 
a journey of just 10 minutes. Shepays £600 a year to Northern Rail, to be 
packed in like a sardine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/the-northerner/2014/sep/07/helen-pidd-i-hate-northern-rail>
, she says.


“I get into work for 8am, but there is just one train an hour at what must be 
the busiest time. It’s terribly cramped and there are never any seats. They 
only ever put three carriages on, and these are small carriages.

“Most weeks there’s a day where only two carriages turn up and people are left 
behind on the platform to wait for the next train. For those that do get on, 
it’s dangerously overcrowded – with more people desperately trying to get on at 
subsequent stations. There will be no change in this service yet they’re 
raising the prices – it’s unbelievable.”

‘My train is not fit for purpose’ 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4ae65dd0707277dc1ea62c09e8e464899c7cc2%2F2224_2113_836_1045%2F836.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0f4ae65dd0707277dc1ea62c09e8e464899c7cc2%2F2224_2113_836_1045%2F836.jpg>
 Jeff Nielsen 
Jeff Nielsen uses the Abellio Greater Anglia service to travel from Billericay 
in Essex to Kings Cross via London Liverpool Street, three or four days a week. 
He accepts that compared to those usingSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern>, he and his fellow passengers 
have had it easy, but says the trains on the route are so old that they are not 
fit for purpose.

He opts to pay £36.40 a day to travel in first class because he suffers minor 
walking difficulties, and this is the only way to get a proper seat.

“The trains are ancient – there’s no air conditioning or ventilation, and the 
rail company doesn’t care as they have a captured market.

“When they took over the franchise we were promised better trains similar to 
the ones operating on nearby lines, but it just gets worse every day.

“I’ve been making the same commute to London since 2009. I love my job but 
hate the commute. The only thing that works is the way they collect the money.”

‘We should have refunds … not price rises’

Sue Davis*, who works in accounts and uses Govia’s Great Northern service to 
travel to London each day from her Stevenage home, says: “It’s a disgrace that 
the prices are allowed to go up when the service has been so terrible. They 
should be giving us all refunds, not increasing the tickets.”


She adds: “We all used to moan about First Capital Connect, but ever since 
Govia took over, things have got steadily worse. The last few months have been 
the worst I can remember – everything late, trains cancelled or broken down ... 
it’s been really dreadful.

“The worst thing is that there is never any information. To put the prices up 
is the final insult. I have a good job that I like, and it’s still just about 
worth going to London, but if this carries on I will start looking for local 
work.

“I’m lucky in that my mother lives round the corner and looks after the kids 
until I get home. At the moment the trains are so unreliable you never know 
what time that will be.”
 (*not her real name) 

‘The strikes just add to a dreadful service’ 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3f31bce62c1f257392ca3da6cb9e76ba5cd84c%2F2415_109_1267_1583%2F1267.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c3f31bce62c1f257392ca3da6cb9e76ba5cd84c%2F2415_109_1267_1583%2F1267.jpg>
 Mark King Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
Mark King, who works in marketing and commutes into the City each day from his 
home in Hassocks, West Sussex, says that seconds after the alarm clock goes off 
he routinely checks the National Rail app to see whether his train is delayed 
or cancelled altogether.

“If it’s running on time, chances are that by the time I finish the 10-minute 
walk from my home to the station, something will have happened to it. This has 
long been the case with the Southern network.

“So while the train strikes have made headline news, the sub-standard service 
has been an ongoing problem for commuters for at least the last year. When a 
company fails to employ enough staff to run a full service without asking those 
people to work overtime, it is clear that something is deeply wrong.

“With the train strikes, I have been unable to get to work on Southern at all 
and must use Thameslink and then a tube. Thameslink trains take an eternity to 
get to London these days and are frequently late themselves – the end result is 
that I am rarely at work on time, which is embarrassing and potentially 
job-threatening.”

But, he adds, being late for work is not half as bad as being late home almost 
every evening.

“With a three- and a six-year-old to say goodnight to at the end of each day, 
delays and cancellations can be devastating. I have missed seeing my children 
for days in a row simply because Southern cannot run a timetable.

“When I eventually get home, I’m often stressed and angry from a dreadful 
journey. When you are stranded in London, the distance between a chaotic train 
station full of angry commuters and my family can feel insurmountable. I have 
frequently left my office at 5.30pm and not got home until 9pm.

“We are constantly told that the Delay Repay scheme is available – and now 
pays out when trains are delayed by 15 minutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/rail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay>
 instead of the previous 30 minutes or more – but financial recompense cannot 
give me back the time I’ve missed with my family.

“Nor does it always get paid.”

‘Real fare rises are much worse than they’re saying’
 Chris Blackwood 
Chris Blackwood moved to York in January but still works from the London 
office Tuesday to Thursday.

He says: “In January I was able to get my tickets three months in advance for 
£26.50. The return journey I could regularly book for £28.50. For months I 
enjoyed a return fare of around £55, catching the 6am train.

“Then the advanced tickets started to dry up. First £42, then £52, then right 
up to £77.50.

“So I began taking the 6.31am train where tickets were cheaper. The same thing 
has happened there, and currently I can’t get the ticket for less than £52.

“On the return leg, it’s been less severe, but has crept up to around £40 to 
£50.

“So even using a later and more inconvenient train, I’m looking at a rise from 
£55 to well over £100 in less than a year. I hear talk of 2.3% rises and mine 
have been closer to 102.3%! I can see being squeezed further to the point of 
paying £155 return next year. It’s terrifying and hugely frustrating.

“In a long-running complaint with Virgin Trains East Coast, six months in they 
finally were a little more honest in their explanation, saying that as trains 
become busier, they remove advanced tickets to the point where they might not 
offer any at all.

“But my train doesn’t seem any busier every Tuesday morning. I’m hugely 
sceptical.”

‘Old trains and delays for £485 a month’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f77f1a6f5106b1e0f17f1d1c045c3c5f0f631a0%2F684_473_1903_2379%2F1903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f77f1a6f5106b1e0f17f1d1c045c3c5f0f631a0%2F684_473_1903_2379%2F1903.jpg>
 Jake Stockwell 
Jake Stockwell travels each day from Didcot to London Paddington using GWR, 
and says he has been forced to change his working hours as a developer analyst 
purely to enable him to get a seat for the hour-long journey – even though it 
means getting up at the crack of dawn.

“I’m now at my desk by 8am, which means being on the platform for the 6.10am, 
and it’s galling that my service, despite being one of the first of the day, is 
commonly between five to 15 minutes late. I pay £485 a month for my ticket. If 
I try to get later trains, they are so overcrowded it’s ridiculous. It was the 
only way to make the journey bearable.”

He adds: “The trains are now more than 30 years old, and the number of 
high-speed jarring bumps has significantly increased – I’m extremely concerned 
about the possibility of another Hatfield incident.

“This year hasn’t been as bad as last year for major disruption, but minor 
delays have definitely increased – it’s so frustrating.”

‘Over 12 years it has got worse and worse’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccc78b091d9d83cb312e40cae58f082601973f7%2F1083_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain's%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rising%20fares%20and%20crowded%20trains%3A%20the%20misery%20of%20Britain%27s%20rail%20users&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Frising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feccc78b091d9d83cb312e40cae58f082601973f7%2F1083_0_3072_3840%2F3072.jpg>
 Charlotte Banks Photograph: George Brooks 
Charlotte Banks uses Southern to commute from Horley to London Bridge station. 
“Unfortunately,” she says, “I have to use this service every day as it is the 
only way I can get to work to do my job.

“I have been doing this for 12 years and, over time, the journey has become 
more and more stressful, tiring and crowded. Before the strikes and continuous 
poor service, my journey would take one hour and 20 minutes door to door.

“I won’t pretend it has always been an unpleasant experience – overcrowding on 
trains has long been an issue, but it was better than having to catch the tube 
every day. I would often say to those who lived in zone 4 that my journey was 
sometimes quicker, and nicer, than theirs. Now it can take anything from one 
and a half hours (on a very good day) to three hours.

“I normally leave the house at 6.50am and I’ve lost count of the amount of 
times I’ve had to leave earlier than normal so that I’m not late for work or 
meetings. Over the last year I have had to miss out on many evenings with 
friends and loved ones because I can’t get home in time to meet with them.

“I recently missed a Christmas get-together because all the trains from London 
Bridge were cancelled and it took me three hours to get home.

“While they were celebrating and opening presents, I was being kicked off a 
train because they couldn’t find the driver and then forced to join a mob of 
commuters all trying to squeeze on to the next available train for Brighton.

“I’ve given up making plans after work, because I can never guarantee what 
time I’ll be home. I pay £3,200 a year to use this service. My season ticket 
runs out in July and I’m dreading having to renew it. But there are no 
alternatives. I have to get to work; what other choice do I have?”

‘The service is generally OK’
 Fergus Gray 
Fergus Gray was one of the few relatively happy rail commuters to speak to 
Guardian Money.

The city worker travels from Highams Park in north-east London into Liverpool 
Street, but admits he takes the 6.14am train each morning to make the journey 
reasonable. “They do cancel trains but generally it’s OK. Although if I ever 
try to get on at peak time it is packed.”

He says he pays £179 a month for a zone 1-4 travelcard. His line has recently 
been taken over by London Overground, operated byTransport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London. TfL has offered to take 
over failing franchises, something that has so far been opposed by government 
ministers.

“They have not run the service for long, but so far it appears to be a bit 
better. I’ve read the stories of what’s been happening on Southern and it seems 
the train service you get in this country has become something of a postcode 
lottery.

“I regularly have to go to Haywards Heath in Sussex, but rather than risk the 
train, I drive,” he says.



 