
Much of the time, talented young architects are viewed in a particular way – 
diverting, promising but not really grown up, not to be entrusted with projects 
of any consequence. Young engineers are treated more seriously, but are assumed 
to have no creative spark. It is to escape such perceptions, and the 
limitations they set, that Maria Smith, architect, and Steve Webb and Andy 
Yates, engineers, have set upInterrobang <http://www.interrobang.london/>, a 
practice dedicated to “hybrid” and “anti-specialist” thinking. An interrobang, 
if you didn’t know, is a fusion of an exclamation point and a question mark. 
“It suggests adventure and questioning,” says Smith.

I've started dreaming in equations
Maria Smith 
Webb Yates Engineers <http://www.webbyates.com/> worked on projects ranging 
from alterations to Gatwick and Heathrow airports tothe Rain Room 
<http://www.webbyates.com/projects/rain-room/>, a space full of falling water 
by the artists rAndom International at the Barbican arts centre. Maria Smith 
used to be half ofStudio Weave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2011/jan/09/young-architects-cineroleum-franks-hastings>
, a practice known for delightful follies and temporary structures but in 
danger of being typecast as such. Smith and Webb are both eloquent and 
quick-thinking, with decided attitudes to what they do, and Smith was also the 
spectacular compere of something calledTurncoats <http://www.turncoats.uk/>, a 
series of the least boring architectural events of recent years. Yates says 
less but, according to his partners, “is the only one who really knows 
anything”.

Together, they can take on, from Smith’s point of view, “larger and more 
ambitious projects than I would have dared to dream”. For Webb and Yates, 
collaboration means they can expand the imaginative dimension of their 
discipline. They all want to destroy the convention that an architect’s job is 
to design pretty things and an engineer’s is to make them happen. Their larger 
projects include the conversion of the famous art decoHoover Building 
<http://www.interrobang.london/projects/the-hoover-building/> in west London 
into flats and continued (and increasingly interesting) work with airports.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarbican-rain-room-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Barbican's%20Rain%20Room%3A%20it's%20raining%2C%20but%20you%20won't%20get%20wet%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarbican-rain-room-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Barbican%27s%20Rain%20Room%3A%20it%27s%20raining%2C%20but%20you%20won%27t%20get%20wet%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Foct%2F03%2Fbarbican-rain-room-video&media=>
Barbican’s Rain Room: it’s raining, but you won’t get wet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/video/2012/oct/03/barbican-rain-room-video>
With a lifting bridge over a canal 
<http://www.interrobang.london/projects/smethwick-lifting-bridge/> in 
Smethwick, west Midlands, they hope to achieve what Webb calls a victory of 
“brain power over a mass of metal” – they propose to add outriggers to ward off 
collisions by boats, which means the structure can be far more delicate than 
usual. They are designinga mews house in south London 
<http://www.interrobang.london/projects/yarn-mews/> – typical young architects’ 
fare, but a project informed by an engineer’s feeling about materials. Webb 
talks of the “utter stupidity of building in brickwork”, on practical and 
environmental grounds, so the facade is a clever composition of tiles.

They all like the intellectual rigour of engineering formulas that, like music 
and mathematics, create a framework that makes it impossible “to bluff”. Smith 
is studying for an engineering degree in her evenings and weekends and says she 
has “started dreaming in equations”. Outcomes of their combined thinking include
Back to the Stone Age 
<http://www.interrobang.london/projects/back-to-the-stone-age/>, an 
installation at the Victoria & Albert Museum that showed how thin stone slabs 
could be used to make a self-supporting floor that would be more efficient than 
concrete and better looking. In works such as this, you can’t tell the 
architecture and the engineering apart, which is the point.

Three more to watch 

■ Orkidstudio <https://orkidstudio.co.uk/>, a Glasgow-based practice that 
works in the developing world, says it wants to achieve social change through 
architecture and is serious and practical about achieving it.

■ Adam Nathaniel Furman  <http://www.adamnathanielfurman.com/>is a man who 
finds more joy in reviving postmodernism than it had in its 1980s heyday and 
expresses it in ceramics, tweets, 3D printed ceramics and the occasional actual 
construction project.

■ Concrete Action <https://www.concreteaction.net/> is not precisely an 
architectural practice but a network for gathering and spreading information 
and advice on housing projects, for the benefit of communities, professionals 
and activists in the many battlegrounds of current London development.
 