
Retailers will struggle in 2017 as rising food price inflation leaves shoppers 
with less to spend on discretionary items such as clothing and homeware, 
according to a leading industry thinktank.

Prices could rise by between 2.5% and 3% next year, led by an expected 2.4% 
rise in the price of food and groceries, the highest level since 2013, 
according to the Retail Thinktank, a group backed by the British Retail 
Consortium (BRC) and analysts at advisory firms KPMG, Verdict, Nielsen and 
Ipsos Retail Performance.

Maureen Hinton at Verdict said: “The higher price of imported goods following 
the EU referendum, and the fall in the UK pound, has been masked by currency 
hedging in 2016, but this starts to unravel in Q2 2017 and all retailers, 
struggling with cost inflation and squeezed margins, will be forced into 
passing on price rises to the consumer.”

Shoppers have so far been unaffected by the Brexit vote, with sales growing 
1.3% in the month to 26 November, but according to the latest data from the 
BRC-KPMG retail sales monitor, the thinktank said the triggering of article 50 
in March, which will kickstart the formal process of the UK leaving the EU, was 
likely to increase uncertainty.


James Knightley of ING said: “Despite the current period of relative calm 
ahead of article 50 being triggered, businesses are wary. Surveys from the Bank 
of England and others are pointing to a sharp slowdown in both hiring and 
investment spending over the next 12 months.

“This is largely due to the perceptions that uncertainty will increase once 
the Brexit countdown clock begins. An intensification of UK-EU hostilities 
could result in more businesses sitting on their hands … and this may feed 
through into weaker consumer confidence.”

British bosses at their most optimistic in 18 months, Deloitte finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/29/british-bosses-at-their-most-optimistic-in-18-months-deloitte-finds>
Retailers’ performance over Christmas will not become clear until next week 
when many major groups, including Next and John Lewis, are expected to reveal 
their trading figures.

Early figures indicate a tough time for physical stores while online retailers 
have enjoyed record sales.

The number of people visiting UK shops was down by 7.3% on Boxing Day, one of 
the most important dates in the retail calendar, according to the monitoring 
firm Springboard. That followed a disappointing Christmas Eve when,instead of 
the expected last-minute rush of gift buyers, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/26/boxing-day-shoppers-expected-splash-out-before-brexit-price-rises-kick-in>
 footfall dropped 5.9% on the year.

Boxing Day online sales rose by 6.2% compared with the record-breaking 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/27/online-christmas-sales-shoppers-new-record-store-frenzy>
, according to figures from the e-commerce data company PCA Predict.

Springboard, which uses electronic sensors to count shopper numbers, predicts 
that footfall for the last week in December will be down 2.3% on the same 
period last year as agrowing tendency to spend on nights out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/06/the-way-we-shop-now-the-revolution-in-british-spending-habits>
 adds to the shift to online shopping.

Fashion retailers, however, are expected to have enjoyed a better season as 
more normal chilly weather returned after two unusually warm autumns and 
winters. A surge in tourist spending prompted by the fall in the pound is also 
likely to have helped luxury shops and stores, especially in London.

James Knightley, senior UK economist at ING, said: “The strength of the 
economy following the Brexit referendum has surprised many, but we must 
remember that article 50 is still to be triggered. Scheduled to happen before 
the end of March, it will coincide with Dutch elections and possibly Italian 
elections, while the French presidential election campaigning will be in full 
swing.”

 