
The older we get, the fewer risks we take. But what lies behind people’s more 
cautious behaviour in their older years has been one of the unsolved puzzles of 
human behaviour.

Now, researchers have found a clue in the form of brain scans which revealed 
that changes in grey matter can predict risk-taking behaviour more than a 
person’s age itself.


Brain scans of 52 volunteers aged 18 to 88 found that the volume of grey 
matter in a region of the brain called the right posterior parietal cortex 
tended to be smaller in those who were more conservative in their 
decision-making.


And while grey matter in the brain diminishes with age, the researchers at 
Yale University in Connecticut noticed that when both age and grey matter 
volume were taken into account, the grey matter seemed to matter most.


If the scientists are right, the findings could support the idea that people 
become more risk-averse in their old age not because they are wiser, but as a 
result of having what the scientists call “limited neural computational 
capacity”.

Taking fewer risks might generally be regarded as a good thing. People tend to 
take the most risks in adolescence, a trend which plays a major role in the 
high numbers of young people killed in road traffic accidents. But in older age 
and in some mental disorders, people can become so risk-averse that it is 
counterproductive. People might take out unnecessary insurance policies, ornot 
invest their savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/may/30/eight-reasons-bad-financial-decisions>
out of fear of taking any risks at all.

Ifat Levy, a neuroscientist who led the research at Yale, said the latest work 
could potentially lead to new interventions – in the form of drugs or 
behavioural therapies – to boost people’s decision-making skills as they age or 
develop conditions that affect their ability to make good choices.

“It’s still very preliminary, but I do believe that in the long run this might 
lead to more individually tailored interventions for people,” Levy said. “If we 
understand the neurobiology and not just the behaviour, it might lead to more 
behavioural and pharmacological interventions. We know sometimes older adults 
make decisions that are not necessarily best for them. It can be easy to take 
advantage of older people in some cases.”


In a series of experiments in the lab, the participants were asked to make 
decisions with varying financial rewards. For example, they could opt to 
receive $5 or enter a lottery that had a 20% chance of winning them $20. After 
the experiment, each volunteer was given a score that reflected their 
willingness to take risks.


The same volunteers next had their brains analysed in a magnetic resonance 
imaging scanner. While the scientists focused on the right posterior parietal 
cortex, they also looked for associations between risk-taking behaviour and 
other parts of the brain but found none.


Grey matter is lost in the ageing brain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/nov/03/brain-age-tests-middle-aged-dementia>
 in a number of ways, all of which could play a role in the loss of neurons 
from the region the researchers suspect is important for risk aversion. The 
study builds onprevious work 
<http://www.jneurosci.org/content/34/37/12394.abstract> by the same team that 
found the posterior parietal cortex was larger in people who took greater 
financial risks.


Writing in the journal Nature Communications 
<http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/ncomms13822>, the scientists point out 
that in a little over 30 years, the number of adults in the world aged 60 and 
above will outnumber children for the first time in history. With that in mind, 
they add that understanding the mechanisms that affect decision making is “an 
important first step in forecasting how decisions made by an ageing population 
might impact, for better or worse political and economic processes at the 
global and local levels.”


Benedetto De Martino, a cognitive neuroscientist at University College London, 
said the study would help researchers narrow down the regions of the brain that 
might be involved in decision-making and risk-taking.


But he added that it was far from clear how the brain region may hold sway 
over risk-taking behaviour. “They have no clue what this region is doing in the 
brain. It could be affecting decision-making in many many ways. It’s not that 
this region is the full culprit. If I can prevent the grey matter from 
shrinking in an old person, it won’t stop them becoming risk-averse.”

 