
Australia is world-famous as a swimming nation. We have a celebrated beach 
culture, not to mentionmore privately owned pools per capita than any other 
country 
<http://www.news.com.au/finance/real-estate/swimming-pools-add-value-to-homes-as-long-as-they-tick-the-boxes/story-fnd91nhy-1226833509231>
. Yet few urban Australians would consider swimming in their city’s river.

Almost every major Australian city sits on the banks of a large river. But 
judging byonline reactions 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/brisbane/comments/4ax5u8/swimming_in_the_brisbane_river/>
 to the suggestion of a dip in the Brisbane river, most people are worried 
about everything from ear infections to a painful death from brain-eating 
amoebae.

Melbourne’s Yarra river has been the butt of many jokes, most famously when 
Norman Gunston <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Gunston> extolled its 
virtues as the river where you could go fishing and land a catch pre-wrapped in 
newspaper. In Sydney and Perth, people just prefer the beach.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21b78c37c073285c001debd63901e46e505ac8a2%2F0_186_6899_4139%2F6899.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=River%20swimming%3A%20why%20don't%20Australians%20take%20the%20plunge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=River%20swimming%3A%20why%20don%27t%20Australians%20take%20the%20plunge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F21b78c37c073285c001debd63901e46e505ac8a2%2F0_186_6899_4139%2F6899.jpg>
 ‘We have a celebrated beach culture, yet few urban Australians would consider 
swimming in their city’s river.’ Photograph: James D. Morgan/Getty Images 
It wasn’t always like this. Our modern distaste for river swimming is a stark 
contrast with a history where urban rivers provided a venue for sport, 
recreation and entertainment – all within easy distance of shops, offices and 
public transport.

There were clubs such as the North Adelaide District Swimming club 
<http://www.salife7.com.au/adelaide/places/historical/swimming-in-the-river-torrens>
, formed in 1905, and open-water swimming competitions such asthose held on 
Perth’s Swan river from 1912 <http://purl.slwa.wa.gov.au/slwa_b2940578_6>. The 
Yarra river’s three-mile swim was held from 1917 to 1964, and at its peak was 
the largest open-water swimming competition in the world.

There was spectacle as well as sport, with feats of aquatic derring-do that 
made swimming look like vaudeville theatre. In the Yarra, Annette Kellerman – 
one of the first women to reject pantaloons in favour of a one-piece bathing 
costume – swam her way to a world record between Church Street bridge and 
Princes bridge in 1904. After leaving Australia she developed her own swimwear 
line and went on to become an author and renowned Hollywood actress. The Yarra 
was her unlikely springboard to global celebrity.

Endurance was similarly tested by “Professor” Alec Lamb in 1907 who swam seven 
miles (11km) and dove from eight bridges, stopping for sustaining glasses of 
milk and whisky from his trainer’s boat. As the Argus newspaper faithfully 
noted, the first of his bridge dives was so high that the force of the impact 
tore off his swimming costume. Harry Houdini also famously attracted a crowd of 
20,000 to watch him emerge triumphant from chains, handcuffs and the Yarra mud 
in 1910.

The world's threatened rivers - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/gallery/2016/sep/22/worlds-threatened-rivers-pollution-industry-agriculture-in-pictures>
Melbourne’s river even hosted innovative fundraising events. In 1910 the Royal 
Life Saving Society used it to stage a fake near-drowning, with a society 
member throwing himself off Princes bridge before being “rescued” by a 
“policeman”. A third member then produced a megaphone to request donations from 
the concerned crowd of onlookers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8345629dd25de0cfa245320d741b414c1888f13%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=River%20swimming%3A%20why%20don't%20Australians%20take%20the%20plunge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=River%20swimming%3A%20why%20don%27t%20Australians%20take%20the%20plunge%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Friver-swimming-why-dont-australians-take-the-plunge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8345629dd25de0cfa245320d741b414c1888f13%2F0_278_4256_2554%2F4256.jpg>
 ‘Australia has more privately owned pools per capita than any other country.’ 
Photograph: Dave Hunt/AAP 
An arguably less brazen charity appeal centred on Solomon Islands swimmer 
Alick Wickham’s record-breaking dive of 250 feet (76m) into the river in 1917, 
attracting 50,000 spectators, with the proceeds going to the Soldiers 
Amelioration Fund.

Several lengths behind

Some projects are now aiming to recast Australia’s urban rivers as fun places 
to swim, includingOur Living River <http://www.ourlivingriver.com.au/> in 
Sydney’s Parramatta river, and theSwim Thru Perth 
<http://www.swimthruperth.org/> open-water swimming event to be held in the 
Swan river. Meanwhile, theYarra Swim Co. <http://www.yarraswim.co/> is planning 
to revive the three-mile race and build ariver-fed swimming pool on the Yarra’s 
banks 
<http://www.theage.com.au/victoria/yarra-river-pool-plan-20160526-gp4ql7.html>.

Fears about pollution are understandable but can be managed by websites such as
Yarra Bay Watch <http://yarraandbay.vic.gov.au/yarra-watch> and the New South 
Wales Office of Environment Health <>. While important, the official advice 
inadvertently adds to the view that Australian urban rivers are little more 
than an extension of the stormwater system.

Chemicals in Melbourne's Yarra River created a health risk, says report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/10/chemicals-in-melbournes-yarra-river-created-a-health-risk-says-report>
Compare that with the renaissance of river swimming internationally. British 
writerCaitlin Davies <http://www.caitlindavies.co.uk/> swam of the length of 
London’s Thames to uncover a multitude of present and historical swimming 
cultures. And municipal governments inCopenhagen 
<http://www.archdaily.com/11216/copenhagen-harbour-bath-plot>, Portland 
<http://www.humanaccessproject.com/>, Berlin 
<http://www.flussbad-berlin.de/project>, New York <http://www.pluspool.org/> and
Boston <http://www.thecharles.org/media/uploads/2013/04/Charles03_web.pdf> have 
all embraced river swimming.

The Swiss must surely be the world leaders, even advocating for river swimming 
ininternational diplomacy 
<http://www.overcommaunder.com/?/work/Cultures/Think-Swiss-Think-Swim/>. Every 
year, large Swiss cities host mass-swimming events like theRhineschwimmen in 
Basel <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C0LfavqBbJ8>.

As the Swiss have already realised, to swim in an urban river is to reclaim, 
one stroke at a time, a public space and a wilder romantic past. It is no 
coincidence that the same country that zealously promotes urban river and lake 
swimming can also lay claim to a distinguished environmental record. Our 
regular, primary contact with this most primal of elements can act in a way to 
force change in the way our rivers are managed, helping both people and the 
environment to be a bit healthier.

• Marco Amati <https://theconversation.com/profiles/marco-amati-209638> is 
associate professor of international planning at the centre for urban research 
at RMIT University. This article was co-authored by Sally McPhee, based on her 
honours thesis for RMIT’s bachelor of urban and regional planning, and has been
republished from the Conversation 
<https://theconversation.com/watered-down-what-happened-to-australias-river-swimming-tradition-69728>
, which is part of the Guardian Comment Network
 