
Rory McIlroy will have to overturn a three-shot deficit if he is to get his 
year off to a winning start at the BMW South African Open. The world No2 
overcame a back problem tofire a 67 in the third round 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/12/rory-mcilroy-strong-start-bmw-sa-open>
 at Glendower Golf Club but that was not enough to close the gap on 
Graeme Storm, who also shot a 67 to get to 17 under.

A win for Storm would represent a remarkable comeback for a player who lost his
European Tour <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/european-tour> card by just 
€100 83 days ago but was handed a reprieve when the American Patrick Reed 
failed to play enough events.

Jordan L Smith has won the EuroPro Golf 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/golf> Tour and the Challenge Tour in the 
last two seasons and is enjoying his debut campaign on the European Tour, 
sitting at 13 under alongside Jbe Kruger.

McIlroy twice caught Storm on Saturday, first when birdies on the 2nd and 8th 
sandwiched a stunning eagle from 157 yards on the par-four 7th and again when 
he made a hat-trick of gains from the 11th. A bogey on the last stalled 
McIlroy’s progress but Storm was a picture of consistency, making birdies on 
the four par-fives and the 7th as he extended his bogey-free run to 41 holes.

“I am just really pleased that I kept the momentum from yesterday and played 
really nicely and holed some good putts,” Storm told the European Tour’s 
website.

“I find myself now in a position that I have only been in a couple of times 
over the past few years. Things have been difficult and last year was a tough 
year but it has given me a new lease of life and I hope to continue playing 
well.

“I thought I had lost my card and all of the privileges that come from playing 
on the European Tour, and when that happens you realise that you can’t afford 
to lose it.”

McIlroy said: “I’d like to be a few shots better or at least a few shots 
closer to the lead. Hopefully I can get off to a good start tomorrow and put a 
bit of pressure on Graeme, and it will be interesting.”
 