
Royal Albert Hall members have exchanged detailed advice on how to sell their 
seats on ticket touting sites, prompting the venue’s former president to label 
its stewardship a “national disgrace”.

The members, about 330 individuals who own 1,276 permanent seats in the 5,272 
capacity venue, were sent a document offering tips on how to use online resale 
sites. The pamphlet tells members they can eschew the RAH’s official ticket 
return system and use controversial “secondary” ticketing sites such asViagogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/what-we-know-about-ticket-reseller-viagogo>
 and StubHub to make more money.

Related: Now ticket touting is hitting the rich, will the government finally 
take action? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/ticket-touting-rich-government-action-touts-albert-hall>

The hall has come under the spotlight in recent months after tickets for 
in-demand acts such asPhil Collins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/08/phil-collins-to-play-biggest-ever-solo-show-in-hyde-park>
 andDave Gilmour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/sep/24/david-gilmour-review-royal-albert-hall-london-pink-floyd>
 appeared on resale sites at huge markups. Tickets to this year’s Last Night of 
the Proms are listed on Viagogo for more than £1,500, even though tickets for 
the event have yet to go on sale.

The advice to owners of permanent seats, seen by the Guardian, is that they 
can “significantly improve income from unwanted tickets” by using secondary 
sites, which have become a haven for touts exploiting the most in-demand events.

The author of the document, a seat owner who asked to remain anonymous, said: 
“Seat owners are entitled to optimise their returns.

“The [official] ticket return scheme is good, but what I do is sell some of my 
tickets online and get a slightly better return. It’s simply a question of 
arithmetic.”

He added that the vast majority of members donate their time and money to the 
hall and do not exploit their position for personal gain.
 Tickets for David Gilmour’s Royal Albert Hall concerts appeared on ticketing 
sites at huge markups. Photograph: Sarah Lee for the Guardian 
The document brands concert promoters as “greedy” and says the hall’s ticket 
return scheme results in a “direct, unfair and unnecessary cost to members by 
paying significantly less than can be achieved in the open market”.

But the former Royal Albert Hall president Richard Lyttelton said members who 
spurn the ticket return scheme in search of higher profits risk tarnishing the 
venue’s reputation by turning seats into investment assets.

He added that trustees in charge of the hall’s policy, some of whom own 
multiple seats, should also disclose the financial benefit they can get from 
them.

“Members of the hall’s council [trustees] own 145 seats worth conservatively 
£14.5m,” he said.

Related: StubHub breached ASA’s code – but nothing has changed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/29/stubhub-breached-advertising-standards-authority-code-ticket-prices>

“This interest is largely undeclared and as trustees of the charity, their 
position of privilege and the advantages afforded by the hall’s charitable 
status puts them in a position to profit personally.

“For this to have been unregulated, despite being in the public domain for so 
long, is a national disgrace.”

He urged the Charity Commission to apply more pressure on the hall to reform 
its governance.


“It’s time for the commission to show that that it is not a toothless tiger 
and ensure that the the hall is run to the high standards of governance 
expected both of a national charity and a royal charter corporation.”

Regulations governing charity accounting demand that trustees detail any 
financial benefit they might receive from their position.

While the RAH’s annual report revealed for the first time this year that 
trustees own 145 seats, no information was given about their value or the 
potential income from selling access to them.

A source close to the hall said trustees typically do not sell their seats but 
the Charity Commission is understood to be considering whether they have made 
proper financial disclosures about their value.


A spokesperson for the Royal Albert Hall said trustees were “satisfied” that 
the charity had met disclosure requirements.

The charities regulator has also raised concerns about the potential for a 
conflict of interest affecting the way policy at the hall is set.

It has warned the Royal Albert Hall to examine its leadership structure as 
part of an ongoing governance review, highlighting that 19 of 25 members of the 
governing council are also seat owners with something to gain from permitting 
seat sales.

“The commission has made clear that the issue of conflicts of interest and the 
independence of the council from the seat owners should be dealt with as part 
of this review,” said a spokesperson.

Most trustees are elected by members, the owners of permanent seats at the 
venue, some of which have been valued at £200,000.

These permanent seats were initially sold in 1867 to raise funds to build the 
hall and are considered private property.
 Tickets for the 2017 Last Night of the Proms are listed on ticketing websites 
even though they are not yet on sale. Photograph: Justin Tallis/AFP/Getty Images
Some have since changed hands for far less than their modern-day value or were 
simply passed down through families.

If members do not want use the allocation of tickets that seat ownership 
confers, they can send them back to the hall and receive a payment in exchange.

But while the ticket return system ensures tickets go back to the box office 
for sale at face value, using secondary sites means they can be sold for much 
more.

Lyttelton estimates that members, including trustees, can make £5,000 a year 
from selling seats via the RAH’s official ticket returns scheme but that 
returns from using secondary sites could be thousands of pounds higher.

Related: £24,840 for an Adele ticket? We need to do more to stop the touts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/may/30/24840-for-an-adele-ticket-we-need-to-do-more-to-stop-the-touts>

Viagogo is already advertising tickets for the 2017 Last Night of the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/proms> for more than £1,500. Tickets for the 
popular annual concert are not yet on official sale, suggesting some are being 
advertised by members. The group of members includes private individuals but 
also professional ticket agencies.

Viagogo does not list any information about who is selling the tickets or 
their contact details, even though under the Consumer Rights Act 2015 that is 
information which anyone selling a ticket must publish.

The Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, who has campaigned for reform of secondary 
ticketing, said: “Members of the Royal Albert Hall are in a position of 
privilege when they have access to the best tickets in the hall and they 
shouldn’t forget that.

“Sadly, the abuse that has been uncovered shows that this privilege is being 
abused for the sake of greed.

“This is an ongoing issue which must be addressed. The Charity Commission 
needs to get to the bottom of this and ensure that fans are not ripped off and 
members do not abuse their position to profiteer.”
 