
Royal Mail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/royal-mail> is poised to 
celebrate its first birthday as a public company after one of the most 
controversial privatisations in history.

This time last year the government achieved its aim of selling off the 
500-year-old national institution, whicheven Margaret Thatcher viewed as a 
privatisation too far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/apr/29/royal-mail-sale-thatcher>, despite 
protests from staff, unions and politicians.

On 11 October, the day of the flotation, Royal Mail shares soared by 38% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/oct/11/royal-mail-share-price-buyers-profit>
, the biggest one-day rise in a privatisation since British Airways in 1987, as 
investors tried to buy more than 23 times the number of shares available.

Despite the business secretary, Vince Cable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/vincentcable>, dismissing the initial 
price spike as “froth and speculation”, the shares continued to climb to a peak 
of 618p – almost double the 330p float price – in January. Royal Mail shares 
were changing hands at 400p on FRiday.

Billy Hayes, general secretary of the Communication Workers Union (CWU), which 
represents more than 100,000 postal workers, on Friday said 
<http://www.cwu.org/news/archive/sale-of-royal-mail-quot-a-national-scandal-quot-says-cwu.html>
: “The botched privatisation of Royal Mail was a national scandal. Not only did 
the public not want it, but it was an unnecessary and costly process that left 
taxpayers £1bn out of pocket.

“We are already beginning to see the effects of the government’s ill-thought 
privatisation firsthand, with the threat to the sustainability of the universal 
postal service.”

The National Audit Office ruled that the government’s desperation to sell the 
postal service, which traces its roots to a forerunner set up by Henry VIII in 
1516, had cost taxpayers at least £750m.

The public spending watchdog said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/01/royal-mail-undervaluing-taxpayer-cable>
 Cable had chosen not to heed repeated warnings from City experts that the 
government had vastly undervalued the company and refused to increase the 
flotation price.

The government paid £12.7m to financial institutions including Lazard, UBS, 
Goldman Sachs, Barclays and Merrill Lynch as well as accountants, lawyers and 
PR consultants for their advice on the flotation. A further £4.2m bonus, 
payable at the discretion of Cable, has been withheld.

The investment bank Lazard, part of which advised the government that Royal 
Mail shares could be sold as cheaply as 212p, made an £8.4m profit by 
immediately selling Royal Mail stock. The investment division, Lazard Asset 
Management, bought 6m shares at 330p each on the day of the float but sold them 
within 48 hours at 470p, reaping an £8.4m profit.

Margaret Hodge, chair of the parliamentary public accounts committee, said 
Lazard had “made a killing at the expense of the ordinary taxpayer that lost 
£750m on day one” of Royal Mail’s stock market debut. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/apr/30/lazard-bank-royal-mail-shares-profit-flotation-margaret-hodge>

During the sale, Lazard’s financial advisory division Lazard & Co, which was 
paid £1.5m by the government for flotation advice, valued Royal Mail shares at 
between 212p and 262p. Other banks valued the shares at up to 510p, with none 
of the syndicate banks deciding they were worth less than 300p.

Hodge said: “How did you get it so wrong that it cost the taxpayer £750m on 
day one?”. William Rucker, chief executive of Lazard & Co, denied any 
wrongdoing. He said the two divisions of the bank were separated by Chinese 
walls and would not have been aware of what the other part was doing. Rucker 
pointed out that the £8.4m profit was made on behalf of clients rather than for 
Lazard Asset Management itself.

Lazard Asset Management was one of 16 investors awarded a priority status that 
allowed them to buy bigger chunks of Royal Mail – before the public – in the 
hope that they would remain with the company.

However, six of the so-called long-term sustainable investors sold all of 
their shares almost immediately and a further six had sold most of their stake 
within weeks.

Three of the investors given the “golden ticket” status were revealed as 
aggressive hedge funds, despite the business secretary’s pledge that Royal Mail 
would not fall into the hands of “spivs and speculators”.

The hedge funds – Third Point, Och Ziff and George Soros’s family fund – were 
allowed to buy millions of shares while hundreds of thousands of other people 
were limited to just £749 worth. Hodge said it felt wrong that a few in the 
City had “made a huge buck” while the average taxpayer lost out.

David Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said the initial 
share-price surge “brought all manner of career politicians who know little of 
life outside the Westminster bubble, let alone financial markets, to criticise 
the government for selling Royal Mail far too cheaply”.

“Much as I hate to defend politicians and particularly Vince Cable, he was 
right in saying that there was an awful lot of froth in the share price in the 
months after the IPO.”

Despite the government’s repeated insistence that privatisation would not 
jeopardise rural deliveries,Royal Mail warned seven months later that its 
promise to deliver to every address in the country six days a week for the same 
price was under threat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/may/22/royal-mail-universal-service-threat-rivals>
.

The government still retains 30% of Royal Mail shares and has shown no desire 
to sell the remainder of its stake anytime soon.
 