
The editor-in-chief of RT, the Russian government-backed 24-hour news network, 
has hit back at claims ina US intelligence report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 that the news organization engaged in a longstanding effort “aimed at 
undermining US viewers’ trust in US democratic procedures”.


Russia slates 'baseless, amateurish' US election hacking report
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/09/vladimir-putin-slates-baseless-amateurish-us-election-hacking-report>
In comments provided to the Guardian by email, Margarita Simonyan disputed US 
intelligence claims linking RT to Russian efforts allegedly “ordered 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
” by President Vladimir Putin, to influence the presidential election in favor 
of President-elect Donald Trump.

In the words of the declassified CIA, FBI and NSA report, RT’s coverage of 
Hillary Clinton “throughout the US presidential campaign was consistently 
negative and focused on her leaked emails and accused her of corruption, poor 
physical and mental health and ties to Islamic extremism”.

Simonyan called the report “a sad commentary on the state of affairs in the 
American intelligence analyst community”.

“The agencies’ only charge against RT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/russia-today> is that we were critical of 
Clinton in reporting actual facts about her,” she wrote. “This is our supposed 
crime! What a resounding endorsement of journalism and freedom of speech.”

The report cited comments made by Simonyan in early November to the Russian 
newspaper Kommersant, in which she said the US itself lacked democracy and had 
“no moral right to teach the rest of the world”.

Simonyan’s comments are unlikely to throw critics of the state-funded 
broadcaster, after the US intelligence report accused RT America of 
“deliberately seeking to obscure any legal ties to the Russian government”.

The report may, however, strengthen those ties, said Alexey Kovalev, who runs 
a website debunking Russian propaganda.

“There are many legitimate reasons to criticise RT,” he said, “but the report 
singles out the channel for all the wrong reasons. Covering protests and other 
social and political fissures is a perfectly legitimate media activity.”

Kovalev added that the prominence given to the channel by the US intelligence 
report is likely to be seen as a huge success by its management, and may lead 
to increased funding.

He also suggested that by “viewing RT reporters in the US as saboteurs and 
spies”, the report would give Russian authorities more ammunition when dealing 
with critical western coverage ofRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>.

Simonyan denied that RT’s reporting constituted propaganda or interference. 

“Apparently,” she wrote, “all foreign media organisations have to follow an 
approved script of acceptable coverage, lest they are accused of interference. 
And make no mistake, we’re not talking about neutrality. The only acceptable 
approach was, ‘Support Clinton, attack Trump’.

“The alternative is that they would have to reckon with the fact that RT’s 
reporting often reflects the reality on the ground, in the US and elsewhere, 
much better than the mainstream media.

“How else to explain years of totally out-of-touch coverage that failed to 
acknowledge the momentum behind not just Trump but Bernie Sanders, leaving 
mainstream media journalists and punditry collectively speechless on 9 
November?”

Simonyan declined to address why US intelligence agencies would identify RT’s 
“importance to the Kremlin as a messaging tool and indicate a Kremlin-directed 
campaign to undermine faith in the US government and fuel political protest”.

That question, she wrote, was “among the many, many other questions left 
unanswered by their report, for instance about actual evidence supporting their 
judgments. So far they haven’t provided any intel aside from 
up-to-a-decade-old, publicly available interviews and obsolete but likewise 
public data.”

RT receives funding from the budget of the Russian Federation. Its executives 
say its journalists are independent.

The intelligence report was particularly embarrassing for the Trump camp 
because its nominee for national security adviser, retired Lt Gen Michael 
Flynn, has been a frequent guest on RT news programmes. In December 2015 he was 
paid by the network to give a speech in Russia and attend a lavish party, at 
which he sat next to Putin.


Simonyan said RT was no different from other state-sponsored broadcasters. 

Donald Trump 'not denying Russia was behind hacking campaign', says Priebus
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/08/donald-trump-not-denying-russia-hacking-report-reince-priebus>
She wrote: “I think the fact that the BBC World Service, Germany’s Deutsche 
Welle and the US Broadcasting Board of Governors receive considerably more 
funding than RT (BBG nearly three times as much!) to get their respective 
countries’ points of view across to a global audience, points to a fact that 
media-political establishments of the United States and Europe can’t let go of 
the monopoly on messaging.”

 Simonyan claimed proof of this lay in the Guardian’s own endorsement of 
Clinton.

“Somehow,” she wrote, “nobody is raising alarm over British interference in 
the US elections when the Guardian published an actual endorsement of a foreign 
country’s candidate (Don’t vote for Trump, elect Clinton) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/the-guardian-view-on-americas-choice-dont-vote-for-trump-elect-clinton>
.”

Guardian US is a US-registered media company and subsidiary of the Guardian.

“You had nearly all the US media 
<http://www.politico.com/blogs/on-media/2016/10/study-91-percent-of-trump-coverage-on-broadcast-news-was-negative-230297>
 in the bag for Clinton,” Simonyan continued, “all the pundits prophesising a 
virtual coronation for several years, and an outsider won regardless.

“What’s obvious is that the US has a very imperfect system, and yet its 
leaders are obsessed with lecturing the rest of the world on how to organise 
their affairs.”

 * Additional reporting by Shaun Walker in Moscow
 