
At Donald Trump’s now-notorious press conference on Tuesday, lost amidst his 
threats to news organizations and denunciations of his enemies, the 
president-elect claimed he would soon assemble “some of the greatest computer 
minds anywhere in the world” to tackle the US government’s cybersecurity 
problem. On Thursday, he went the opposite route instead and hiredRudy Giuliani 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/rudygiuliani>.

Giuliani, Trump election surrogate and the disgraced former mayor of New York 
<http://www.politico.com/magazine/story/2016/09/rudy-giuliani-donald-trump-2016-214207>
, is apparently going to head up Trump’s efforts to coordinate “cybersecurity” 
issues between the federal government and the private sector, the transition 
team announced Tuesday. But what does Giuliani, last seen on the campaign trail
claiming the president can break whatever law he likes 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/rudy-giuliani-anything-legal-iraq-oil_us_57d55d1ee4b06a74c9f50fa9>
 in a time of war, know about cybersecurity? From the look and sound of it, not 
much.

Giuliani does head a consulting firm in New York called Giuliani Partners that 
supposedly focuses on cybersecurity, but Vice’s Motherboardreported 
<http://motherboard.vice.com/read/what-does-rudy-giuliani-actually-know-about-cybersecurity>
 yesterday, it’s tough to tell what they actually do, and it’s even tougher to 
tell what Giuliani does for them, besides being the face of the operation while 
saying outrageous things on television.

As Motherboard’s Jason Koebler and Lorenzo Franceschi-Bicchierai wrote, 
“Unlike many other cybersecurity firms, Giuliani Partners does not publish 
white papers about malware and large-scale hacks, or push for increased 
adoption of encryption, which would enhance cybersecurity across the board. In 
fact, it doesn’t talk much about cybersecurity at all, instead choosing to 
focus on its more traditional anti-crime consulting work.”

Just after the Trump team’s announcement, security experts took a look at 
Giuliani Partner’s website andstarted mercilessly mocking it on Twitter 
<http://www.theregister.co.uk/2017/01/13/giuliani_joomla_outdated_site/> for 
glaring vulnerabilities and its own lax cybersecurity practices that makes it 
looks more like a website built in the mid 1990s than a supposedly respected 
cybersecurity firm would present the public today.
Kevin Beaumont 🤗 (@GossiTheDog) 
Oh, people are already poking it. pic.twitter.com/pxoi2M7HFU 
<https://t.co/pxoi2M7HFU>
 <https://twitter.com/GossiTheDog/status/819704211143270400> January 13, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/GossiTheDog/status/819704211143270400> 
In fact, searching Giuliani’s past public comments (for example 
<https://gizmodo.com/rudy-giuliani-will-be-a-disaster-1788813294>, “I’d love to 
become the person that comes up with a solution to cybersecurity”) it’s hard to 
find an intelligent sentence he’s strung together on the subject at all.


There is one thing Giuliani should get credit for though: he realized earlier 
than most what a racket cybersecurity “consulting” would be.Here he is 
<https://gizmodo.com/rudy-giuliani-will-be-a-disaster-1788813294>, for example, 
laughing about how much corporations paid his firm to do work in the mid 2000s.

While it’s amusing to make fun of Giuliani, hiring people with little or no 
bona fide security experience to head up cybersecurity practices in government 
is sadly a tried and true pastime in Washington. Instead of tapping actual 
computer security experts, politicians in many cases continue to put their 
friends or people they know in charge of a monumental problem that requires 
expertise beyond having many political connections or relationships with donors.

The DNC’s response to the hack of their emails is the perfect example. The 
Democrats and Republicans should have been well aware their information could 
be hacked by a foreign government since it happened to both Obama and John 
McCain in 2008. But it was only after the DNC’s leaked emails started being 
published in the summer that the committee announced it would create a 
Cybersecurity Advisory Board to “ensure that the DNC’s cybersecurity 
capabilities are best-in-class”.

As technologist Chris Soghoian asked at the time 
<https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/764172442055106560>, “Will the DNC cyber 
board have experienced cybersecurity pros or just ex senior intelligence 
officials & politicians?” Sure enough, a day later when the lineup was 
announced,every person on it 
<https://twitter.com/csoghoian/status/764875901200961536> was either a lawyer 
or ex-government official – not an engineer or computer scientist among them.

Congress itself suffers from the same problem. While there are four members of 
the House with a computer science degree 
<https://hurd.house.gov/media-center/in-the-news/we-asked-every-member-congress-computer-science-degree-about-apple-s-war>
, none of them have been assigned to thecybersecurity subcommittee 
<https://homeland.house.gov/subcommittee/cybersecurity_infrastructure_protection_and_security_technologies_subcommittee/>
 by their parties’ leadership. John McCain, who will soon create a new 
cybersecurity subcommittee in the Senate,admits to never even using email 
<http://www.businessinsider.com/john-mccains-explanation-for-why-he-doesnt-use-email-2015-3>
.

But while Giuliani is just a particularly cartoonish example of a longstanding 
problem, he is, in one sense, a perfect fit for the Trump administration: yet 
another already rich man taking a position in which he clearly has a vested 
interest, set to more money for himself and likely to fail those he’s supposed 
to be helping. Giuliani will almost certainly get fatter contracts while he 
continues to head up his “cybersecurity” firm, but it’s the American people who 
will ultimately lose.
 