
Agony artists: Thom Yorke, Run the Jewels and Karen O's pop wisdom
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/apr/02/agony-artists-thom-yorke-run-the-jewels-and-karen-os-pop-wisdom>
“Is there a tax write-off thing for cults or is that just religions?” asks 
Jaime Meline AKA El-P, as he sits in a practise room on LA’s Sunset Boulevard, 
whereRun The Jewels <https://www.theguardian.com/music/run-the-jewels> are 
preparing for their forthcoming world tour. The firebrand rap duo of El-P and 
Killer Mike have built up a cultish following by adopting the tactics of 
old-time preachers, touring incessantly while giving their music away for free. 
Indeed, they unexpectedlybrought their new album forward and dropped it on 
Christmas Eve 
<http://www.vulture.com/2016/12/run-the-jewels-drops-their-new-album-rtj3.html>
, where it was downloaded 125,000 times from their website alone, by people 
supposed to be observing other traditional rituals. But now, El-P has ideas 
about what a real Run The Jewels cult would be like.

“It’s a very small cult,” qualifies El-P, “and we don’t have any tenets, no 
ideas about anything; we’re just going for the tax write-off. There’s only a 
few cults that have managed that transfer from cult status to religious status, 
and it’s all on some tax-break shit.”

“The big three religions have done pretty good,” adds Mike.

“The big three are killing the game,” says El-P, “and the people.”

It’s an exchange that does a nice job of summing up Run The Jewels: 
nonsensical musing veering into a sharp critique of organised religion and 
politics, delivered with comedy timing that Abbott and Costello would be proud 
of. This mix of serious and silly has proved wildly successful. Since 2013, Run 
The Jewels have managed to attract millions of believers to their world, where 
lyrical flow is king, beats are of the chest-pumping variety, and an absurdist 
ab-libbed joke is only ever a moment away. One minute they’ll be releasing a 
remix album where instrumentals are replaced with cat noises; the next a 
protest track about hitting back at police brutality. Their festive gift and 
third album,Run The Jewels 3 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/05/run-the-jewels-run-the-jewels-3-review-their-time-is-now>
, which the pair describe as “harder, darker and angrier” is the latest item 
off a production line that hasn’t stopped rolling.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1b9n0Amr9RI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1b9n0Amr9RI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D1b9n0Amr9RI&media=>
“We’re in sync so much now, after two records and several tours – and this new 
one felt like we hit that point in the Rocky training montage when he’s just 
killing shit,” says El-P. “We hit the point where we are catching the chicken.”

Chickens, world tours, cartoon versions of themselves in Marvel comics like 
Deadpool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/30/deadpool-ryan-reynolds-tim-miller-gina-carano>
 and Howard The Duck, an appearance in video gameGears Of War 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/06/gears-of-war-4-review-a-shot-in-the-arm-for-a-fading-series>
, self-released critically acclaimed albums. You name it, El-P and Mike seem to 
be able to catch it. Run The Jewels 3 builds on their popularity as 
larger-than-life foghorns for the good fight. Recorded in rural seclusion in 
upstate New York, and produced by El-P, it balances the abrasive cuts of rap 
braggadocio of their previous two albums with more reflective moments, such as 
anti-hate anthem 2100, alongside Trump takedowns (“Went to war with the Devil 
and Shaytan/ He wore a bad toupee and a spray tan,” raps Mike on Talk To Me). 
The album’s guests are a curveball mix, too – certainly not your usual starry 
rap features. Among them are Detroit motormouth Danny Brown;TV On The Radio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/tv-on-the-radio>’s Tunde Adebimpe; and 
avant-jazzer Kamasi Washington, who adds evocative sax to another down-beater, 
Thursday In The Danger Room. Pretty good for a project which started as an 
experiment.

“There was not a plan,” confesses El-P. “I don’t think there really ever was 
to be honest. I don’t think we’re a ‘plan’ type of group. We just say yes 
because it’s fun. That’s always been the guiding principle. It’s got way bigger 
than we ever thought it would, straight up.” Suddenly the reasons for releasing 
their album as a free download over Christmas begin to make more sense…
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5292377268355607be558b45922b929385ef3fd8%2F0_0_4912_6141%2F4912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20'It's%20going%20to%20be%20horrible'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20%27It%27s%20going%20to%20be%20horrible%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5292377268355607be558b45922b929385ef3fd8%2F0_0_4912_6141%2F4912.jpg>
 Run The Jewels, AKA Killer Mike and El-P. Photograph: Steve Schofield for the 
Guardian 
Banksy meets Run The Jewels: ‘The bravest artists have always been graf 
artists’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/aug/22/banksy-interviews-run-the-jewels-dismaland>
There’s a strange alchemy in Run The Jewels’ union of cynical New Yorker and 
gregarious Atlantan. When they first started out, the combination of a ginger 
American of Irish (and Jewish, Cajun and Lithuanian) heritage and an 
African-American from the south did draw attention. “You could see guys almost 
trying to beat around the bush,” says El-P. “We were like: ‘It’s OK, you can 
ask: how is it possible you guys are not the same race but you’re friends?’ But 
it’s not crazy for us. It’s how I grew up. This is not my new experience. I did 
not just make my first friend from outside my direct culture.”

Mike has a simpler take: “I prayed for a brother as a kid and God has brought 
me one.” That touch of sincerity is taken as an invitation by El-P to fire up 
another gag. “I wanted a Redline BMX. I never asked for you.”

Mike pauses, before his deapan response. “That’s what you prayed for? You 
could have just stole that.”

El-P: “Bikes were a little too hard for me.”

Whether or not providence was at play with the forming of RTJ, the project 
came at a good time for both of them. El-P had been burned by his experiences 
in the industry, first as part of Rawkus Records act Company Flow who, after 
critical success in the mid-90s, split from their label and then split up 
themselves. As a result, in 1999, he co-founded independent hip-hop label Def 
Jux. It gave the world terrific records by the likes ofAesop Rock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/shortcuts/2014/may/05/aesop-rock-rapper-language-shakespeare-vocabulary>
 and Cannibal Ox, as well as his own successful solo material, setting the bar 
for underground rap, but it sucked money out of him. Killer Mike, meanwhile, 
worked his way up through Atlanta’s hip-hop scene, making his name as a 
featured artist onOutKast’s classic Stankonia album 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/musicblog/2016/feb/10/outkast-10-of-the-best>
. Buoyed by that success, he signed a solo deal but it left him feeling 
isolated.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64f6d47d0108b240fc8c3d86326cbad9186650e4%2F0_66_4392_2635%2F4392.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20'It's%20going%20to%20be%20horrible'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20%27It%27s%20going%20to%20be%20horrible%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F64f6d47d0108b240fc8c3d86326cbad9186650e4%2F0_66_4392_2635%2F4392.jpg>
 Killer Mike addresses a rally for Bernie Sanders in Atlanta, Georgia, in 
February 2016. Photograph: Prince Williams/WireImage 
Run the Jewels' Killer Mike says conscience wouldn't let him vote for Hillary 
Clinton
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/29/run-the-jewels-killer-mike-hillary-clinton-bernie-sanders>
“Rap to me is communal. It’s something you do with your friends,” says Mike. 
“So becoming a member of a group was the dream. For me, Coachella and stuff are 
the highlights, but being in the group is nirvana for me. It is heaven, being 
able to experience a transfer of energy with [El-P] and the audience.”

Clearly teaming up as Run The Jewels has energised these rap veterans (both 
El-P and Mike are now 41), allowing them to commune with a new generation of 
music fans. Mike in particular has made the most of this new platform, and many 
of those fans have found Run The Jewels via Killer Mike’s outspoken political 
views. During the spate of police shootings of unarmed black men in the US 
during 2015, he became a lightning rod for people looking to understand the 
situation.The powerful speech he made before a gig in a St Louis on the day 
that the Ferguson grand jury acquitted Michael Brown’s killer went viral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/aug/10/run-the-jewels-killer-mike-el-p-ferguson-protest-bbc-interview>
, with Mike almost breaking down on stage as he talked about his own children.

More recently, Mike was one of Bernie Sanders’s most high-profile advocates 
during the Democratic primary race, backing him because of his long-standing 
commitment to social justice. He appeared onmajor US talkshows 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JhudugDROn0>, ostensibly to support Sanders, 
but at times found himself having to explain things like why his name doesn’t 
mean he’s actually killed people and why hip-hop isn’t synonymous with crime. 
It made Mike one of the most identifiable faces of the election, but constantly 
having to defend himself and hip-hop culture took its toll.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ddd2a3a661750e8f999c873da20e4d3d0cca81%2F0_694_6825_4095%2F6825.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20'It's%20going%20to%20be%20horrible'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Run%20The%20Jewels%20on%20Trump%3A%20%27It%27s%20going%20to%20be%20horrible%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmusic%2F2017%2Fjan%2F07%2Frun-the-jewels-rap-duo-el-p-and-killer-mike%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50ddd2a3a661750e8f999c873da20e4d3d0cca81%2F0_694_6825_4095%2F6825.jpg>
 Killer Mike and El-P photographed in Los Angeles. Photograph: Steve Schofield 
for the Guardian 
“It hurts, to be honest, because you’re an artist,” he says. “You want the 
world to get it and you’re pretty sure at a certain point that they have got 
it. So some of that is chosen ignorance and that hurts because I think this 
artform has done some beautiful things.”

Perhaps understandably then, politics isn’t something the group really want to 
talk about today. When the US election is brought up, there’s a stoney silence. 
“Let’s not get into it,” says El-P. “Everyone knows ad nauseum what the 
perspectives on that are right now. I’m personally fucking tired of the 
conversation. Y’all got what you want, well, all right – let’s try and make 
this shit fucking work. It’s going to be horrible.”

The reticence to discuss politics might be down to the hot water that Mike has 
gotten into by sticking his head above the parapet. When speaking at a college 
about why he thought Sanders should win the Democratic nomination over Hillary 
Clinton, and referencing debate at the time over whether women should vote for 
women, he quoted from a conversation with feminist academic Jane Elliott, who 
told him: “A uterus doesn’t qualify you to be president of the United States.” 
Taken out of context, that quote became attached to Mike himself, prompting 
accusations of sexism.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG5Da2ISBiEw&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG5Da2ISBiEw>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DG5Da2ISBiEw&media=>
 Run The Jewels make a guest appearance on Portlandia. How Guardian Guide is 
that? 
Today Mike seems determined to make it clear he’s not a polished political 
performer, just someone who is tired of things not working the way they should. 
“I’m not the goddamn ‘marathon for peace’ celebrity,” he says. “I’m the ‘work 
out your shit, fix your shit, be a whole community and keep on pushing’ 
celebrity.” This manifests itself in Mike’s charity work and with his 
commitment to providing off-kilter ideas for how communities can become 
self-sufficient, like getting into the legal marijuana industry.

Mike’s tell-it-as-it-is honesty is something El-P keeps a brotherly eye on. 
“Don’t let me do no stupid shit,” Mike says to El-P. “Sometimes I’ll call Mike 
and be like: ‘Dude, think about this.’” confirms El-P. But Mike’s off-the-cuff 
approach is a part of the pair’s appeal. Whether live or on a late-night 
chatshow, RTJ will call bullshit on anyone, regardless of political 
affiliations.

“That’s why I like Run The Jewels, man,” says El-P, gearing up another surreal 
metaphor. “It’s like you’ve taken two savage kittens, put them in a sack and 
thrown them in a river. Each may not be there for the same reason, but they 
both have the same job: get out of that fucking bag.”

Run The Jewels 3 is out now via runthejewels.com and as a physical release 
from Friday
 