
The rush to beat an increase in the tax bill on buying a second home led to 
sharp rises in UK mortgage lending and house sales in March, two new sets of 
housing market data show.

Non-seasonally adjusted figures from HMRC show that 161,990 property sales of 
£40,000 or more were registered during the month, a 77% increase on the figure 
for March 2015. Rising house prices in recent years also helped to drive the 
figure to a higher level than any month during the last property boom.

Separate data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders shows gross lending was up 
by 43% month-on-month and 59% on the previous March at a total of £25.7bn. It 
was the highest March figure since 2007, before the downturn began.

Since 1 April, anyone paying more than £40,000 for a property other than their 
main home has faced a stamp dutysurcharge in a change that was unveiled in 
November’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/28/stamp-duty-buy-to-let-autumn-statement>
. The extra three percentage points on these sales added £6,000 to the cost of 
buying a £200,000 property.Estate agents had reported that investors were keen 
to beat the change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/31/buy-to-let-investors-complete-stamp-duty-rise>
 and had been bringing forward purchases to complete ahead of the new regime.

Mohammad Jamei, a CML economist, said: “Against a backdrop of a recovering 
market, the substantial jump in lending in March was significantly influenced 
by a late surge of activity to beat the government’s stamp duty change on 
second properties, which came into effect at the start of April.

“The distortion caused by this stamp duty change appears to be larger than any 
previous stamp duty change we’ve seen.”

Jamei said the market was now expected to slow down. “We expect there will be 
about 10,000 fewer mortgaged transactions each month in the second quarter of 
2016 than would otherwise have been the case, offsetting the increase in 
activity seen in March.” he said.



The HMRC figures are for property purchases registered during the month, and 
can include transactions completed over several months. The data shows strong 
increases in all parts of the UK.

In England, the number of transactions over £40,000 hit 141,310 in March, 
compared with 81,320 in February and 78,240 in March 2015. In Scotland, the 
figure rose from 5,760 in February to 11,100, in Wales it was up to 6,570 and 
in Northern Ireland 3,010 sales were registered.
HMRC figures showing sharp rise in property transactions above £40,000 in March
 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/apr/2016-04-21T14:55:32/embed.html>
 HMRC figures showing sharp rise in property transactions above £40,000 in March
HMRC said long-term movement in the number of transactions reflected “the 
general performance of the housing market over the past nine years”.


Before the end of 2007 and the onset of the credit crunch the number of 
transactions rose constantly over a number of years to reach a peak of around 
150,000 a month.

HMRC’s figures show a peak in December 2009, as a stamp duty holiday on 
properties costing between £125,000 and £175,000 came to an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2009/dec/09/stamp-duty-holiday-pre-budget-report>
, and another small peak inMarch 2012 as a relief for first-time buyers came to 
an end 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/mar/13/rics-property-stamp-duty-holiday-ends>
.

“The large increase in transactions for March 2016 is likely to be associated 
with the introduction of the higher rates on additional properties in April 
2016,” HMRC said. “These measures were announced in the Autumn Statement 2015 
for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and in the Scottish government’s draft 
2016-17 budget for Scotland. Additional non-tax factors may have played a role 
as well, for example the Bank of England’s plans to curb buy-to-let mortgages 
resulting in a rush to purchase.”

Lucian Cook, head of residential research at property firm Savills, said the 
figures confirmed “a frenzy of buying activity” before the 1 April tax changes, 
and underscored the significant distorting effect that stamp duty changes can 
have on the housing market.


He added: “This is clearly a one-off event and such volumes are unsustainable 
against a backdrop of economic uncertainty and the prospect of an increased 
regulatory environment for buy-to-let borrowing.

 “We’d expect a significant fall in transaction levels in the second quarter 
of the year to offset the March activity and the stamp duty surcharge to act as 
a longer term drag on housing transactions.”

A Treasury spokesperson said: “The new higher rate of stamp duty on additional 
properties will help double the affordable housing budget and support even more 
first time buyers fulfil their ambition of owning their own home. ‎We think 
that’s fair. It was right to consult on this policy to make sure it worked 
fairly and to allow buyers time to plan effectively.”
 