
With days to go before Donald Trump is inaugurated as the 45th president of 
the United States, Washington has been convulsed by news of a 35-page 
intelligence dossier containing incendiary allegations from Russian spies about 
close links between the Trump camp and the Kremlin as well as salacious sexual 
details that could allegedly expose the next US head of state to blackmail. The 
allegations are wholly unsubstantiated, but were deemed serious enough for US 
intelligence agencies to pass a two-page summary of them last week both to 
Trump and the current president,Barack Obama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>.

Trump dossier: intelligence sources vouch for credibility of report's author
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
What is the origin of the Russian dossier?

The provenance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-russia-report-opposition-research-john-mccain>
 of the dossier lies with a Washington-based oppositionresearch firm 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2017/01/11/us/politics/donald-trump-russia-intelligence.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news>
, Fusion GPS, led by former journalists skilled in digging up secrets on public 
figures. The company was employed in September 2015 by one of Trump’s 
Republican detractors to look into his dealings. According to theBBC 
<https://latest.com/2017/01/bbc-ex-mi6-agent-who-made-golden-shower-report-worked-for-jeb-bush-pac-has-multiple-sources/>
, an outside group supporting then presidential candidate Jeb Bush was the main 
client initially, followed by an anonymous Democratic donor. Fusion GPS in turn 
contracted a former British counter-intelligence officer with strong Russia 
contacts to delve into Trump. Reports gathered by the contractor based on his 
Russian sources were brought together to form the dossier, which in turn began 
to circulate between the FBI, British intelligence and DC-based journalists who 
looked into the allegations but could not stand them up. The dossier was also 
personally passed by the Republican senatorJohn McCain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
, a critic of the president-elect who learned about the allegations in 
November, to the FBI director, James Comey. Top federal officials decided the 
claims in the dossier, albeit unverified, were so explosive that Trump and 
Obama had to be informed, so they appended the summary to their report to the 
president and president-elect last week onRussian hacking 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/intelligence-chiefs-expected-in-new-york-to-brief-trump-on-russian-hacking/2017/01/06/5f591416-d41a-11e6-9cb0-54ab630851e8_story.html?utm_term=.353aa61fba81>
 of Democratic emails during the 2016 election.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Trump called it fake news, but can it be dismissed so easily?

At a press conference on Wednesday in Trump Tower, the president-elect 
dismissed the dossier as “fake news”, “phony stuff”, “crap” and the work of 
“sick people” among his political opponents. Certainly, none of the news 
organizations that had access to the dossier before this week, including the 
Guardian, were able to verify its most salacious details and nor have the 
intelligence agencies been able to ascertain whether it is at all reliable. But 
it is unlikely to be discarded as quickly or as conclusively as Trump would 
like. The flip side of information that cannot be classed reliable is that 
neither can it be classed unreliable. The individual responsible for compiling 
the reports – a former British MI6 officer calledChristopher Steele 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/christopher-steele-ex-british-intelligence-officer-said-to-have-prepared-dossier-on-trump-1484162553>
 – ishighly regarded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 among US and UK intelligence circles and was at one point head of MI6’s Russia 
desk. He wasdescribed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/10/fbi-chief-given-dossier-by-john-mccain-alleging-secret-trump-russia-contacts>
 to the Guardian by a US official as consistently reliable, meticulous and 
well-informed, with extensive Russian contacts.

Does the dossier contain anything that could cause Trump problems after he 
becomes president?

The most sensational details contained in the dossier concern the allegation 
that Russian spies gathered compromising material, or “kompromat”, on Trump by 
secretly recording audio and video tape of his sexual activities in the 
presidential suite of the Ritz Carlton hotel in Moscow. Such content is 
virtually impossible to prove, or disprove, other than in the unlikely 
circumstance that tapes were to emerge. A potentially more potent line of 
inquiry contained in the dossier that could yet cause Trump trouble relates to 
allegations that members of his team were in close contact with Russian 
officials in the course of last year’s presidential election over Russian 
hacking of Democratic emails that were later published byWikiLeaks 
<https://wikileaks.org/podesta-emails/>. Independent reports 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/u-s-intel-officials-probe-ties-between-trump-adviser-and-kremlin-175046002.html>
 suggest that US intelligence agencies were already investigating alleged 
links, such as those between businessman Carter Page and senior Russian 
officials. The president-elect’s spokesman Sean Spicer this week said that the 
president-elect “does not know” Page, even though Trump himself last March
described Page 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/post-partisan/wp/2016/03/21/a-transcript-of-donald-trumps-meeting-with-the-washington-post-editorial-board/?utm_term=.1c49508a310d>
 as a member of his foreign policy team.

How bad could it get for Trump?

As ever, the question of whether the Russia dossier has legs is a matter not 
of science but of politics. The degree to which it might continue to snap at 
the heels of the 45th president depends on whether there is the appetite to 
pursue the claims. News outlets can be expected to stick with the theme, though 
all efforts so far on their part have failed to throw up anything solid. 
Congress has formidable powers to subpoena witnesses that have the potential to 
uncover secrets that others cannot reach. Two Republican senators, John McCain 
and Lindsey Graham, both of them Trump skeptics, have beenpushing 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/john-mccain-russian-hacking-232481> for 
a no-holds-barred investigation into Russian hacking by a special select 
committee of the ilk of the Watergate panel. But so far the leadership of the 
Republican party, who control both chambers of Congress and thus have the final 
say on any such exercise, have shownno appetite 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/12/republicans-russia-donald-trump-232528> 
for rocking the boat with their new president. That leaves the intelligence 
agencies. The danger for Trump here is that he has so alienated senior 
officials, not least by likening them toNazis 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/819164172781060096?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw>
, that he has hardly earned their loyalty.


Donald Trump's truce with spy agencies breaks down over Russia dossier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
At most extreme, could the new president be impeached and how?

We are currently a very long way from this point, but not so far to prevent 
speculation <http://www.vanityfair.com/news/2016/11/will-trump-be-impeached> 
about whether Trump could beimpeached 
<http://www.forbes.com/forbes/welcome/?toURL=http://www.forbes.com/sites/thomasbrewster/2017/01/11/impeachable-but-unverified-trump-russia-memo/&refURL=https://www.google.com/&referrer=https://www.google.com/>
. Were Trump’s team to be found to have conspired with the Kremlin to distort 
the 2016 presidential election, that would certainly fall into the impeachable 
category. But, again, it is entirely unsubstantiated. To take a flight of 
fancy, what if it were substantiated? That would again come down to a question 
of politics. No US president has ever been forced out of office by impeachment 
(Richard Nixon resigned before the vote; Andrew Johnson and Bill Clinton were 
acquitted by the Senate). Any such procedure would have to be prepared and 
approved by a majority of the House of Representatives, and then passed to the 
Senate for a two-thirds majority vote. As the Republicans hold the reins in 
both chambers, it would take an almighty severing of ties between Trump and his 
own party to even get close to such a place.
 