
A batch of stolen emails was released to the public, with evidence pointing 
towards Russian hackers. The media ran through the formerly private 
correspondence with a fine-toothed comb, looking for dirt. Although little if 
any damning information was found, public trust in the hacking victims was 
severely eroded. The volume of media coverage created the perception that where 
there’s smoke, there must be fire, and a general presumption of guilt resulted.

The year was 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2010/jul/07/climate-emails-question-answer>
, and the victims were climate scientists working for and communicating with 
the University of East Anglia.The story was repeated  
<https://climatecrocks.com/2016/11/29/tweetstorm-links-between-climate-gate-and-election-hacks-16/>
in 2016 with theRussian hacking of the Democratic National Committee 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
.

The faux scandal known as “Climategate”


After 1,000 of climate scientists’ private emails were stolen and published 
online,snippets of text were taken out of context and misrepresented 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/Climategate-CRU-emails-hacked.htm> to falsely 
accuse the scientists of scandal, conspiracy, collusion, falsification, and 
illegal activities. Climate deniers and biased media outlets whipped up such 
froth over these misrepresentations that various organizations launched nine 
separate investigations to identify any possible scientific wrongdoing 
uncovered by the emails.They found none 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/Climategate-CRU-emails-hacked.htm>.

Nevertheless, “Climategate” caused temporary erosion in public trust of 
climate scientists 
<http://environment.yale.edu/climate-communication-OFF/files/Climategate_Opinion_and_Loss_of_Trust_1.pdf>
. Like most such news events, people quickly forgot andthe effect soon faded 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1748-9326/9/5/054005/meta;jsessionid=DB26A9F1ABD01D2005617EC1D9EF2519.c4.iopscience.cld.iop.org>
; however, the stolen emails were made public just a month beforethe Copenhagen 
international climate summit 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/2009_United_Nations_Climate_Change_Conference>. 
The well-timed release of the hacked emails provided a distraction that helped 
sink the negotiations, which weregenerally viewed as a failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/dec/18/copenhagen-deal>. A 
serious international climate agreement wasdelayed for another six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/dec/14/the-paris-agreement-signals-that-deniers-have-lost-the-climate-wars>
.

Clinton’s campaign was similarly sunk


Similarly, the stolen emails released by Wikileaks did not identify any 
damning revelations about Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/16/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-wall-street-goldman-sachs-speeches>
. The leaks had the desired effect –Clinton’s emails received three times more 
nightly news network coverage than all policy issues combined 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/11/02/how-media-s-email-obsession-obliterated-clinton-policy-coverage/214242>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frussian-email-hackers-keep-playing-us-for-fools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e056043e22ed90e2094590c4bb446532f312c40%2F0_0_2000_1383%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Russian%20email%20hackers%20keep%20playing%20us%20for%20fools%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frussian-email-hackers-keep-playing-us-for-fools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Russian%20email%20hackers%20keep%20playing%20us%20for%20fools%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2Frussian-email-hackers-keep-playing-us-for-fools%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e056043e22ed90e2094590c4bb446532f312c40%2F0_0_2000_1383%2F2000.jpg>
Gallup consistently found that Clinton’s emails were dominating the news 
<http://www.gallup.com/opinion/polling-matters/196988/americans-news-clinton-equals-emails.aspx>
 Americans were receiving about her. The constant flood of overwhelming media 
coverage of the emails createdthe perception that Hillary Clinton was somehow 
‘just as bad’ as Donald Trump 
<http://www.cnn.com/2016/08/31/politics/clinton-equals-trump-unfavorable-rating/>
.

Although Clinton won the popular vote by a margin of over 2% and close to 3 
million votes 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/133Eb4qQmOxNvtesw2hdVns073R68EZx4SfCnP4IGQf8/htmlview?sle=true>
, the email effect helped Trump win the election.

On both email hacking stories, the media blew it

As President Obama said 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/12/16/13988114/obama-russia-hacking-election>
 at his year-end press conference last Friday:

This was not some elaborate complicated espionage scheme. They hacked into 
some Democratic party emails that contained pretty routine stuff, some of it 
embarrassing or uncomfortable, because I suspect that if any of us got our 
emails hacked into, there might be some things that we wouldn’t want suddenly 
appearing on the front page of a newspaper or telecast even if there wasn’t 
anything particularly illegal or controversial about it. And then it just took 
off. And that concerns me. And it should concern all of us.

The exact same could be said of the hacked Climategate emails. The contents of 
the emails were so benign that those trying to attack climate scientists were 
forced to take statements out of context. For example,a sentence using the word 
“trick” as in “technique” 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/Mikes-Nature-trick-hide-the-decline.htm> was 
distorted and claimed to mean the scientists were nefariously trying to trick 
people. And the distortions worked. The media treated the hacked emails like a 
scandal, and the scientists who were its victims were treated like criminals.
Even Jon Stewart jumped on the faux scandal bandwagon 
<http://www.cc.com/video-clips/v9n1tt/the-daily-show-with-jon-stewart-scientists-hide-global-warming-data>
.

Reading hacked emails is like eavesdropping

At the American Geophysical Union conference last week, attorney Michael 
Mandig, who represents Dr. Malcolm Hughes and other climate scientists on 
behalf of the University of Arizona, put his finger on the problem:

Having general, open access to a researcher’s email is the functional 
equivalent of eavesdropping.

Those trying to block climate policy by any means necessary have resorted to 
trying to make scientists’ private emails public, via either hacking or 
frivolous Freedom of Information Act requests. But there’s no reason to 
electronically eavesdrop on private discussions between scientists. As Dr. 
Hughes noted:

Email has enabled collaboration without geographical limits in science to an 
extraordinary degree. Treating scientists’ emails as public records, subject to 
twisting by anti-science ideologues, chills the vital expression of competing, 
and changing, views on which science depends.

Science is a competition of ideas, and scientists are critical of each others’ 
work. Informal discussions between scientists, whether over the telephone or in 
hallways or via email, depend on privacy to allow the free and frank exchange 
of ideas.


As President Obama noted, everyone says things in private emails that we 
wouldn’t want aired in public. Climategate and the 2016 presidential election 
provided perfect examples – despite no incriminating content, the media treated 
both events like scandals, and public perception of climate scientists and
Hillary Clinton <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> were 
damaged as a result.

Russia keeps beating us

For the climate scientists who lived through Climategate, the Wikileaks email 
scandal crated a sense of déjà vu. In both cases,the Russian petrostate 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2015/03/09/to-understand-russia-think-of-it-as-an-ordinary-petrostate-as-opposed-to-an-extraordinary-superpower/?utm_term=.396bcd31623d>
 may have been the perpetrator of the illegal email hacks, and emerged as the 
winner of the faux scandals, while the rest of us lost.

By helping elect Donald Trump, Russia now has a friendly American leadership 
<http://www.vox.com/world/2016/12/18/13921962/trump-obama-china-russia-policy> 
replacing an outgoing administration that sought to punish their invasion of 
Ukraine and bombing in Syria.Russian operatives covertly interfered with the 
American election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 to aid Trump’s campaign, and Americans responded by electing Vladimir Putin’s 
preferred candidate.Russian agents may also have been behind the Climategate 
<https://www.newscientist.com/blogs/shortsharpscience/2009/12/since-over-1000-confidential-e.html>
 email hack (although the perpetrators were never identified), and again they 
achieved their intended goal of shaking public trust in their victims, and 
disrupting the Copenhagen conference.

Russia is manipulating us through these email hacks, and Americans keep 
falling for it. The president-elect is alreadydenying the evidence presented by 
his own intelligence agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
, and many Americans seem tobelieve anything he says 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/monkey-cage/wp/2016/12/18/a-new-poll-shows-an-astonishing-52-of-republicans-think-trump-won-the-popular-vote/?utm_term=.54e23c8e4026>
. Despite his international aggression,Olympic doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/russia-doping-scandal>, and interference 
with the presidential election, Republicans have a far more favorable view of 
Putin than of their own current President.
Will Jordan (@williamjordann) 
Here is Republicans and Democrats on Vladimir Putin since July 2014. 
pic.twitter.com/s4I6FY5cbt <https://t.co/s4I6FY5cbt>
 <https://twitter.com/williamjordann/status/809069737879674888> December 14, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/williamjordann/status/809069737879674888> 
Germans are worried 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/08/russian-cyber-attacks-could-influence-german-election-says-merkel>
 that Russian hackers will try to influence their elections next. After all, 
they achieved their goals with the Climategate and American election hacking. 
Until we stop letting the email hackers play us for fools, these Russian 
cyber-attacks will undoubtedly continue.

 