
The Kremlin has hit back at a US intelligence report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/vladimir-putin-us-election-interference-report-donald-trump>
 blaming Russia for interference in the presidential election, describing the 
claims as part of a political witch-hunt.

“These are baseless allegations substantiated with nothing, done on a rather 
amateurish, emotional level,” Vladimir Putin’s spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, told 
journalists on Monday. “We still don’t know what data is really being used by 
those who present such unfounded accusations.”

US intelligence agencies released the joint report on Friday, a day after a 
Senate armed forces committee hearing on foreign cyberthreats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/russia-election-hacking-hearing-congress>
, convened over fears of Moscow’s interference in the election. The report 
assessed that the Russian president had ordered a multifaceted campaign to 
influence the election, with a clear preference for a Donald Trump victory.

UK intelligence gave US key tipoff about Russian hacking, report says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/07/russia-us-election-hacking-uk-intelligence>
“We are growing rather tired of these accusations. It is becoming a full-on 
witch-hunt,” Peskov said, in an echo of Trump’sown assessment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/donald-trump-russia-hacking-meeting-intelligence-officials>
 and disparagement of the US intelligence agencies.

Friday’s report was a declassified version of a top-secret paper. A disclaimer 
printed on the public version said its conclusions were “identical to those in 
the highly classified assessment, but this version does not include the full 
supporting information on key elements of the influence campaign”.


The declassified version does not give examples of the kind of evidence that 
has been collected, but relies on claims that at times appear thin. InRussia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, even Kremlin critics have reacted 
with surprise to the contents of the report and the uncritical way its findings 
were presented in much of the US media.

“The unclassified report is insulting to the knowledge of anyone who covers 
Russia either from the outside or the inside,” said Alexey Kovalev, who runs a 
website devoted to debunking Russian propaganda.

Georgian mansions, Moscow dachas and the souring of US-Russian relations
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/georgian-mansions-moscow-dachas-and-the-souring-of-us-russian-relations>
The report appears to be based on reading the tea leaves of Russian 
open-source publications and media reports, and includes pro-Trump quotes from 
figures such as the nationalist Vladimir Zhirinovsky as an indicator of Kremlin 
intentions. Zhirinovsky has, on various occasions in the past, suggested 
sinking the US with gravitational weapons and dropping a nuclear bomb on 
Istanbul.

Much of the report is made up of an annex about the Kremlin-funded television 
station Russia Today, which was written in 2012 and has little relevance to the 
most recent election cycle. RT was accused of being part of a subversion and 
disinformation campaign aimed at “fuelling discontent” in the US.

The part of the report about RT also contains numerous basic factual errors. A 
repeatedly referenced article <http://kommersant.ru/doc/1911336> from the 
Russian press is given as published on 4 July, when it actually was from 7 
April. Dates in Russia are written day/month, not month/day as in the US. Such 
errors, while minor, do not appear to reflect a careful and accurate 
intelligence operation.

The report makes the “high confidence” judgments that Russia intervened in the 
electoral process, and that its GRU military intelligence agency hacked the 
Democratic party’s email servers and handed the material to WikiLeaks.


It goes on to state, however, that “high confidence in a judgment does not 
imply that the assessment is a fact or a certainty; such judgments may be 
wrong”.

Tech firms such as CrowdStrike have said a group known as Fancy Bear, APT29 or 
Sofacy hacked the Democrats, and a number of analysts have said there is strong 
evidence that the trail the hackers left and their previous targets strongly 
aligns with Russian intelligence. Trump and Putin have repeatedly expressed 
admiration for each other, both during the campaign and since Trump’s victory.

The intelligence report’s lack of even hints at the kind of evidence collected 
make it difficult to assess the claims, and its weakness gave Russian officials 
ample opportunity to poke fun.

The foreign ministry spokeswoman, Maria Zakharova, wrote on Facebook on 
Monday: “If ‘Russian hackers’ managed to hack anything in America, it’s two 
things: Obama’s brain and, of course, the report itself.”
 