
At least now you know who to blame. Since Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and especially after 
Donald Trump, the quack analysts have been out in force, holding aloft their 
quack explanations. It is apparently all the fault of the white working 
classes. They got left behind and cast aside in the past two decades of 
globalisation – now they’re making the rest of us pay.

No politician can keep a promise to bring back jobs – especially not Donald 
Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/14/no-politician-can-keep-a-promise-to-bring-back-jobs-especially-not-donald-trump>
Like all good quack analysis, it is instantly digestible, it makes little 
demands of its audience: no scouring of footnotes nor leafing through history. 
It is toxically simple. Never mind actual facts – such asthe ones that prove 
Asian and black people are around twice as likely to be unemployed as white 
people <http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06385>
. Never mind that such quackery, while pretending to be rooted in economics, 
merely turns the “white working class” into just another branch of identity 
politics. Never mind that it muddies the debate (the Le Pen dynasty and the 
millionaire Nigel Farage somehow turn out to be the real victims in all this) 
and trivialises the very people to whom the quack is pretending to genuflect. 
Poor sods: unlike the rest of us, they just couldn’t keep up.

However seductive this is as explanation, as analysis it’s off economically 
and it’s off politically because it misses the point. The Trump vote contained 
rednecks and inhabitants of the rust belt, just assouth Wales and Sunderland 
turned out for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/08/sunderland-how-labour-city-became-one-of-the-uks-most-eurosceptic>
 – but in neither case was that the whole story. It also seeks to turn a larger 
and wider economic process into a smaller and more trivial culture war. It pits 
the middle classes against the working classes, and the poor whites against the 
poor blacks. All the while, since 2008 the single biggest economic story across 
Britain and the US and other rich countries has been achingly slow growth and 
austerity for the masses, alongside state-subsidised riches for the very 
wealthiest.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Put bluntly, if you think that what has happened to the advanced countries’ 
working classes – how over four decades they have sunk from semi-prosperity 
into pauperism – was a one-off event driven by the magical, unanswerable forces 
of globalisation, then you’ve missed the point. This is a process that’s 
swallowing up the middle classes too. Indeed, it’s happening now. And the 
political implications will, I think, make Trump come to seem as benevolent as 
a greasepaint baddie at a Christmas panto.

In Britain, it wasn’t globalisation that shunted the rail and telecoms and gas 
engineers and their colleagues on to private employers and then into thousands 
upon thousands of layoffs. It wasn’t globalisation that prompted Thatcher’s 
scorched-earth economics that saw the loss of one in five of all manufacturing 
jobs within just 18 months in the early 80s. All this happened in the decade 
running up to the fall of the Berlin Wall. Whatever Theresa May says, it had 
less to do with globalisation thanKeith Joseph 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1994/dec/12/obituaries>, Margaret 
Thatcher and their hardline neoliberal friends. As for the liberals who are 
today pointing at an atlas and shrugging for the cameras, back then their 
parents were probably writing letters to the Times about the need for greater 
economic efficiency.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frust-belt-middle-class-wiped-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4924f0ec7ab069fc2c6c789fb077071a4823cc82%2F0_191_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rust-belt%20romantics%20don%E2%80%99t%20get%20it%3A%20the%20middle%20class%20is%20being%20wiped%20out%20too%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frust-belt-middle-class-wiped-out%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rust-belt%20romantics%20don%E2%80%99t%20get%20it%3A%20the%20middle%20class%20is%20being%20wiped%20out%20too%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Frust-belt-middle-class-wiped-out%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4924f0ec7ab069fc2c6c789fb077071a4823cc82%2F0_191_3896_2337%2F3896.jpg>
 ‘If Philip Hammond presses on with George Osborne’s cuts, a further 100,000 
civil servants will lose their jobs by 2020.’ Photograph: Mark 
Thomas/Rex/Shutterstock 
Among the modern-day equivalents, you might include the appalling pay and 
conditions for care workers – driven not by foreign competition but by the 
demand of the private-equity firms running these businesses to make as much of 
a margin as possible. The only thing that’s globalised here is the tax affairs 
of the finance shops running the show. This isn’t about the advent of China, 
nor has it been driven by migrant labour. It’s about acapitalism run wild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/07/capitalism-austerity-revolution-why-we-took-part-in-the-million-mask-march>
 that tramples over skills and people and isn’t tempered by regulations, by 
unions, or by politics.

Ah, you might say. Ah. But that’s the working classes, priced out by the 
markets. Wrong. It’s about choices made by politicians – and they’re coming for 
the white collars, too. Consider what’s happening right now in the era of 
austerity. Since David Cameron moved into Downing Street in 2010, the 
government has scrapped 80,000 civil service jobs. Let that number sink in: it 
amounts to the shutdown of 20 Port Talbot steelworks, and it has gone barely 
covered.

If in next week’s autumn statement, chancellor Philip Hammond presses on with 
George Osborne’s cuts, a further 100,000 civil servants will lose their jobs by 
2020. Add to them the other public-sector staff laid off this decade: the 
librarians, the town hall clerks. Consider the deprofessionalisation going on 
right now in our schools, so that nearly half of all teachers are planning to 
leave. Think about the middle classes working for the private sector and the 
impossible targets they have to follow just so their bosses and shareholders 
can enjoy the dividends.

This isn’t globalisation: this is Big Finance and its copyists, trampling over 
workers, families, communities. What’s left for such workers is the same as 
their blue-collar counterparts: lower wages, precarious work and a lot of 
borrowing. It’s already happening: 17 million British adults haveless than £100 
in savings <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/business-37504449>. By some odd social 
symmetry, just over 17 million Britons voted in June to leave the EU.

Strip away professional protections and you unleash what, 170 years ago, 
Engels called “the battle of all against all”. InThe Condition of the Working 
Class in England 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Condition_of_the_Working_Class_in_England>, 
he wrote of how “a battle for life, for existence, for everything, is fought 
not between the different classes of society only, but also between the 
individual members of these classes. The power-loom weaver is in competition 
with the hand-loom weaver, the unemployed or ill-paid hand-loom weaver with him 
who has work or is better paid, each trying to supplant the other.” I think 
we’re already there, except this time you can substitute the weavers for the 
Uber drivers, the hourly paid university lecturers, even the freelance 
journalists. Then paint in impossible house prices and rising fuel costs. And 
remember that behind Engels’s characterisation was another wealthy elite.

The answer isn’t further to isolate one tribe as having special attributes 
that need to be mollified or tamed. It’s to look at the process that isolated 
them economically and politically and to be aware that we are on the verge of 
doing the same. If the rich countries are only now dealing with the electoral 
fallout of a socioeconomic process that began 40 years ago, then ask yourself: 
what does a Marine Le Pen for the middle classes look like?
 