
It is not a typical royal residence but a terraced house on a quiet and 
slightly dishevelled housing estate in Sale,Greater Manchester 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/greater-manchester>, is now the home of the new 
king of Rwanda.

Three months after the country’s previous exiled monarch King Kigeli died in 
relative poverty in the US aged 80, an official decree by his chief courtier 
has declared his nephew Emmanuel Bushayija – a naturalised British citizen – as 
his successor.

“The Rwandan Royal Council of Abiru hereby informs all Rwandans and friends of 
Rwanda <https://www.theguardian.com/world/rwanda> that in keeping with the 
ancient custom, it has acclaimed His Royal Highness Prince Emmanuel Bushayija 
as the successor of his late majesty,” the edict read.

In a video posted on Facebook 
<https://www.facebook.com/aurentv/videos/1857970657749385/>, Boniface Benzinge, 
who describes himself as the deceased king’s assistant and best friend, reads a 
statement over tinny piano music saying that Kigeli had named his brother’s son 
as his successor in 2006 and that he wished the new king “long life and 
success”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frwandas-new-king-named-a-father-of-two-living-on-an-estate-near-manchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0c02445686c65100dc946da574fe873b0f2384%2F798_0_4161_4032%2F4161.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Rwanda's%20new%20king%20named%20%E2%80%93%20a%20father%20of%20two%20living%20on%20an%20estate%20near%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frwandas-new-king-named-a-father-of-two-living-on-an-estate-near-manchester%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Rwanda%27s%20new%20king%20named%20%E2%80%93%20a%20father%20of%20two%20living%20on%20an%20estate%20near%20Manchester&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Frwandas-new-king-named-a-father-of-two-living-on-an-estate-near-manchester%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde0c02445686c65100dc946da574fe873b0f2384%2F798_0_4161_4032%2F4161.jpg>
 The house in Sale, Greater Manchester, where Emmanuel Bushayija lives. 
Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Father of two Bushayija, or Yuhi VI as his new royal title has him, has so far 
remained silent about the announcement. Answering the door of his neat and well 
kept house on Wednesday morning, a family member said he was not in and would 
not be speaking to the press.

The Rwandan royal family was exiled in 1961, when Bushayija was a baby, and he 
was schooled in Uganda, where he later worked for Pepsi. He moved back to 
Rwanda in 1994, before relocating to the UK in 2000.

He first lived in a council flat near Old Trafford, before moving to his 
current terraced house, which is owned by the Irwell Valley housing 
association. Company records show that he started a security company, Intersec 
Security, in 2013, which is registered to his home address but provides armed 
security for clients in Rwanda.

Wendy Otoo, 50, a foster carer who lives two doors down from the family, said 
Bushayija had mentioned his big news to her husband, but that she didn’t think 
it would change much for the family.

“He’s very laid back and humble,” she said. “He’s a lovely man. I look after 
my granddaughters full time and he’s great with them. He always stops for a 
chat, so he’s not very king-like.” She added: “It’s funny because my family are 
from Ghana on my Dad’s side, and my uncle there is a king.”

The first Dola Tope–Agboola, 43, heard about her royal neighbour was when a 
journalist knocked on her door on Wednesday morning. “It’s just amazing to be 
honest,” she says. “I’m going to be on the look out for him. I should get to 
know him.”

Rwanda became a republic in 1961 following a referendum, a year before it 
gained independence from Belgian rule. The result suggested that 80% of the 
public opposed the monarchy but King Kigeli claimed that the vote had been 
rigged.

In 2013, Washingtonian magazine 
<https://www.washingtonian.com/2013/03/27/a-king-with-no-country/> found Kigeli 
living in subsidised housing in Virginia, living off food stamps. He told the 
magazine thatPaul Kagame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/01/rwanda-paul-kagame-third-term-office-constitutional-changes>
, president of Rwanda and a fellow Tutsi, had permitted him to return to his 
home country but said that he could not resume the throne.

While alive, Kigeli spent much of his time attempting to preserve the 
traditions of the Rwandan monarchy, subsidising his small income with the sale 
of knighthoods, and hoping that his people would one day invite him back.

Following his death, a row broke out about where he should be laid to rest and 
a US court ruled in favour of relatives who wanted his body returned to Rwanda. 
Benzinge insisted that his friend would not have wanted to be buried in his 
home land “as long as the current government administration that was hostile to 
his majesty in life was still in power”.

Benzinge’s announcement that Bushayija is the new king has also been 
controversial. Pastor Ezra Mpyisi, a former adviser to the Rwandan king, told 
journalists in the country’s capital that he would not recognise the new king.

“[Benzinge] cannot name the new king because he is in no position to do so. He 
has no powers to do so because he is not part of the royal family or related to 
the king in any way,” he said.

• This article was amended on 13 January 2017. An earlier version said Rwanda 
became a republic in January 1961 following a referendum. The referendum was in 
September 1961.
 