
Are you wetting your pants over something Gary Lineker said 
<https://twitter.com/GaryLineker/status/788407048031600640> on Twitter about 
something that isn’t to do with his job? Are you demanding the BBC give Gary his
first ever straight red 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/news/2018976/leftie-luvvie-gary-lineker-should-be-sacked-for-peddling-charity-lie-about-child-migrant-38/>
, because that’s the sort of thing we demand these days, presumably in the 
absence of being able to achieve anything actually meaningful? Are you pretty 
sure you didn’t fight in two world wars just so a football presenter could have 
a compassionate opinion you disagree with? Are you three years old?

Gary Lineker hits back at online abuse over criticism of Calais refugee 
coverage
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/gary-lineker-hits-back-at-online-abuse-over-hideously-racist-coverage-refugees>
Seriously, are you actually three years old? You’ve done precociously well to 
read this far, but you need to stop here because I’m probably going to swear 
later. Everyone else is invited to roll up for another week in toddler culture, 
where we scream about things we don’t like until a misguided grownup gives in 
and removes them from our presence.

In another saga of frenzied twattery, Lineker’s tweeted distaste for some 
people’s reaction to refugees arriving in the UK from the refugee camp in 
Calais has caused a ludicrously disproportionate outcry. According to an 
indeterminate number of internet users, and now the front page of the Sun, this 
renders Lineker unsuitable to anchor the Premier League highlights.

This is the kind of episode of outrage culture that makes me think I have some 
kind of essential lobe missing, physiologically preventing me from being able 
to “get it”. You see, tomorrow night, when I watchMatch of the Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/14/gary-lineker-bbc-match-of-the-day-motd>
, I think I’m just about going to be able to separate something Lineker said 
about people’s callousness towards refugees from his thoughts on Loris Karius. 
Even if Karius has another wobbler in goal for Liverpool? OK, OK … I can see 
you’re testing me. But yes. Yes, even if Karius has such a wobbler that you 
could remotely diagnosenot one 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/jul/29/football-liverpool-loris-karius-breaks-hand-injured-chelsea>
 but two broken hands, I’m probably going to be able to manage to find what 
Gary thinks about refugees irrelevant. But I take your point: a principle isn’t 
a principle until it’s tested.

Still, whatever happened to principles? The sole freedom that significant and 
powerful sections of the press now seem to care about is freedom of the press, 
or – but only up to a point – the freedom to be Jeremy Clarkson. Other freedoms 
don’t just not matter, they are actively to be suppressed. It’s like Voltaire
didn’t say <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evelyn_Beatrice_Hall>: I don’t agree 
with what you say, and I will fight to the death to get you sacked by the Beeb 
for it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsack-gary-lineker-tweet-the-sun-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7be23c2fa1f69bec09dd00b5da48d4c5b30afa42%2F0_26_2787_1672%2F2787.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sack%20Gary%20Lineker%20for%20a%20tweet%3F%20That%E2%80%99s%20the%20peevish%20cry%20of%20our%20toddler%20culture%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsack-gary-lineker-tweet-the-sun-culture%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sack%20Gary%20Lineker%20for%20a%20tweet%3F%20That%E2%80%99s%20the%20peevish%20cry%20of%20our%20toddler%20culture%20%7C%20Marina%20Hyde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F21%2Fsack-gary-lineker-tweet-the-sun-culture%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7be23c2fa1f69bec09dd00b5da48d4c5b30afa42%2F0_26_2787_1672%2F2787.jpg>
 Philip Green. ‘Still, what you do go home with is a Commons debate about 
whether or not someone should lose their knighthood.’ Photograph: Justin 
Tallis/AFP/Getty Images 
“The Beeb must sack him!” is the clarion call of a culture that feels impotent 
to change much else. It’s almost too obvious to mention that the calls come 
mostly from papers that regard the BBC much as Hamas regards Israel. These days 
the biannual shaming and eventual sacking of a BBC presenter or comedian is 
regarded as a victory on a par withEl Alamein 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/worldwars/wwtwo/battle_el_alamein_01.shtml> (see 
also “Strip him of his knighthood!”).

The overriding message is to lower your expectations and get heavily involved 
in displacement activity. A country with a proper tax system, which doesn’t 
suck up to and ennoble those who nakedly avoid it much less make them government
“efficiency tsars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2010/aug/13/philip-green-eficiency-savings>
”, then act surprised when they tank a pension fund: that’s what you could have 
won. Still, what you do go home with is a Commons debate about whether or not 
someone should lose their knighthood. We are living in the consolation-prize 
era of post-imperial life.

Of course, there will be people who reflexively think I’m defending Lineker 
only because I agree with him. And, as it goes, I do. So let’s consider someone 
and something that absolutely doesn’t float my boat. And for extra special 
relevance, let’s keep it in the area of football. How about the time when the 
Premier League chief executive Richard Scudamore was found to have exchanged 
variousoff-colour emails 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/may/20/exposed-richard-scudamore-sexist-emails-premier-league-chief-executive>
 with a colleague, in which the colleague referred to women as “gash” and so on?

Countless people called for him to be sacked, many because their free-speech 
priorities are so far out of whack that they no longer even notice an assault 
on them unless it affects them personally. On that occasionI wrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/14/premier-league-richard-scudamore>
 not one buttwo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2014/may/21/richard-scudamore-email-debacle-excessive-moral-outrage>
 columns on the subject (yes, yes – slow couple of weeks), both of which 
declared the outrage wildly out of proportion, and were of the firm 
opinion that he should not be sacked. And me a bird and everything.

As for why I didn’t demand Richard’s head on a plate … how to put this mildly? 
I do not warm to Scudamore, as much of my prior and subsequent output would 
attest. I do not warm to many aspects of the way in which he has run the 
Premier League, and I certainly do not warm to boring little inadequates who 
josh about “gash”.

Are we going to sack or fine everyone who dares to have a view – a nation of 
Violet Elizabeth Botts?

But so what? Because you know what really and truly and gets my goat? People 
who scream that those people should be sacked if they do it in their private 
emails. People who actually think the mere failure of Scudamore to tell his 
friend not to say gash, in a private email conversation, is something he should 
lose his entire job for. I can barely imagine anything more babyish than 
thinking he should – except perhaps the notion that Lineker can’t analyse 
Leicester-Crystal Palace tomorrow. (Did you know he supports Leicester? Just 
sayin’.) Yet the twits that think this stuff are inheriting the Earth.

Anyone who believes in a free press and other equally vital yet threatened 
freedoms should believe in Lineker’s right to commit relatively benign 
infractions of the self-interested tabloid code. Furthermore, there is no more 
absurd suspension of disbelief than the pretence that BBC presenters are Fritz 
Lang automatons devoid of opinions. We live in a social media age. Are we going 
to grow up about this, or are we going to proceed further down the road to 
cultural infantilisation, and sack or fine everyone who dares to have a view – 
a nation ofViolet Elizabeth Botts <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=GUczkXl_uVU> 
thcweaming and thcweaming and thcweaming until we’re sick?

PS: If I ever end up writing about the BBC, in the interests of full 
disclosure I always mention that my husband works there, though I’m running out 
of ways to take the piss out of him in a way that causes him to put his head in 
his hands and groan NOOOOOOOOOO by about the fourth paragraph. Today is easy, 
though: you should definitely scream for him to be sacked on the basis I’ve 
written this.
 