
When the history of recent education policy is written, a special chapter 
should be devoted to the saga of the Durand academy, whose funding agreement was
terminated 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/11/owing-2m-durand-academy-state-school-in-south-londonto-be-stripped-of-management>
 last month by the Department for Education.

It is often hard to remember, while unravelling the murky affairs of this 
school, that at the heart of the sorry story is the education of children in 
one of the most deprived parts of the country, in south London. For much of the 
past 20 years Durand has done the job of educating them reasonably well, but 
its legacy is likely to be a case study in what can go wrong when schools are 
encouraged to operate, as they have been for two decades, in a market, with too 
much freedom and not enough oversight.

Its ambitious leader, Sir Greg Martin 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/06/03/sir-greg-martin-the-superhead-who-fell-from-grace-fights-back/>
, one of Michael Gove’s much praised favourite heads, recognised early on the 
benefits of opting out of direct local authority oversight and becoming an 
autonomous state school.

An early adopter of grant-maintained status, Durand 
<http://www.durandacademy.com/our-school/our-history/> had become a foundation 
primary school under Labour and an all-through academy converter in 2010. Along 
the way it added a privateleisure centre 
<http://www.horizonsfitness.co.uk/about-us> to its portfolio, and set up a 
charitable trust 
<http://apps.charitycommission.gov.uk/Showcharity/RegisterOfCharities/CharityWithPartB.aspx?RegisteredCharityNumber=1136362&SubsidiaryNumber=0>
, which owns all its property interests, and severalprivate management 
companies [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/561697/overview_of_the_organisations_connected_to_durand_academy.pdf>
. One of these companies was contracted, without any clear procurement process, 
to provide services to the leisure centre, lifting sole shareholder Sir Greg’s 
overall income to £400,000 a year.

By the time the government’s Education Funding Agency (EFA) [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/559066/Notice_of_intention_to_terminate_to_Durand_Academy_Trust.pdf>
 and theCharity Commission 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/durand-education-trust-inquiry-report>
 caught up with the intricate web of transactions between these organisations, 
their directors and trustees, Martin had registered adating agency 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/durand-head-greg-martin-grilled-over-dating-agency-and-other-companies/>
 at the school’s address and the trust had bought and opened a low-costboarding 
school <http://www.durandacademy.com/boarding/boarding-info/> in West Sussex. 
Thisschool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/state-sector-eton-inner-city-boarders-durand-academy-west-sussex>
 still lacks the planning permission needed to adequately educate its secondary 
age pupils, who are bussed in each week from Lambeth, south London.

Even now, as the EFA 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/durand-chief-makes-blistering-attack-on-senior-government-officials/>
 belatedly tries to wrest back control of this empire and oblige a repayment of 
almost £2m from the charitable trust to the school,Durand’s leaders [pdf] 
<http://durandacademy.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/PERSONAL-STATEMENT-ISSUED-IN-RESPONSE-TO-THE-CHARITY-COMMISSION-REPORT-INTO-DURAND-EDUCATION-TRUST.pdf>
 are sticking up two fingers to the hand that fed them so generously with 
public money, accusing the EFA of weak and failing oversight.

‘State sector Eton’ for inner-city boarders fails to live up to the hype
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/state-sector-eton-inner-city-boarders-durand-academy-west-sussex>
We can’t really fault them on that point, but how was this allowed to happen? 
There are several possible reasons. Some headteachers have been allowed to 
accrue too much power. The obsession with the “flagship” school has been 
accompanied by the inexorable rise of the knighted, flamboyant, noisy and often 
overpaid “superhead”, whose short-term successes and individual style often 
blind their paymasters to personal flaws.

A recent study from the Harvard Business Review 
<https://hbr.org/2016/10/the-one-type-of-leader-who-can-turn-around-a-failing-school>
 into school leadership suggested we are still attracting too many of the 
superhead types and not enough “architects”, the low-profile, unshowy heads who 
concentrate on sustainable improvement and the boring business of getting the 
teaching right.

The independent state school programme has also rested too heavily on the 
notion that freedom, entrepreneurial spirit, and untested gimmicky innovation – 
such as a half-baked “Eton of the state sector 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/jun/17/boarding-academy-school-for-state-pupils>
” boarding school – would somehow automatically deliver high standards and 
probity.

In his book Education, Education, Education 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/education-education-education.html>, Labour’s 
academy architect Lord Adonis explains why he resisted calls to put a tougher 
legal framework around his favoured schools: “In my experience charisma, 
persuasion and money, not legislation and regulation, are the great drivers of 
reform”, he said.

Sadly that proved to be a fatal mistake. Politicians love the idea of dynamic 
unfettered edu-knights riding to the rescue of failing schools, but sponsors, 
academies and free schools have not provided a miracle cure and, while many 
leaders have strong moral values and don’t abuse their position, Martin isn’t 
the onlycelebrity head 
<https://www.tes.com/news/school-news/breaking-news/charting-downfall-famous-five-superheads>
 to have fallen from grace.

But the most obvious lesson from Durand is that healthy autonomy needs the 
counterweight of rigorous oversight. It is mind-boggling that Durand was 
allowed to get away with this for so long.

Justine Greening may have made a sensible retreat when she quietly dumped the 
idea of academies for all two weeks ago. She and Theresa May, who seem more 
sober sensible types than their recent predecessors, may not be seduced by the 
cult of the superhead.

But she still has the headache of trying to work out how to oversee the 
thousands of existing independent state schools. I suspect we may not have seen 
the last of Martin, who still appears as chair of the Durand governing body on 
the school’swebsite <http://www.durandacademy.com/our-school/governing-body/> 
and seems determined to fight to the end. Greening’s challenge will be to 
ensure we don’t see the likes of Durand again.
 