
London’s mayor, Sadiq Khan <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, 
has promised to spend £770m on cycling initiatives over the course of his term, 
saying he wants to make riding a bike the “safe and obvious” transport choice 
for all Londoners.

Following criticism that Khan has not been as bold as his predecessor, Boris 
Johnson, in committing to new bike routes, and amidincreasing worries about air 
quality in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/15/nearly-9500-people-die-each-year-in-london-because-of-air-pollution-study>
, Khan’s office has set out what is described as a hugely ambitious programme 
to boost cyclist numbers.

The proposed spending of about £17 per person per year gets near the levels 
seen in cycle-friendly nations such as the Netherlands and Denmark.

Among the plans are proposals for two new cycle superhighways, routes on which 
riders are largely separated from motor traffic by kerbs and dedicated traffic 
lights, the first of which were built under Johnson and have proved hugely 
popular.

Cycle superhighway 4 would go from Tower Bridge to Greenwich in south-east 
London, and cycle superhighway 9 is planned to run from Olympia to Hounslow in 
westLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, the City Hall announcement 
said.

The spending, which represents 5.5% of the budget for Transport for London 
(TfL), also covers the delivery of a series of extensions or new cycle 
superhighways already planned under Johnson.

It will also involve more so-called mini-Holland schemes 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/london/mini-holland-scheme-in-walthamstow-hailed-as-major-success-as-traffic-falls-by-half-a3389936.html>
 in suburbs, which involve reducing through-traffic on quiet residential 
streets, and more than a dozen quietway routes along back streets.

Khan said he was delivering on his manifesto promise to be “the most 
pro-cycling mayor London has ever had”. He said: “With record amounts of money 
now committed for cycling in London, we will continue to work over the coming 
months developing further detailed plans for making cycling a safe and obvious 
choice for Londoners of all ages and backgrounds.”

London is seen as something of a national testbed for schemes to tempt more 
people out of cars and on to bikes. While overall levels of cycling for 
transport across the UK have stayed largely static over recent years, in London 
they have accelerated rapidly, especially on the new protected bike lanes.

TfL statistics released last week 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/cyclists-make-up-70-of-blackfriars-bridge-traffic-a3409351.html>
 showed that cycle traffic on the first two major cycle superhighways, one 
running north to south past Blackfriars bridge, the other east-to-west along 
the Embankment, had risen by 55% in six months. At peak times, bikes now form 
the majority of all vehicles on both routes, the figures showed.

Khan has faced criticism that he has been slow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/bike-blog/2016/nov/17/five-london-cycling-tests-for-sadiq-khan>
 to push through new bike routes, amid vehement if largely unfounded criticism 
from some driving groups, notably London’s taxi trade, that cycle lanes 
increase traffic congestion.

His new funding announcement has won support from cycling groups, including the
London Cycling Campaign <http://lcc.org.uk/>, Ashok Sinha, the chief executive 
of the organisation, said the investment “shows the mayor is serious about 
meeting his promises to triple the extent of London’s protected cycle lanes, 
fix the most dangerous junctions and enable boroughs to implement major walking 
and cycling schemes”.

He said: “It will help make London a better, greener, healthier and less 
congested city.”

However, Andrew Gilligan, the commissioner for cycling under Johnson, who has 
previously criticised Khan for delays over cycle schemes, said the money 
committed would not be spent “unless the mayor actually starts building 
something”.


He said: “So far, most movement has been in the other direction, with 
shovel-ready schemes delayed or cancelled. Today’s press release contains no 
commitment to actually build any segregated cycle route beyond the one scheme 
(the north-south extension) already announced. This includes only half a mile 
of segregated track. With thecancellation of the 4.5-mile segregated scheme on 
the Westway 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/plans-for-crazy-westway-cycle-superhighway-scrapped-by-mayor-a3395731.html>
 and A40, the net total of new segregated routes so far promised by this 
mayoralty is minus four miles.

Gilligan said that while the plans for the two new cycle superhighways were 
welcome, neither would reach central London. He added: “We need a promise that 
they will be segregated, and also that a consultation result which favours 
their building will not be ignored, as it was with the Westway.”
 