
Sainsbury’s has stepped up its battle with John Lewis to be the UK’s most 
popular Christmas ad with an animated West End musical-style story with James 
Corden on vocals.

The supermarket will launch its three-minute ad, which took seven weeks to 
animate using hitech 3D-printing techniques never previously used in the UK, on 
Monday, making it the last of the major retailers to kick off its festive 
campaign.

The upbeat film features the story of busy dad Dave who comes up with the plan 
of creating toy replicas of himself to stand in for him at work so that he can 
spend time with his family over Christmas. It will launch on social media and 
air for the first time on TV during I’m a Celebrity ... Get Me Out of Here on 
ITV.

With increasing numbers of people watching programmes online or via catch-up, 
or recorded services where they can skip ads,companies are having to battle 
hard to grab attention during the busiest time of the year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/05/christmas-tv-ads-john-lewis>.

As well as Sainsbury’s, which beat John Lewis to be the most popular ad last 
year with 30m views of itsMog film on YouTube 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/12/raiding-the-kitty-sainsburys-resurrects-mog-the-cat-for-christmas-advert>
, Marks & Spencer, Waitrose and even Aldi have short-story films this year.

The Sainsbury’s ad, which retains the tagline “Christmas is for Sharing” used 
in previous years, will have a charitable link. Profits from a range of 
merchandise, including a gingerbread version of Dave and an animation kit, will 
go towards family accommodation at Great Ormond Street hospital for children.


Sarah Kilmartin, who is in charge of broadcast communications at Sainsbury’s, 
said the company did not have a specific fundraising target but raised £1.4m 
for Save the Children last year from merchandise related to its Christmas ad 
and customer donations.

She would not reveal how much Sainsbury’s had spent on the ad, but last year 
the company spent almost £22m on advertising over Christmas.

Directed by Sam Fell, an alumni of Wallace and Gromit maker Aardman Animations 
who went on to make comedy zombie animation ParaNorman, the film does not 
feature any Sainsbury’s products directly. However, unlike in the three 
previous years, when the supermarket ads were based on the Judith Kerr 
character Mog, a heartwarming tale of friendship on the battlefield, and a 
mash-up of Christmas home videos, Sainsbury’s has found a way to link this 
year’s ad to its stores.


Animators created tiny versions of Sainsbury’s prosecco, Christmas cards and 
homewares to fill the houses of the multi-racial mix of families who are in 
Dave’s world.


Fell said work on creating and planning the film began in March and was only 
completed last week. It took 16 weeks to build the sets and create the 26 
puppets used in the film. All the puppets were built by Mackinnon and Saunders 
in Manchester, the company that makes most of the puppets for Tim Burton’s 
animated films, such as Frankenweenie. The puppets’ faces, 1,700 of which were 
used to create the film, were all printed by 3D Print Bureau in Stoke-on-Trent, 
a company which usually makes prototypes for engineers or items for medical use.


Corden’s song, which will be released for free via a partnership with Spotify, 
was written by Bret McKenzie, the Oscar-winning songwriter and comedian from 
Flight of the Conchords.

 