
Sainsbury’s <https://www.theguardian.com/business/j-sainsbury> is stepping up 
its drive to tackle the UK’sfood waste epidemic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/series/food-waste> by announcing a 
further £1m to help towns and cities reduce the number of items thrown away by 
consumers.

In the second phase of the retailer’s “waste less, save more” programme 
<https://wastelesssavemore.sainsburys.co.uk/whats-happening/swadlincote/blog/families-join-food-waste-campaign>
, which aims to reduce food waste by 50% and save the average household £350 a 
year, funding is being extended to regions keen to replicate the lessons 
learned from an ongoing trial in Swadlincote, Derbyshire.

After a nationwide search, Swadlincote was chosen  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/01/sainsburys-swadlincote-derbyshire-town-1m-food-waste>
from 200 applicants to trial the scheme, with residents invited to use a range 
of initiatives over a year including smart fridges and food-sharing apps.

Tech innovations that could reduce food waste
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/tech-innovations-that-could-reduce-food-waste>
The findings from this trial, which started in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/29/uk-families-blow-twice-as-much-money-on-food-waste-as-they-think-research-shows>
, are being used to create a blueprint for other communities. More than 110 
regions from Dundee to Truro – so-called discovery communities – that have 
signed up in support of the initiative will receive funding, though other 
regions are still able to apply. The scheme is being announced at an event in 
Birmingham on Tuesday.

British families could save an average of £700 a year by wasting less food, 
according to the government’s waste advisory body,Wrap <http://www.wrap.org.uk/>
, which is monitoring the Swadlincote project.

In addition to the funding, Sainsbury’s will advise communities on how to 
replicate the work in Swadlincote. These free and low-cost solutions include 
organising community events and schools programmes through to larger 
initiatives such as the introduction of neighbourhood fridges.

“Today marks a significant milestone in our waste less, save more programme as 
we broaden out our focus from a single trial town to sharing our learnings with 
communities up and down the UK,” said Paul Crewe, head of sustainability at 
Sainsbury’s.

Only 3% of UK adults feel ashamed at wasting food, poll finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/food-waste-uk-householders-sainsburys-survey-saving-money>
“With well over 100 communities already signed up, the response so far has 
been overwhelming and really highlights that the nation is waking up to food 
waste.”

Trials under way in Swadlincote include the Olio app <https://olioex.com/> 
(available worldwide since October), which facilitates food sharing among 
neighbours, and the Fab Foods project, which engages with local schools.

Elsewhere households are testing technology 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/tech-innovations-that-could-reduce-food-waste>
 such as smart fridges with internal cameras. By allowing residents to view the 
contents of their fridge via their smartphone, they eliminate the risk of 
buying unnecessary items – a practice that costs the UK £1.5bn a year.








 