
The chief executive of Sainsbury’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/j-sainsbury> has warned major suppliers 
that they should be taking the hit on any cost increases resulting from the 
falling value of the pound, rather than trying to pass on price rises to 
retailers and shoppers.

Mike Coupe fought back against widely reported price rise demands from large 
grocery brand owners, such as Unilever – the owner of Marmite – Birds Eye and 
Pepsico, which owns Walkers Crisps, saying these international groups were more 
profitable than the retailers they supplied. “I would encourage them to 
mitigate cost pressures they might feel through their supply chain,” he said.

The impact on prices of the sharp drop in the value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/11/pound-completes-worst-four-day-performance-since-brexit-vote>
 since the Brexit vote was still uncertain, Coupe said, as Sainsbury’s reported 
a fall in first-half profits for the third year in a row.

Underlying pre-tax profit fell 10% to £277m and the supermarket cut its 
interim dividend to 3.6p a share from 4p a year earlier against a backdrop of 
what Coupe said were “challenging market conditions”.

Sales in stores open for more than a year fell 1%, although total group sales 
increased 1.8% to £12.6bn in the 28 weeks to 24 September, helped by growth 
online, the opening of 16 new convenience stores and a 1% rise in clothing 
sales and growth at itsnewly acquired Argos chain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/sainsburys-argos-outlets-habitat-home-retail-group>
.

Coupe warned that, excluding the contribution from Argos, Sainsbury’s profits 
for the second half of its financial year would be even lower than the first 
because of price cuts and cost inflation, partly resulting from wage rises for 
shopfloor staff.

Profits and sales for all the main supermarket chains have fallen in the face 
of rising competition from discounters Aldi and Lidl, which has forced a wave 
of price cuts across the market. Now suppliers are demanding increased payment 
for their goods because of cost increases resulting from a 15% fall in the 
value of the pound against the dollar and the euro.

Sainsbury's invests another £1m in battle against food waste
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/08/sainsbury-invests-food-waste-waste-less-save-more-scheme>
Shares fell more than 6% on Wednesday, making Sainsbury’s the FTSE 100’s 
biggest faller, as the company revealed that profit margins remained under 
pressure after dipping 0.24 percentage points to 2.47% in the half year.

There was also concern about a £674m leap in the value of Sainsbury’s pension 
deficit to £1.06bn, although the company said this figure was largely down to 
timing, and was already as much as £400m lower.

Coupe said the full impact of the devaluation of sterling on shopfloor prices 
was “as yet uncertain” and “difficult to predict”.

Referring to the election of Donald Trump as US president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live>
, Coupe said: “As we see from events this morning we are living in 
unprecedented times. With currency fluctuations and commodity price 
differences, [pricing on various products] will play out in different ways.”

Over the three months to 24 September, Sainsbury’s grocery prices fell 1%, 
about the same level as the previous quarter. Coupe said the main sign of 
inflation so far was on petrol, which has risen by 5p a litre or 4.5% to £1.15. 
“Apart from that, there is no sure sign of any significant changes,” Coupe said.

He said about half of Sainsbury’s food was imported, and therefore subject to 
cost inflation related to the fall in the value of the pound, and the retail 
chain already sourced about as much UK product as it possibly could. But he 
said the retailer was already looking at alternative sources of supply in order 
to offset cost rises.

“Our job is to do everything we can in the supply chain to mitigate those cost 
price rises for our customers,” Coupe said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F957541e52fe6c5df0f74dc44f37107e5aff2eb41%2F0_4_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sainsbury%E2%80%99s%20boss%20says%20suppliers%20should%20take%20hit%20over%20falling%20pound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sainsbury%E2%80%99s%20boss%20says%20suppliers%20should%20take%20hit%20over%20falling%20pound&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fsainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F957541e52fe6c5df0f74dc44f37107e5aff2eb41%2F0_4_3228_1937%2F3228.jpg>
 Sainsbury’s chief executive Mike Coupe. Photograph: Suzanne Plunkett/Reuters 
The UK’s second biggest supermarket group completed a £1.4bn takeover of Home 
Retail Group 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/sainsburys-gets-all-clear-to-buy-argos>
, which owns Argos, in September. Sainsbury’s has opened 22 Argos digital 
stores in its supermarkets and plans to have 30 in place by Christmas. Its 
purchase ofHome Retail <https://www.theguardian.com/business/homeretailgroup> 
was part of a push to sell a broader range of products in an increasingly 
competitive grocery market.

It wants to have 250 Argos stores in Sainsbury’s outlets in three years’ time, 
although Coupe would not say how many of those will be replacements for high 
street catalogue shops. Of the 28 that will be open in Sainsbury’s by Christmas 
two will be replacements – Oldham and Plymouth.

Sainsbury’s also plans to open three more supermarkets and more than 20 
convenience stores despite the difficulties in the grocery market.

The retailer said it was on track to deliver £500m of cost reductions by the 
end of 2017-18, and had also identified another £500m of cost savings that 
could be realised over three years from 2018.

Consumers are likely to face rising food prices in the coming months if 
supermarkets start to pass on the higher cost of imported goods to customers. 
Last month, Tesco became embroiled in arow with the supplier Unilever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/12/tesco-running-low-key-unilever-brands-price-row-supplier-supermarket-falling-pound>
 after the maker of brands including Marmite and Persil demanded an 
across-the-board 10% rise in prices in light of the devaluation of the pound.
 