
Sainsbury’s is to fight back against Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/amazon> with a one-hour grocery 
delivery service in London.

The supermarket, which recently bought Argos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/01/home-retail-backs-sainsburys-argos-takeover-bid>
 as part of its efforts to see off the American online retail specialist, has 
developed an app called Chop Chop, through which shoppers can order up to 20 
items to be delivered from a local store within an hour.

Since June, Sainsbury’s has been testing the service in Wandsworth, south 
London, with groceries delivered Deliveroo-style using bicycles. It is now 
being extended across south-west and central London areas including Chelsea, 
Westminster, Fulham, Battersea, Southwark, Wandsworth and Wimbledon.

The supermarket first offered a delivery service by bicycle more than 130 
years ago, but the latest effort is part of its bid to fight back against the 
encroachment of a very modern phenomenon.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bc92a5bf51c20e5ce4a54e9411b3bf0bf7ac5d5%2F0_48_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sainsbury's%20one-hour%20delivery%20service%20takes%20on%20Amazon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sainsbury%27s%20one-hour%20delivery%20service%20takes%20on%20Amazon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0bc92a5bf51c20e5ce4a54e9411b3bf0bf7ac5d5%2F0_48_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
 Harry Webb, a delivery boy for Sainsbury’s, with his tricycle in 1913. 
Photograph: Sainsbury's 
Amazon began offering frozen and chilled foods via its Prime Now one-hour 
delivery service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/29/amazon-one-hour-delivery-service-prime-now-food-grocery>
in Birmingham nearly a year ago, and now offers fruit and vegetables for 
one-hour delivery in a number of cities including London, Glasgow, Manchester 
and Liverpool.

In June, Amazon launched its Fresh grocery delivery service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
, which offers fresh fruit, vegetables and meat as well as other kitchen 
cupboard staples, in London and Surrey. It kicked off the service after
Morrisons agreed to supply Amazon with groceries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/29/amazon-enters-fresh-food-market-with-morrisons-deal>
.


Amazon starts UK fresh food delivery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/09/amazon-starts-uk-fresh-food-delivery>
The arrival of Amazon has prompted the major supermarkets to up their game by 
trialling new delivery services.

Sainsbury’s is also testing a same-day delivery service in Streatham and 
Richmond in London, and Brookwood in Surrey. Customers who order by 12 noon can 
get their shopping delivered within six hours. Tesco is also trialling same-day 
delivery in a few locations.

Sainsbury’s said it had recruited a team of 40 cyclists and grocery pickers, 
all direct employees, to support its one-hour delivery service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04a767655a68fc67df244e3992e58fc746bc4c5%2F0_89_4696_2817%2F4696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sainsbury's%20one-hour%20delivery%20service%20takes%20on%20Amazon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sainsbury%27s%20one-hour%20delivery%20service%20takes%20on%20Amazon&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsainsburys-one-hour-delivery-takes-on-amazon-bikes-london%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb04a767655a68fc67df244e3992e58fc746bc4c5%2F0_89_4696_2817%2F4696.jpg>
 A woman receives her groceries ordered through the Sainsbury’s Chop Chop app. 
Photograph: Graham Flack/Sainsbury's 
Orders will be picked by Sainsbury’s staff in either the Wandsworth or Pimlico 
stores and customers pay via the app, which they can also use to track their 
delivery. If a product isn’t in stock, the store will call the customer to ask 
if they want a substitute item.

Jon Rudoe, Sainsbury’s director of digital and technology, said: “Speed of 
delivery is important to some customers, so we have brought back our bicycle 
service to test demand further.

“In Wandsworth, customers are using the new one-hour delivery service to buy 
forgotten items, or emergency goods when they cannot leave their home or have 
invited guests on the spur of the moment.

 “If it proves popular, we might introduce it to other areas of London. It 
complements our same-day delivery service, which is available at selected 
London postcodes through our online groceries service.”
 