
Prosecutors investigating a corruption scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
 that has plungedSouth Korea <https://www.theguardian.com/world/south-korea> 
into its biggest political crisis in decades are seeking a warrant for the 
arrest of the acting head of Samsung, the country’s most powerful conglomerate, 
on bribery charges.

Special prosecutors alleged that Jay Y Lee 
<http://www.forbes.com/profile/jay-y-lee/>, heir apparent to the Samsung group, 
had paid bribes totalling more than $36m (£30m) to Choi Soon-sil, a longtime 
friend of the country’simpeached president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/south-koreas-parliament-votes-to-impeach-president-park-geun-hye>
,Park Geun-hye <https://www.theguardian.com/world/park-geun-hye>, in return for 
business favours.

“The special prosecutor’s office, in making this decision to seek an arrest 
warrant, determined that while the country’s economic conditions are important, 
upholding justice takes precedence,” Lee Kyu-chul, a spokesman for the office, 
told reporters on Monday.

South Korea scandal explained: six key points on the cronyism claims engulfing 
the president
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/02/south-korea-explainer-park-guen-hye-six-key-points-scandal-choi-soon-sil>
The involvement of the third-generation leader of South Korea’s richest chaebol
 – or family-run conglomerate – comes days after Park denied any wrongdoing 
over allegations that Choi fraudulently received tens of millions of dollars 
from South Korean companies, includingSamsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung>, for two foundations she 
operated.

Lee, 48, who became the de facto head of the Samsung 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/samsung> group after his father, Lee 
Kun-hee, suffered a heart attack in 2014, was also accused of embezzlement and 
perjury in the prosecution’s application for an arrest warrant.

Seoul’s central district court will hold a hearing on Wednesday morning to 
decide whether to approve the prosecutors’ request.

Lee is suspected of paying millions of dollars in bribes to a business and two 
foundations run by Choi, whose alleged secretive role at the apex of the South 
Korean administration has brought Park’sunpopular presidency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/choi-gate-south-korean-presidents-approval-rating-tanks-at-4>
 to the brink of collapse.

Park was impeached in early December, with the country’s constitutional court 
due to rule on the impeachment vote’s validity by June. If it upholds the vote, 
Park will immediately leave office and new presidential elections will be held 
within two months.

Lee was questioned for 22 hours at the end of last week, as he became the 
latest high-profile name to be sucked into a corruption scandal that could see 
Park become South Korea’s first democratically elected president to be forced 
out of office.

Prosecutors are trying to establish if the money Samsung paid Choi was 
connected to a 2015 decision by the National Pension Service (NPS) to approve a 
controversial $8bn merger of two Samsung group affiliates.

The NPS supported the merger of Samsung C&T and Cheil Industries even though 
it was expected to create losses for the pension fund, according to theKorea 
Times <http://www.koreatimes.co.kr/www/news/nation/2017/01/116_222141.html>. 
The merger was intended to enable Lee to increase his stake in the Samsung 
group and clear the way for a smooth transfer of power from his ailing father.

The chairman of the NPS, Moon Hyung-pyo, was arrested last month after he 
admitted ordering the fund – the world’s third biggest – to support the merger. 
At the time, Moon was head of the health ministry, which oversees the NPS.

The prosecutors’ indictment against Moon on charges of abuse of power and 
false testimony alleges that Park ordered him to realise the merger.

Samsung has acknowledged providing funds to the three institutions but on 
Monday it denied that Lee had paid bribes to facilitate the merger.

“It is difficult to understand the special prosecution’s decision,” the firm 
said in a statement. “We cannot accept the special prosecutors’ argument that 
there were unlawful favours related to the merger or the leadership succession.”

Lee’s possible prosecution is a fresh source of embarrassment for Samsung, 
whose reputation has already been damaged by fire accidents involving its faulty
Galaxy Note 7 <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/galaxy-note-7> smartphone.

“The public demand that chaebol, especially Samsung, should not be an 
exception and that everyone should be equal before laws has become stronger,” 
said Kim Sang-jo, executive director of Solidarity for Economic Reform, a 
private business watchdog. “Prosecutors and judicial institutions cannot ignore 
the huge pressure from the public.”

Park, 64, is still president but has ceded her powers to an acting leader 
while the constitutional court deliberates over her impeachment.

She has repeatedly apologised for acting “naively” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/04/tearful-south-korean-president-says-scandal-of-friends-influence-is-all-my-fault>
 over her relationship with Choi, but denies seeking any personal gain.

Earlier this month, in her first public appearance since being impeached, Park 
dismissed allegations that she and Choi colluded to pressure businesses into 
contributing to the latter’s non-profit foundations as“fabrication and 
falsehood” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/01/park-geun-hye-impeached-south-korea-president-corruption-allegations-fabrication>
. She added that she had been “set up” over claims that she ordered the 
government to support the Samsung merger.

Choi, 60, is suspected of using large sums paid by Samsung to fund her 
daughter’s equestrian training 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/daughter-of-south-koreas-female-rasputin-arrested-in-denmark>
 in Germany.

Choi, who is facing charges of fraud and abuse of power, repeated her denials 
of any wrongdoing during an appearance at the constitutional court on Monday. 
“Even if I knew, I could not have passed on any information because I have no 
knowledge about mergers or hedge funds, anything like that, in the first 
place,” she told the court.

She is also accused of meddling in state affairs, including advising Park on 
economic policy and South Korea’s relations withNorth Korea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/north-korea>.

Choi admitted she had access to a former presidential aide’s email address 
containing official documents, but insisted that she only ever read Park’s 
speeches to gauge their “emotional expression”. She described the president, 
whom she has known for 40 years, as “a person without ulterior motives”.

The two first met in the 1970s after the death of Park’s mother during an 
assassination attempt on her father, Park Chung-hee, who was then South Korea’s 
president. Choi’s father, the leader of shady religious cult, emerged as Park’s 
mentor after Park Chung-hee was assassinated by his head of intelligence in 
1979.

The former UN secretary general, Ban Ki-moon, is among those rumoured to be 
preparing to run for the presidential Blue House if the constitutional court 
upholds Park’s impeachment and ends her presidency several months shy of her 
full five-year term.

Ban currently trails former opposition party leader Moon Jae-in as favourite 
to replace Park, according to a poll published on Monday.






 