
Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, has hailed a “glorious victory” after senior 
diplomats in Vienna formally announced the lifting of sanctions against the 
country following confirmations from the UN that Tehran had fulfilled its 
obligations under last year’s nuclear accord.

A final report by the International Atomic Energy Agency released late on 
Saturday triggered the much anticipated announcement of “Implementation Day”, 
which putsIran <https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran> on the brink of an 
extraordinary transformation, reconnecting it to the global economy.

 “Today we have achieved Implementation Day of the joint comprehensive plan of 
action,” Iran’s foreign minister, Mohammad Javad Zarif, and the EU foreign 
policy chief, Federica Mogherini, said in a joint statement read at the UN in 
the Austrian capital in front of the world media.

The US secretary of state, John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/john-kerry> – who was also in Vienna, said 
the sanctions termination provisions of Iran’s landmark nuclear agreement were 
now in effect. Barack Obama delegated authority to Kerry to make the 
determination. At the same time, all nuclear-related sanctions imposed by the 
EU and the UN were also lifted.

Freed journalist Jason Rezaian sought to improve Iran's image in the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jan/16/jason-rezaian-freed-journalist-iran-profile>
The move came after a remarkable day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-releases-washington-post-journalist-jason-rezaian>
 that saw the release of four dual nationals and a teenage student in a 
prisoner swap with the US. They included the Washington Post journalist Jason 
Rezaian, who had been held on charges of spying for over a year.

The Iranian-Americans were released in exchange for seven Iranian nationals 
held in US prisons, apparently for violating sanctions. The timing of the 
prisoner swap suggests that the issue had been discussed on the sidelines of 
the nuclear talks, despite denial from both sides.

Iran’s president, Hassan Rouhani, who is due to deliver a live TV address on 
Sunday, <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ImplementationDay?src=hash>reacted on 
Twitter by calling for a push for global peace.
Javad Zarif (@JZarif) 
#ImplementationDay <https://twitter.com/hashtag/ImplementationDay?src=hash>, 
it’s now time for all—especially Muslim nations—to join hands and rid the world 
of violent extremism. Iran is ready.
 <https://twitter.com/JZarif/status/688273623191162880> January 16, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/JZarif/status/688273623191162880> 
Kerry, meanwhile, said the American prisoners “should be on their way home”. 
“I am very happy to say, as we speak, we have received confirmation that five 
Americans that have been unjustly detained in Iran have been released,” he said 
in a statement. “They should be on their way home to their families before 
long.”

The UN chief, Ban Ki-moon, welcomed the implementation of the nuclear accord 
and said: “This achievement demonstrates that international proliferation 
concerns are best addressed through dialogue and patient diplomacy.”

Earlier in the day, Mohammad Javad Zarif, Iran’s foreign minister, had hailed 
the milestone as “a good day” for Iran and for the international community. In 
the words of a report by leading Russian investment firm Renaissance Capital, 
Iran is “the last remaining sizable global economy that has been cut off from 
international capital to reopen”.

The UK’s foreign secretary, Philip Hammond, said: “The nuclear deal with Iran, 
in which Britain played a major role, makes the Middle East and the wider world 
a safer place. Years of patient and persistent diplomacy, and difficult 
technical work, have borne fruit as we now implement the deal.

 “There were many sceptics who said Iran would never deliver on its side of 
the bargain, but the independent International Atomic Energy Agency has said 
they have. Tonnes of uranium have been shipped out of Iran, thousands of 
centrifuges have been taken out of use and the core has been removed from the 
Arak reactor. Iran’s nuclear programme has been substantially rolled back, in 
return for the lifting of sanctions and the economic benefits that will bring.

 “The UK has played a central role, and I hope British businesses seize the 
opportunities available to them through the phased lifting of sanctions on 
Iran. The future is as important as the landmark we’ve reached today.”

Iran releases Washington Post journalist Jason Rezaian in prisoner swap with US
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-releases-washington-post-journalist-jason-rezaian>
Rouhani particularly wants his people to feel the impact of the nuclear deal 
in their everyday livesbefore parliamentary elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/08/iran-president-hassan-rouhani-post-sanctions-era-new-year>
 in February.

Iranian banks will soon re-establish connections with the European financial 
system, and private firms can now pursue business opportunities without fear of 
western punishment. About $30bn (£21bn) of a total of $100bn in frozen assets 
will be released to Iran imminently.

The lifting of sanctions, which will include an end to an EU embargo on 
imports of Iranian oil, will also affect the global oil market, as Tehran is 
expected to immediately add almost half a million barrels per day to crude 
exports. This is likely to add to downward pressure on an oil price that is 
already plummeting due to oversupply.

The Mehr news agency said a group of oil executives from Total and Shell were 
in Tehran on Saturday for talks with Iranian officials on the sidelines of an 
oil conference marking the 60th anniversary of the national Iranian tanker 
company. Iran has already unveiled a set of new lucrative oil contracts worth 
tens of billions of dollars to lure foreign investment.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8e622f1849cbc3609768726fed20387e5bd904a%2F1329_534_2838_1706%2F2838.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sanctions%20against%20Iran%20lifted%20after%20compliance%20with%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sanctions%20against%20Iran%20lifted%20after%20compliance%20with%20nuclear%20deal&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fjan%2F16%2Fsanctions-against-iran-to-be-lifted-after-compliance-with-nuclear-deal%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8e622f1849cbc3609768726fed20387e5bd904a%2F1329_534_2838_1706%2F2838.jpg>
 Philip Hammond said the deal has made the world a safer place. Photograph: Ray 
Tang/REX 
The mood in Tehran is upbeat, but many remain cautious 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/15/people-are-desperate-to-see-change-tehran>
. The index of the Tehran stock market rose to its highest level in 18 months 
on Saturday morning. Reuters reported that as many as 13 Iranian crude carriers 
were on course to be fully loaded and prepared to leave for India and Europe. 
President Barack Obama on Friday night also lifted the ban on the sale of 
passenger planes to Iran, a decades-long restriction that resulted in Iran’s 
fleet being very old, prone to accidents and faults.

Zarif said: “This is a very good day for the Iranian people … a very good day 
for the region. Our region will be relieved of the shadow of an unnecessary 
conflict that could have caused worry. This is also a good day for the world. 
Today is a day when we prove to the world that threats, sanctions, 
intimidation, pressure don’t work; respect works.


“Through respect, through dialogue, through negotiations, we can in fact reach 
mutually acceptable solutions, implement mutually acceptable solutions, prove 
that the naysayers were always wrong, and therefore move towards a world in 
which diplomacy – not force, not pressure – will prevail.”

The west has already put in place the legislation for lifting sanctions, 
meaning that it is not subject to further paperwork.


European companies will be able to resume business with Iran, but US companies 
are still hampered by terrorism, human rights and ballistic missile-related 
sanctions that will remain in place. Foreign companies dealing with Iran will 
however no longer be punished by the US.


“Implementation Day is a demonstration of how persistent, high-level 
engagement is a critical ingredient for successful policies between Iran and 
the international community,” said Reza Marashi of the National Iranian 
American Council, who followed the nuclear talks closely.

Iran celebrates lifting of sanctions but many caveats remain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/16/iran-celebrates-lifting-of-sanctions-but-many-caveats-remain>
He said direct diplomacy between Kerry and Zarif “was the linchpin of this 
peaceful outcome. In the absence of US-Iran dialogue, accidents such as [the 
recentcapture of US sailors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/13/iran-releases-us-navy-boat-crews-who-entered-territorial-waters-state-tv>
] could have quickly escalated. Thanks to the Iran nuclear deal, a sustained 
diplomatic channel now exists to de-escalate. The entire Middle East will 
benefit if this is the new normal”.

Hossein Rassam, a London-based Iranian analyst, said the removal of sanctions 
would bring two years of intensive diplomacy to fruition. “The significance of 
the post-implemenation day period is that sectors of the Iranian economy, such 
as trade and oil, can, after many years, experience relative normalcy,” he said.

John Forrest, head of international trade in London at the law firm DLA Piper, 
said: “As a significant and diverse emerging market, Iran presents substantial 
opportunities for European businesses” – particularly those in the energy 
sector, manufacturing, retail, consumer goods, food and drink, and financial 
institutions and services.

“From a practical perspective, it remains to be seen whether EU sanction 
relief will be held back should banks continue to take a cautious approach to 
processing Iranian payment transactions,” he said.

Forrest also said ongoing human rights and terrorism-related sanctions in the 
US would have an effect. “While the EU piece of the puzzle is clear, as it has 
already published relevant legislation amending existing sanctions measures to 
pave the way for early EU termination, there remains a lack of clarity with 
regards to the US.”
 