
The UK payment protection insurance (PPI) scandal is continuing to haunt major 
banks after Santander set aside another £450m to pay compensation to customers 
who were mis-sold.


The top up to the provision – the Spanish bank’s first for a year – came as 
Royal Bank of Scotlandadded another £500m to its PPI compensation fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/rbs-royal-bank-scotland-chief-executive-announces-clean-up>
 and drove the UK arm of Santander to a fourth quarter loss of £82m.

RBS takes £2.5bn hit to profits as chief executive announces bank 'clean-up'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/rbs-royal-bank-scotland-chief-executive-announces-clean-up>
Wednesday’s PPI charge knocked the profits of the wider Santander group, which 
has major operations in its home market and Brazil,, but it is expected to be 
the bank’s final PPI provision. Santander has now set aside £1.5bn for PPI, 
though its bill is lower than rivals such as Lloyds Banking Group,which has set 
aside more than £13bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jul/31/ppi-bill-rises-again-at-lloyds>
.

The Financial Conduct Authority is consulting on a proposed 2018 deadline for 
PPI claims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/ppi-2018-deadline-fca-proposal>
 and on how to handle any breaches of the Consumer Credit Act that may have 
taken place during the sales process, as a result ofa case known as Plevin v 
Paragon Personal Finance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/may/27/banks-face-bigger-ppi-mis-selling-bill-regulator-compensation-rules-fca-supreme-court>
.

The UK arm of Santander reported a slight fall in 2015 profits from £1.4bn to 
£1.3bn as a result of the PPI charge. The group’s overall profits were up 3% to 
nearly €6bn (£4.5bn).

Nathan Bostock, the chief executive of the UK arm, did not dampen speculation 
that the bank is interested inbuying the hundreds of branches RBS must sell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/16/santander-royal-bank-scotland-bid-rbs-branch-takeover-williams-glyn>
 to meet requirements set out by the EU following its taxpayer bailout in 2008.

He also admitted that new rules coming into force in the UK in 2019 could 
require customers to receive new sort codes for their accounts. This is a 
result of ringfencing rules –devised by Sir John Vickers in his 2011 review of 
banking 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/sep/12/vickers-report-banks-given-until-2019>
 – that force financial institutions to separate their high street operations 
from any riskier lending and investment businesses.

Banks in the UK have to submit plans for how they will comply with these rules 
to the Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority by Friday.

As Santander raises its fees, check that 123 still adds up
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/16/santander-raises-fees-rivals-best-alternatives>
Bostock said: “In terms of banking reform, we are close to submitting our 
near-final plans on ringfencing and remain in constructive dialogue with the 
PRA.

“We anticipate that the UK economy will remain supportive of our business in 
2016, but are mindful of the recent market volatility from macro/geopolitical 
factors, and that our future earnings will be impacted by the bank corporation 
tax surcharge.”

Santander has amassed its business in the UK by buying Abbey National, 
Alliance & Leicester and the parts of Bradford & Bingleynot nationalised during 
the 2008 crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2008/sep/29/bradfordbingley.banking7>. It 
has been trying to compete with the big four of Lloyds, RBS, Barclays and HSBC 
through its 123 account, but earlier this month itasked customers to pay a 
higher monthly charge of £5 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/08/santander-raises-monthly-charge-popular-account-123>
.

Bostock said the bank was not achieving all its targets because interest rates 
had stayed low for longer than expected.
 