
The month of August is when Edinburgh’s classical magnificence ought to be 
regarded in its best light. During those long hours when daylight slowly and 
reluctantly gives way to the night is the best time to admire Edinburgh Castle 
and the Calton Hill and some of its Hellenic masterpieces. In August, though, 
Edinburgh becomes captive to its festivals and the city, and everything in it 
that is solid and fastened down, seems to move and sway with the multitudes. 
This is not a time to observe the beauty ofEdinburgh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/edinburgh>.

Perhaps that’s why it seemed appropriate that Alexander Stoddart, Her 
Majesty’s Sculptor in Ordinary for Scotland 
<http://www.adamsmith.org/blog/miscellaneous/alexander-stoddart-her-majesty-s-sculptor-in-ordinary-in-scotland>
, chose the first day of September to reveal a new work. Stoddart’s sculptures 
are crafted in the neoclassical tradition and those that he has already made 
for the city have helped to maintain its beauty by paying homage to its past. 
His latest statue is ofWilliam Playfai 
<http://www.scotsman.com/news/new-william-henry-playfair-statue-officially-unveiled-1-4218992>
r, the great architect who did more than any other to make Edinburgh the Athens 
of the north. At the statue’s unveiling, outside the National Museum of 
Scotland, Stoddart gently and eloquently expressed a de profundis for 
Edinburgh’s classical character. “Peace and rest,” he said, “are promulgated by 
classical buildings. Modernism, on the other hand, likes conflict and action. 
Like all dynamic creeds, it likes nothing better than a fire in a planned city. 
It gives the potential for perpetual revolution.”

Some of Edinburgh’s planners and civic architects, though, seem bent on a 
process that would turn Athens into downtown Tirana during the Hoxha years. The 
eastern end of Princes Street and the top of Leith Walk, which ought to serve 
as antechambers before the glories of Calton Hill, have instead been disfigured 
by a brutalism that makes Cumbernauld look like Lisbon.

The long-overdue demise of the unlovely St James Centre 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-edinburgh-east-fife-35723838> presented 
the ideal opportunity to begin a process of repair. Instead, the city’s 
planners and architects sought to embed further their dismal credo and now a 
bizarre luxury hotel complex will soon begin to take shape. On the drawing 
board, it looks like a giant sore thumb loosely wrapped in bandages. Only 
recently were Edinburgh’s panjandrums reluctantly persuaded to ditch plans that 
would have turnedThomas Hamilton’s neoclassical Royal High school in Calton Hill
 <http://www.edinburgharchitecture.co.uk/royal-high-school> into another luxury 
hotel.

This would have made it look from afar as if a giant pair of Mickey Mouse ears 
had been added to the building. Perversely, this would have been a fitting 
monument to a Mickey Mouse council. And although the plans were dropped the 
damage to Edinburgh’s reputation has been incalculable. “What else might they 
do if we don’t keep a close eye on them?” we were asking ourselves. It would 
take a few volumes to explain the chicanery and sheer, unadulterated vandalism 
of the Caltongate, the glass-and-stone portable building in the Old Town. 
Imagine the Sex Pistols playingSwan Lake and you begin to get a sense of the 
effect.

Sandy Stoddart was scathing on Wednesday about the recent attempted 
desecration of the city’s architectural heritage. He said: “We mustn’t 
underestimate how lucky we are to be relatively unscathed. We have to guard 
against the consistent and wilful desecration of these things.”

It’s good to see that Stoddart gets it and can convey in simple terms why all 
of this stuff matters. This is not a debate reserved only for a cultural elite 
and their languid preferences. It concerns the rest of us too and acutely so. 
For, until the super-rich find a way of restricting the right of access to 
these buildings and the avenues on which they stand, their beauty remains a 
free gift that is handed down through generations for all the children of the 
city, both high and low.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fsave-scottish-jewels-from-barbarians-grasp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20663afd86a15b1f828eff46ea3b86d3db8c00f8%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Save%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20jewels%20from%20the%20barbarians%E2%80%99%20grasp%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fsave-scottish-jewels-from-barbarians-grasp%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Save%20Scotland%E2%80%99s%20jewels%20from%20the%20barbarians%E2%80%99%20grasp%20%7C%20Kevin%20McKenna&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F04%2Fsave-scottish-jewels-from-barbarians-grasp%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F20663afd86a15b1f828eff46ea3b86d3db8c00f8%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 National treasure: the rear of Provand’s Lordship, built in 1471, the oldest 
house in Glasgow. Photograph: Alamy 
In Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow>, whose civic buildings 
don’t quite possess the majesty of Edinburgh’s finest, there is nonetheless 
sufficient beauty in its built heritage to make those of us who live and work 
here proud. Its Georgian architecture running upwards from the city centre 
through the grid network of its big streets is among the finest in Europe and 
the intricate stonework on some of its office buildings can make you stay a 
little longer and reduce the pace of your life. As Sandy Stoddart said: “Peace 
and rest are promulgated by classical buildings.” In places and among people 
where peace and rest are hard to come by and where, instead, there is conflict 
and squalor these buildings possess even more value.

One of Glasgow’s most historic thoroughfares is the old High Street, which 
possesses some of the city’s oldest built heritage. Here is whereProvand’s 
Lordship 
<http://www.glasgowlife.org.uk/museums/provands-lordship/pages/default.aspx> 
resides; here, too, the splendour of Glasgow Cathedral, standing in front of 
the magnificent necropolis. As this old street winds down towards Glasgow Cross 
the old buildings on either side convey the essence and soul of the city. This 
street, though, has become a monument to civic neglect that is every bit as 
distressing as the Edinburgh council’s wrecking ball in the east. In 
desperation at the plight of the shops that keep some of these buildings alive 
theHigh Street Merchants’ Association 
<http://www.eveningtimes.co.uk/news/13255240.City_centre_traders__We_re_being_driven_out/>
 has been formed to raise awareness of the slow death of one of Glasgow’s 
oldest streets.

Pictures collected by shopkeepers up and down the high street paint a vivid 
but unedifying picture of filth with rot and raw sewage running through many 
premises. The To Let signs that now dominate this place make it seem like a 
natural extension to “City of the Dead” behind the cathedral. The council will 
argue that it has more pressing concerns with the publication of the latest 
despairing figures from theScottish Index of Multiple Deprivation 
<http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Statistics/SIMD>. Glasgow’s High Street is where a 
journey into the city’s East End begins. Perhaps the council wants to let this 
old street be a fitting signpost to the poverty and ill health that lies 
beyond. If so, they are making a good job of it.

Like Edinburgh’s grand buildings, the High Street belongs to the citizens. It 
would be grand to seize possession of them and divert the rents into making the 
old buildings lovely once more.
 