
The amount of cash that will be protected for savers in banks and building 
societies that go bust is likely to be raised to £85,000 because of the slump 
in the value of the pound since the vote to leave the UK.

The £10,000 rise is required to keep the UK in line with an EU-wide deposit 
protection limit of €100,000.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
said the situation was absurd and causing uncertainty for savers. “Brexit 
should give the UK the opportunity to set its own level of protection,” said 
Tyrie. “We should take it.”

The limit was cut to £75,000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/jul/03/bank-of-england-cuts-savings-protection-euro-crisis>
 in July 2015, when sterling was stronger, to keep the UK banking system in 
step with the rest of the EU. The measure was introduced after the banking 
crisis to prevent savers moving their money across borders to chase the highest 
level of protection, as was the case whenIreland offered more generous 
insurance during the height of the crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2008/oct/02/alistairdarling.ireland> in 
October 2008.

In the UK, the savings guarantee is provided by the Financial Services 
Compensation Scheme (FSCS), which in turn is funded by the financial services 
industry.

Take care, FSCS changes mean your savings aren’t as protected as they were
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/02/fscs-changes-savings-protected-compensation-rules-changed>
Each country in the EU but not using the euro is obliged to review its limit 
every five years, but is allowed to make changes in the light of unforeseen 
events. Following the fall in the pound over the summer, the Bank of England’s 
Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) isconsulting on plans to bring the limit 
back up to £85,000 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/pra/Pages/publications/cp/2016/cp4116.aspx>, 
with effect from 30 January 2017.

“Taking into consideration the developments in financial markets following the 
UK’s referendum vote to leave theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> on 23 June 2016, including with respect 
to the [pound-euro] exchange rate, the PRA considers that a structural shift in 
the exchange rate has occurred,” the Bank said. “These events were unforeseen 
when the UK limit was reduced in 2015.”

The Bank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> appears to be 
indicating that devaluation of sterling is for the long-term. Since the 
surprise result of the 23 June referendum, sterling has plunged to 30-year lows 
against the dollar. In terms of euros, the pound was was trading at €1.30 
before result of the vote, and now trades at around €1.17.

Savings <https://www.theguardian.com/money/savings> providers will be given 
until 30 June 2017 to update their systems and promotional material such as 
adverts and letters to customers.

Danny Cox, chartered financial planner at the independent financial advisor 
Hargreaves Lansdown, said: “Setting the level of deposit protection for UK 
savers based on the exchange rate from a foreign currency on a seemingly random 
date has never made much sense.”

He said the popularity of government-backed National Savings & Investments 
products showed how important security was to people. “Resetting theFSCS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/fscs> limit back to £85,000 sets a more 
positive tone for savers,” he added.

The FSCS protects customers of banks, building societies and credit unions 
that collapse. The queues outside branches ofNorthern Rock 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/business/2012/aug/07/credit-crunch-boom-bust-timeline>
 in 2007 forced policymakers to take action on deposit protection. The Labour 
government moved toguarantee 100% of £35,000 of savings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2007/oct/01/politics.money>, replacing a 
tiered system of protection. It was increased to £50,000 during the 2008 
banking crisis and £85,000 at the end of 2010.

The plan to increase the protection level back to £85,000 will benefit about 
500,000 savers and will mean around 98% of customers are protected. Just under 
1m savings accounts hold more than the top limit of £85,000.

“Arguably the UK is obliged to make an early adjustment under the relevant EU 
directive, on account of the post-referendum adjustment in the exchange rate, 
but there is little doubt that putting the level of financial protection back 
to its pre-2015 sterling level of £85,000 serves the UK’s domestic agenda,” 
said Paul Edmondson, head of financial services at the law firm CMS.
 