
Best-buy savings accounts are disappearing rapidly ahead of the expected cut 
to base rate by the Bank of England on Thursday.


Data provider Moneyfacts said that in July 13 best buy savings deals were 
withdrawn from the market and have yet to be replaced.

Popular deals that have disappeared include a three-year bond from Saga, 
paying interest at 1.8%, and one- and two-year Isas and bonds from Virgin 
Money. The Post Office also removed its top-paying three-year bond from sale on 
Friday.

There is widespread anticipation in the City that the Bank of England will 
make itsfirst cut to base rate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/31/uk-interest-rates-set-to-be-cut-bank-of-england-growth-forecasts>
 since 2009 this Thursday, cutting the cost of borrowing from its current level 
of 0.5% to a new record low of 0.25%.

Savers will be strongly affected, while mortgage borrowers are likely to 
benefit.

Rachel Springall of Moneyfacts.co.uk said: “Decent savings deals are facing 
slaughter: repetitive cuts are just not practical for all providers to 
continue, so the only option left to limit the amount of cash coming in is to 
withdraw the best deals entirely and not replace them.

 “Small providers that would have never envisaged being market-leaders are 
slowly finding themselves near the top of the market, due to other providers 
falling out of the best buys. This has resulted in a vicious cycle of rate 
reductions so that they can move to a more mid-market position, or indeed 
withdrawing the deal entirely due to countless applicants.”

Among the small building societies to withdraw best buy deals in recent weeks 
are the Buckinghamshire, the Beverly and the National Counties.

 “Withdrawing the best buys is only going to cause panic among savers 
struggling to get a decent return, so it is unlikely we’re going to see an end 
to this mass exit from the best buys anytime soon,” said Springall.

But the flipside to poor savings rates is better deals for borrowers. 
Moneyfacts said the average interest rate on a two-year fixed rate mortgage has 
dropped to a new low of 2.48% from 2.68% a year ago.

The MPC held off reducing official borrowing costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/14/bank-of-england-leaves-uk-interest-rates-on-hold-at-05>
 in July. However, the committee has dropped heavy hints that it will act this 
week when fresh forecasts for the economy are published. Mark Carney, the 
Bank’s governor, warned before the referendum that voting to leavecould push 
Britain into a recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/12/bank-of-england-keeps-interest-rates-on-hold-as-brexit-fears-bite>
.

The Bank’s forecasts are expected to include an unprecedented downgrade of the 
prospects for the British economy. In May’s inflation report, it forecast that 
the economy would grow by 2.3% this year, but economists believe this could now 
be slashed to less than 1%, which would be the largest downgrade in the Bank’s 
forecasts between inflation reportssince it became independent in 1997 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1997/may/07/economy.uk>.
 