
There was an omission in your article on the public services in 2017 (Society, 
4 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/society-2017-prisons-homelessness-welfare-reforms-nhs-social-care>
): there was no mention of education. Yet the government’s long-awaited 
announcement of itsnational funding formula 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/national-funding-formula-the-winners-and-losers-by-local-authority-area/>
 for schools has left head teachers and politicians reeling. The NUT and ATL 
were accused by the Department for Education of scaremongering when we 
predicted losses in November through ourSchool Cuts website 
<http://www.schoolcuts.org.uk/#/>. But far from scaremongering, the reality is 
worse than we predicted – 98% of schools will have their per-pupil funding cut, 
with an average loss per primary pupil of £339, and £477 per secondary pupil. 
Such is the scale of the problem that even Conservative MPs are now waking up 
to the fact that schools in their constituencies will suffer unmanageable cuts.

Balancing the books has become the worst aspect of many heads’ jobs. Begging 
letters to parents for equipment, repairs and resources are common. School 
staff posts are being left unfilled. Class sizes are increasing and the 
curriculum is being pared back to the basics, as arts and vocational subjects 
are being lost. No funding system for schools can be fair unless funding levels 
are sufficient. The education secretary, Justine Greening, has no option but to 
insist that our schools are funded to a level where they can operate 
effectively. Parents, children and young people deserve nothing less.
Kevin Courtney General secretary, National Union of Teachers, Mary Bousted 
General secretary, Association of Teachers and Lecturers

• It is surprising but prescient that you have not included education in your 
round-up of the challenges facing the public sector. With the increasing 
privatisation through academies and free schools and the siphoning of public 
money into corporations via multi-academy trusts, sadly – and appallingly – 
this omission makes sense. And children are the losers.
Fiona Carnie
Bath

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 