
The government has frequently repeated its commitment to protecting funding 
for schools and to improving the life chances of disadvantaged pupils. So one 
headteacher in a deprived part of the country was shocked, a fortnight ago, to 
find a £250,000 hole in her budget.

After some frantic digging, Jane Gardiner (not her real name) discovered that 
the shortfall was the result of changes to funding tied to theEnglish Indices 
of Deprivation [pdf] 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/465791/English_Indices_of_Deprivation_2015_-_Statistical_Release.pdf>
, which plot the poorest neighbourhoods in the country. These were updated in 
September last year. Based on the indices, extra money is paid by local 
authorities to schools for the pupils who live in the poorest postcodes. This 
is in addition to thepupil premium 
<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/pupil-premium-information-for-schools-and-alternative-provision-settings>
, which comes from central government.

“My pupils had not all moved to leafy areas, but some of them were now 
regarded as less deprived than before, I can’t think why,” she says.

The change, says Gardiner, means that, although her urban school in south-west 
England continues to serve one of the most deprived neighbourhoods in the 
country, fewer pupils are now eligible for the highest bands of deprivation 
money.

A quarter of a million pounds is not a shortfall that can be patched. Her 
budget pressures now mean 12 members of staff will have to go. Half are jobs 
that will not be advertised when people leave, including two assistant 
headships; the other half will be redundancies including a teacher, reading 
assistants for primary children, a family link worker, an education welfare 
officer and a full-time counsellor whom Gardiner employed to support the mental 
health of vulnerable pupils. All must be gone by the end of the summer term.

“It feels horrible,” Gardiner says. “Some of my kids have serious mental 
health issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/27/this-is-the-nhs-schools-help-children-mental-health-services>
. Some families really struggle to engage and get their children into school – 
they don’t understand the importance of good attendance and punctuality – and 
these staff are on to them, phoning them in the morning. Our capacity to 
support those pupils will be reduced.”

Gardiner is not the only headteacher to be grappling with unforeseen cuts to 
her deprivation funding: at another school nearby, the percentage of pupils 
eligible for the two highest bands of postcode-linked money has dropped by 16%. 
Another school in the same area has lost £77,000.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fschool-deprivation-funding-changes-education-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2770aa97f115e37819b88b770e570cda55c2050%2F0_36_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Schools%20%E2%80%98running%20on%20empty%E2%80%99%20hit%20by%20deprivation%20funding%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fschool-deprivation-funding-changes-education-budget%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Schools%20%E2%80%98running%20on%20empty%E2%80%99%20hit%20by%20deprivation%20funding%20changes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fapr%2F05%2Fschool-deprivation-funding-changes-education-budget%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe2770aa97f115e37819b88b770e570cda55c2050%2F0_36_2900_1740%2F2900.jpg>
 Peter Shelton, headmaster of St Martin’s primary school, near Newbury, 
Berkshire. Photograph: Laura Dale/INS News Agency Ltd 
The surprise funding gap in Gardiner’s area comes as many schools are already 
staring at budget deficits of hundreds of thousands of pounds, with nowhere 
left to go but cutting staff. A 1% teacher pay rise, an increase in 
employer-paid pension contributions and higher national insurance rates for 
employers – all unfunded – means, says Peter Woodman, chair of the West Sussex 
Secondary Headteachers Association, that from 2016-17, every teaching post will 
cost him an additional 5% a year.

“I’d say that half to two-thirds of my secondary colleagues can’t balance 
their budgets or are on the point of not being able to, hence they are making 
redundancies,” he says. Woodman’s school, rated outstanding, is £100,000 in the 
red for next year. There are three ways, he says, to manage a staff bill that 
has gone up £70,000 from 2016-17 onwards. “Classes get bigger – one local 
school is running its top maths set with 37 pupils – or teachers teach more, or 
you lose people.” Woodman has had to reduce his senior team by two posts, 
despite having 200 more pupils.

I am furious that I am pushed far into a corner that I have almost no options 
left. It’s now cutting into the heart
Headteacher 
At St Martin’s primary school in a small village near Newbury, Berkshire, 
headteacher Peter Shelton says that, having already slashed training, resources 
and all non-essential and lower priority items, there is no more left to cut. 
His “carry forward” from previous years is only a few hundred pounds, rather 
than, as used to be the case, a few thousand.

Primary schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/primary-schools>, which 
have limits on class sizes, cannot lose classroom teachers, but Shelton is 
unable to afford to recruit two teaching assistants for his Year 4/5 and Year 
5/6 pupils.

He spells out what this means: “We will be able to run fewer support groups, 
provide less group reading and one-to-one reading, provide less targeted 
in-class and general support, and have less flexibility in arrangements and 
support across the wider school.”

“It is simply the case that for the first time in my 20 years as a 
headteacher, the squeeze on budgets is having a direct negative impact on 
children’s learning.”

And with schools embroiled in a recruitment crisis, headteachers in deprived 
areas, who know their pupils need the best teachers available, can no longer 
afford to pay the salaries that might attract those teachers.

The headteacher of one 11-18 local authority secondary school in the south of 
England that has a high special educational needs and pupil premium intake, 
together with lower than average key stage 2 point scores on entry, saysfunding 
cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/20/budget-pressures-forcing-schools-in-england-to-cut-staff-survey-finds>
 have meant two rounds of redundancies in teaching staff, support staff and the 
leadership team. “It puts a huge dent in morale,” he says. “It knocks the 
stuffing out of people, and they fear for their future, and they start looking 
elsewhere.”

Like many headteachers, he asked not to be named. They worry about the 
reputations of their schools: if parents were to hear about bigger class sizes 
and job cuts, it could put their school’s future at risk.

Heads can see only rocks and hard places ahead – it is hard to justify 
offering higher salaries for subjects that are difficult to recruit for when 
other staff are losing their jobs. As this head says: “Schools that are most 
challenged are being the most clobbered: those with challenging intakes have to 
pay more, but they’re getting less money. At the same time, the expectation 
from Ofsted is that all students should reach a standard level of attainment, 
so we are asked to do more, with less, in more difficult circumstances. It’s 
not surprising that we’re struggling.”

A survey in January of nearly 900 mainly secondary headteachers and senior 
leaders by the Association of School and College Leaders confirms that more 
than 38% of respondents made redundancies in the previous 12 months, with even 
more staff losses hidden by the under-the-radar non-replacement of teaching 
(70%) and support roles (80%).

More than a third of respondents believed their school’s financial situation 
would become critical or very serious within the year, with less than 2% saying 
that their situation was fine. Half said they would need to make more 
redundancies; three-quarters expected class sizes to increase. If this could be 
managed without pupils suffering, it would be of less concern, but 77% of those 
surveyed said financial pressures had a detrimental effect on education 
provision.

The head of an “outstanding” London primary says he can longer afford to train 
teachers throughSchools Direct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/jan/19/school-direct-v-pgce-pros-cons-for-new-teachers>
 because bursaries have been cut from £17,600 to £11,000. “The government talks 
about having the best teachers in front of children and the only way to do that 
is to have an oversupply,” he says. “We can’t lose teachers here because we 
don’t have any spare capacity. We don’t have much pupil premium and so not a 
lot of teaching assistants, so we can’t save there either. If you’ve got a very 
small amount of money after staffing and utilities, what’s going to go?”

Children who thrive with a little bit of focused attention in smaller classes 
will be hit hardest as schools’ budgets are decimated, says another head in 
West Sussex facing a £341,000 budget deficit – he has to run all classes with 
at least 30 pupils. “We’re running on empty,” he says. In a county that sits 
near the bottom for per-pupil funding, it is also unfair on children, he says. 
Thefairer funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/24/school-funding-system-fair-local-authorities>
 announced by the government will be heavily tapered, so the fairness will come 
in only slowly, he says.

'Perfect storm' has state schools struggling to balance the books
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/06/perfect-storm-has-state-schools-struggling-to-balance-the-books>
This head got his deficit down to £200,000 by deciding not to re-recruit for 
two senior leadership posts: nevertheless, he has just had to announce four 
teacher and four support staff redundancies, as well having to do without two 
language assistants.

And the subjects on offer will drop. There will be no economics, no German, no 
dance, no textiles and no food science from now on. “I feel absolutely angry to 
the core of my being that children who deserve to be properly educated and have 
their needs met are not having their needs met – and that’s across the academic 
and social needs range,” he says. “I am incandescent that I cannot offer German 
classes for those who would like it. I am furious that I am pushed far into a 
corner that I have almost no options left. It’s now cutting into the heart, and 
that’s wrong.”

A spokesman for the Department for Education said: “We have delivered on our 
manifesto commitment to protect the schools budget and as pupil numbers 
increase, so will the amount of money in our schools. At the same time, we will 
make funding fairer by introducing a new national funding formula so that areas 
with the highest need attract the most funding.”

Gardiner now has a meeting with her human resources consultant about how to 
break the news of job losses to her staff. She knows her most vulnerable pupils 
will suffer. “I have parents of one young girl who think it’s OK to take her 
off school for the day to babysit her younger brother,” she says bleakly. 
“Redundancies mean in future we’ll have no one to pick up those cases.”
 