
Theresa May made sweeping changes when she was catapulted into Downing Street. 
New departments were created, and the government had acquired a fresh mission – 
navigating our way out of the EU. Science and research could easily have been 
squeezed out of a picture dominated by migration, trade and market access.

In fact, the reverse is happening: the PM wrote in July 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-36915846> that she wants “a 
positive outcome for science as we exit the EU”; and Philip Hammond followed 
this up in his autumn statement with a£4.7 billion increase in science and 
innovation investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/nov/24/autumn-statement-what-will-an-extra-47-billion-do-for-uk-science-and-innovation>
. Industrial strategy isback in favour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/25/electric-vehicles-greg-clark-jaguar-land-rover>
; the prospects for science have beendebated in recent weeks 
<http://www.parliament.uk/eu-referendum> in both the Lords and the Commons; and 
ministers have been queuing up to emphasise its importance to the future of the 
UK.

The latest report 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/science-and-technology-committee/news-parliament-2015/eu-membership-referendum-report-published/>
 from the House of Lords science and technology committee, published today, 
highlights three things that government and the science community must work 
together to tackle over the coming months.

First, preparing us for the challenges of leaving the EU. Successive 
governments have underinvested in research, such that the UK holds an ever more 
tenuous grip on its claims to be a world leader. Theextra investment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/nov/24/autumn-statement-what-will-an-extra-47-billion-do-for-uk-science-and-innovation>
 that has now been promised allows cracks in the science base to be repaired 
and provides vital resources to link science to innovation through the new 
industrial strategy. Philip Hammond told parliament recently that “this is 
additional money”, distinct fromreassurances he has already given 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-philip-hammond-guarantees-eu-funding-beyond-date-uk-leaves-the-eu>
 on replacing funds lost from EU research programmes after Brexit.

Technical evidence and input will also be vital. Liam Fox’s department for 
international trade 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-international-trade>
 (DIT) will need scientific advice and expertise ahead of any trade 
negotiations. Such deals may not include a section headlined “science”, but 
they typically include harmonisation of consumer protection, environmental and 
manufacturing standards – each of which is underpinned by science. TheLords 
recommend 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldsctech/85/8502.htm>
 that DIT appoints a chief scientific adviser, and echo concerns from their 
Commons counterparts about the absence of such a role in the Brexit department (
DExEU) 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-exiting-the-european-union>
. There should be no further delay in making these important appointments.

Second, the science, innovation and higher education community needs to work 
out realistic ambitions, and feed these into the Brexit negotiations. Jo 
Johnson MP, minister for universities and science, announced recently that a 
“high level forum” is being established to capture the views of the community. 
This is a welcome development: the UK needs an agile, entrepreneurial approach 
to Brexit rather than a rigid masterplan, so we can respond to opportunities 
and challenges as the negotiations proceed.

The Lords’ report 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldsctech/85/8502.htm>
 calls for the voice of the scientific community to be heard alongside the 
voice of business during the Brexit negotiations. In research, over many years, 
the UK’s relationship with the EU has been consistently harmonious. This should 
give it aunique place in the wider negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/political-science/2016/jul/12/heres-why-science-should-take-a-seat-at-the-brexit-negotiation-table>
, and the UK could take advantage of science as a point of agreement in more 
difficult discussions.

Third, the UK can explore new prospects for research collaboration beyond the 
EU. The Lords’ report suggests that “UK scientific leaders should try not to be 
consumed by UK-EU negotiations and should make space for discussions with the 
rest of the world, particularly where there is potential to build on an 
existing track record…”. They also recommend that the UK sends a powerful 
signal of its global ambitions, by offering to host a large international 
research facility –on a scale comparable to the Crick Institute or the Diamond 
Light Source – in partnership with other countries. There are also some 
opportunities for positive reforms in public procurement and the taxation of 
R&D investments that may become possible outside the EU.

One dark cloud hangs over this more positive approach: uncertainty over 
immigration. The UK’s ambitions for science will be undermined if we fail to 
attract and retain researchers from the EU and beyond. Increasingly, the 
chancellor, foreign secretary and Brexit ministers are aligning with the 
science minister – and public opinion – in recognising that the UK should 
welcome talented people from overseas. But the home secretary, Amber Rudd,seems 
unconvinced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/12/uk-halve-international-student-visa-tougher-rules>
 and the prime minister remains non-committal. And as the Lords argue in 
today’s report, “The delay in solid reassurances and mixed messages from senior 
ministers is having a corrosive effect on the UK research base.”

The Lords go further, arguing that tweaking the terms under which scientists 
are permitted to work in the UK is not enough. Instead, they recommend that we 
“search the globe for outstanding scientific leaders, and attract them to the 
UK with compelling offers of research funding for their first 10 years in the 
UK, and support for their immediate families as they settle into the UK”. Let’s 
hope that Amber Rudd includesa copy of the report 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldsctech/85/85.pdf> 
in her box of Christmas reading.

Graeme Reid <https://twitter.com/graemetr> is professor of science and 
research policy at University College London, and was a specialist adviser to 
theHouse of Lords Science and Technology Committee inquiry into EU membership 
and UK science 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/science-and-technology-committee/inquiries/parliament-2015/eu-membership-and-uk-science-follow-up-/>
. The committee’s latest report“A time for boldness: EU membership and UK 
science after the referendum” 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/lords-select/science-and-technology-committee/news-parliament-2015/eu-membership-referendum-report-published/>
 is published today.
 