
Kezia Dugdale, <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/kezia-dugdale> the 
ScottishLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> leader, has called 
for a radical reshaping of the UK into a federal state withScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> taking control over fisheries, 
farming and social rights now covered byEU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> laws.

In a speech in London, Dugdale said the UK needed “a new political settlement” 
to prevent it splitting apart overBrexit, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> and to tackle an erratic 
and uneven distribution of power between its regions and nations.

It would be underpinned, she told the Institute for Public Policy Research 
<http://www.ippr.org/> thinktank on Wednesday, by a new act of union designed 
for a post-Brexit era, to replace the treaty signed by England and Scotland 
that unified their parliaments 300 years ago.

This new structure would be designed in part by a new “people’s constitutional 
convention” of civic and political groups that would mimic the Scottish civic 
convention that helped frame the 1999 devolution settlement, which led to the 
creation of the Scottish parliament.

The UK needs a new Act of Union to prevent it breaking once and for all | 
Kezia Dugdale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/uk-needs-new-act-union-stop-break-brexit-scotland>
“This would mean a radical reshaping of our country along federal lines where 
every component part of the United Kingdom –Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, Wales, Northern Ireland and the 
English regions – take more responsibility for what happens in their own 
communities, but where we still maintain the protection of being part of a 
greater whole as the UK,” Dugdale said.

“It would involve significant changes to how central government operates.” 

Answering questions after the speech, Dugdale said the confusion of Brexit 
provided the ideal opportunity to “renew the mission” of the UK be looking at 
what powers were exercised where.

“Much of the debate around that has been about the threats of Brexit to 
Scotland, of which there are substantial concerns, but also there’s an 
opportunity here,” Dugdale said.

“The United Kingdom is leaving the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, and there will be powers coming back 
from Brussels. I think it’s important to start now to talk about where those 
powers go.”


Dugdale said she would not be meeting the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, while 
in London, but was in “regular contact” with him. She had “talked him though 
the basic bones of the speech” last week, she added.

“While this is an argument I’m putting forwards as leader of the Scottish 
Labour party, it’s very much the trend of what Jeremy Corbyn has been saying,” 
she said.

Dugdale’s agenda, intended to help strengthen her party’s faltering popularity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/scottish-labour-facing-third-place-after-collapse-in-vote>
 while undermining preparations byNicola Sturgeon’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> Scottish government for 
a possible second independence referendum, echoes proposals from the former 
Labour prime ministerGordon Brown. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gordon-brown>


Earlier this year, Brown called for the House of Lords 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/lords> to be replaced by an elected 
senate and floated proposals for a federal system, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/29/gordon-brown-house-of-lords-elected-senate-brexit-uk-scottish-independence>
 bringing himself alongside similar plans set out byLiberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> in Scotland.

Similar proposals were also mooted by Dugdale and senior Scottish Labour 
figures 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/27/scottish-labour-seeks-possibility-federal-uk-brexit-aftermath>
 including the former lord chancellor Lord Falconer immediately after the 
referendum revealed a deep split between Scottish and English voters over the 
EU, when Scotland voted heavily to remain.

Dugdale said core tax, state funding and social policies would still be 
controlled in London – a policy framework often nicknamed devolution-plus.


She added that after the UK leaves the EU:

 *  Scotland should take control over fishing and agriculture – areas overseen 
now by the EU, but coordinated with the rest of the UK.

 * Scotland take charge of employment rights covered now by the EU social 
chapter, and be empowered to top up a basic minimum wage.

 * The UK government would retain control over foreign affairs, overseas aid 
and defence. 
 * Core funding would still come from the Treasury in London while state 
pensions, or major taxes such as corporation or inheritance tax, would remain 
under the control of a federal parliament. 
Dugdale said this structure would preserve the sharing of resources and the 
principles of solidarity that Labour was set up to champion.

“The UK provides the redistribution of wealth that defines our entire Labour 
movement, and it provides the protection for public finance in Scotland that 
comes from being part of something larger. Something good. Something worth 
fighting for,” she said.

Dugdale’s speech was designed to rebuild her personal profile as well as 
Labour’s declining popularity in Scotland, which has worsened under Corbyn’s 
leadership.

A YouGov poll for the Times last week said 32% of Scottish voters had no 
opinion on Dugdale’s leadership qualities, while 42% thought she was doing 
badly. She has been outmaneouvered byRuth Davidson, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson> the Scottish Tory leader, 
who has positioned herself as the champion of the union, while critics inside 
the Scottish Labour party have accused Dugdale of being too weak on the 
constitution and post-referendum policy.


Linda Fabiani MSP, a former Scottish government minister who sat on the Smith 
Commission which agreed Holyrood’s new £14bn tax and welfare powers after the 
2014 independence referendum, said Dugdale’s proposals were “just the latest 
version of the same old song.”

 “Labour has been promising a supercharged, powerhouse, federalism-max for 
years – and consistently failing to deliver it. In fact it was Labour 
politicians that specifically blocked the powers over the minimum wage they are 
now asking for,” Fabiani said.

 “Kezia Dugdale is always quick to accuse others of obsessing over the 
constitution, but Scottish Labour’s default answer to bad polling numbers is to 
promise powers that they don’t deliver. Billions of years from now I half 
expect Labour politicians to be staring into the dying sun calling for a 
constitutional convention.”




 