
Scottish commuters are to be given a free week’s rail travel to head off 
mounting complaints and unrest caused by cancellations, overcrowding and 
disruption to services.

A £3m package of discounted travel will be shared among season ticket holders 
as an implied apology for thedecline in performance by ScotRail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/scotland-rail-network-vulnerable-as-problems-mount-regulator-warns>
 – a gesture that will be met with envy by commuters usingstrike-hit services 
in southern England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-cancels-all-services-as-strike-continues-for-third-day>
.

The latest ScotRail performance figures showed that only 83.7% of trains 
arrived within five minutes of their scheduled time over the last four weeks. 
On one day in that period, services across centralScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> were hit when a train broke down 
crossing several tracks just outside Waverley station in Edinburgh at rush hour.

Among the price cuts being rolled out in the new year, weekly and monthly 
season ticket holders on the busiest Edinburgh to Glasgow line will get the 
equivalent of £95.50 worth of rail travel, and commuters travelling from 
Stonehaven to Aberdeen will get £32.40.

Humza Yousaf, who as Scottish transport minister has fended off calls to 
resign in recent weeks, said the package was a thank you to passengers for 
their patience. At the height of the controversy last month, Yousaf said 
ministers wanted to work up a public sector bid for the service.

A modern rail network in Scotland is long overdue
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/nov/21/modern-rail-network-scotland-long-overdue>
“We recognise any level of delay or disruption on the rail network in Scotland 
affects people’s lives,” he said on Friday. “This year has been particularly 
challenging as we take forward our record-breaking investment programme on the 
live network to deliver newer, longer, greener trains on our flagship routes 
between Edinburgh and Glasgow as well as further afield.”

The Scottish government said the free week 
<http://news.gov.scot/news/rail-ticket-holders-to-benefit-from-free-week> was 
worth more than the fare freeze demanded this week by Scottish Labour, which 
has led an increasingly fierce campaign on rail services. There would be 
additional promotions and fare offers for other passengers.

But Neil Bibby, Labour’s transport spokesman at Holyrood, said it would not 
help frequent travellers who did not hold season tickets.

“Like everything with the Scottish National party and ScotRail, this doesn’t 
hit the mark. Labour’s fare freeze policy would have benefited every ScotRail 
passenger – the SNP’s policy won’t,” Bibby said. Prices were still set to rise 
on average by a record 1.9% in the new year for the majority of passengers, he 
said.
 