
A mining company hoping to open the only underground goldmine in the Scottish 
Highlands has sold its first gold in the form of 11 commemorative coins.

Scotgold Resources raised just under £46,000 by auctioning 10 “rounds” to 
enthusiasts and collectors. Eachsolid gold coin 
<http://www.scotgoldresources.com.au/first-pour/> weighs an ounce, which 
represents a markup of nearly 400% on the current market price of $1,192 (£959) 
per ounce.

The company hopes that the auction, the first sale of Scottish gold in recent 
history, will attract enough investment to fund its long-delayed mining 
operation at Cononish on the edge of Loch Lomond and the Trossachs national 
park in Stirlingshire in the southern Highlands.

Scotgold Resources believes its gold will attract a premium price as a niche 
product for tourists, jewellers and couples keen on Scottish gold wedding or 
engagement rings. Villagersin nearby Tyndrum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2009/nov/08/gold-mining-tyndrum-scotland-scotgold>
, a popular stop on the route north to Glencoe and Fort William, hope to open a 
visitors’ centre and to market Cononish gold to tourists.

Scottish gold mine plans get go-ahead
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/25/scottish-gold-mine-cononish> 
The first round, embossed, like all the coins, with a stag’s head, was snapped 
up by Graham Donaldson, a Scotgold shareholder who lives in Christchurch, 
Dorset. His bid of £21,003.3p was the highest. “As to what I would do with it 
now, I would probably look at it and stroke it, and put it in a safe,” he said.


Originally from Kirkintilloch near Glasgow, he also bought the 11th round at 
its reserve price, which Scotgold hopes to donate to the Hunterian museum in 
Glasgow. Donaldson said he and his wife planned in time to get new engagement 
and wedding rings made from Cononish gold, to replace the budget rings they 
could afford when they originally married. “Those are worn thin,” he said.

After buying the mothballed site in 2007, Scotgold has struggled to raise 
enough money to restart mining despite arush of enthusiasm from Australian 
investors <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/aug/14/scotland.commodities>, 
and has faced a series of tough environmental and landscape tests sets by the 
park authority.

The mine sits near popular walking routes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/oct/25/scottish-gold-mine-cononish>, and 
climbers and countryside groups were worried that the site, which was 
originally due to have a large and expensive tailings dam visible from 
surrounding hills such as Ben Lui, would be damaging to the landscape.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fscottish-mining-company-scotgold-resources-sells-first-gold-coins-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba724bc9d455f862febe00d0574f0aaade4981e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20mining%20company%20sells%20its%20first%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fscottish-mining-company-scotgold-resources-sells-first-gold-coins-auction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20mining%20company%20sells%20its%20first%20gold&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fscottish-mining-company-scotgold-resources-sells-first-gold-coins-auction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ba724bc9d455f862febe00d0574f0aaade4981e%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 The first coins minted by Scotgold Resources. Photograph: Scotgold Resources 
The price of gold has fluctuated sharply over the last three years, 
undermining the mine’s viability, while its relatively small scale has left it 
unable to attract major investors, who prefer far conventional, larger mines.

Ore stored from previous test drillings was used to produce the site’s first 
gold, and Scotgold hope to replace the visually intrusive tailings dam needed 
for waste rock and runoff with a system using vast bags that hold the dry waste 
rock. Those bags can be more easily disguised and landscaped.

Richard Gray, Scotgold Resources’ managing director, said they currently 
estimated there were 200,000 oz of gold present at Cononish, and 1m oz of 
silver.

The site sits on the same Dalradian rock strata that stretches over to a 
surface-based goldmine in Tyrone in Northern Ireland. The Galantas mine near 
Omagh previouslyextracted ore 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2007/oct/18/northernireland.uknews4> from 
beneath peat. It has plans to open an underground mine, but is facing legal 
challenges to its planning consent.

Surveys of the surrounding rock suggest there are other gold reserves lying 
untapped: Gray argues that once the Cononish site is in full production, the 
firm will be able to target viable sites for further mines.

He said he was pleased with the auction’s results. “The quantum [price] is 
nice, but the most important thing is to raise people’s awareness of Scottish 
gold and to highlight the fact that more gold sales are coming,” he said.
 