
Many Scottish councils face losing all their reserves unless they continue to 
make deep cuts in spending, the local government watchdog has warned.

The Accounts Commission 
<http://www.audit-scotland.gov.uk/about-us/accounts-commission> predicts that 
well over a third ofScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>’s 32 
councils will face afunding gap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/05/scottish-councils-pile-up-record-debt>
 by 2018 that is larger than their reserves, while Falkirk and South 
Lanarkshire believe that shortfall will dwarf their savings next year.

It estimates the cumulative size of the funding shortfall and councils’ use of 
reserves could exceed £1bn from this year through to April 2019, depending on 
how councils manage their budgets.

In its 2016/17 financial overview, the Accounts Commission reports that 
councils have substantially increased their reserves to some £2.5bn despite 
absorbing cuts in central government support of 8.4% since 2010/11, at the same 
time as taking on a heavier workload.

Originally intended to act as long-term sources of top-up funding in the face 
of ongoing cuts, those reserves would be essential to guarantee services at 13 
councils within the next 12 months unless they continued to cut spending, find 
efficiencies or reduce services, it said.

Scotland’s councils had put aside reserves of £2.5bn in March 2016 as a 
cushion against ongoing cuts and soaring social services costs. They had 
investments of £1.5bn, which helped bring downnet debt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/mar/05/why-local-government-debt-so-high-scotland>
 to £13.6bn; excluding those investments, overall debt stood at £15.25bn.

Why is local government debt so high in Scotland?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/mar/05/why-local-government-debt-so-high-scotland>
Councils are expected to see their incomes from the government, council tax 
and business rates fall annually from £11.94bn this year to £11.72bn in 2018/19 
– including small increases in council tax rates for some councils. And in 
2018/19, the commission estimates that the year’s deficit will be £553m – more 
than half the projected £1bn deficit from this year to April 2019.

The report’s warnings have fuelled an increasingly intense debate on the 
future of Scottish local government financing in the run-up to next May’s 
council elections, when the Scottish National party is forecast to make 
substantial gains.

Professor John Curtice of the Scottish Centre for Social Research says the 
current polls suggest the SNP could win overall control of a dozen councils and 
become the largest party in 12 more. It already runs Perth and Dundee and would 
take control of Glasgow – the biggest political prize the SNP has yet to win – 
as well as Aberdeen, Edinburgh and Stirling.

The SNP <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/snp> government in Edinburgh has 
refused to support cross-party and expert calls for a fundamental reform of 
council financing but for the first time since 2008 will allow councils to
increase council tax rates 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/mar/02/nicola-sturgeon-scotland-council-tax-changes-not-far-enough-critics>
 by 3% next year. Since the Accounts Commission forecasts ministers will 
continue cutting central funding, that will shift the political onus for 
raising taxes away from ministers and on to councils.

In parallel with that option for an overall 3% increase, ministers have 
changed council tax bands by cutting them for the lowest rated homes but 
increasing tax on higher value homes. That will hit richer areas such as 
Edinburgh, Aberdeenshire, West Dumbartonshire and East Renfrewshire.

The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/14/scottish-councils-warned-of-failing-to-properly-oversee-capital-spending-accounts-commission>
, the umbrella body for most Scottish councils, did not respond directly to the 
commission’s findings on its reserves but said its members were doing their 
best to manage.

Councillor Kevin Keenan, its finance spokesman, said the Scottish government 
made their task far harder by only giving councils funding estimates a year in 
advance. That made it harder to plan with any certainty.

“We all know the direction of travel for public sector finances,” Keenan said. 
“Whilst councils and councillors do their best to mitigate the damage to 
communities from political choices made at the centre this is becoming harder 
and harder to do.”

Andy Wightman, the Scottish Greens’ local government spokesman at Holyrood, 
said these financial challenges strengthened the case for substantial reforms 
of council funding. The Scottish Greens have also called for all council debt 
to be written off. Councils spent £1.5bn last year servicing their debts.

“It is clear we now need to dedicate as much time and energy on negotiating a 
fiscal framework for local government to set the ground rules for future 
funding and to increase fiscal autonomy and democracy,” Wightman said.


Alex Rowley, Scottish Labour’s deputy leader, said it would aim to amend next 
year’s Scottish budget to increase higher rates of income tax in part to fund 
increased council spending. “These figures confirm that the SNP has slashed 
funding for local services, like schools and social care, which put the life 
chances of people acrossScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> at 
risk,” he said.

No Scottish government minister responded. Instead, a spokesman said: “This 
report highlights the pressures that councils – like other parts of the public 
sector – face, but also highlights that they are continuing to improve 
services. We expect local authorities to continue to use resources as 
efficiently and effectively as possible to ensure taxpayers get the best 
possible services and value for money.”
 