
During the 1910-1913 British Antarctic Expedition, two men working side by 
side to record one of the most famous ventures in the history of polar 
exploration – on glass plate negatives and watercolours that had to be finished 
indoors before the paint froze – discussed holding a joint exhibition of their 
work back in London.

More than a century later, their ambition has finally been realised in the 
first exhibition of the photographs of Captain Scott’s fatal last expedition 
taken by Herbert Ponting and the beautiful paintings of Edward Wilson.

“What they have in common is that they’re not just interested in the bald 
scientific truth, they are very carefully choosing the views for their artistic 
effect as well,” curator Charlotte Connelly said. She has hung some together in 
pairs, when the two men chose strikingly similar viewpoints.


Their work, including the original watercolours, and spectacular new prints 
made from the glass negatives mounted by theScott Polar Research Institute 
<http://www.spri.cam.ac.uk/> in Cambridge, will be on display at Bonham’s 
auctioneers <https://www.bonhams.com/press_release/22167/> in London this week, 
alongside contemporary works made by artists in residence in the Antarctic, 
include Scott’s granddaughter Dafila Scott.

The exhibition never happened because of the tragic fate of Wilson. He died in 
March 1912, lying besideScott and Henry Bowers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/29/captain-scott-letter-on-display>, 
when they starved and froze to death in their tent after the bitter discovery 
that theNorwegian explorer Roald Amundsen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/from-the-archive-blog/2011/dec/14/archive-1911-amundsen-south-pole>
 had reached the pole first.

Ponting recalled: “Uncle Bill handed me a parcel which contained all his 
sketches. He asked me to take charge of it, and deliver it to his wife, telling 
me that it was his earnest hope that we might have a joint exhibition of our 
work – his sketches and my photographs.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F906ee79a2ca88af9a06c2e1169837d5db2e61fd8%2F0_17_1638_982%2F1638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists'%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists%27%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F906ee79a2ca88af9a06c2e1169837d5db2e61fd8%2F0_17_1638_982%2F1638.jpg>
 Herbert Ponting working in Antarctic conditions. Photograph: Scott Polar 
Research Institute 
Instead, separate exhibitions of their work were held, Wilson’s at the Alpine 
Club, Ponting’s near the Bonham’s saleroom at the Fine Arts Society.

Ponting, a professional photographer, left the expedition early and got his 
film and the heavy crates containing more than 1,700 glass negatives safely 
back to England. Photographs including the expedition ship Terra Nova clenched 
in the frozen sea and the explorers framed by a cathedral-like ice cave became 
iconic images of the heroic age of polar exploration, and his film was shown as 
morale-bracing entertainment to soldiers in the first world war. He lived on 
until 1935.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e5832bbca48da2c539dc10ba73df3dc547567a5%2F0_410_3332_2000%2F3332.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists'%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists%27%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e5832bbca48da2c539dc10ba73df3dc547567a5%2F0_410_3332_2000%2F3332.jpg>
 Captain Scott and party at the South Pole. Photograph: Scott Polar Research 
Institute 
Wilson, a medical doctor, botanist and talented amateur artist, known as 
“Uncle Bill” by the team for his cheerful peacemaking nature, had already 
survived an earlier polar expedition and a terrible trek to collect Emperor 
penguin eggs in appalling weather, dubbed by one of the members as “the worst 
journey in the world”. He was one of the closest to Scott of the Terra Nova 
team and so was chosen to join the small group to make the attempt on the pole.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf6a3f95481b6dadd56ee9321f659cc8946bc5a%2F0_0_2126_1638%2F2126.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists'%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scott%20expedition%20pictures%20on%20show%20together%20over%20100%20years%20after%20artists%27%20plan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Faug%2F01%2Fscott-expedition-pictures-on-show-together-over-100-years-after-artists-plan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1cf6a3f95481b6dadd56ee9321f659cc8946bc5a%2F0_0_2126_1638%2F2126.jpg>
 Capt Scott and team foundering in soft snow. Photograph: Scott Polar Research 
Institute 
Before Ponting left he taught Scott to use a camera, and the leader took the 
final images in the exhibition, printed from negatives found after his death. 
One shows an exhausted-looking team hauling and shoving the heavy sled, 
stumbling and slipping in knee-deep snow, another a line of ponies vanishing 
into icy fog. “I suspect Scott wouldn’t have been too pleased with these, some 
are quite out of focus,” Connelly said, “but to me they give a more vivid 
impression of the infinite whiteness and harshness of the landscape than if 
they were technically perfect.”


 * Visions of the Great White South 
<https://www.bonhams.com/press_release/22167/>, Bonham’s New Bond Street, 
London, August 2-19
 