
I was looking at Romer’s Gap the other day. No this isn’t a dirty confession, 
although I did come back with sand in my hiking boots. Just before Christmas I 
found myself digging into the fine shingle of a beach opposite Bass Rock, near 
Edinburgh, in the pouring rain. Beside me were three burly men with shovels, 
who were undoubtedly making faster progress than I. We were digging down 350 
million years into Scotland’s past, in search of bones from a time when the 
fossil record falls eerily silent: this is Romer’s Gap.


There are often periods of geological time where conditions were not good for 
fossil preservation, or the creatures that lived didn’t preserve well (such as 
the very earliest boneless, squishy lifeforms over 540 million years ago). In 
some cases we haven’t found the right rocks of that age yet, or we can’t access 
the rocks, for example if someone has peskily built a city on top of them. 
Occasionally these fossil gaps represent true low points in diversity – there 
simply weren’t very many animals in existence to then die and become fossilised 
– but often the fossils have just not been uncovered yet.


Romer’s Gap is a global missing page, a time when the record of tetrapods, our 
four-limbed vertebrate ancestors, is scanty at best. It was first recognised by 
the famous and prolific palaeontologist, Alfred Romer, and so it was given his 
name. The lack of information is a real snag, as it is also when our earliest 
terrestrial ancestors evolved the key features that would let them breathe air, 
lift their bodies out of the water, and, 350 million years later, wrap their 
cold digits around the handle of a shovel on a rocky beach inScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd18f8be782d4e9023b681c0de79afb63a5aa29%2F0_212_2591_1554%2F2591.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7dd18f8be782d4e9023b681c0de79afb63a5aa29%2F0_212_2591_1554%2F2591.jpg>
 Palaeontologists collecting fossils on a Scottish beach Photograph: Elsa 
Panciroli 
What caused Romer’s Gap? The mystery begins at the end of the Devonian, a time 
period famous for its fishes. The earliest tetrapods had begun to develop: 
limbed, fish-like creatures clearly on their way to becoming land-lubbers, but 
with anatomy that wasn’t quite cut out for the job. Their legs were too weak, 
they still had gills, and their limbs ended in decidedly fishy fins rather than 
fingers. At the end of the Devonian, 375–360 million years ago, two mass 
extinctions decimated a much of the life on earth. For the next 15 million 
years (the start of the Carboniferous period) the fossil record goes strangely 
quiet. It is probable that the low concentration of oxygen on earth reduced the 
amount of fossilisation, but there were also fewer animals around to be 
preserved. This makes the search to uncover remnants from this time especially 
tricky, and every new find is an exciting piece in the evolutionary jigsaw 
puzzle.


It turns out Scotland holds some key pieces. The men sweating away on the 
beach shovelling sand had invited me to join them in digging up fresh evidence. 
The first was Dr Stig Walsh, Senior Curator of Vertebrate Palaeobiology at the 
National Museum of Scotland (NMS), Edinburgh. Alongside other scientists from 
the Museum, the Universities of Cambridge, Leicester and Southampton, and the 
British Geological Survey, Stig is part of theTW:eed project 
<http://tetrapods.org/>, working to find out more about the earliest tetrapods 
from Romer’s Gap, as well as fleshing out whole ecosystems during this 20 
million year fossil blackout.


“The tetrapods we know from the latest Devonian would have been strange to our 
eyes,” Stig explains to me as we pause for a quick break from digging. “They 
had far too many digits for one thing, and probably wouldn’t have been able to 
come far onto land. After the Gap the tetrapod fauna is diverse and well 
adapted for walking on land, but we just had no information on how this had 
happened or why.” Putting on his gloves, he picks up his shovel and continues - 
“fortunately for us, Scotland has an amazing fossil record; the answers were 
here all along.”


After scratching our way over a metre downwards through the shingle, we 
finally hit the waterworn rocks of the early Carboniferous. The four of us took 
a break to drink coffee and chat about the site. Dr Tom Challands, teaching 
fellow at the University of Edinburgh and TW:eed Associate Partner - known as 
“The Lungfish Doctor” by his colleagues – was hoping to find the fossils of his 
moniker. It looked promising: “that’s definitely a lungfish tooth,” he cries, 
unabashedly dropping to his knees to examine a bright fleck in the rock beneath 
him, “I reckon we might get lucky and find some bone.”


Previous research has suggested that vertebrates became smaller during Romer’s 
Gap. Changes in body size have important repercussions for our understanding of 
ecosystems over the long-term, so any change in fish and other vertebrates at 
this time would have important ecological consequences. “The only thing is,” 
points out Tom, “that previously there was only one definitive species of 
lungfish known from this time period – that’s only one data point. We can’t 
really tell what happened to them without more data.”


The final person in our team was Matt Dale, owner of Mr Wood’s Fossil Shop in 
Edinburgh. He had visited this beach some years previously alongside the late 
and well-respected Scottish fossil hunter, Stan Wood. This was one of many 
sites around Edinburgh Stan frequented, finding internationally important plant 
and animal fossils, such asWestlothiana lizziae 
<http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&aid=8344524>
: a lizard-like creature that bears the name of the area in which it was found. 
Matt reminisced about Stan’s talent and persistence in looking for fossils; a 
determination necessary for all palaeontologists, whether amateur or 
professional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74b247987f0a3716003709c53fb044a9bfaf3c0d%2F0_25_1023_614%2F1023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74b247987f0a3716003709c53fb044a9bfaf3c0d%2F0_25_1023_614%2F1023.jpg>
 An example of the early fossil tetrapod Westlothiana Photograph: National 
Museum of Scotland 
We returned to work, noting the geological features of the rock layers before 
taking samples and looking for fossils. There were some pieces of plants, 
bones, and teeth, all of which we excitedly photographed and bagged for later 
preparation and study. These are the fragmentary fossils that science needs to 
advance it’s understanding of the evolution of life on earth, but they are not 
the kind of thing Matt would sell in his shop.Fossils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/fossils> in the field are often 
underwhelming to non-specialists, being small, unremarkable and looking exactly 
like what they are: chunks of jumbled rock. It requires a trained eye to 
recognise them as the remnants of living things. Very few fossils are preserved 
as whole bodies, laid out for human admiration, even fewer when you are 
studying an elusive period of time like Romer’s Gap.


Our samples were packed in protective foam and loaded into backpacks for the 
hike back to the car. On the way Stig told me about the upcoming exhibition at 
the National Museum of Scotland, Fossil Hunters: showcasing some of the 
important Scottish contributions to early tetrapod palaeontology, and 
celebrating the people, like Stan Wood, who uncovered them. Through our work 
that day on the beach, we could count ourselves amongst those people.


A few weeks later I caught up with Tom in his office, regarding the rucksacks 
of rock we had trudged back to the car that rainy afternoon in North Berwick. 
His eyes widened with delight as he showed me seven new species of lungfish 
identified from the site we’d been digging. “Turns out lungfish were actually 
getting bigger during Romer’s gap,” he explained, the exact opposite of 
previous studies. “They just didn’t have enough information before – this is 
why the work TW:eed is doing is so important, we have to find more evidence if 
we want to understand what was happening to life back then.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b8c293d1650d24290e608389ee7202e6c017eb0%2F0_104_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%20holds%20the%20key%20to%20understanding%20how%20life%20first%20walked%20on%20land&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F19%2Ffossils-palaeontology-romer-scotland-holds-the-key-to-understanding-how-life-first-walked-on-land%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2b8c293d1650d24290e608389ee7202e6c017eb0%2F0_104_6000_3600%2F6000.jpg>
 A modern lungfish (this one is called Len). Photograph: Elsa Panciroli 
Our work that day in the rain had helped to fill a sliver of Romer’s gap. Like 
digging on the beach, we are uncovering the past in a series of small 
increments. One day we may finally assemble the entire picture of this 
formative period in earth’s history.

Fossil Hunters: Unearthing the Mystery of Life on Land opens at the National 
Museum of Scotland 
<http://www.nms.ac.uk/national-museum-of-scotland/whats-on/fossil-hunters/> on 
the 19th February until the 14th August. Admission is free. #FossilHunters
The TW:eed Project <http://tetrapods.org/>
Sallan, L. and Galimberti, A.K., 2015. Body-size reduction in vertebrates 
following the end-Devonian mass extinction. Science, 350(6262), pp.812-815

 