
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>’s minimum age of criminal 
responsibility will be raised to 12 years, in line with UN standards, after the 
current minimum age of eight, the lowest in Europe, was labelled a “national 
embarrassment”.

Mark McDonald 
<http://www.parliament.scot/msps/currentmsps/mark-mcdonald-msp.aspx>, minister 
for childcare and early years, announced on Thursday afternoon that the 
Scottish government would bring forward legislation to raise the age by four 
years, calling the case for it “clear and compelling”.


Age of criminal responsibility is too low, say brain scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2011/dec/13/age-criminal-responsibility-brain-scientists>
In a statement to Holyrood, McDonald told MSPs: “Having the lowest minimum age 
of criminal responsibility inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> does not match with our 
progressive approach to youth justice and ambitions to give children the best 
start in life.”


A recent consultation with police, prosecutors and victims’ groups found that 
95% supported an increase to the age of 12 or above.

In 2010, the Scottish government raised the age of criminal prosecution to 12, 
assuring that no one under that age could be prosecuted or sentenced in the 
criminal courts but would be dealt with through children’s hearings. However, 
those outcomes would still be added to children’s criminal records.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fscotland-to-raise-age-of-criminal-responsibility-to-12-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8bb29d20aa8c6f01564b3f18d49916e26638a2e%2F812_84_2313_1388%2F2313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scotland%20to%20raise%20age%20of%20criminal%20responsibility%20to%2012%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fscotland-to-raise-age-of-criminal-responsibility-to-12-years%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scotland%20to%20raise%20age%20of%20criminal%20responsibility%20to%2012%20years&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fscotland-to-raise-age-of-criminal-responsibility-to-12-years%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff8bb29d20aa8c6f01564b3f18d49916e26638a2e%2F812_84_2313_1388%2F2313.jpg>
 Childcare minister Mark McDonald told Holyrood that people must not bear 
criminal records for events of their early years. Photograph: Andrew Milligan/PA
McDonald said: “Raising the age of criminal responsibility will mean people no 
longer face potentially damaging and life-altering consequences, such as a 
criminal record, for events that took place when they were a young child.”

He added that he recognised the need for safeguards in exceptional cases, and 
that police would still have powers to investigate serious offences committed 
by children under 12s.

UN group urges Britain to raise age of criminal responsibility
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2008/oct/03/children.youngpeople> 
The minimum age of criminal responsibility in England and Wales is 10. The UN 
committee on the rights of the child has stated that setting the age of 
criminal responsibility below 12 is considered “not to be internationally 
acceptable”.

Liam McArthur MSP, the Scottish Liberal Democrat justice spokesperson, 
welcomed the decision. His predecessor in the role Alison McInnes advocated the 
rise, but her attempts to alter the law by bringing forward amendments to a 
criminal justice bill in the last Holyrood session were voted down by the SNP.

McDonald told the chamber on Thursday that he wanted to put on the record his 
thanks to McInnes for pressing the issue. McArthur likewise praised her 
“tireless work”, adding: “Eight-year-olds should be treated as children not 
criminals. The fact they can receive convictions which need to be declared for 
decades, or even the rest of their lives, is a national embarrassment.”

The amazing, sad and very good world of the children's panel | Clara Glynn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/09/childrens-panel-scotland-big-society>
The acting chair of the Scottish youth parliament 
<http://www.syp.org.uk/find_your_msyp>, Amy Lee Fraioli MSYP, also welcomed the 
move, adding that children and young people across Scotland felt strongly about 
the issue. “Raising the age of criminal responsibility from eight to 12 is an 
important step towards fully incorporating the UN convention on the rights of 
the child into Scots law. Many children who find themselves in children’s 
hearings are also victims themselves, and are often ill-equipped to deal with 
the situations they find themselves in. Raising the age will help ensure that 
Scotland is a fair place for children, and shift focus to supporting children 
instead of criminalising them.”



 