
A draft bill on a second independence referendum has been published by the 
Scottish government after the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, pledged to hold 
a new poll in the event of a hard Brexit in adirect challenge to Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/nicola-sturgeon-challenges-may-with-second-referendum-bill-scottish-independence-snp-conference>
.

The draft legislation, which was formally unveiled by the constitution 
secretary, Derek Mackay, despite the Scottish parliament being in recess until 
next week, sets out proposals for the rules governing the campaign, the conduct 
of the poll and how votes are counted.

Mackay said the proposed franchise would be the same as for the Scottish 
parliament. “That will mean two important groups of people would have a voice 
denied to them in the recent referendum on EU membership: 16- and 17-year-olds 
and citizens of EU countries who have madeScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> their home.”

The eight-page document proposes that any referendum would be run in a way 
similar to 2014, using the same yes/no question: “Should Scotland be an 
independent country?” It also suggests that the vote would similarly not be 
subject to any minimum turnout requirement or an approval threshold.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsecond-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f9e19dd5a8006051b75e3899f652969b472716b%2F0_78_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Scottish%20independence%3A%20draft%20bill%20published%20on%20second%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsecond-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Scottish%20independence%3A%20draft%20bill%20published%20on%20second%20referendum&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Foct%2F20%2Fsecond-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f9e19dd5a8006051b75e3899f652969b472716b%2F0_78_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Sturgeon said she would put forward proposals for maintaining Scotland’s 
position in the single market. Photograph: Murdo Macleod for the Guardian 
As the bill was published, Sturgeon said: “We will continue to work UK-wide to 
seek to avert a hard Brexit and we will also bring forward proposals that seek 
to protect our place in the single market, even if the rest of the UK leaves.

“However, if we find that our interests cannot be properly or fully protected 
within a UK context then independence must be one of the options open to us and 
the Scottish people must have the right to consider it.”

She added that any decision on holding a referendum, including the timing of 
it, would be for the Scottish parliament – where a pro-independence majority 
exists between the SNP and the Scottish Greens – to take. Despite May’s stated 
intention to oppose another independence poll, Holyrood would then ask the UK 
government to grant a section 30 order to allow the vote to take place.

Sturgeon, who will next meet May in London on Monday with other heads of 
devolved governments, has said she will put forward specific proposals in the 
coming weeks for maintaining Scotland’s position in the single market even if 
the rest of the UK leaves, as well as pushing for substantial additional powers 
for Holyrood as part of the UK’s article 50 negotiations, including over 
international trade deals and immigration.

In her foreword to the consultation, which will run until 11 January 2017, 
Sturgeon writes: “In May 2016 the current Scottish government was elected with 
a clear mandate that the Scottish parliament should have the right to hold an 
independence referendum if there was clear and sustained evidence that 
independence had become the preferred option of a majority of the Scottish 
people – or if there was a significant and material change in the circumstances 
that prevailed in 2014, such as Scotland being taken out of the EU against our 
will.”

She adds: “The UK government’s recent statements on its approach to leaving 
the EU raise serious concerns for the Scottish government. We face unacceptable 
risks to our democratic, economic and social interests and to the right of the 
Scottish parliament to have its say.

“Indeed those statements contradict the assurances given before the 
independence referendum in 2014 that Scotland is an equal partner within the UK 
and that a vote against independence would secure our EU membership.”

But the Scottish Labour leader, Kezia Dugdale, described the draft bill as 
“irresponsible economic vandalism”, warning: “Our economy is in trouble 
following David Cameron’s reckless Brexit gamble, and the very last thing we 
need is more uncertainty for employers.”

And speaking before the publication, the Scottish Conservative leader, Ruth 
Davidson, vowed that her party would fight proposals for a second referendum 
“every step of the way”.

Dugdale has also written to the Scottish parliament’s presiding officer, Ken 
Macintosh, asking for clarification over how the SNP’s plans will be examined, 
arguing that the SNP is trying to dodge scrutiny by publishing the consultation 
during parliamentary recess.
 