
The main nationalist opposition party in Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> has called for joint London 
and Dublin rule if attempts to establish devolution fail after elections to the 
Stormont assembly.

As the British prime minister, Theresa May, and Irish taoiseach, Enda Kenny, 
pledged on Wednesday to work together to deal with the political crisis caused 
by theresignation of Martin McGuinness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
 as deputy first minister, the Social Democratic and Labour party suggested 
that joint authority should be imposed if an administration in Belfast could 
not be formed.

Colum Eastwood, the SDLP leader, said if the parties in the assembly failed to 
piece together a devolved administration, there could be no return to direct 
rule with London-based ministers in charge of the region.

The demand for joint authority will be bitterly opposed by the Democratic 
Unionist party and Ulster Unionist party. The UUP sits with the SDLP on the 
opposition benches at Stormont, and the former’s leader, Mike Nesbitt, has 
previously suggested that the two parties could offer an alternative government 
to the outgoing DUP-Sinn Féin coalition.

Eastwood said: “If post election an executive cannot be formed, the only 
acceptable position for the nationalist community is joint authority between 
the Irish and British governments. We cannot allow a DUP-run government to be 
solely replaced by British direct rule ministers.

“Theresa May, the British secretary of state [for Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland>, James Brokenshire] and the DUP 
need to understand that there can be no return to what has gone before.”

He added: “Joint authority allows a balance of voices between the two 
traditions on this island. That balance is the basis of all our agreements and 
it is the accommodation we all signed up to. In the absence of a functioning 
assembly and executive, that balance can only be served through joint authority.

“This is particularly important in the context of Brexit.

“In the absence of an executive, British direct rule would mean we are at the 
mercy of a hard Brexit British government. Joint authority will mean we have a 
voice at the Brexit table, a voice that could stand against attempts to ignore 
the will of our people, a voice that could represent the interests of the 
entire island and represent the majority of the people in the north, who voted 
to remain in the European Union.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmartin-mcguinness-deputy-first-minister-northern-ireland-resignation-statement-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Martin%20McGuinness%2C%20deputy%20first%20minister%20of%20Northern%20Ireland%2C%20delivers%20resignation%20statement%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmartin-mcguinness-deputy-first-minister-northern-ireland-resignation-statement-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Martin%20McGuinness%2C%20deputy%20first%20minister%20of%20Northern%20Ireland%2C%20delivers%20resignation%20statement%20%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fmartin-mcguinness-deputy-first-minister-northern-ireland-resignation-statement-video&media=>
Martin McGuinness, deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, delivers 
resignation statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-deputy-first-minister-northern-ireland-resignation-statement-video>
Sinn Féin has ruled out any 11th-hour negotiations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/10/martin-mcguinness-decision-to-stand-northern-ireland-assembly-election>
 to prevent elections to the assembly, saying it was “not interested” in crisis 
talks suggested by the outgoing first minister and DUP leader, Arlene Foster.

Speaking after meeting Brokenshire, Sinn Féin’s Michelle O’Neill said: “What 
we need is fundamental change. We believe the public need to have their say.

“There’s been a disrespect to the public by the DUP over a number of weeks and 
months in relation to [the green energy crisis], a disrespect for the public in 
relation to listening to the views and the concerns out there.”

The line advocated by Sinn Féin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sinn-fein> means that on Monday next 
week, the assembly will likely be dissolved and elections will have to take 
place within eight weeks.

Given the renewed rancour between Sinn Féin and the DUP, piecing together a 
new coalition to run a devolved administration is likely to be challenging.

McGuinness, the former chief negotiator for Sinn Féin during the peace process 
that led to the Good Friday agreement in 1998, said on Monday he was leaving 
his post because of Foster’srefusal to stand down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-first-minister-arlene-foster-urged-resign-fuel-subsidy-scheme>
 temporarily from her job over the renewable heat incentive (RHI).

Serious questions have been raised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/18/northern-ireland-assembly-faces-vote-of-no-confidence>
 by opposition parties about the “cash for ash” scandal, which could cost 
taxpayers up to £500m.

Foster had been under pressure to stand down for the duration of a proposed 
independent inquiry into the RHI.

Under the scheme, large financial incentives were offered to farms, businesses 
and other non-domestic consumers to use biomass boilers that mostly burned 
wooden pellets, as well as solar thermal and heat pumps.

In February 2016, a whistleblower claimed that the scheme was being abused and 
one farmer had made at least £1m from renting an empty shed with one boiler.

Sinn Féin initially refused to take part in a vote of no confidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/19/northern-ireland-arlene-foster-survives-no-confidence-vote-green-energy-scandal-sinn-fein>
 against Foster last December, tabled by opposition parties. But it came under 
intense pressure internally to take a stronger line against the DUP, resulting 
in McGuinness’s resignation.

There are doubts as to whether he will stand for re-election as deputy first 
minister. McGuinness appeared weak and ill during the press conference 
announcing his resignation, and reports in Dublin suggest he has a rare heart 
condition.

A spokesman for Kenny said: “The taoiseach and prime minister agreed that the 
situation is very serious. They agreed that the two governments would work 
closely over the coming period.

“The taoiseach and prime minister agreed to maintain close contact ahead of 
Theresa May’s planned visit to Dublin at the end of January.”

The Irish foreign affairs and trade minister, Charlie Flanagan, and 
Brokenshire have scheduled a series of meetings with parties in the assembly in 
an attempt to find a solution to the crisis.

 