
Two ships have left Australia bound for the freezing Southern Ocean to 
confront the Japanese whaling fleet in an annual high-seas battle, the 
environmental activist groupSea Shepherd 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/23/sea-shepherd-will-keep-harassing-japanese-whaling-boats-despite-us-court-ruling>
 has said.

The organisation’s flagship, Steve Irwin, departed for Antarctic waters on 
Monday along with a fast new patrol vessel, Ocean Warrior, built with financial 
support from the Dutch, British and Swedish lotteries.

It has a powerful water cannon and is capable of outrunning the whalers, which 
an official at Japan’s Fisheries Agency said would be protected by a fleet of 
patrol boats.

Japan to face criticism at international summit for flouting whaling ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/20/japan-to-face-criticism-at-international-summit-for-flouting-whaling-ban-iwc>
“Sea Shepherd has engaged in repeated acts of sabotage over the years. Those 
actions threaten the lives of Japanese crew members and we cannot tolerate it,” 
said the official, who declined to give his name.

Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan> has previously sought court 
action to halt the anti-whaling campaigns, saying the activists ram their 
ships, snare propellers with ropes, and harass crew with paint and stink bombs.

Sea Shepherd is embarking on its 11th campaign to disrupt the hunt. The 
Japanese fleet set sail on 18 November in defiance of a worldwide moratorium on 
commercial whaling andan international court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
.

“It’s time that Japan respected the International Court of Justice ... and the 
global moratorium on commercial whaling and ended their so-called scientific 
lethal hunting of whales off the Antarctic coast,” said Sea Shepherd 
Australia’s chief Jeff Hansen.

Japan is a signatory to the International Whaling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/whaling> Commission’s moratorium in 
force since 1986. But it uses a loophole that allows whales to be killed for 
the purposes of scientific research.

Tokyo claims it is trying to prove the whale population is large enough to 
sustain a return to commercial hunting for a traditional source of food. But 
the meat from what it calls scientific research still ends up on dinner tables 
and is served up in school lunches.

In 2014 the United Nations’s international court of justice ordered Tokyo to 
end the Antarctic hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/mar/31/japanese-whaling-halt-antarctic-international-court>
, saying it found permits issued by Japan were “not for purposes of scientific 
research”.

After the ruling Japan cancelled its 2014-15 hunt, only to resume it the 
following yearunder a new programme with a two-thirds cut in the target catch 
number 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/29/japan-to-resume-whaling-programme>
, saying the fresh plan is genuinely scientific.
 