
Both the Arctic and Antarctic experienced record lows in sea ice extent in 
November, with scientists astonished to seeArctic 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/arctic> ice actually retreating at a time 
when the region enters the cold darkness of winter.


The fate of Arctic sea ice – Science Weekly podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/sep/06/the-fate-of-arctic-sea-ice-science-weekly-podcast>
Warm temperatures and winds drove record declines in sea ice at both polar 
regions in November compared to the 38-year satellite record of ice extent for 
the month. Arctic sea ice extent averaged 9.08m sq km (3.51m sq miles) for 
November, which is 1.95m sq km (or 753,000 sq miles) below the long-term 
average from 1981 to 2010 for the month.

Scientists at the National Snow and Ice Data Center (NSIDC) said 
<https://nsidc.org/arcticseaicenews/> that Arctic sea ice extent dipped for a 
short time in mid-November, an “almost unprecedented” event. Sea ice shrank by 
around 50,000 sq km (19,300 sq miles) in this period, mainly in the Barents Sea.

This decline, which also occurred to a smaller degree in November 2013, 
removed an area of ice larger than Denmark from the Arctic at a time when sea 
ice is usually growing.

 “It looks like a triple whammy – a warm ocean, a warm atmosphere, and a wind 
pattern all working against the ice in the Arctic,” said NSIDC director Mark 
Serreze.

In Antarctica, the average extent of sea ice in November was 14.54m sq km 
(5.61m sq miles), which is 1.81m sq km (699,000 sq miles) below the 1981 to 
2010 average. This more than doubles the previous record low for the month of 
November.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Farctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95a7a2c0bd8115ec1bd6a62931e27f5ce15b8cb1%2F0_0_1460_1740%2F1460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sea%20ice%20extent%20in%20Arctic%20and%20Antarctic%20reached%20record%20lows%20in%20November&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Farctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sea%20ice%20extent%20in%20Arctic%20and%20Antarctic%20reached%20record%20lows%20in%20November&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Farctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F95a7a2c0bd8115ec1bd6a62931e27f5ce15b8cb1%2F0_0_1460_1740%2F1460.jpg>
 A map from NSIDC showing the sea ice extent compared to the historical average 
from 1981 to 2010. Photograph: National Snow and Ice Data Center 
Ted Scambos, the lead scientist at NSIDC, said: “Antarctic sea ice really went 
down the rabbit hole this time.” His colleague Walt Meier, who also works at 
Nasa, added: “The Arctic has typically been where the most interest lies, but 
this month, the Antarctic has flipped the script and it is southern sea ice 
that is surprising us.”

The Arctic’s record low, beating a mark set in 2012, was driven by unusually 
high temperatures over the Arctic Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
, persistent winds that pushed ice north and a warm ocean. Areas of the Arctic 
have reached more than 20C (36F) warmer than usual, with an area of Russian 
Arcticforecast <https://twitter.com/EricHolthaus/status/806181252814340096> to 
be 33C (59F) warmer than normal on Thursday. 2016 is on track to be thewarmest 
year on record globally 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/18/2016-locked-into-being-hottest-year-on-record-nasa-says>
.

Arctic sea ice usually grows over winter until it hits its maximum annual 
extent in March. However, this year has been notable for the lack of ice. 
“Typically sea ice begins to form in the fjords at the beginning of November, 
but this year there was no ice to be found,” said NSIDC scientist Julienne 
Stroeve, who assessed ice cover in Svalbard during November.

In the Antarctic air temperatures were 2-4C (3.6-7.2F) warmer than normal in 
November, with strong westerly winds helping disperse the sea ice pack. Several 
large bodies of open water have opened up within the sea ice formations around 
the Amundsen Sea and Ross Sea coasts.

The slump in November sea ice follows a persistent trend in the Arctic, where 
warming temperatures are causing problems for indigenous communities and 
wildlifeincluding polar bears 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/polar-bears-losing-crucial-sea-ice-study-arctic>
 and walruses. This summer saw thesecond smallest ice extent on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/arctic-sea-ice-cover-set-to-be-second-lowest-ever-recorded-data-suggests>
, with the Arctic expected to be ice-free during summerwithin decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/sep/20/arctic-sea-ice-decline-melting-summer>
.

The loss of reflective sea ice amplifies the warming process by exposing the 
dark sea, which soaks up more heat which in turn helps melt more ice. The extra 
heat is alsowinnowing away the world’s glaciers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/04/speed-glacier-retreat-worldwide-historically-unprecedented-climate-change>
, leading to sea level rise that places many of the world’s major cities at 
risk of flooding.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhy-melting-arctic-ice-can-cause-uncontrollable-climate-change-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20melting%20Arctic%20ice%20could%20cause%20uncontrollable%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhy-melting-arctic-ice-can-cause-uncontrollable-climate-change-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20melting%20Arctic%20ice%20could%20cause%20uncontrollable%20climate%20change%20%E2%80%93%20video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F25%2Fwhy-melting-arctic-ice-can-cause-uncontrollable-climate-change-video-report&media=>
Why melting Arctic ice can cause uncontrollable climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/nov/25/why-melting-arctic-ice-can-cause-uncontrollable-climate-change-video-report> 