
“Sir, can you read my story?”

It’s a request that fills me with dread, because I know what will follow.

I will read the story and delight at how well developed the characters are, 
how effectively suspense has been built up and how great the ending is.

Secret Teacher: Dear Nicky, I cried at the SATs hell you put my pupils through
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/may/14/secret-teacher-dear-nicky-i-cried-at-the-sats-hell-you-put-my-pupils-through>
But none of that matters. All that matters in year 6 are the interim teacher 
assessment frameworks 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/interim-frameworks-for-teacher-assessment-at-the-end-of-key-stage-2>
. These make it clear that writing an engaging story is of secondary importance 
– what really counts is being able to use the passive voice, chuck in a modal 
verb, employ cohesive devices and throw in some semi-colons.

I read the story. It’s good and the author is rightly proud. However, it 
doesn’t have many sentences starting with conjunctions and it is lacking colons 
and semi-colons. According the government-devised scheme for judging writing, 
this child is not working at the expected standard.

I have no choice but to convey some of this in the hope that this pupil will 
include some more fronted adverbials next time and please the powers that be. 
There is no room for discretion or negotiation in the framework.

This approach to assessment is supposed to be raising standards, but I do not 
see how. The children in my class have not become better writers this year. 
They haven’t had as many opportunities to be creative. They haven’t been able 
to focus on good story writing.

They have, however, become more technically proficient – but is this really 
what matters? When we read a brilliant story, do we exclaim: “I loved how 
Charles Dickens used that semi-colon to separate two independent clauses” or “I 
like Roald Dahl but I wish he had used the passive voice a little more often”?

No. Instead we delight in falling in love with the characters or feeling the 
tension as they get into difficulty. The assessment frameworks tell our 
children that creativity and exciting plots are not important. They encourage 
children to see technical aspects as the central requirement of good writing.

The frameworks are also largely useless in providing helpful information to 
secondary schools. Take two children, Ali and Grace. Ali can do almost 
everything mentioned in the interim frameworks for the expected standard. In 
fact, he can also do some things which indicate that he is “working at a 
greater depth within the expected standard”. But he is missing one thing: he 
has not used a single hyphen in his work. This means Ali is below the expected 
standard for writing.


Grace, on the other hand, has used a hyphen in addition to jumping through all 
of the other hoops, so she is at the expected standard. And so secondary 
schools will be told that Grace is a better writer, on the basis of one hyphen.

Secret Teacher: Our obsession with targets is hurting vulnerable pupils
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/mar/19/secret-teacher-hated-school-worry-special-needs-students-will-too>
At least under the best-fit model, in the bygone age of levels, there was some 
rationale for one child being a 3a and another a 4c. The blunt interim 
frameworks essentially make the assessment information meaningless for our 
secondary colleagues – and the impact will be felt by the children in the 
longer term, as they deal with inaccurate targets. The irony is that the 
government’s relentless drive for higher standards may actually end up damaging 
aspirations.

Teachers hoped that the huge flaws in these frameworks would mean that they 
were scrapped quickly. We hoped that the government would listen when we said 
the standards were too focused on grammar. We hoped that common sense would 
prevail. No such luck. It was recently announced that they would stay in place 
for the 2017 assessment cycle. And so another group of children will have their 
creativity suppressed in favour of technical box-ticking.

What they need – what we all need – is a system that ensures children can 
write good stories, letters, arguments and reports. This system must be 
realistic about the punctuation and grammatical features that 11-year-olds can 
be expected to use. This system could actually give useful information to 
parents and teachers.

It is not too late to save a generation of children from drowning in a sea of 
technical proficiency. But we must act now to save our future authors.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 