
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools>, understandably, want 
to be “Ofsted-ready”. In the past three years as a supply teacher, however, 
I’ve seen how headteachers use the threat of an imminent Ofsted visit to create 
a climate of fear and control.

Related: Secret Teacher: I see Ofsted for what it is – a purposeless farce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/feb/20/secret-teacher-see-ofsted-for-what-it-is-purposeless-farce>

Senior managers prowl around with clipboards all day on learning walks, 
checking for anything that inspectors might criticise. Teachers are given new 
complex forms of assessment to complete, which often duplicate ones that are 
already in use (there must be a limit to the number of times a primary teacher 
has to confirm that a pupil can count from one to 20). Everyone is forced to 
take a rigid approach to planning and employ a particular style of teaching, 
because we’re told thatOfsted <https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> 
wants to see conformity.

This culture of fear doesn’t just affect staff, who are under constant 
pressure to meet unreal expectations for exam results and data. It also has a 
major impact on pupils’ anxiety levels, as their unhappy teachers struggle to 
cope.

No escape

One of my placements was in a primary school where there was an obsession with 
pupils’ learning targets (because they were so important to Ofsted). Cards 
detailing pupils’ targets were hung from the classroom ceiling, alongside their 
photographs. The children’s weaknesses were literally hanging over them, for 
everyone to see.

This went wrong when the pupils achieved their targets and had to get new 
ones. The autistic children couldn’t cope with the change and started having 
meltdowns.

I’ve also been in schools that pride themselves on wellbeing. But there is no 
point in promoting mindfulness in the classroom, painting the corridors calming 
pastel colours or holding yoga classes for staff if the school is constantly in 
a state of nervous exhaustion at the thought that the Ofsted monster could rear 
its head the following week.

Related: Secret headteacher: I am desperate for Ofsted to call to prove we're 
'good' 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/23/secret-headteacher-ofsted-inspection-good>

Schools create their own Ofsted myths; it doesn’t matter how many times the 
inspectorate reaffirms that it doesn’t require a particular teaching style or 
lesson plan.

I once visited a special school for children with profound learning 
difficulties and watched a teacher lead a plenary on the water cycle in a 
geography lesson. The only people paying attention were the support staff. I 
later found out that staff believed having a plenary was the only way you could 
be “outstanding”. And so vulnerable children with very short concentration 
spans and at a developmentally early stage were being given the wrong sort of 
education based on a pure fantasy of what Ofsted required.

In another school, the head made staff fill in a form if they were going to 
meet each other outside school hours. He said that this procedure would satisfy 
Ofsted’s health and safety requirements. His staff would probably be discussing 
school issues, so the thinking went, and he believed he would be responsible if 
we came to any harm. We had to disclose where and when we were meeting and any 
work-related points for discussion. How this worked for two teachers on the 
staff who were having an affair, I never found out.

As if waiting for Ofsted is not painful enough, some schools opt to bring in 
external “mocksted” teams. These businesses are paid to produce a report, so 
they end up being more critical than Ofsted. They are friends of the school, we 
are told, not inspectors. However, these so-called friends have torn lessons to 
pieces and have been the last straw that pushed some dedicated older colleagues 
to early retirement.

They are supposedly brought in to do a “health check”, but they end up raising 
stress levels to a dangerous point. Managers seem not to appreciate the effect 
that these outsiders have on staff. They seem to feel that the end result of 
being Ofsted-ready justifies the means.

Losing out

When the inspectors finally do come, the reports are usually filled with 
judgements that look like they have been cut and pasted from a comments bank, 
good or bad. And that’s it.

Related: Secret Teacher: schools turn a blind eye to bad managers as long as 
they hit targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/21/secret-teacher-schools-turn-blind-eye-bad-managers-hit-targets-ofsted>

But there’s no time to relax. There’s maybe a tin of biscuits in the staffroom 
as a thank you from the head, and then it’s off again, preparing for the next 
visit. The areas of improvement become the new focus of obsession.

However, the schools that try so desperately to please can come a cropper. The 
one that tried to pin down staff’s private meetings ended up being put in 
special measures, for issues including the quality of pupil welfare. The school 
had focused on the wrong things in a bid to satisfy Ofsted.

Pupils are losing out and teachers’ morale is plummeting. It could be 
different, though. Older colleagues share memories of a dream-like time when 
inspectors came into school with a positive attitude, appreciated your lessons 
and what the school did well, and offered wise observations for improvement. It 
sounds like another world now. It seems that the current system is so embedded 
that managers are unable see another way – and fail to understand the damage 
they are doing.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 