
It’s a fact: while Americans have countless tools with which to connect with 
one another, we are also watching fragmentation, polarization, and 
de-diversification happen en masse. The American public is self-segregating, 
tearing at the social fabric of the country.

Many in the tech world imagined that the internet would connect people in 
unprecedented ways, allow for divisions to be bridged and wounds to heal – a 
Kumbaya dream of sorts. Today, those same dreamers find it quite unsettling to 
watch as the tools that were designed to bring people together are used by 
people to magnify divisions and undermine social solidarity.

These tools were built in a bubble, and that bubble has burst.

Nowhere is this more acute than with Facebook. Naive as hell, Mark Zuckerberg 
dreamed he could build the tools that would connect people at unprecedented 
scale, both domestically and internationally. He still clings to that hope 
while facing increasing attacks about the role that Facebook is playing in 
magnifying social divisions. Although critics love to paint him as only 
motivated by money, he genuinely wants to make the world a better place and sees
Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> as a tool to connect 
people, not empower them to self-segregate.

2016: the year Facebook became the bad guy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/12/facebook-2016-problems-fake-news-censorship>
The problem is not simply the “filter bubble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/08/eli-pariser-activist-whose-filter-bubble-warnings-presaged-trump-and-brexit>
”,Eli Pariser’s notion 
<https://www.ted.com/talks/eli_pariser_beware_online_filter_bubbles> that 
personalization-driven algorithmic systems help silo people into segregated 
content streams. Facebook’s claim that content personalization plays a small 
role in shaping what people see compared with their own choices is accurate, so 
they have every right to be annoyed. I couldn’t imagine Time Warner being 
blamed for who watchesDuck Dynasty v Modern Family 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/12/26/upshot/duck-dynasty-vs-modern-family-television-maps.html>
.

And yet what Facebook does do is mirror and magnify a trend that’s been 
unfolding in the US for the last 20 years: a trend of self-segregation that is 
enabled by technology in all sorts of complicated ways.

The US can only function as a healthy democracy if we find a way to diversify 
our social connections, if we find a way to weave together a strong social 
fabric that bridges ties across difference. Right now, we are moving in the 
opposite direction with serious consequences.

Two contemporary trend lines can help us understand this.

Privatizing the military: a blow to the diversification America’s social fabric
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F898f8fbe22fc99f4b85184c93545da0270e311e4%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F898f8fbe22fc99f4b85184c93545da0270e311e4%2F0_200_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The US army – once a tool of desegregation, now increasingly privatized. 
Photograph: Spencer Platt/Getty Images 
The voluntary US military <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> 
is, in many ways, a social engineering project.

The public understands the military as a service organization, dedicated to 
protecting the country’s interests. Yet when recruits sign up, they are 
promised training and job opportunities. Individual motivations vary 
tremendously, but many are enticed by the opportunity to travel the world, 
participate in a cause with a purpose, and get the heck out of Dodge. Everyone 
expects basic training to be physically hard, but few recognize that some of 
the most grueling aspects of signing up have to do with the diversification 
project that is central to the formation of the American military.

When a soldier is in combat, she must trust her fellow soldiers with her life. 
And she must be willing to do what it takes to protect the rest of her unit. In 
order to make that possible, the military must wage war on prejudice. This is 
not an easy task: plenty of generals fought hard to fight racial desegregation 
and to limit the role of women in combat.

Yet the US military was desegregated in 1948, six years before Brown v Board 
of Education forced desegregation of schools. And the supreme court ruled that 
LGBT individuals could openly serve in the military before they could legally 
marry.

Private companies focus on 'culture fit', emphasize teams that get along, 
which reinforces existing segregation patterns

Morale is often proposed as the main reason soldiers should not be forced to 
entrust their lives to people who are different from them. Yet time and again, 
this justification collapses under broader interests to grow the military.

As a result, commanders are forced to find ways to build up morale across 
difference, to actively seek to break down barriers to teamwork, and to help a 
group of people whose demographics, values, politics and ideologies are as 
varied as the country’s jell. In the process, they build one of the most 
crucial social infrastructures of the country. They build the diverse social 
fabric that underpins democracy.

Tons of money was poured into defense after 9/11, but the number of people 
serving in the US military today is far lower than it was throughout the 1980s. 
Why?

Starting in the 1990s and accelerating after 9/11, the US privatized huge 
chunks of the military. This means that private contractors and their employees 
play critical roles in everything, from providing food services to equipment 
maintenance to military housing.

The impact of this on the role of the military in society is significant. For 
example, it undermines recruits’ ability to get training to develop critical 
skills that will be essential in civilian life. Instead, while serving on 
active duty, they spend much more time on the frontlines and in high-risk 
battle, increasing the likelihood that they will be physically or 
psychologically harmed. The impact on skills development and job opportunities 
is tremendous, but so is the impact on the diversification of the social fabric.

Private vendors are not engaged in the same social engineering project as the 
military and, as a result, tend to hire and fire people based on their ability 
to work effectively as a team. Like many companies, they have little incentive 
to invest in helping diverse teams learn to work together as effectively as 
possible. Building diverse teams – especially ones in which members depend on 
each other for their survival – is extremely hard, time-consuming, and 
emotionally exhausting. As a result, private companies focus on “culture fit”, 
emphasize teams that get along, and look for people who already have the 
necessary skills, all of which helps reinforce existing segregation patterns.

The result is that, in the last 20 years, we’ve watched one of our major 
structures for diversification collapse without anyone taking notice. And 
because of how it’s happened, the process is also connected to job 
opportunities and economic opportunity for many working- and middle-class 
individuals, seeding resentment and hatred.

A self-segregated college life
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb442ab0e4ad77fc405b1c1a3525b4f0ab690fe44%2F0_206_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb442ab0e4ad77fc405b1c1a3525b4f0ab690fe44%2F0_206_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 ‘At many universities, residential life is often in the business of student 
therapy.’ Photograph: Alamy 
If you ask a college admissions officer at an elite institution to describe 
how they build a class of incoming freshmen, you will quickly realize that the 
American college system is a diversification project.

Unlike colleges in most parts of the world, the vast majority of freshmen at 
top-tier universities in the US live on campus with roommates who are assigned 
to them. Colleges approach housing assignments as an opportunity to pair 
diverse strangers with one another to build social ties. This makes sense given 
how many friendships emerge out of freshman dorms. By pairing middle-class kids 
with students from wealthier families, elite institutions help diversify the 
elites of the future.

This diversification project produces a tremendous amount of conflict. 
Although plenty of people adore their college roommates and relish the 
opportunity to get to know people from different walks of life as part of their 
college experience, there is an amazing amount of angst about dorm assignments 
and the troubles that brew once folks try to live together in close quarters. 
At many universities, residential life is often in the business of student 
therapy as students complain about their roommates and dorm-mates.

Yet just like in the military, learning how to negotiate conflict and 
diversity in close quarters can be tremendously effective in weaving the social 
fabric.

In the spring of 2006, I was doing fieldwork with teenagers at a time when 
they had just received acceptances to college. I giggled at how many of them 
immediately wrote to the college in which they intended to enroll, begging for 
a campus email address so that they could join Facebook through the school 
(before Facebook was broadly available). In the previous year, I had watched 
the previous class look up roommate assignments on MySpace so I was prepared 
for the fact that they’d use Facebook to do the same. What I wasn’t prepared 
for was how quickly they would all get on Facebook, map the incoming freshman 
class, and use this information to ask for a roommate switch.

Before they even arrived on campus in August or September, they had 
self-segregated as much as possible.

A few years later, I watched another trend hit: cellphones. While these were 
touted as tools that allowed students to stay connected to parents (which 
prompted many faculty to complain about “helicopter parents” arriving on 
campus), they really ended up serving as a crutch to address homesickness, as 
incoming students focused on maintaining ties to high school friends rather 
than building new relationships.

Students go to elite universities to “get an education”. Few realize that the 
true quality product that elite colleges in the US have historically offered is 
social network diversification. Even when it comes to job acquisition,
sociologists have long known 
<https://sociology.stanford.edu/sites/default/files/publications/the_strength_of_weak_ties_and_exch_w-gans.pdf>
 that diverse social networks (“weak ties”) are what increase job prospects. By 
self-segregating on campus, students undermine their own potential while also 
helping fragment the diversity of the broader social fabric.

Diversity is hard
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0562f0fd2ab907324023c040ece1241379768340%2F0_184_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Self-segregation%3A%20how%20a%20personalized%20world%20is%20dividing%20Americans&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fself-segregation-military-facebook-college-diversity%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0562f0fd2ab907324023c040ece1241379768340%2F0_184_3456_2074%2F3456.jpg>
 ‘Increasingly, the technologies and tools around us allow us to self-segregate 
with ease.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Diversity is often touted as highly desirable. Indeed, in professional 
contexts, we know that more diverse teams often outperform homogeneous teams. 
Diversity also increases cognitive development, both intellectually and 
socially. And yet actually encountering and working through diverse viewpoints, 
experiences, and perspectives is hard work. It’s uncomfortable. It’s 
emotionally exhausting. It can be downright frustrating.

Thus, given the opportunity, people typically revert to situations where they 
can be in homogeneous environments. They look for “safe spaces” and “culture 
fit”. Systems that are “personalized” are highly desirable. Most people aren’t 
looking to self-segregate, but they do it anyway.

Increasingly, the technologies and tools around us allow us to self-segregate 
with ease. Is your uncle annoying you with his political rants? Mute him. Tired 
of getting ads for irrelevant products? Reveal your preferences. Want your 
search engine to remember the things that matter to you? Let it capture data. 
Want to watch a TV show that appeals to your senses? Here are some 
recommendations.

What makes people willing to hear difference is knowing and trusting people 
whose worldview differs from their own

Any company whose business model is based on advertising revenue and attention 
is incentivized to engage you by giving you what you want. And what you want in 
theory is different than what you want in practice.

Consider, for example, what Netflix encountered when it started its streaming 
offer. Users didn’t watch the movies that they had placed into their queue. 
Those movies were the movies they thought they wanted, movies that reflected 
their ideal selves – 12 Years a Slave, for example. What they watched when they 
could stream whatever they were in the mood for at that moment was the 
equivalent of junk food – reruns of Friends, for example. (This completely 
undid Netflix’s recommendation infrastructure, which had been trained on 
people’s idealistic self-images).

The divisions are not just happening through commercialism, though. School 
choice has led people to self-segregate from childhood on up. The structures of 
American work life mean that fewer people work alongside others from different 
socioeconomic backgrounds. Our contemporary culture of retail and service labor 
means there’s a huge cultural gap between workers and customers with little 
opportunity to truly get to know one another. Even many religious institutions 
are increasingly fragmented such that people have fewer interactions across 
diverse lines. (Just think about how there are now “family services” and 
“traditional services” which segregate people by age.)

In so many parts of public, civic and professional life, we are 
self-segregating, and the opportunities for doing so are increasing every day.

Burst your bubble: five conservative articles to read in this 'peak Trump' week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/burst-your-bubble-five-conservative-articles-peak-trump-week>
By and large, the American public wants to have strong connections across 
divisions. They see the value in it, politically and socially. But they’re not 
going to work for it. And given the option, they’re going to renew their 
license remotely, try to get out of jury duty, and use available data to seek 
out housing and schools that are filled with people like them.

This is the conundrum we now face.

Many pundits remarked that, during the 2016 election season, very few 
Americans were regularly exposed to peoplewhose political ideology conflicted 
with their own 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/16/facebook-bias-bubble-us-election-conservative-liberal-news-feed>
. This is true. But it cannot be fixed by Facebook or the news media. Exposing 
people to content that challenges their perspective doesn’t actually make them 
more empathetic to those values and perspectives. To the contrary, it polarizes 
them.

What makes people willing to hear difference is knowing and trusting people 
whose worldview differs from their own. Exposure to content cannot make up for 
self-segregation.

If we want to develop a healthy democracy, we need a diverse and highly 
connected social fabric. This requires creating contexts in which the American 
public voluntarily struggles with the challenges of diversity to build bonds 
that will last a lifetime.

We have been systematically undoing this, and the public has used new 
technological advances to make their lives easier by self-segregating. This has 
increased polarization, and we’re going to pay a heavy price. Rather than 
focusing on what media enterprises can and should do, we need to focus instead 
on building new infrastructures for connection where people have a reason to 
come together across divisions. We need that social infrastructure just as much 
as we need bridges and roads.
 