
One of the enduring achievements of the coalition government – an achievement 
that had and has strong all-party support – is thegreen investment bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/13/green-bank-sell-off-fears-mps-peers>
. Since its creation in 2012 it has built a reputation for financially sound 
investments in green projects, and is recognised, inside and outside 
government, to be a success story that’s being copied elsewhere. Yet it is at 
risk of being broken up and destroyed, with its green purpose lost.

The idea for the bank was conceived in the wake of the financial crisis, and 
sought to address the lack of long-term finance for projects that have both 
commercial and environmental value. David Cameron was at that time passing 
through a green phase and his ministers were supportive. My Liberal Democrat 
colleagues were enthusiastic and I was charged with establishing the bank in 
the Department of Business. The only controversy was the scale of ambition. 
Some of us wanted the bank to have borrowing powers, but this ran into 
implacable Treasury opposition, and so the bank was launched with £2bn of 
government equity capital, aiming to attract private investment alongside this. 
Despite some opposition from the London banking community, I made the decision 
to locate the bank in Edinburgh.

The sale has been clouded in secrecy, and threatens to have a seriously bad 
outcome

In its brief existence the bank has been able to use its capital base to 
secure around £12bn in investment in three main sectors: industrial energy 
efficiency (including projects such asenergy-efficient street lighting in 
Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/feb/04/glasgow-green-loan-street-lights>
), waste disposal and renewable energy, as in offshore wind. The 70-plus 
projects have satisfied tests of commercial viability and green value, and also 
of “additionality”: ie they would not have happened through private investment 
alone. The choice of projects has been totally professional and non-political.

While I was secretary of state we started to consider how to give the bank 
more freedom to attract private capital and to break away from the onerous 
restrictions on additionality imposed by the European commission as a result of 
itsstate aid rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/05/drax-biomass-conversion-must-comply-with-eu-state-aid-rules>
. We also recognised that the original market conditions, post crisis, have 
changed and that it is now easier to raise capital for big, long-term projects. 
We envisaged a hybrid part-private, part-public institution.

When the Conservatives won a majority in May 2015, they decided instead on 
outright privatisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jun/25/green-investment-bank-tories-14bn-sell-pay-down-deficit>
. No doubt the Treasury saw the attractions of a pile of cash, especially with 
other privatisations, such as RBS andChannel 4 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/09/whittingdale-accused-of-misleading-mps-on-plan-to-privatise-channel-4-labours-maria-eagle>
, running into trouble. But despite reservations, I and other supporters of the 
bank could see that, under the right owner with a commitment to the growth of 
the institution, a private green investment bank could still do valuable work 
in delivering the original green purposes. It could act as a market maker for 
environmental projects, attracting long-term capital from institutional 
investors.

However, not only has the sale been clouded in secrecy and rumour but it also 
threatens to have a seriously bad outcome. In October the government selected a 
preferred bidder and, though this was never announced publicly, the choice was
Macquarie bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/05/green-investment-bank-sale-scottish-ministers-nick-hurd>
. Macquarie has acquireda bad reputation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/13/brexit-leave-voters-theresa-may-promise>
 in Australia and here, through its ownership of Thames Water, after securing 
very high rates of shareholder return at the expense of long term re-investment 
of profit. Since the whole process of sale has been opaque we do not know 
whether the sale is to go ahead and on what terms. But there is a widespread 
assumption that the bank wishes to sell off the portfolio and that delays are 
caused by their valuation exercise.

Green Investment Bank sale is 'deeply troubling', say Scottish ministers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/05/green-investment-bank-sale-scottish-ministers-nick-hurd>
The government has been considering the idea of a “golden share 
<http://www.investopedia.com/terms/g/goldenshare.asp>” to protect the green 
purpose of the bank. But it is difficult to see how this could stop a breakup 
of the bank if the purchaser is primarily motivated by short-term profit, and 
the shareholder executive (now in the Treasury rather than the Department for 
Business, Innovation and Skills) is primarily interested in getting maximum 
short-term value.

There is an optimistic view that the government is caught up in legal 
processes and really wants to save the bank. Pessimists question whether there 
is the will or the competence to do so. I am inclined to give my former 
colleagues in government the benefit of the doubt, though many wouldn’t. It 
would be tragic if the government drifted into a position where it allowed the 
destruction of a very effective and successful institution that embodies the 
prime minister’s declared objective ofbuilding a long-term industrial strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/industrial-strategy-welcomed-as-part-of-governments-new-business-policy>
 mobilising patient capital investment. Is this the final nail in the coffin of 
“green Conservatism”?
 