
The Vale of York has been granted permission this week by NHS England to put 
fat people and smokers to the back of the queue for operations 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=newssearch&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjOnIm__9LQAhUBDcAKHf4fAJEQqQIIGigAMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsurgeons-nhs-delay-treatment-obese-patients-smokers-york&usg=AFQjCNGJYO3DLiqIsEGhEoJkQZYn5sVjlA&sig2=l22883bY_uQ_VjqlB6eEVA&bvm=bv.139782543,d.d24>
. Starting in January, their treatments will be delayed a year; the obese must 
lose 10% of their body weight, and smokers give up for at least two months.

The Royal College of Surgeons says it is “very disappointed that NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> England and No 10 seem to be backing 
this arbitrary policy”.

It’s always good advice to live healthily, but this crosses a new red line. 
The clinical commissioning group (CCG), which buys services for people in York 
and Selby, is the first to be given official permission, agreed by Downing 
Street, to discriminate against particular patients – something forbidden in 
the (non-justiciable) NHS constitution. But the CCG is in trouble, in July 
judged “inadequate” and put into special measures and prescribed a “financial 
turnaround” for its debts.

Rationing will always be a part of the NHS social contract. Every system in 
the world rations: just look at the strict limits in US health insurance 
policies. There never was, or can ever be, an instant, ever-open door – however 
much politicians pretend, with their impossible seven-day pledges on no extra 
money, that there can be. But the UK system is judged one of the most efficient 
in the world, getting the biggest bang for its modest bucks, spending less than 
similar countries.

The key is its unique gatekeeping GPs who dispense the great bulk of 
treatment, while the National Institute forHealth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/health> and Care Excellence (Nice), 
devised by the last Labour government, judges which drugs and treatments are 
good enough value for money for the NHS. The rule of thumb is to spend up to 
£30,000 for an extra year of good quality life.

Right from 1948, when the NHS was first set up, waiting lists were the 
traditional rationing mechanism. When governments tightened spending, waiting 
times grew, which was good for surgeons’ private practice.

For the first time in history, the last Labour government all but abolished 
waiting lists, something seasoned NHS experts never thought possible. With a 
spending increase of 7% a year, new targets saw waiting times drop from 
sometimes two years to just 18 weeks maximum, and two weeks for suspected 
cancers. Surgeons’ incomes plummeted, as did payments for private healthcare.

But in the present crisis, rationing is tightening everywhere. You get only 
one cataract fixed where CCGs think one eye is enough. The list of treatments 
being struck off is lengthening, and the postcode lottery of what your CCG pays 
for produces injustices.

I reported recently on a podiatry clinic treating severe diabetics that can 
give some patients a cast that cures ulcers in eight weeks. Those in other CCG 
areas get a cheaper bandage, which means healing takes 52 weeks. In the past, 
old people were often denied many life-enhancing treatments. All such rationing 
may be unfair, but at least it was never personal.

The abiding principle was that the NHS treated people in order of medical 
need, according to resources available. Minor complaints went to the back of 
the queue. Urgent cases were treated first, followed by those people likely to 
be rendered wheelchair-bound and needing social care if they did not get 
surgery on hips or knees – as will many of these obese patients.

The system was blind to everything but medical priority, a founding NHS 
principle that treated viscount and vagrant according to urgency, priest and 
sinner in next-door beds regardless of rank or virtue.

But once a patient’s personal failings can be taken into account, where does 
that lead? More people on low incomes are obese and smoke, and therefore 
already suffer worse health. This is for a host of psychosocial reasons, 
including the sheer stress and hardship of being at the bottom. (SeeMichael 
Marmot’s work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/michael-marmot-consider-health-impacts-policies>
, or the irrefutable evidence from Richard Wilkinson and Kate Pickett, authors 
ofThe Spirit Level <https://www.equalitytrust.org.uk/resources/the-spirit-level>
, on the link between low status and poor physical and mental health.)

The poor often get worse NHS treatment, having less sharp elbows, and living 
in areas where the best doctors are harder to recruit. Undoubtedly most will 
have tried to lose weight and quit smoking, but public health budgets for 
obesity and smoking programmes have been cut, and are set to shrink again. This 
blaming of the individual conveniently shuts out social context. Don’t they 
have free will, these people? Politically, they will be easy to cast to the 
back of the queue, shamed into silence for their fatness and addiction. They 
will make much less fuss than local campaigners against any closures to 
hospital units.

This opens up new horizons: how much easier rationing becomes when we can 
blame the patients. Hey presto, waiting lists can be pared right down, targets 
hit, leaving only the virtuous on the lists.

But who are they? Let’s weed out anyone in any way responsible for the burden 
they put on the NHS. Away with the boy racers smashing themselves up with their 
first motorbikes and cars. Out with the extreme sports addicts – the climbers, 
potholers, boxers, base jumpers paragliders, skiers and F1 drivers, who get 
their adrenaline kicks at the NHS’s expense. Forget all sports injures.

Away with my own age group, too: drinking too much wine of an evening, slowly 
corroding our livers: a host of cancers are caused by drink and diet. And what 
about people bitten by their own horrible, fierce dogs? Or idiots tripping over 
while texting on smartphones?

As Hamlet said, use every man after his desert (or perhaps desserts) and who 
shall ‘scape whipping? Until now, in the NHS, the service may have creaked 
under the strains of the worst funding crisis in its history, but the quality 
of mercy was not strained. That has been the NHS’s great moral strength, as 
with the Red Cross or Médecins Sans Frontières, or indeed the Hippocratic oath 
itself. In treating the sick, let there be no discrimination over their moral 
worth.
 