


Senegal is hosting Adama Barrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/adama-barrow-gambia-president-argos-security-guard-london>
, president-elect of neighbouringthe Gambia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gambia>, until his inauguration on 19 
January, as the small west African country’s longtime leader, Yahya Jammeh, 
refuses to step down peacefully despitemediation efforts and calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/18/african-leaders-back-adama-barrow-as-new-president-of-the-gambia>
 from regional and international leaders.

Jammeh had initially conceded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/02/the-gambia-president-jammeh-concede-defeat-in-election>
 to Barrow after losing elections on 1 December butchanged his mind a week later
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/10/gambian-president-rejects-election-results-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
, saying the vote was invalid, citing irregularities. His party has submitted a 
petition to the supreme court against the results, but there are not enough 
judges currently presiding to hear the case.


Leaders from west Africa’s regional bloc, Ecowas, have met Jammeh and Barrow 
in attempts to mediate, and Nigeria has offered asylum to Jammeh. However, 
Ecowas said no deal had been reached yet.

Forces on standby to oust Gambian president Yahya Jammeh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/forces-on-standby-to-oust-gambian-president-yahya-jammeh>
After meeting African leaders at the France-Africa summit in Mali on Saturday, 
Barrow is now inSenegal <https://www.theguardian.com/world/senegal>, according 
to an official who spoke on condition of anonymity.


At the request of Ecowas, Senegal will host Barrow until his inauguration, the 
official said.

The Gambia is on a knife-edge. Yahya Jammeh must step aside | Momodou Musa 
Touray
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/14/gambia-yahya-jammeh-adama-barrow>
The west African regional bloc has said that if Jammeh does not cede power it 
will consider military intervention and has already prepared a standby force 
led by Senegal, which almost completely surrounds the Gambia. A Nigerian army 
memo has also ordered officers to prepare a battalion of 800 troops for a 
possible military intervention should Jammeh not step down.

The African Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africanunion> has 
announced it will cease to recognise Jammeh as the Gambia’s legitimate leader 
from 19 January, when his mandate expires, and warned of “serious consequences” 
if his actions led to the loss of lives.

The political uncertainty has in the past 10 days made several thousand 
Gambians – mostly women and children – flee the country of about 1.9 million 
people and cross the borders into Senegal.

 