
Many Brits may think they know France and Spain as holiday destinations, but 
part of their allure is that there’s always something new to discover.

You don’t have to travel halfway around the world to discover new things. 
France, for example, offers a multitude of options for the curious traveller: 
from the vast rural landscapes and medieval heritage of Brittany and Normandy 
to the verdant vineyards of Bordeaux, the sun-drenched Côte d’Azur and the 
majestic snowcapped mountains of the Alps.


And it’s so close to home. Sail to one of the ports in western France and, 
taking your own car, you can soon be exploring southern Brittany, Western 
Loire, Poitou Charentes and Aquitaine – areas that are ideal for families and 
those looking to get away from the crowds.


Or, if you’re contemplating a trip to Spain, consider staying in the north, 
where dramatic mountains, lush countryside and unspoiled beaches await. Many of 
us have experienced holidays in southern Spain, but the traditions, cuisine, 
landscape and history in the north offer a markedly different experience from 
many of the commercialised costas. Staying in a casa, parador or on a campsite 
in Asturias or Cantabria, or taking a pre-arranged car tour of the region, 
could help you discover a completely different side to Spain.


Every visit brings new experiences – and your next holiday could have a 
completely new angle: you can arrange your whole holiday experience with 
Brittany Ferries, and return ferry travel with your car is included in the 
price.


Enjoy the open road

For those who like an itinerary with variety, consider a car tour with 
pre-booked hotels along your chosen route and not too much driving every day. 
Northern Spain is great driving country and there a plenty of tours to choose 
from, such as a seven-night exploration of the Picos de Europa mountains, or a 
tour of the Rioja wine region.

In France, choose from options including coastal Brittany, the D-day beaches 
of Normandy, or the wine regions of Burgundy or Champagne. Or perhaps enjoy a 
leisurely round of golf at one of the many courses that dot the region, before 
Ryder Cup fever hits in 2018.


Find out more about Brittany Ferries’ car tours 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/holidays/car-motorcycle-tours?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=ctours>
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fset-sail-to-new-holiday-destinations-in-france-and-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e800ca94df998e876038c705b4125bef365f4e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Set%20sail%20to%20new%20holiday%20destinations%20in%20France%20and%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fset-sail-to-new-holiday-destinations-in-france-and-spain%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Set%20sail%20to%20new%20holiday%20destinations%20in%20France%20and%20Spain&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fset-sail-to-new-holiday-destinations-in-france-and-spain%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe3e800ca94df998e876038c705b4125bef365f4e%2F0_0_5760_3840%2F5760.jpg>
 The beaches of France are ideal for those with young families. Photograph: PR 
France for families

If you’re taking the whole family, France is a great holiday choice, with 
safe, beautiful beaches and child-friendly activities across the country. 
Brittany Ferries holiday options include chalet camping, with lively action and 
all-ages entertainment on the doorstep; holiday apartments with large family 
pools offering easy access to long beaches, hidden coves and extensive 
watersports; and resort hotels with family rooms and amenities for all tastes 
and budgets. You can pack your car with everything you need to keep the kids 
entertained, from surfboards to scooters – and even bring four-legged family 
members along, with a range of pet-friendly holidays to choose from, too.


Find out more about family holidays in France 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/holidays/family?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=family>

Brittany Ferries operates the UK’s widest choice of routes across the Channel, 
sailing from Portsmouth, Poole and Plymouth, to Normandy and Brittany in 
France, and Bilbao and Santander on Spain’s north coast. Onboard accommodation 
is designed to suit all budgets and preferences – all cabins are en suite and 
air conditioned, with linen, towels and toiletries provided. And with fantastic 
cuisine prepared by French chefs, shopping, cinemas and live entertainment to 
enjoy, the journey itself is part of the holiday.

Book now and save up to 20% 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/holidays/2017-sale?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=ebo>
 on Brittany Ferries sail & stay holidays, even during school holidays. Choose 
from family friendly resorts, cottages or hotel breaks in France and Spain.

Why endure all the hassles of flying when you can enjoy award winning 
facilities and service as you sail 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/fleet?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=onboard>
 to France or cruise overnight to northern Spain? Not only can you pack the car 
with all you need, you’ll also be free to explore at your own pace in the 
comfort of your own car. You can plan your perfect holiday in France or Spain 
usingBrittany Ferries’ Trip Planner 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/trip-planner?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=planner>
. It includes all their sail & stay holidays as well as places to see and 
things to do whilst you are away.
 