
Feedback can be a difficult business. When it is used in the right way, it can 
be one of the most effective strategies to improve learning, according toThe 
Sutton Trust 
<https://educationendowmentfoundation.org.uk/toolkit/toolkit-a-z/feedback/>. But
research also suggests 
<https://www.tamu.edu/faculty/payne/PA/Kluger%20&%20DeNisi%201996.pdf> that, if 
handled badly, it can do more harm than good.


The problem of perfectionism: five tips to help your students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/oct/12/the-problem-of-perfectionism-five-tips-to-help-your-students>
We all want our feedback to be encouraging and constructive, yet it can be 
misinterpreted as judgement and criticism. So how you save yourself – and your 
students – from potentially damaging comments?


Don’t go overboard

When a student has repeatedly struggled, it is tempting – and natural – to 
want to heap lots of praise on them when they achieve some level of success, no 
matter how small it is. But this can actually do more harm than good. For 
starters, insincere praise is easy to detect and can be massively off-putting. 
What’s more, too much praise canconvey a sense of low expectation 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-29838029> and, as a result, can be 
demotivating.

Correct quietly

Teenagers care a lot <http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2779518/> 
about what their peers think of them. Constructive feedback given in front of 
others, even if it is well-intended, can be read as a public attack on them and 
their ability. This can lead to students developing afear of failure 
<http://www.innerdrive.co.uk/Release_Your_Inner_Drive/7-ways-to-reduce-the-fear-of-failure/>
 and putting up a front.

One way to overcome this is what author Doug Lemov calls private individual 
correction <https://www.facebook.com/TeachLikeAChampion/videos/1997703905866>. 
This limits the attention drawn to the feedback while getting the message 
across clearly. This is similar to the technique he callsthe whisper correction 
<http://teachlikeachampion.com/blog/clip-day-jason-armstrong-whsiper-correction/>
 – the feedback technically takes place in public, but the pitch and tone of 
voice is designed to be heard only by the individual receiving it.


Four questions that encourage growth mindset among students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/nov/15/four-questions-encourage-growth-mindset-students>
Don’t compare

It is far better to focus your feedback on a student’s individual development 
and improvement rather than comparing them to their classmates (or anyone else, 
for that matter).A recent study <http://www.pnas.org/content/112/12/3659.short> 
found that being positively compared to others can lead to narcissistic 
behaviour. This sort of comparison can also reduce motivation and result in
lower confidence, emotional control, academic performance and increased anxiety 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1041608096900151>.

Be specific

When we say something is “good”, we often assume that people will know exactly 
what about it was good. This is not always the case – especially when you’re 
talking to teenagers, who,as a result of their brain restructuring 
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/09/teenage-brain-psychologist-guide-teachers-classroom>
, can find it harder to understand other people’s perspectives and thought 
processes. The more detailed and specific your feedback is, the better, to 
remove any ambiguity. Rather than “good work”, say “The way you did X was 
really good.”

Focus on process, not natural ability

Praising effort instead of intelligence increases intrinsic motivation 
<http://www.reed.edu/motivation/docs/PraiseReview.pdf> and provides a template 
for students to follow next time. Researchers have found that the type of 
praise children receive drives the type of feedback they seek out themselves. 
In thisstudy 
<http://www.itari.in/categories/ability_to_learn/praise_for_intelligence_can_undermine_childrens.pdf>
, 86% of children who had been praised for their natural ability asked for 
information about how their peers did on the same task. Only 23% of children 
who had been praised for effort asked for this type of feedback, with the vast 
majority of them asking for feedback about how they could do better.

Secrets of the teenage brain: a psychologist's guide for teachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/09/teenage-brain-psychologist-guide-teachers-classroom>
Combine open and closed questions

The problem with closed questions – “Were you nervous before the exam?” – is 
that if the answer is no, the conversation can grind to a halt. You may find 
out that the student wasn’t nervous, but you won’t find out what they were 
actually feeling (sad, angry, not bothered, tired and so on). Open questions – 
“How were you feeling in the morning of the exam?” – encourage pupils to tell 
their stories and develop ownership of the situation.

But you should aim for a combination of open and closed questions in your 
feedback, along with statements. Closed statements are useful for conveying key 
information and keeping the conversation focused.


End with clear action points

This is one of the key points from the What Makes Great Teaching 
<http://www.suttontrust.com/wp-content/uploads/2014/10/What-makes-great-teaching-FINAL-4.11.14.pdf>
 report. Any feedback that doesn’t lead to a change in behaviour change is 
redundant – there must be a point to it. What do you want them to do 
differently? What are they going to do after the conversation to improve? The 
more detailed and specific the action points, the better.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 