
Sex education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sexeducation> in schools 
worldwide is so “out of touch” with pupils’ experiences that they find it 
irrelevant and switch off, research of young people in 10 countries including 
the UK shows.

Many students find lessons about sex and relationships negative, moralistic 
and too scientific to help them deal with the feelings and situations they are 
encountering, according to an analysis of young people’s viewspublished in the 
journal BMJ Open 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/embargo?embargoed-uri=http%3A%2F%2Fbmjopen.bmj.com%2Fcontent%2F6%2F9%2Fe011329>
.

The study, led by Dr Pandora Pound of the school of social and community 
medicine at Bristol University, found a surprising consistency in young 
people’s views on sex education regardless of whether they were in Britain, the 
US, Iran,Japan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/japan>, Australia or 
elsewhere.

“It is clear from our findings that SRE [sex and relationship education] 
provision in schools frequently fails to meet the needs of young people,” Pound 
said. “Schools seem to have difficulty accepting [that] some people are 
sexually active, which leads to SRE that is out of touch with many young 
people’s lives.”

Pound and her colleagues reached their conclusions after examining 55 
previously published studies that set out young people’s views of sex education 
between 1990 and 2015. It also included pupils and ex-pupils in the Republic of 
Ireland, New Zealand, Canada, Brazil and Sweden.

SRE lessons too often left female pupils at risk of harassment if they 
participated and male students anxious to hide their ignorance about sex, they 
found. Some young men were disruptive in class in order to disguise their 
inexperience.

Many pupils believed that schools saw sex as a problem to be managed, that 
there was too much focus on heterosexual relationships and that females were 
often portrayed as passive and males as predatory, the researchers found.

Many pupils also found it uncomfortable and unhelpful that teachers they had 
for other subjects also taught them SRE. “They expressed dislike of their own 
teachers delivering SRE due to blurred boundaries, lack of anonymity, 
embarrassment and poor training,” according to thestudy 
<http://bmjopen.bmj.com/embargo?embargoed-uri=http%3A%2F%2Fbmjopen.bmj.com%2Fcontent%2F6%2F9%2Fe011329>
.

 A 2013 report into sex education by Ofsted, the schools inspectorate for 
England, found that just 19% of 18-year-olds believe that SRE should be taught 
by a teacher from their own schools.

For their part, teachers themselves often admit to “discomfort” at teaching 
SRE. Ofsted’s review also found that one in three English schools delivered 
poor quality SRE.

Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> could tackle these 
problems by instead holding some single sex SRE lessons and using sex educators 
from outside to deliver lessons, the authors suggest.

They also suggest that schools should be much more “sex-positive” – open, 
frank and positive about sex in a way that challenges negative attitudes in 
society to sex.

“It is disappointing that the pattern of inadequate sex and relationships 
education is repeated from country to country, with young people in England and 
elsewhere saying that SRE starts too little and too late and is often too 
biological with little attention to relationships, and lessons fail to reflect 
the reality of young people’s lives,” said Lucy Emmerson, co-ordinator of the 
UK’s Sex Education Forum.

“Teachers have repeatedly said that they need subject-specific training so 
that they can teach good quality sex and relationships education, but in 
England there has been a failing on the part of government to require that SRE 
must be taught in every school, so there are huge gaps in provision with some 
schools not teaching the subject at all,” she added.

The study, which was funded by the NHS’s National Institute for Health 
Research, also found that SRE often does not give pupils practical information 
such as what to do if they become pregnant and the pros and cons of different 
methods of contraception. In addition it found that sex education is often 
delivered too late for some pupils.

Without an overhaul of SRE, “young people will continue to disengage from SRE 
and opportunities for safeguarding and improving their sexual health will be 
reduced”, the paper warns.

“The international evidence is clear, comprehensive SRE taught early by 
trained educators results in improvements for young people’s sexual health and 
reductions in sexual violence,” added Emmerson. “But too many countries are 
failing to respond and take action and provide children and young people with 
the education they need and deserve.”
 