
Government guidance on sex and relationship teaching in English schools, last 
updated 16 years ago, has no reference to pornography despite “significant 
evidence” that its ready availability online can facilitate harassment and 
sexual violence, MPs say.

An inquiry report published on Tuesday by the women and equalities committee 
criticises the Department for Education and Ofsted, the schools watchdog, for 
their lack of a coherent plan to monitor the“shocking scale” of sexual 
harassment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/08/sex-offences-in-schools-reported-to-police-trebles>
 and violence in classrooms across England or to tackle the consequences.

Evidence of the need for government action was now “quite overwhelming”, said 
Maria Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/maria-miller>, the 
committee’s chair. Her inquiry found an “alarming inconsistency” in how schools 
deal with sexual harassment and violence, with many under-reporting incidents, 
a disregard for existing national and international equality obligations and a 
lack of guidance and support for teachers.

The committee called for a new duty on schools to record, prevent and respond 
to incidents of sexual violence, for age-appropriate sex and relationship 
education (SRE) to be compulsory in primary and secondary schools, and for 
clear national government guidance on the issue. Ofsted and the Independent
Schools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Inspectorate must 
assess how well schools perform this duty, the MPs said.


Pupils reported hearing girls being called a slut or a slag on a regular 
basis, according to research highlighted by the committee. It heard that 
“slapping of bums and flicking [lifting up] of skirts” was common, while one 
teacher told how they had had “many young girls sobbing and humiliated in my 
office because partially naked images have gone viral”.

Teachers’ unions and women’s groups welcomed the report. 

At the report’s launch at Girlguiding HQ in London, Miller said her report 
painted a “concerning picture”. She said: “We have heard girls talk about 
sexual bullying and abuse as an expected part of everyday life; with teachers 
accepting sexual harassment as ‘just banter’; and parents struggling to know 
how they can best support their children.”

On Monday the Guardian reported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/12/sexualised-behaviour-in-very-young-children-increasing-say-teachers>
 that teachers had concerns about a “slow creep” of sexualised behaviour in 
children as young as five.

Comparing sexual harassment in schools with how (now illegal) harassment in 
the workplace was treated two decades ago, Miller asked: “It is right for young 
girls as young as 11 have to dealt with sexual harassment and even sexual 
violence at school on an everyday basis?”


Miller stressed the report’s findings on the negative impact that widespread 
access to pornography was having on children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/how-porn-is-damaging-our-childrens-future-sex-lives>
 and their perceptions of sex, relationships and consent. “The most important 
recommendation is for SRE to be made statutory to recognise the changed way we 
live and the way young people accessing pornography form their attitudes 
towards sex and relationships,” she said.

The data cited in the Commons on Tuesday – first published in September last 
year – revealed that5,500 sexual offences were recorded in UK schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/sep/05/wave-school-sex-abuse-pupils> 
over a three-year period, including 600 rapes.

Other recommendations put forward by the committee were for the government to 
update SRE guidance to include teaching on pornography, for police to record 
incidents of sexual harassment and violence in schools and for 
government-funded research to establish the most effective ways to support boys 
and young men to be part of the solution.

Almost a quarter of young people said they were 12 years old or younger when 
they first saw pornography online, and 7.3% were under 10, according to aBBC 
survey <http://www.bbc.co.uk/mediacentre/latestnews/2014/porn-whats-the-harm> 
in 2014.

Research by Girlguiding in 2015 shows that 59% of girls have experienced 
sexual harassment at school and 75% say anxiety about it negatively affects 
their lives, including thinking twice about raising their hands in class.

Girlguiding, which has been campaigning about sexual harassment in schools 
since 2014,launched an online petition on change.org 
<https://www.change.org/p/end-sexual-harassment-in-schools> on Tuesday calling 
on Justine Greening, the education secretary, and her counterparts in Scotland 
and Wales to adopt the committee’s findings. It is the second petition to be 
launched on change.org calling for Greening to take action to tackle the issue.

Teachers’ unions welcomed the report and called for urgent government 
leadership, support and guidance on the issue.

Kevin Courtney, general secretary of the National Union of Teachers, said: 
“Government education policies hinder schools’ ability to tackle sexual 
harassment and sexual bullying effectively by leaving no time for pastoral care 
or personal, social, health and economic education (PSHE) within the curriculum 
or school day.”

“Government needs to provide real leadership on this issue and widen their 
vision for the purpose of education.”

Chris Keates, general secretary of the NASUWT, which gave evidence to the 
inquiry, said: “The NASUWT submitted evidence to the inquiry based on our own 
research, which showed that sexual harassment, including threats of sexual 
violence and degrading comments, is an all too frequent reality for pupils and 
teachers in our schools.

“Mobile phones and social media have become tools by which this abuse is often 
perpetrated, yet a survey of over 1,300 teachers by the NASUWT earlier this 
year found that only just over a quarter of schools had an internet or social 
media policy which makes specific reference to protecting staff and pupils from 
this kind of abuse.”

Jane Lees, chair of the Sex Education Forum, said: “That sexual violence and 
harassment in schools is so widespread is disturbing but it is not inevitable.”

“There is no excuse for the government to ignore the overwhelming support 
amongst young people, parents, teachers, MPs and peers from across the 
political spectrum.”
 