
Sexual harassment <https://www.theguardian.com/world/sexual-harassment> in 
universities is real, it is ugly, and it is well known about – certainly in my 
departments. Yes, plural. I have heard about it, seen it and experienced it 
myself, throughout my career.

Forget equality and diversity, my university only cares about appearances
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/29/forget-equality-and-diversity-my-university-only-cares-about-appearances>
It usually comes from nice, affable, older male academics who are all hot on 
equality and feminism until they’ve had a few drinks at the pub, or, worse, 
when we’re away for a conference. At conferences there are no wives to go home 
to, there is no one to check on them, and there are hotel rooms available.


Things can get pretty out of hand, but even I was surprised the morning I saw 
a young woman who had been left with bite marks on her face from the advances 
of a male lecturer, 20 years her senior. She said she blamed herself for not 
having pushed him back quickly enough.


Why do we not speak about this? Rather, why do we not speak out about it in 
public? We do in private. Do senior academics not realise that we talk to each 
other, and that they are earning themselves reputations as predators to be 
avoided? You don’t want to be the last one left in the pub with them and you 
never, ever agree to share a taxi. But avoiding them altogether is not an 
option: it is through socialising that career-boosting networks are built.


A precarious position

I am known as an early-career researcher, or an ECR – a euphemism to describe 
a person stuck in a series temporary contracts and fixed-term posts that can 
often stretch into their late thirties. If and when we ECRs emerge from these 
precarious contracts, once we are in a position to choose, many of us will be 
careful in selecting who we work with. I’d sooner get out of academia than work 
with some senior male staff I have crossed paths with.


Do senior academics not realise that we talk to each other, and that they are 
earning reputations as predators?

And that is the problem. The inappropriate comments and the unreasonable 
requests (and worse) all stem from a system where many, many men are now safely 
established in permanent posts.


They know each other, especially within their fields and disciplines. They 
protect one another and they don’t want to let members of the group down by 
supporting an ECR or PhD student making a complaint against them.


Stories like the recent case from the University of Sussex – where a lecturer 
onlyrecently lost his job 
<http://www.theargus.co.uk/news/14680261.Update__Lecturer_who_beat_student_lover_leaves_post/>
 after being convicted for abusing a young female student he was in a 
relationship with – do not give us confidence in the system. Earlier this year, 
Sara Amhed, a professor at Goldsmiths University,was moved to resign 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/education/education-news/london-university-goldsmiths-professor-quits-sexual-harassment-female-students-staff-a7072131.html>
 because she claimed sexual harassment was becoming “normalised and 
generalised” and “part of the culture of academia”.


But making a stand can amount to career suicide for ECRs. Getting a job is 
difficult enough: permanent positions are like golden unicorns at the end of 
the rainbow and no one can afford to be known as “the one who complained”.


Jobs are also tied to the number of publications a person has. As journals 
become more and more specialised, it is not difficult to work out whose writing 
you are peer-reviewing. The networks come into play again. Is it worth making a 
complaint against senior men who may end up deciding whether your work gets 
published or not, all the while covered by the pretence of anonymity?


Working as a casual? Zip your lip and do as you're told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/22/working-as-a-casual-zip-your-lip-and-do-as-youre-told>
Safety, sanity and self-esteem

So how widespread is the problem? I can only speak about the handful of 
universities I have worked in, but I can confidently say that the worst things 
I have seen and experienced happened when male senior academics were in charge 
all the way to the top of the hierarchy.

I know that harassment is not only male-to-female, but I have only ever had 
male principal investigators on my projects – four of them over 10 years – and 
have always been the junior female around tables full of men in senior roles.


My colleagues and I do what we can to maintain safety, sanity and self-esteem 
in an academic environment that is still dominated by old boys’ networks, and 
we hope that things will improve as more women become established and take on 
senior roles. I am not saying that a female-led system would be perfect, of 
course – I am sure there are plenty of women who would steal your data, but 
maybe without trying to grope you in the process.


Is this something you have experienced? We’d like to hear from staff and 
students who have concerns about sexual harassment at UK universities.Get in 
touch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/26/have-you-been-affected-by-sexual-harassment-at-university>
 to share your story confidentially.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 