
This week, the Women and Equalities Select Committee reported on its inquiry 
into sexual violence and harassment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/13/sex-education-in-schools-is-inadequate-say-mps>
 in schools. As the school year began last week, Everyday Sexism founder Laura 
Bates and supporters wrotean open letter to the prime minister and education 
secretary 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/women/sex/these-women-are-calling-on-theresa-may-to-make-sex-education-com/>
 demanding mandatory sex and relationships education to be taught in schools. 
They were responding to evidence from aBBC Freedom of Information investigation 
<http://www.endviolenceagainstwomen.org.uk/news/212/alarming-level-of-sexual-offending-in-schools-is-a-national-emergency>
 which found that more than 5,500 sexual assaults, including 600 rapes, were 
recorded by the police as having taken place in schools over three years.

The glass ceiling in education: why are so few women becoming headteachers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/teacher-blog/2014/feb/12/women-headteachers-education-glass-ceiling-careers>
Sexual harassment and violence are consequences of a culture rooted in rigid 
and binary gender norms. These are the norms that cause the underrepresentation 
ofgirls studying physics 
<http://www.iop.org/publications/iop/2013/closingdoors/> at A-level and boys 
taking up careers innursing 
<https://www.nursingtimes.net/why-are-there-so-few-men-in-nursing/849269.article>
. These norms mean that girls get teased for playing sport, an allegedly 
“masculine” pursuit. These same norms feed into the idea that girls’ bodies are 
inherently sexual and enticing to boys and men, who cannot control their 
desires.

As educators, we have an important role in building cultures of consent and 
respect among our students. Here are three simple steps you can take in your 
classroom:


Challenge sexist language

When you hear a sexist comment, don’t think of it as a drain on your subject 
teaching time, but a useful teachable moment. I’ve certainly been guilty of 
responding with a cursory “Please don’t use that language in my classroom”, 
suggesting that the comment is mildly offensive and inconsequential, or – worse 
– not allowed within the formal teaching environment, but acceptable elsewhere.

Blaming and shaming young people for saying such things only encourages them 
to say it in private, it doesn’t stop it from happening. Instead, see these 
comments as opportunities to engage students in critical thinking: explore what 
was said, and why. This approach allows you to bring learning to all students 
in the class.

Questions could include:


 * What made you say that?

 * Do you think it’s true?

 * Is there any evidence that it may not be the case?

 * What do you think the consequences are of saying what you’ve said? 
Six of the best sex education programmes around the world
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/may/20/six-best-sex-education-programmes-around-the-world>
Deal with causes, not consequences

Imagine you are a headteacher and you are told that two boys sexually harassed 
a girl while they were all playing sport at lunchtime. What do you do? You 
could ban the mixed playing of sport going forward. This is a common response.


But the root of the issue is not that the girls and boys were playing sport 
together. The problem was that, in this scenario, boys touched a girl 
non-consensually. Treating the symptom rather than the cause does not create a 
safe learning environment or healthy relationships. So what could be done 
instead?

You need to engage the students responsible in a frank discussion about their 
behaviour. Help them to understand why what they did was harmful.Ensure that 
they understand the meaning of consent 
<http://www.rasasc.org.uk/wp/wp-content/uploads/2013/11/Young-People-I-Heart-Consent-workshopsback-and-front.pdf>
.


As for the victim of the harassment: it is imperative that they receive a 
clear message from staff that what happened was not their fault. They did not 
provoke the behaviour. They are not to blame.


Your own school behaviour management policy will guide the punishment, but it 
is important that you don’t ban the activity or environment where the 
harassment has taken place (whether it is girls and boys sitting next to one 
another in class or young people hugging in the playground). Doing so tells 
young people that sexual harassment is a result of an unsuitable activity or 
environment, not an unacceptable behaviour itself.


Examine your own assumptions

The way we engage with inequality shapes the learning of the young people we 
are teaching. Look at the way you treat girls and boys, and think about the 
assumptions you may be subconsciously bringing into the classroom.

How to teach ... human rights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/oct/01/young-human-rights-reporter-competition>
We need to interrogate why we do these things, and develop our skills and 
knowledge. Without doing this important work ourselves, as teachers and school 
leaders, we’ll be unable to truly support young people to move beyond thinking 
these things too.

To move away from a world that allows sexual harassment and violence to 
happen, we must ensure everyone’s right to participate in education free from 
fear, in a culture underpinned by mutual respect. This can only be possible 
with well-informed educators who have taken the time to understand the the 
problem and support young people in engaging with the consequences.


Rachael Curzons is a former teacher who works for the Fearless Futures 
<http://twitter.com/fearlessfutures> social enterprise

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox
 