
It isn’t always easy to be a politician or a parent. Shami Chakrabarti has 
found, sometimes,it’s very difficult to be both 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/09/shami-chakrabarti-grammar-schools-segragation-theresa-may-11-plus>
.

“I have real concerns about grammar schools,” the new shadow attorney general 
said on ITV’s Peston on Sunday 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-10-09/shami-chakrabarti-defends-sending-son-to-18-000-private-school-while-criticising-selective-education/>
 when asked about Labour’s opposition to selective education – before admitting 
she in fact sends her own son to a private school. That’s the prestigious 
Dulwich College at a cost of £18,000 a year.

“I live in a nice big house and eat nice food and my neighbours are homeless 
and go to food banks,” Chakrabarti acknowledged when Robert Peston suggested 
she could be called a hypocrite.

I have some sympathy for the former head of Liberty. She made what is in many 
ways a personal decision about her family and I imagine didn’t do it lightly.

Several Labour party parents have faced similar conflict. Back in 2003, it 
came out thatDiane Abbott was sending her son to the £10,000 per year City of 
London school <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/nov/05/labour.uk>, 
while Tony Blair sent his sons to comprehensives buthired private tutors for 
them <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/jul/05/schools.publicservices> 
from a leading independent school.

Shami Chakrabarti says grammar schools enforce segregation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/09/shami-chakrabarti-grammar-schools-segragation-theresa-may-11-plus>
It’s an entirely natural impulse to want the best for your children, and 
sticking with your principles is tough when you’re weighing it up against their 
future.

But if it is difficult for people like Chakrabarti to overcome this dilemma – 
to think about the greater good of society over whatever advantage they can get 
for their own child – it seems a tough sell to then ask millions of families to 
do that very thing. To put it another way, if you’ve felt the need to choose a 
selective education for your own child, it becomes somewhat tricky to argue 
against other people’s child having one – particularly when they’re 
considerably less advantaged than you.

No matter how genuine their conflict, it’s ironic how hard some politicians or 
high-profile campaigners seem to find sending their child to state school. The 
reality is, it should be easier for them than many of us: they can afford to 
live in the wealthiest catchment areas, often in London, with some of the best 
state schools in the country at their disposal. They can also rest easy that 
they’re giving their children all they need at home: after all, the same 
high-profile job that brings scrutiny also brings the cushion of a generous 
salary, control over working hours, and a parent with (often) an Oxbridge 
education. More than many families, a politician’s child is hardly starting 
with a disadvantage, in desperate need of a leg up.

When Chakrabarti points to the fact she’s surrounded by homeless people and 
food banks – the inference being, no one would accuse her of hypocrisy over 
that advantage – she’s using a flawed comparison. Sending a child to the local 
comprehensive is not the equivalent of starving them or selling your home. And 
not simply because, contrary to the worst myths about state schools, a 
comprehensive education is not five years of deprivation and misery. (I doubt 
very much Chakrabarti believes that). It’s because throwing your family’s 
dinner in the bin, or swapping your five-bedroom townhouse for a council flat, 
is entirely fruitless. Your son not being able to eat does not make someone 
else’s less hungry. Your daughter not having her own room does not allow 
someone else’s to have a bed.

My school’s broad social mix benefited all pupils. I’m glad it wasn’t a 
grammar | Poppy Noor
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/broad-social-mix-school-benefited-pupils-not-grammar>
But resisting sending your child to a selective school – whether that’s 
through the 11-plus or private fees – does really improve the education of 
other people’s less-advantaged children.Research shows 
<http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/2/7/45002641.pdf> that articulate, confident, 
able classmates are the greatest source of help for other pupils. Similarly,
middle-class parents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/oct/29/middle-class-children-better-school>
 who can use their time, influence and experience do wonders for their local 
school. Put bluntly, when people like Chakrabarti siphon their kids into 
grammars and private schools, they weaken the comprehensive system. Yes, the 
exact system they advocate.

This isn’t about criticising individual parents or a sanctimonious need for 
political purity. But recognising that each time a vocal supporter of 
non-selective education opts for a grammar or private school for their own 
child, it damages the wider argument. It doesn’t matter that Labour’s 
opposition to selective education is based on evidence of what actually helps 
the majority of people’s children. The public won’t have faith in the 
comprehensive system if politicians, peers and campaigners don’t.

It’s the smell of hypocrisy of so-called out-of-touch elites that turns voters 
off politics: one rule for me and another for you. Right or wrong, that’s even 
more the case when you’re talking about the need for a fair and equal 
education, when you’re trying to make the case for a society that cares about 
the life chances of all children, not just our own.

If the left really wants to win the argument for equality, it can’t publicly 
argue for collective responsibility and privately duck out in the name of 
individualism. Chakrabarti has remindedLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> of an ongoing lesson. Words are 
easy. Actions are altogether more difficult.
 