
It’s ten past three on a Thursday afternoon and Shappi Khorsandi is talking 
nether regions. “I spoke to a comedian the other day who is 26 and he has never 
seen a woman with pubic hair,” the British-Iranian comedian says, enunciating 
incredulously. “They just haven’t seen it. Just the very idea, it’s like: 
‘Whoa! Why would you have that, why would you keep that on?’

Is women's visible pubic hair really so shocking that it must be censored? | 
Jessica Valenti
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/23/women-visible-pubic-hair-shocking-censored>
“And I know young women who are horrified at the idea … I think pornography 
has made it look like women do not havepubic hair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/23/the-disturbing-truth-about-how-we-treat-out-pubic-hair>
. And they do.”

And that’s why we’re discussing bikini lines – or the lack thereof – at her 
kitchen table in Ealing, west London, over tea, bananas and glasses of coke. 
Since January, Khorsandi has been president of theBritish Humanist Association 
<https://humanism.org.uk/>, which campaigns for high-quality sex and 
relationships education (SRE) to be made statutory. For her it’s the ubiquity 
of online porn that makes proper education so critical.

“We have to be much more open about what we talk about and really understand 
the difference between fantasy and reality,” she says. “Every fantasy, every 
kink between consenting adults is fine, but I don’t like the idea of any 
teenager watching pornography and not having an outlet to talk about what 
they’ve seen.

“A very young friend told me when she first started sex she just started 
acting out porn stuff because she thought that’s what sex was meant to be. It’s 
said so often, but there are so many pressures on kids these days and they’re 
subjected to so much damaging nonsense on the internet, on TV, on their phones. 
If we don’t give them all the information they need to stay healthy and happy 
and safe, we’re letting them down.”

The last Labour government had been set to make personal, social, health, and 
economic education (PSHE) – which includes SRE – statutory, but dropped the 
plan to get its schools bill passed before the 2010 election. After that 
Michael Gove and Nicky Morgan rejected calls for statutory PSHE, most recently 
in February this year. Last week the new education secretary, Justine Greening, 
told the education select committee she was looking at the possibility, but was 
yet to reach a formal view. Figures published by the Department for Education 
last month reveal a 29% drop in teaching time given to PSHE in English 
secondary schools between 2011 and 2015.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsex-lads-grey-areas-uk-universities-consent-rape-sexual-assault-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sex%2C%20lads%20and%20grey%20areas%3A%20what's%20going%20on%20at%20UK%20universities%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsex-lads-grey-areas-uk-universities-consent-rape-sexual-assault-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sex%2C%20lads%20and%20grey%20areas%3A%20what%27s%20going%20on%20at%20UK%20universities%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Foct%2F19%2Fsex-lads-grey-areas-uk-universities-consent-rape-sexual-assault-video&media=>
Sex, lads and grey areas: what’s going on at UK universities? – video (October 
2015) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2015/oct/19/sex-lads-grey-areas-uk-universities-consent-rape-sexual-assault-video>
“The emotions around sex need to be talked about in a safe place and I can’t 
think of a safer place than school,” says Khorsandi, mother to Cassius, nine, 
and Genevieve, three. “We need to let our guard down and be less prudish. 
You’re not ruining a childhood by talking about sex and relationships.”

What was her own sex education like? “Rudimentary. Something about a rabbit 
and then some diagram. When I was 11 this girl called Paula told me you got one 
baby if you had sex for five minutes, and twins if you had sex for 10 minutes. 
At 11 I want my children to be a lot more clued up than that.”

Born to non-religious parents in Iran, Khorsandi, 43, grew up in Ealing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/23/shappi-khorsandi-my-family-values>
 after the family fled to London following the Islamic revolution. Her 
Edinburgh show this year, which she’s now touring, sees her “sending a love 
letter to her adopted land”.

How porn is damaging our children’s future sex lives
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/10/how-porn-is-damaging-our-childrens-future-sex-lives>
This summer her first novel, Nina Is Not OK, which explores issues around 
alcohol and consent, was published.

“There were incidences when I was younger, one in particular, where if I had 
known the law I would have gone to the police,” she says. “And I’m so glad for 
this generation that historical rape cases are being brought forward, and 
people are being charged. And that women who make a complaint after being raped 
when drunk are taken seriously.

“I don’t think it happens more often, I think that my generation just ‘put it 
down to experience’ … you weren’t walking down an alley, you weren’t dragged 
down by a stranger and therefore you haven’t been raped.

“So in my book my character and what happened to her was a way for me to 
create someone to rescue from that sort of situation and give her that 
awareness that this was wrong.”

Khorsandi got involved with the BHA after meeting its chief executive, Andrew 
Copson <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/andrewcopson>, while appearing in 
fellow comedianRobin Ince <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/robin-ince>’s 
Christmas show, Nine Lessons and Carols for Godless People, several years ago.

She has spent her life countering assumptions, including in the media, that 
she must be a Muslim. “I’ll be at someone’s house tucking into a pork pie and 
someone will go: ‘Oh, should you be eating that?’” she says. “What a bizarre 
assumption to make – you don’t even know my name, you just looked at the colour 
of my skin.”

She became a BHA patron and was delighted to be invited to be president when 
physicistJim Al-Khalili <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/jimalkhalili> 
stepped down. “I really believe in the campaigning they do. It just felt like a 
really warm and lovely thing to be asked to do.”

Another key part of that campaigning is against faith schools. “Faith off!” 
says Khorsandi. “I support parents in raising their children with whatever 
faith they want. But in a state-funded school there is no room for exclusion.

“We wouldn’t expect that in our health service or our fire service – 
‘these fire engines will only go out to people whose favourite colour is 
purple.’ A public service is a public service.”

The negative consequences of faith schools “know no bounds”. “So much is made 
about how increasingly segregated we are becoming as a country, and that has 
been more apparent in the last few weeks than it has in a long time,” she says, 
referring to the reportedrise in hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 since the EU referendum. “It’s as clear as day to me that religiously 
segregated faith schools are one of the key drivers of division.”

News of Theresa May’s intention to lift the 50% cap 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-to-end-ban-on-new-grammar-schools>
 on the number of pupils new faith free schools can choose based on religion 
has been condemned by the BHA as a “catastrophic setback”.

Maria Miller: ‘Young people need sensible, grounded sex education at school’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/sep/12/maria-miller-young-people-sex-education-inequality-tory-mp>
Khorsandi’s own school days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2010/nov/14/shappi-khorsandi-comedian-obsessive-compulsive>
 at a London comprehensive were marred by learning difficulties that were not 
picked up: dyslexia that was recognised only at university (the first essay she 
submitted came back with a single comment: “Are you dyslexic?”) and attention 
deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), which was diagnosed last year, after a 
spell of therapy.

“I enjoyed primary school very much, I hated secondary school with a passion,” 
she says. “It was full of really scary kids who picked on me. I was ignored by 
teachers and I came out with four GCSEs … they just sort of left me by the 
wayside.”

Getting an A in her English A-level, with the help of a teacher who spotted 
her talent for writing, changed her life: “I used to go and sit with her at 
lunchtimes and she’d go through things with me.” She went on to study drama, 
theatre and television at the University of Winchester.

Is it less likely today that problems like hers would go unnoticed? “I think 
you have to have a school and parents that are on the ball,” she says. “You 
can’t just expect a teacher of a class of 30 or 40 to pick up on every little 
thing.”

A few days after our interview, the women and equalities select committee 
published a report detailing widespreadsexual harassment and violence in schools
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/13/the-guardian-view-on-sexual-harassment-in-schools-action-is-needed>
. “Of the 90-odd pieces of written evidence submitted to the inquiry, only one 
didn’t recommend statutory SRE,” Khorsandi points out in an email. “A comedian 
could only dream of the kind of approval ratings this policy has, so what is 
stopping the government I do not know.”
 