
We have a large and active community of members on the Guardian Higher 
Education Network, many of whom write blogs and comment pieces for us. We value 
these contributions enormously - you are the real experts on the higher 
education sector and our coverage is enhanced by your insider experience of how 
things work on the ground.

How to come up with an idea

Be fresh 
When you’re thinking about what to offer, remember that what readers want is 
something unusual, something they’ve not read before. You’re looking for an 
unusual topic, or a fresh approach to an old theme. We cannot publish pieces 
that have appeared elsewhere, even on a blog.

We are interested in submissions about all aspects of life in the sector from 
the point of view of everyone working there - academics, policymakers, 
planners, librarians, estate managers, early career researchers, 
administrators, those providing student services… the list could go on for a 
very long time.


And which topics are good? We are interested in everything from the political 
to the personal, the financial to the frivolous. How is policy changing and how 
does this affect your work? How do you feel about your place in the university 
- and what could be done to improve conditions? Tell us about funding, 
publishing, planning, expanding, recruiting, managing, branding, going global, 
widening access, researching, evaluating success, gender inequality, mental 
health, teaching, sustainability and the social scene.


Be specific 
The best topics tend to be tight and focused, with lots of colour and example. 
So don’t pitch “the state of higher education today”, and do pitch “our 
vice-chancellor makes us all do salsa on a Friday night”.

How to pitch

So how do you get to be published on the Guardian? You begin by pitching us an 
idea. These ideas can range from the deeply personal to something more like a 
traditional news comment piece.

Think about whether you want to write anonymously – you certainly can, in our 
Anonymous Academics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/series/academics-anonymous>
 section. It allows for a welcome frankness. But having a bylined piece on the 
Guardian site has clear benefits too, and will be a boost to your online 
profile.


Have a clear argument 
You need to have a strong point to make, something readers are going to be 
eager to discuss in the comments section. Outline your argument in your pitch.

Explain how you will make your case 
If you are going to cite previous articles on the subject, or base it on new 
research, we need to know. If you get the go-ahead to write the piece, you will 
need to make sure that anything you assert as fact is backed up by links.

Quotes 
Introducing other voices into your piece can work well, because it adds 
variety and nuance. You can bring in a range of opinions on a topic, and back 
up your own views by having someone else say it. So if you are going to include 
quotes, tell us who will be in your piece.

How to write your piece

If we like your idea – and if no one else has pitched the same thing – then 
we’ll discuss it with you, make further suggestions as to how you can develop 
it, and ask you to go ahead and put your piece together.

 * Your piece needs to be 600 to 800 words long. 
 * Adopt a conversational, chatty style. Avoid cliches, jargon, academic 
language and acronyms. 
 * Put some serious work into your intro – is it intriguing, engaging and 
different? 
 * Always use specific examples, perhaps based on personal experience. Don’t 
generalise or waffle on about challenges and passion. 
 * Use short common nouns as much as you can: “boots” and “apples” are much 
more evocative than “footwear” and “produce”. And long strings of 
multi-syllabled abstract nouns – “advocacy of a multicultural specificity in 
urbanisations” – are soporific. 
 * Where possible, find recent research or media coverage about your topic, 
and link to it in your piece. 
 * Check your facts. There’s no point in having a guess at, say, the number of 
students who drop out in first year. You need to have an up-to-date statistic 
and a link to show where you found it. 
 * You can’t break the law. You can’t make unsubstantiated libellous claims 
against people. You can’t change a quote to make it say what you want it to say.
 * Read what you’ve written aloud when you’re finished. Is that how you talk? 
 * The reader should emerge clear about what you’re saying, what other people 
have said on the subject, and what they are being asked to comment on. 
 * If you want to check what our style is on the spelling of a particular 
word, or how we punctuate quotations, the Guardian Style Guide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-observer-style-guide-a> is available 
online. 
What happens next

Once we’ve decided your piece is suitable for publication, we will edit it.


At this point, we may come back to you to ask for clarifications, links or 
picture ideas. We will also ask you for a short one-sentence bio to put 
alongside your byline.


Then it will be launched online, be published on the relevant section fronts (
Education <https://www.theguardian.com/education>, Higher Education Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network>, maybe even the main 
front of thesite <https://www.theguardian.com/uk>, if those editors select it) 
and be promoted through our social media.


Don’t be taken aback if the final version of your piece is different from what 
you submitted. Everything that is written for the Guardian is edited, sometimes 
quite heavily, to make the writing punchier, to cut repetition, and to accord 
with the Guardian Style Guide and the tone of the site.


Still not sure where to start?

Here are a few great examples of previous pieces to inspire you:

 * Female academics: don’t power dress, forget heels – and no flowing hair 
allowed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/oct/26/-sp-female-academics-dont-power-dress-forget-heels-and-no-flowing-hair-allowed>

 * Writing for an academic journal: 10 tips 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/sep/06/academic-journal-writing-top-tips>
 * Academics: leave your ivory towers and pitch your work to the media 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/23/academics-leave-your-ivory-towers-and-pitch-your-work-to-the-media>

 * Six myths about how universities spend their tuition fee income 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/feb/06/five-myths-about-how-universities-spend-their-tuition-fee-income>
 * Academics are being hoodwinked into writing books nobody can buy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/sep/17/are-publishers-really-hoodwinking-academics>

One last thing

We’d like all our contributors to sign up for membership of the Higher 
Education Network and get our weekly newsletter. If you’ve not done so yet, 
here’s thelink <https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/>.

Email your ideas to us at highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk <mailto: 
highereducationnetwork@guardian.co.uk>

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>.

 