
As a marine biologist specialising in shark research, I’m passionate about all 
aspects of shark conservation. What many people don’t realise is that shark 
conservation issues exist within the UK - typically warmer, more tropical 
waters are brought to mind when thinking of sharks.

Think again, though: at least 21 species of shark are commonly found in 
British waters. Unfortunately, however, sharks - primarily their fins - are 
also found in UK restaurants, adding to the threat facing many shark species, 
including those already considered endangered.



Shark fin cartilage is usually shredded and used primarily to provide texture 
and thickening toshark fin soup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/mar/10/shark-fin-soup-a-dangerous-delicacy-for-humans-and-sharks-alike>
, a traditional Chinese soup or broth considered to be a luxury item embodying 
notions of hospitality, status and good fortune. In the EU, regulations were 
strengthened in 2013, with the requirement that sharks must be landed with fins 
naturally attached - a method widely acknowledged as the most reliable means 
for implementing a finning ban. This was a vast improvement on the original 
2003 legislation, which outlined a fin landing weight of 5% ratio of the total 
shark’s weight. However, it presented a loophole that actually allowed more 
fins to be landed per whole animal, as the primary fin set actually weighs 
around 2% of the total body weight.

Earlier this year, shark conservation organisation Bite-Back 
<http://www.bite-back.com/> exposed another loophole, this time in UK customs 
regulations. Bite-Back discovered that passengers are allowed to import up to 
20kg of dried shark fin in their luggage for personal consumption. To put that 
into context, 20kg of dried shark fin results in the death of about 12 adult 
blue sharks (some of the most heavily fished species for the shark fin trade); 
1kg of dried shark fin fetches around £180 on wholesale markets.

Bite-Back’s campaign director Graham Buckingham has previously stated that his 
organisation’s research indicates thatas many as one in five UK Chinese 
restaurants 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3048340/Shark-fin-soup-menu-dozens-Chinese-restaurants-use-loophole-allows-passengers-bring-personal-consumption.html>
 could be offering shark fin soup. It is often simply called “fish fin soup”, 
or sometimes not listed at all, despite being available on request. Soup may 
sound harmless, but this delicacy is having a major impact on shark 
populations. In fact, in the time it has taken you to read to this point, over 
280 sharks will have been killed for their fins (and that’s a conservative 
estimate).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsharks-fascinate-us-but-are-we-prepared-to-protect-them-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0740d9f5b38bca893c1f3f98389c10f34572630%2F0_799_3456_4385%2F3456.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sharks%20fascinate%20us%20-%20but%20are%20we%20prepared%20to%20protect%20them%20from%20extinction%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsharks-fascinate-us-but-are-we-prepared-to-protect-them-from-extinction%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sharks%20fascinate%20us%20-%20but%20are%20we%20prepared%20to%20protect%20them%20from%20extinction%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fsharks-fascinate-us-but-are-we-prepared-to-protect-them-from-extinction%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0740d9f5b38bca893c1f3f98389c10f34572630%2F0_799_3456_4385%2F3456.jpg>
 Fin Fighters co-founders Phil Root and Lou Ruddell (centre) with SharkFest 
event manager Jasmine Tribe. Photograph: Lauren Smith 
It’s not just the shark fin trade that threatens the survival of shark 
species: by-catch and habitat destruction also have significant effects on 
population numbers. Their vulnerability to overexploitation and loss of habitat 
is due to the fact that the majority of shark species have a slow growth rate, 
take a long time to reach maturity and have low fecundity in comparison to most 
teleosts. The status of sharks in European seas is particularly critical with 
around half of all species being threatened with extinction or at risk of 
becoming endangered (Fordham, 2006).

And so the conservation initiatives of shark and marine organisations are 
vital when it comes to raising awareness and increasing understanding to the 
wider public; and what better way to do this than at a dedicated shark 
festival? Saturday 24 September saw the UK’s first ever Shark Festival, held at 
The-M-Shed in Bristol, focusing on encouraging positivity, cooperation and 
active participation in shark conservation.

The festival was organised by Jasmine Tribe, a volunteer for conservation 
organisationFin Fighters <http://www.finfighters.org/#home1>. Co-founded by Lou 
Ruddell and Phil Root in 2014, the organisation’s mission is to protect sharks 
worldwide, and to end the sale and distribution of shark fin in the UK by the 
year 2023.

A range of marine organisations and exhibitors attended,including Surfers 
Against Sewage, Marine Conservation Society, The Shark Trust, The Manta Trust, 
The Gills Club, Basking Shark Scotland and many more besides, all keen to 
engage the public. Presentations were delivered by representatives of some of 
the exhibitors throughout the day, with the event culminating in the exclusive 
UK screening of David Diley’s filmOf Shark and Man <http://ofsharkandman.com/>.

The public interest in the event was fantastic: some people had come from all 
over the UK as well as Europe; other people were just passing by but ended up 
spending their entire day there. It was really encouraging, as preaching to the 
converted is one thing, but events that further understanding, change public 
perceptions and engage a previously indifferent audience are what really matter.






Although people are often fascinated by sharks, engaging them in conservation 
is a different prospect altogether. A study by Friedrich et al 2014, entitled
Public perceptions of sharks: gathering support for shark conservation 
<https://www.researchgate.net/publication/260296222_Public_perceptions_of_sharks_Gathering_support_for_shark_conservation>
, points out that public engagement and support for conservation is limited. 
The notion of sharks as fearsome predators, cultural representation in movies 
such as Jaws, plus sensationalist media coverage of shark attacks all 
contribute to frame sharks negatively in the public imagination. However, the 
emerging concept ofmarine citizenship 
<http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0308597X11001813> recognises 
each member of the public as a potential agent of change to address marine 
environmental issues through their behavioural choices (Fletcher and Potts 
2007, Hamzaki and Tanno 2010).

A well-informed public that understands an issue and potential solutions is in 
a stronger position to exert pressure on policy makers to address environmental 
concerns. Studies on public perceptions of marine wildlife have found that 
individuals with high levels of knowledge of and positive attitudes towards 
animals such as sharks are more likely to support their conservation and avoid 
behaviour potentially harmful to them (Thompson and Mintzes 2002, O’Bryhim 
2009).

Across the board, species and habitat conservation is more important than ever 
before. Here’s hoping that events like SharkFest really get people thinking and 
working towards a better future for sharks.

References

Fordham, S (2006), Shark Alert. Revealing Europe’s impact on shark 
populations. Shark Alliance.

Friedrich, L.A. Jefferson, R. Glegg, G. (2014). Public perceptions of sharks: 
Gathering support for shark conservation. Marine Policy. 47. 1-7.

Fletcher, S. Potts, J. (2007). Ocean citizenship: an emergent geographical 
concept. Coastal Management. 35. 511-24.

McKinley, E. Fetcher, S. (2010). Individual responsibility for the oceans? An 
evaluation of marine citizenship by UK marine practitioners. Ocean and Coastal 
Management. 53. 379-84.

Thompson, TL. Mintzes, J.J. (2002). Cognitive structure and the affective 
domain: on knowing and feeling in biology. International Journal of Science and 
Education. 24. (6). 645-60.

O’Bryhim, J. (2009). Public knowledge, attitudes, and behaviour towards sharks 
and shark conservation. MSc Thesis. Washington DC. George Mason University.
 