
Talk about baby steps. On the first anniversary of the government’s shared 
parental leave scheme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2015/may/05/will-shared-parental-leave-actually-take-root>
, figures show men have not leapt at the chance to have a chunk of time at home 
with their new baby.

According to the research by My Family Care and the Women’s Business Council, 
the main obstacle was family finances. This should not come as a surprise. 
Equality campaigners have long warned too few families can afford for fathers 
to take shared parental leave. The government’s own analysis estimated that 
only 2-8% of fathers would take up the entitlement.

The financial reality for many families is that the father is still the main 
breadwinner. The arrival of a new child and the extra financial strain is 
understandably seen as the worst time for them to take extended leave.

In other words, the UK’s enduring gender pay gap is keeping old roles 
entrenched. Men go out to work, women stay home as carers. That is underscored 
by this new research, which found half of men believe that taking shared 
parental leave is perceived negatively at work while 57% of women say it would 
impact negatively on their partner’s career.

Shared parental leave should in time help cut that gender pay gap – something 
which David Cameron has vowed to do “in a generation 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-minister-my-one-nation-government-will-close-the-gender-pay-gap>
”.

That men currently feel unable to take the career risk or financial penalty of 
extended leave shows they also stand to gain from greater equality. Sadly, 
recent history shows progress is painfully slow. The Equal Pay Act was passed 
more than four decades ago and the latestofficial figures still put the gender 
pay gap at more than 9% 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/earningsandworkinghours/bulletins/annualsurveyofhoursandearnings/2015provisionalresults#gender-pay-differences>
.

PPI savings account - with interest

Mis-sold payment protection insurance policies have turned out to be a 
lucrative form of savings account. Banks are obliged to pay 8% interest on the 
money they are returning to hapless customers. They are not only getting back 
their premiums but a sizeable chunk on top.

It is worth thinking about what this means for the banking sector. The latest 
reporting season provided anew wave of provisions for PPI refunds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/27/santander-profits-plunge-by-98-after-ppi-compensation-charges>
 withLloyds alone adding a further £4bn to the pot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/25/lloyds-hands-chief-executive-85m-pay-package>
.

The figures are mindboggling. Calculations by Which? show that the total 
amount set aside by the big five banks alone is £32.2bn. Since 2011, £23bn has 
been handed over – seemingly a fair chunk of the £44bn paid in premiums between 
1990 and 2010.

However, once the interest payments are factored in, there appears to be scope 
for further payouts. According to theProfessional Financial Claims Association 
<http://www.pfca.org.uk/> (PFCA), only about half the £23bn represents refunded 
payments. The rest is interest.

The PFCA chairman, Nick Baxter, suggests that on a conservative estimate about 
three-quarters of policies were mis-sold. Not all of those sales would warrant 
a full refund – in some cases a policyholder may have been flogged an expensive 
single premium policy when they would have willingly bought one that they paid 
for every month. But, by some measures, there could be a further £22bn worth of 
premiums to repay – plus interest.

Clearly the PFCA has an axe to grind. It represents claims management 
companies and is lobbying against theFinancial Conduct Authority’s proposed 
2018 deadline for customers who want to complain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/ppi-2018-deadline-fca-proposal>
. This time bar is also causing controversy with consumer bodies and Baxter 
argues the banks can hardly claim to be “nearly there” in tackling the scandal 
if half of what they have paid out is in fact interest and not just the return 
of premiums.

The political and regulatory mood is clearly for the time bar to proceed – the 
sale of PPI was lucrative for the industry, while the prolonged period over 
which compensation is being repaid is a drag on the sector. But the 
implementation of any time limit on claims needs to be carefully thought 
through.

Executive pay’s long-term flaw

Who’d have thought that selling kitchen cleaners, condoms and throat soothers 
could be so lucrative? Six years after Bart Becht, the then boss of Reckitt 
Benckiser, received an eye-watering £90m pay deal, the Slough-based company 
revealedhis successor has been handed £23m for 2015 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/apr/04/reckitt-benckise-paid-chief-executive-23m-last-year-rakesh-kapoor-share>
.

Rakesh Kapoor’s total is down to an £18m payout from a long-term incentive 
plan. These “Ltips” are deployed by most major companies and, largely, based on 
performance over three years. Stefan Stern of the High Pay Centre points out 
that they are hopelessly flawed and that three years is hardly long term.

It has been said many times, but it is worth repeating: executive pay deals 
need a radical rethink.
 