
Shell is to shift nearly 400 jobs overseas as it looks to shore up its 
finances againstpersistently low oil prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/06/oil-prices-plummet-oversupply-global-markets>
 by hiring cheaper workers in the developing world.

The Anglo-Dutch company told 380 staff at its finance operations in Glasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> that the office would be closed and 
they were facing “involuntary severance”.

Scottish MPs said the announcement was a “devastating blow” to staff.

The jobs will be moved over a 15-month period to locations such as Shell’s 
offices in Chennai in India and Kuala Lumpur in Malaysia.

Shell and BP beat forecasts as energy giants cut spending
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/shell-bp-beat-forecasts-oil-price>
The overall effect on Shell’s headcount will be negligible, although the firm 
hasannounced 12,500 job cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/25/shell-cut-jobs-low-oil-prices-north-sea>
 since last year.

Senior managers told staff of the looming cuts at the Bothwell Street office 
at a meeting on Wednesday.

Speaking after the meeting, a Shell spokesperson said: “For Shell to remain 
competitive, difficult choices continue to have to be made to improve 
efficiency and value for money across all of our businesses and functions. 
Employees currently based in the Glasgow office will likely face involuntary 
severance.”

Shell signalled earlier this year that more staff could be affected, as it 
tries to trim costs as rock-bottom oil prices continue todent profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/28/shell-reports-71-plunge-in-profits>
.

“This decision is driven by increasing pressures on our business to reduce 
cost and generate cash, and reflects the fact that the capability of our other 
centres has evolved to be able to handle the activities that are currently 
performed in Glasgow, but at a significantly lower cost,” Shell said.

“We understand this is very difficult news for employees. During the 
transition period we are committed to ensuring ongoing regular employee 
engagement and support.”

The Scottish Liberal Democrat energy spokesperson, Liam McArthur MSP, said: 
“This news will be a devastating blow to those directly affected and their 
families. We cannot afford to lose these skills and every effort must be made 
to provide training and advice to give workers the best chance to secure new 
roles.

“It is also important that Scottish and UK governments look again at the tax 
regime and take urgent action to stop decommissioning contracts floating away 
fromScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> to our international 
competitors.”

Annie Wells, the Scottish Conservative Glasgow MSP, said Shell’s decision was 
“regrettable”.

“The movement of jobs abroad is a challenging issue and it is as important as 
ever that both the UK and Scottish governments work together to ensure that 
things pick up in the future. The only silver lining to this story is that the 
announcement has been made over a year ahead of most employees leaving the 
company,” she said.

“I would urge the Scottish government therefore to use this time, along with 
its agencies, to make sure the process of redundancy is made as comfortable as 
possible for the workers and their families.”

The Glasgow office is part of a division that manages financial reporting, 
corporate governance risk and travel and expenditure.
 