
It doesn’t take a sleuth to tell you that Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> Holmes is cooler than James 
Bond. 007 may drink and gamble, but Holmes is the emperor of his own mind 
palace. Bond may drive an Aston Martin and fight with his fists, but Holmes can 
captivate a room with nothing more than his words. If you can think at the 
speed of light, you don’t need a pen that’s also a grenade.

So there should be cause for grave concern that the greatest mind in fiction 
is currently channelling the secret service agent whose main objective is to 
kill baddies but try not to get the dinner jacket dirty. Meetings must be held 
and pitchforks held aloft. This cannot stand.


The detective at 221B Baker Street has always occupied the natural realm. His 
capabilities, while breathtaking, are just about comprehensible. Holmes uses 
science and a phenomenal application of logic to make sense of physical 
evidence. Unlike Bond, he is just about human enough to remind us of people we 
have met at parties. He is a nerd, not an action figure; a scientist, not a 
spy. But, as Sherlock’s stakes have risen, and as the guns and assassins have 
multiplied, it is starting to feel worryingly like we are watching villains be 
taken to task by a mutation named Sherlock Bond.

Sherlock review – Cumberbatch channels Bond in the most explosive outing yet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/01/sherlock-benedict-cumberbatch-review-james-bond-margaret-thatcher-mark-gatiss-steven-moffat-detective>
Arthur Conan Doyle tells us in his short stories that Holmes has considerable 
athletic abilities, but chooses to keep these skills – boxing, bartitsu and 
singlestick – a titillating prospect: a stockinged leg poking out from behind a 
curtain. Because the most scintillating thing about Holmes is his mind, his 
displays of physical prowess ought to be rationed. Conan Doyle wanted his 
protagonist to rise above the cheap thrills of the penny dreadful. Steven 
Moffat and Mark Gatiss should be aware that their protagonist is at risk of 
suffering the fate Conan Doyle swerved.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Watch%20Sherlock%20Holmes%20return%20in%20New%20Year%E2%80%99s%20Day%20episode%20trailer%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Fwatch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video&media=>
Sherlock Holmes returns in New Year’s Day episode trailer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/video/2016/dec/17/watch-sherlock-holmes-return-new-years-day-episode-trailer-video>
For a while, there was a clear line between the BBC show and the Guy Ritchie 
films that took inspiration from the same detective. Ritchie’s films are 
absurdly, knowingly over-the-top; his Holmes is played by a man who has spent 
most of his 40s in ared superhero outfit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/iron-man>. The only thing anyone remembers 
about the films is that Robert Downey Jr does some good bare-knuckle boxing – 
and that at the end of the first film, Holmes doesn’t just fight his adversary, 
he fights him while wobbling precariously on top of Tower Bridge. Given that 
they are not based on any of the stories, Ritchie’s films may as well fly free, 
entirely divorced from the Baker Street detective. They are,as Michael Sragow 
writes in The New Yorker 
<http://www.newyorker.com/culture/culture-desk/getting-sherlock-holmes-right-onscreen>
, camp.

When its budgets and audience were smaller, Sherlock could not have been 
accused of being camp. It mapped out Holmes’ mental machinations with verve and 
integrity. It was mischievous but loyal to the source material; and, crucially, 
it felt plausible.

A case of identity: Cumberbatch and Sherlock Holmes author are cousins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/31/benedict-cumberbatch-sherlock-holmes-arthur-conan-doyle-cousins>
The problems with the show, once so surprising and so vital, began in series 
three,when it had become a phenomenon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2015/dec/30/sherlock-enters-new-year-as-global-tv-phenomenon>
. A single decision shoulders much of the blame. When Moffat, Gatiss or both 
decided that Mary Watson just had to be a ninja assassin with a murky past, 
they took ill-advised liberties with Conan Doyle’s stories in what one can only 
assume was an attempt to make the programme even sexier. It failed. None of the 
scenes involving Mary ring true. How can the viewer be expected to believe that 
both John Watson’s best friend and his wife could be waist-deep in such 
extraordinarily cool activities? The show began to feel implausible, a fate 
from which it has never recovered.

As the Miss Marple TV series reached the autumn of its years, its writers did 
not decide that what the character really needed was to pump lead into some bad 
guys. Poirot would not have been a better show if the moustachioed detective 
had an assistant who was also a Navy SEAL. There is obviously an audience and 
an appetite for abseiling assassins, machine-gun shootouts and Benedict 
Cumberbatch getting sopping wet while kicking ass in an expensive suit – as he 
does in latest episodeThe Six Thatchers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/02/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers>
. But, like the perverse instincts that lurk in the palaces of our minds, this 
is an appetite that ought to be resisted. Sherlock’s unofficial tagline is 
“brainy is the new sexy”. It feels like it gave up being brainy a while ago. 
Soon it may even cease to be sexy. Before you know it, it will have become 
James Bond.
 