
The BBC’s fourth series of Sherlock ended with its lowest ever audience 
figures, one day after the episode appeared online followinga leak from the 
Russian broadcaster Channel One 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/15/sherlock-finale-trumped-by-russian-leak-online>
.

The Final Problem, Sunday night’s finale, drew 5.9 million viewers, down 
slightly on the previous episode. The figure is lower than any episode since 
the show launched in 2010, though it was still the most watched programme in 
its time slot.

Is Sherlock worse for too much action? Gatiss sends his verse reaction
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/04/is-sherlock-worse-for-too-much-action-mark-gatiss-sends-his-verse-reaction>
Previous Sherlock finales have not dropped below 7 million viewers, and the 
smallest audience in any previous series was for the second episode in 2010,
which attracted 6.4 million viewers on the night 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2010/aug/02/sherlock-bbc1-tv-ratings>.

The BBC will hope the audience will climb over the week as viewers use 
catch-up services such as iPlayer. More than 3m extra viewers watched the 
series opener in the week after it was broadcast on New Year’s Day, taking its 
total audienceto 11.3 million 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/09/sherlock-tops-uk-most-watched-list-for-christmas-period>
 and making it the most watched show over the festive period.

The fourth series of Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/sherlock> has come under fire for its 
handling of Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s eponymous hero, and suffered from an 
online leak of a Russian-dubbed version of the finale.

Following the first episode, co-creator Mark Gatiss used verse to respond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2017/jan/04/is-sherlock-worse-for-too-much-action-mark-gatiss-sends-his-verse-reaction>
 to a piece in the Guardian that suggested Benedict Cumberbatch’s Sherlock was 
behaving like a James Bond-style action hero.

Sunday night’s series closer has also divided critics. The Daily Mail gave it 
no stars, with reviewer Christopher Stevens calling it “an abject, flailing, 
noxious mess” and “shockingly bad”.

However, Michael Hogan in the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/tv/0/sherlock-episode-3-final-problem-review-exhilarating-thrill/>
 praised its “dazzling script” which “delivered laughs, excitement and 
emotion”. He added: “If this was the last-ever episode, which it surely won’t 
be, it worked well as a sign-off.”

BBC Worldwide <https://www.theguardian.com/media/bbc-worldwide> is 
investigating the leak of the 90-minute episode, which was identified from a 
continuity announcement as originating from the Russian state-owned broadcaster 
Channel One. However, the leak is unlikely to have had a significant impact on 
UK viewing figures, as no English subtitles were immediately available.

There is doubt over the prospect of a fifth series due to the scheduling 
challenges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/30/sherlocks-future-in-doubt-as-stars-hollywood-schedules-fill>
 of its increasingly in-demand cast. However, Gatiss and co-creator Steven 
Moffat have not ruled out a return.
 