
First day nerves got to Paula Sherriff. Looking around at her Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> colleagues from the 2015 
parliamentary intake, the new MP for Dewsbury in West Yorkshire saw former 
special advisers and academic high-fliers with Oxbridge degrees.

“I’d never been to university, so I felt completely out of my depth,” sighs 
Sherriff. “But then you find your way, you find your place. I’ll never be an 
expert in economics, but if you want somebody to get something through then I’m 
probably your girl because I’ve got this incredible northern grit.”

The 41-year-old former Unison shop steward found her way pretty quickly and 
has become one of the breakout stars of the 2015 cohort.

Last week, the Guardian revealed that Tesco had pledged to reduce the price of 
women’s twin-blade razors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/01/tesco-cuts-price-of-womens-razors-so-they-cost-the-same-as-mens>
 to the same as men’s at 50p for a pack of five following Sherriff’s pressure 
on the supermarket giant.

Kari Daniels, Tesco’s commercial director, wrote to Sherriff to insist the 
products were not simply a different colour – pink rather than blue – but added 
that Britain’s biggest supermarket would act “on concerns about the difference 
in price”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fshoppers-champion-goes-on-the-offensive-over-uk-retails-sexist-surcharge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25c12432ae034a38960b54a6aa7e16f365b20d49%2F113_167_5647_3388%2F5647.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shopper's%20champion%20goes%20on%20the%20offensive%20over%20UK%20retail's%20sexist%20surcharge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fshoppers-champion-goes-on-the-offensive-over-uk-retails-sexist-surcharge%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shopper%27s%20champion%20goes%20on%20the%20offensive%20over%20UK%20retail%27s%20sexist%20surcharge&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fshoppers-champion-goes-on-the-offensive-over-uk-retails-sexist-surcharge%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F25c12432ae034a38960b54a6aa7e16f365b20d49%2F113_167_5647_3388%2F5647.jpg>
 Paula Sherriff. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
Tesco’s concession is already being viewed as one of the major victories in 
the war to end gender price discrimination on the high street. The news added 
just a little extra lustre to a short but glittering parliamentary CV that 
includes: persuading Boots to pilot a scheme to let customers gift sanitary 
products to food banks; forcing WH Smith to lower product prices in hospital 
shops to match those in high street stores; and making House of Commons history 
in her bidto abolish the so-called tampon tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/18/tampon-tax-scrapped-announces-osborne>
.

Sherriff joined the police at 18 and then spent 13 years in healthcare, but, 
as an MP she is defining herself as the champion of the shopper. She tweeted 
after theTesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> story broke:
Paula Sherriff MP (@paulasherriff) 
Really pleased with this result. Chipping away at gender pricing bit by bit. 
Watch out retailers-I'm onto you!https://t.co/u7ZJlCEJwI 
<https://t.co/u7ZJlCEJwI>
 <https://twitter.com/paulasherriff/status/815559594894299137> January 1, 2017 
<https://twitter.com/paulasherriff/status/815559594894299137> 
Her efforts in highlighting gender price discrimination in clothes, beauty 
products and toys during a parliamentary debate, secured in her name last 
February, were noted by Jeremy Corbyn. Sherriff did not vote for him in either 
of his leadership election victories – she backed Yvette Cooper in 2015 and 
then Owen Smith last summer – but he still made her Labour’s women and 
equalities spokeswoman in October’s reshuffle.

Fresh off her Tesco triumph, Sherriff will now push supermarkets and major 
brands to sign up to a charter pledging not to “knowingly impose” prices that 
rip-off women. Analysis suggests that products aimed at women are, on average, 
37% more expensive than identical items marketed to men.

“It’s time just to raise an awareness among retailers about the ‘pink tax’ or 
the ‘sexist surcharge’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/19/the-sexist-surcharge-how-women-get-ripped-off-on-the-high-street>
 or whatever you want to call it,” says Sherriff. “I just like the idea of 
asking them to not just talk about specific items but to sign up to this 
mentality. I just like the idea of shops saying: ‘We do not impose a sexist 
surcharge.’”

The sexist surcharge – how women ​get ripped off on the high street
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2016/jan/19/the-sexist-surcharge-how-women-get-ripped-off-on-the-high-street>
This month Sherriff will meet executives at Proctor & Gamble, which 
manufactures the Tampax and Always feminine hygiene brands, to talk about how 
it can help with The Homeless Period Campaign by donating sanitary products to 
shelters. An online petition aimed at P&G gathered nearly 70,000 signatures.

This follows Sherriff’s success over the Tampon Tax last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/15/tampon-tax-supermarkets-pledge-tax-saving-women>
, when she became the first opposition MP to amend a government’s budget. 
Sherriff was furious that tampons carry 5% VAT – or “vagina added tax” as she 
memorably described it to the House of Commons – because of European Union 
rules.

At a birthday party for Clive Lewis, who is now shadow business secretary, 
Sherriff told senior party aide Nick Parrott that she was desperate to remove 
the rate altogether. Parrott devised a “long-shot” plan that allowed Sherriff 
two attempts at forcing the government to accept a zero rate.

After narrowly losing the first time around, Parrott and Sherriff ambushed the 
government by making a Faustian pact with a group of Conservative Brexiters to 
sign an amendment to abolish VAT on tampons. This was tabled shortly before the 
finance bill debate took place, so that the Conservative whips had no time to 
persuade rebels to change their minds.

The government had to adopt the amendment or face humiliating defeat. David 
Cameron headed to Brussels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/mar/18/tampon-tax-scrapped-announces-osborne>
, where the UK and other EU members states were granted permission to abolish 
VAT on sanitary products.

“All the major retailers have agreed in writing that they will pass the 
savings on to the consumer,” says Sherriff, proudly.

Prior to this nugget of Commons’ history, Sherriff had already forced WH Smith 
to drop its prices in hospital shops 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/sep/22/wh-smith-prices-hospitals-nhs-patients>
. As a junior manager responsible for outpatient services in Wakefield, 
Pontefract and Dewsbury, Sherriff found out how chains would sell their 
products at a premium in hospitals. For example, people were paying 89p more 
for a bottle of water in a WH Smith shop in a Wakefield hospital than they 
would in Leeds city centre.

WH Smith <https://www.theguardian.com/business/whsmith> bowed to the pressure 
and lowered prices on items such as “get well soon” cards. Today, Sherriff is 
full of praise for the chain. “Stephen Clarke, who is the CEO, keeps in touch 
with me literally monthly, saying: ‘Look, if there are any problems, just let 
us know.’ It’s fantastic, all credit to them.”

By contrast, Marks & Spencer refused to yield on its higher prices in hospital 
outlets, arguing it was impossible because they are run under franchise and 
forcing cuts would breach competition law.

But M&S had better heed her Twitter warning: the high Sherriff of shops is 
preparing to ride into town once more and she isn’t about to let any major 
retailer escape her sights.
 