
Outside an old warehouse in Christianshavn groups have gathered round a giant 
snow dome to watch a man wearing an inflatable Santa suit pretend to ride a 
reindeer. This isFlying Tiger Copenhagen HQ <http://uk.flyingtiger.com/en-gb> 
(or Tiger, as the Danish retailer was known until it officially changed its 
name earlier this year) and Christmas is in full swing.

They have grown from a market stall in Copenhagen to 680 shops in 29 countries

Inside, the offices are the epitome of Scandi style: wooden floors, original 
beams and big picture windows overlooking the water. Shelves of sample products 
are a snapshot of what’s soon to arrive in stores. There are remote control 
sumo wrestlers and virtual reality goggles on one; a plastic snowball scoop and 
puppets on another.

Anyone who has shopped at Tiger won’t be surprised by the products. “Fun” is a 
key part of the formula that has seen the company grow from a market stall in 
Copenhagen 21 years ago to having, at the last count, nearly 680 shops in 29 
countries. Last year, sales in the UK alone were £62m and global bestsellers 
are the simplest items: popping candy, pencil sets, soap bubbles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fshop-of-delights-tigers-retail-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc9d961c99fc330d347ca1dfffa25bdfc73c4e0%2F0_162_4864_2919%2F4864.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Shop%20of%20delights%3A%20Tiger's%20retail%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fshop-of-delights-tigers-retail-revolution%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Shop%20of%20delights%3A%20Tiger%27s%20retail%20revolution&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fshop-of-delights-tigers-retail-revolution%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbfc9d961c99fc330d347ca1dfffa25bdfc73c4e0%2F0_162_4864_2919%2F4864.jpg>
 Happy shopper: a pleased customer leaves a branch of Tiger. Photograph: Alamy 
In such a rocky financial climate it’s a retail phenomenon. There are 
collaborations with artists such asYoko Ono 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/yoko-ono> and David Shrigley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/david-shrigley> (a mini version of 
his Fourth Plinth“Really Good” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/29/david-shrigley-really-good-fourth-plinth-trafalgar-square>
 sculpture has almost sold out); a monochrome series of graphic prints has been 
picked up by Parisian concept storeColette <http://www.colette.fr/>; the first 
global concession has opened insideSelfridges Birmingham 
<http://www.selfridges.com/GB/en/> and the company has scooped several 
prestigious awards, including, most recently, a Red Dot award for their pink 
and green food containers.

Of course, a crucial component of its success is the low prices. What began as 
a pound shop – founderLennart Lajboschitz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/mar/30/posh-pound-shop-tiger-uk-denmark>
 left his brother’s girlfriend in charge and she couldn’t find the prices so he 
told her to charge 10 kroner, the equivalent of £1 for everything – now sells 
the odd item, such as a record player, for £100. “When we opened our first UK 
store in Basingstoke in 2005, some press called us a cool Scandi company,” 
recalls brand director Tina Schwarz. “We hadn’t seen ourselves like that. We 
were just a Danish store selling cheap items. It was a game changer because 
then Lennart hired the first in-house designer. The vision was to make design 
affordable.”

Described by one retail analyst as “an Ikea marketplace on speed”, Tiger 
attracted middle-class mums with its clean-lined look and retro music. And it’s 
true, the shopping experience does set Tiger apart (it’s far less stressful 
than going to Ikea), but so do the products. While others such asWilkinson’s 
<http://www.wilko.com/> have made their name selling cut-price practical 
household items, Tiger taps into lifestyle trends – not just the obvious 
money-making occasions such as Halloween or Christmas.

As the craze for crafting took off, they introduced knitting needles and 
brightly coloured wool and, in response to the surge in cycling, this January, 
they are launching a range of bicycle kit. By contrast, failed retail giant 
Woolworths stuck to traditional categories such as confectionary and toys and, 
in shoppers’ eyes, wasn’t seen as being distinctive enough. There’s no danger 
of that at Tiger. Today, up to 50% of the 300 new lines introduced each month 
are designed in-house, either from scratch or given a Tiger twist with quirky 
new graphics and packaging. “Design can be serious, sometimes even boring,” 
says innovation and design director Federico Bosisio. “We are trying to make 
our customers smile.”

Chief executive Xavier Vidal reels off stories illustrating exactly how Tiger 
achieves this, including a memorable Ireland vs Italy rugby game earlier this 
year. “There were 30 Italians wearing our nodding flamingo hats. You could see 
them from anywhere in the stadium.” For Christmas, he tips a green wood 
Christmas tree as a product to look out for. “Here at HQ ours is decorated with 
plastic sausages, and why not? We want to surprise people.”
 