
In 1797 Patrick Colquhoun was worried about pawnbrokers. Colquhoun, a 
Glaswegian merchant and magistrate, had co-founded a soup kitchen in London 
that aimed to “alleviate distress” among working families. Colquhoun believed 
that the provision of nutritious and healthy soups would not simply assuage 
immediate hunger. He hoped it would also lessen the dependence of working 
people on pawnbrokers. Unemployment, sickness or the death of breadwinners 
often obliged the poor to borrow money from shady lenders. Sometimes they 
pawned the very tools they needed to work. Colquhoun was shocked by the 
extortionate interest rates charged by pawnbrokers. This was particularly the 
case with short-term loans, which he believed were very common among working 
people. He calculated that a loan of 3 pence could accrue an interest rate of 
850% if it was renewed weekly.

Colquhoun would be horrified to learn that in 2014 the payday lender Wonga 
offered loans at a rate of nearly 6,000%. Despite efforts to limit interest 
rates and ban advertising, the difficult economic circumstances faced by many 
Britons continue to provide a fertile environment for parasitic lending 
practices. Wonga’s own website describes aninterest rate of 1,509% as 
“representative” <https://www.wonga.com/how-it-works>. This week the financial 
ombudsman reported a surge in complaints about payday loans (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/06/financial-ombudsman-still-receiving-thousands-of-ppi-complaints>
, theguardian.com, 6 September). Wonga’s parent company was the subject of 821. 
Interest rates for the very poor have gone from 850% in 1797 to 1,509% today. 
It’s useful, if sobering, to be reminded that things can always get worse.
Professor Rebecca Earle
Department of history, University of Warwick 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>
 