
Hugh Muir <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/hughmuir>: Violence with a 
political aim makes Mair a terrorist

The facts about what Thomas Mair did 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-slow-burning-hatred-led-to-jo-cox-murder>
 are beyond shocking, beyond dispute, and so hard for us to comprehend that we 
seek a suitable vocabulary. He wasconvicted by a criminal court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
 and given a whole-life sentence. So does that make him merely a criminal of 
our worst imagination? Or does it go further than that? Can hereasonably be 
described as a terrorist? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-trial-and-the-question-of-terrorism-jo-cox>

Why didn't the Daily Mail put the jailing of Jo Cox's murderer on its front 
page? | Jane Martinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/daily-mail-jailing-jo-coxs-murderer-front-page>
Jo Cox’s bereaved and resolutely dignified partner, Brendan, gave us a clear 
view into his thinking. This,he said 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/brendan-cox-youve-heard-so-much-about-jos-death-wed-like-to-talk-about-her-life>
, was a political act – an “incompetent and self-defeating” act of terrorism. 
Not because the attack itself was not meticulously executed (it clearly was) 
but because it had wider and deeper aims: aims that Brendan Cox believed the 
attacker had failed to fulfil. Instead of engineering hate, Cox said, Mair had 
triggered an outpouring of love and solidarity.

The Oxford Dictionaries definition of a terrorist 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/terrorist> is: “A person who uses 
unlawful violence and intimidation, especially against civilians, in the 
pursuit of political aims.” That clearly describes Mair and his modus operandi.

Was Jo Cox's killer tried as a terrorist?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-trial-and-the-question-of-terrorism-jo-cox>
As he struck the fatal blows, he made clear that his was not solely an attack 
on Cox as an individual: “This is for Britain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/18/jo-cox-murder-suspect-thomas-mair-told-police-he-was-political-activist>
,” he said, and “Keep Britain independent,” reloading his gun.His first court 
appearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
, where he gave his name as “Death to traitors, freedom for Britain”, confirmed 
that wider motivation.

Even a mind as warped as Mair’s cannot have believed that the slaying of one 
MP would achieve his desired aim. It was an attack on a public representative 
with the intention of terrorising all that she and others like her represented.

She was the blameless victim, but the target was a philosophy.

That Mair, as an avowed neo-Nazi, was apparently working alone without any 
obvious association with a group, does not detract from the fact that his aims 
were terrorist aims and the template employed was that of the terrorist.

After the verdict, Sue Hemming, head of special crime and counter-terrorism at 
the Crown Prosecution Service,said her officials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/thomas-mair-found-guilty-of-jo-cox-murder>
 had no doubt as to how Mair might best be classified. “Motivated by hate, his 
premeditated crimes were nothing less than acts of terrorism designed to 
advance his twisted ideology,”she said 
<http://blog.cps.gov.uk/2016/11/thomas-mair-convicted-of-the-murder-of-jo-cox-mp.html>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwho-is-thomas-mair-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Who%20is%20Thomas%20Mair%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwho-is-thomas-mair-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Who%20is%20Thomas%20Mair%3F%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F17%2Fwho-is-thomas-mair-video&media=>
Who is Thomas Mair? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/jun/17/who-is-thomas-mair-video> 
Hemming and her team had the option of prosecuting Mair under anti-terrorism 
legislation. They chose not to do so, not because he fell outside the 
definition but because the charges were framed in such a way as to make his 
motivation irrelevant.

For all that, the killing of Jo Cox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jo-cox> was recognised at the time, by 
parliamentarians and the public at large – at home and abroad – for what it 
was: an attempt to leverage an isolated act of violence so as to achieve a 
magnified intimidatory and political effect. Terrorists have been doing that 
for years.

Joseph Harker <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/josephharker>: Mair acted 
alone so should not be seen as a terrorist
 Joseph Harker. 
It has become a cliche question among race-rights campaigners (with whom I 
have common cause): “Why aren’t far-right crimes considered terrorism?” Such a 
common question that now, it seems, the police are changing tack and labelling 
Thomas Mair a terrorist (though not so much that they actually charged him with 
terrorism offences).

It’s certainly true that a narrow definition of terrorism as a “political act” 
would include Mair. But whatever one particular dictionary might say,there is 
no widely agreed definition of terrorism 
<http://abcnews.go.com/US/story?id=92340&page=1>.

And while I don’t doubt that Mair’s motives were political, in the common 
understanding and usage of the term “terrorism”, more than this is required. 
Because, though he had far-right sympathies, it’s clear his actions weren’t 
supporting anyone’s agenda but his own.

To my knowledge there is no organisation that calls for the violent overthrow 
of the state, or for the killing of leftwing MPs. And though some eyewitnesses 
reported Mair shouting “Britain first” during his attack on Jo Cox, there’s no 
evidence he was acting for, or under the instruction of, the legal rightwing 
organisation of the same name.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshould-thomas-mair-be-considered-a-terrorist-jo-cox-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7d7578070950bc0e1f012f395751c4c1648ca8%2F0_833_1898_1512%2F1898.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20Thomas%20Mair%20be%20considered%20a%20terrorist%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir%20and%20Joseph%20Harker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshould-thomas-mair-be-considered-a-terrorist-jo-cox-murder%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20Thomas%20Mair%20be%20considered%20a%20terrorist%3F%20%7C%20Hugh%20Muir%20and%20Joseph%20Harker&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fshould-thomas-mair-be-considered-a-terrorist-jo-cox-murder%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7c7d7578070950bc0e1f012f395751c4c1648ca8%2F0_833_1898_1512%2F1898.jpg>
 ‘Mair’s guidance came from inside his head.’ Photograph: AP 
In fact, the commonly held perception is that a criminal has to be acting on 
behalf of a wider organisation to be considered a terrorist. So, for example, 
even though there have been several “lone wolf” attacks by jihadi extremists in 
the UK and beyond, they are carrying out the agenda of Islamic State, or 
al-Qaida, and part of a wider bloody struggle. These terror groups gain power 
because every attack carries the specific and sharpened threat of further 
violence from another sympathiser.

Mair’s guidance came from inside his head. His was a shocking hate crime 
against a dedicated young woman who was trying to make the world a better 
place, but it’s not surprising that this wasn’t widely considered a terror 
attack amid all the reporting at the time.

My friend Jo Cox was assassinated, but her legacy will be to unite communities 
| Stephen Kinnock
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/jo-cox-trial-remember-assassination-legacy-unite-communities>
And if we’re to consider all “political acts” terrorism, then where do we 
stop? Was the Yorkshire Ripper, who wanted to rid the world of sex workers, a 
terrorist? What about Robert Ashman, the man who in 2000killed Andrew Pennington
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2000/apr/17/mpsurgery.simonhattenstone>, 
an aide to the Lib Dem MP Nigel Jones? Lee Harvey Oswaldshot a president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/nov/22/jfk-assassination-timeline> but 
has rarely, if ever, been called a terrorist.

By overusing the label we merely dilute our sense of the evil that lies behind 
those groups and networks that coolly and calculatingly conspire to bring about 
wide-scale slaughter.

And, to my fellow race equality campaigners: I’m not, of course, saying that 
far-right crimes cannot be considered terrorism. Groups such asCombat 18 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/1999/may/02/yvonneridley.theobserver> have 
carried out acts of violence and harassment against Britain’s ethnic minorities 
since the 1970s. And the historic campaign of lynchings by the Ku Klux Klan 
makes it, in my view, a terrorist organisation. The KKK is, however, still 
legal in the United States, and its favoured candidate is about to move into 
the White House. It may take some time before this group is officially given 
the status it deserves.
 