
Muscle soreness is something many people experience for a couple of days after 
exercising. When the activity has been particularly intense or you’ve been 
unusually inactive beforehand, it can even last as long as five days. This ache 
is often referred to as Doms (delayed onset muscle soreness), and this annoying 
pain can cause people to avoid training and exercise until it has completely 
subsided, for fear of injury or intensifying the soreness. Luckily – or maybe 
unluckily – you needn’t wrap yourself in cotton wool or avoid all activity 
until you feel 100% again.

Before we go further into the creaky, sweary and achy world of aerobic- and 
weight training-induced Doms, it is important to note that you should be 
careful with very severe and localised bouts of muscle pain following exercise. 
Pain emanating from a focused area of the muscle can be a symptom of a muscle 
tear, which could have been missed if you are very competitive, determined, 
have a high pain threshold, or were simply aching equally everywhere and 
nearing the end of some particularly gruelling activity. If the localised pain 
is accompanied by bruising or swelling or you’re worried, it would be wise to 
stop and seek medical advice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6c47face9b616f1bc3babbcc48cfcbd70da14e%2F0_158_5716_3429%2F5716.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20I%20exercise%20if%20my%20muscles%20are%20sore%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20-%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Max%20Bridger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20I%20exercise%20if%20my%20muscles%20are%20sore%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20-%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Max%20Bridger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6e6c47face9b616f1bc3babbcc48cfcbd70da14e%2F0_158_5716_3429%2F5716.jpg>
 ‘Muscle ache will be more severe towards the beginning of a new exercise 
regime; such as a weights workout plan.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Sometimes the post-exercise pain encompasses the entire muscle group – as you 
may have experienced after weights or a challenging class – in which case you 
should ensure you warm up fully before your next bout of training. The pain may 
impede your ability to assume correct posture, suitable technique and safe 
practices, which will increase your risk of injury. So it’s important to take 
the correct precautions, such as warming up, stretching, cooling down, and 
extra rest periods.

When I feel unutterably sad, there’s only one thing that helps: exercise | 
Bella Mackie
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/18/sad-exercise-antidepressants>
Most commonly, muscle ache will be more severe towards the beginning of a new 
exercise regime; such as a weights workout plan or resistance class in the gym, 
or even the start of a new rugby or football season. This is because your body 
is not conditioned to the intensity or duration of the activity, and most 
likely you won’t use a full and proper cool-down period. When time to exercise 
is scarce, this is the bit we all have a tendency to skip. To reduce the 
inevitable Doms, increased frequency of training, and even a reduced volume of 
repetitions in regards to weights specifically, will help. Your fitness and 
conditioning will improve as you become used to the activity and increase your 
fitness. Reducing the volume of reps (repetitions) per muscle group, but 
hitting the muscle two to three times per week across more sessions, will allow 
for better recovery, less ache and more efficient progress towards your goals.

Muscle soreness can be caused by small micro-tears in the muscles, and/or the 
build-up of byproducts of intense activity such as lactic acid and calcium, 
which can be reduced with a proper cool-down period. These tiny tears to the 
muscle cells are nothing to be worried about; they are what cause your muscles 
to grow and repair (in combination with good nutrition and sufficient rest), 
making the muscles stronger and bigger over time. In the majority of cases, 
muscle soreness should not be a cause for concern and shouldn’t stop you 
training, rather it simply serves as a reminder that you need to:

• cool down and stretch after intense periods of cardiovascular activity;

• ensure your nutrition (including hydration) is up to scratch;

• increase your fitness, which is likely to improve as the season or regime 
you’ve started progresses;

• consider training more muscle groups per session, and multiple times per 
week, rather than a one-muscle group such as a biceps or a chest day – where 
too much volume is used, resulting in debilitating muscle soreness, and no 
extra progress for the pain.

Muscle soreness should lessen as you become used to the volume, intensity and 
duration of exercise, so you should only have to train while aching for the 
first couple of weeks of a fitness programme. Simply ensure you leave around 48 
hours between training the same body part twice with weights to allow the 
muscles to fully recover before you hit your next session.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3e17604195078ec89e20329e2ddc5027eca8ea%2F0_213_6362_3817%2F6362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20I%20exercise%20if%20my%20muscles%20are%20sore%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20-%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Max%20Bridger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20I%20exercise%20if%20my%20muscles%20are%20sore%3F%20You%20asked%20Google%20-%20here%E2%80%99s%20the%20answer%20%7C%20Max%20Bridger&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fshould-i-exercise-if-my-muscles-are-sore-google-answer%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d3e17604195078ec89e20329e2ddc5027eca8ea%2F0_213_6362_3817%2F6362.jpg>
 ‘Cool down and stretch after intense periods of cardiovascular activity.’ 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Equally, in the same way that you shouldn’t stop training because you still 
have Doms, you shouldn’t label a workout as ineffective because you don’t 
experience severe muscle aches afterwards. This pain differs in intensity from 
person to person, and will lessen over time as you get used to the exercise. It 
does not have a correlation to muscle growth or improved fitness.

The best advice when weighing up whether or not to train with sore muscles is 
to listen to your body and distinguish between muscle ache, general fatigue 
(physical and mental) and an actual injury. If there is swelling and bruising 
around the site of pain or you’re worried, there may be some damage, so cease 
any activity that aggravates the area and seek medical advice. If your workout 
is extremely laboured even with a warm-up then consider training another part 
of your body or performing a non-weight bearing form of exercise instead – 
swimming, cycling or rowing.
 