
The government is proposing to allow new free schools to select up to 100% of 
pupils according to their parents’ religion, and has a publicconsultation 
<https://consult.education.gov.uk/school-frameworks/schools-that-work-for-everyone/>
 open until 12 December. Since 2007, in a bid to increase diversity, no new 
academy or free school has been permitted to admit more than 50% of its pupils 
based on faith. The Catholic church, however,has refused to open any new schools
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/22/education-grammar-school-twitter-storm>
 on this basis, saying it needs to be able to select up to 100% of pupils on 
their faith.

Guy Shirley, parent and founder of the Kingston Fair Admissions Group 

“I moved to an area with very good schools, only to find our house was in a 
triangle between two Catholic schools that were 100% selective by faith, and a 
Church of England school that at the time was the same. It’s important to 
remember that at least half the population no longer has a faith. The 
admissions criteria of some faith schools – church attendance, participation in 
church events – encourage parents to act dishonestly: a register kept by the 
local vicar showed that 80% of parents stopped going to church after their 
child got a place at the local CofE school. These are state schools and for me, 
religion is a matter for home. The cap was introduced in the interests of 
fairness. At a time when as a society we are increasingly isolationist, is this 
a good idea to remove it? It also compounds religious – often middle-class, 
often white – privilege. Parents who can, make the time to get to a church on a 
Sunday morning. People have to engage in church activities for a year before 
they apply for a place – harder to do if you’re pushed to make ends meet or 
you’re a single parent. What is desperately needed is lots more schools, not 
lots more schools reserved for Catholics or any other faith group.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0525d1d787dcc60e78dbf0f841d88cb4ceee24e8%2F189_115_1136_1136%2F1136.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0525d1d787dcc60e78dbf0f841d88cb4ceee24e8%2F189_115_1136_1136%2F1136.jpg>
Ghulam Abbas, spokesperson, Association of Muslim Schools

“The 50% cap has not stopped new Muslim, CofE, Jewish, Hindu, and Sikh schools 
from opening, so this could be a move to get outstanding and good Catholic 
schools to open more schools. That would be a positive move. The charge is that 
it will promote segregation but, actually, the proposals put a number of 
responsibilities on schools: to promote British values, have people of other 
faith on your governing body, and to work with other schools. These should go a 
long way to allay concerns. If you look at existing faith schools, a lot of 
Church of England and Catholic schools, which make up the majority of faith 
schools, have a high proportion of Muslims and children from other faiths or 
none. Removal of the cap will make no difference to Muslim schools. I’m not 
aware of any Muslim groups that have held off applying to open a school because 
of the admissions cap.

Brian Conway, headteacher, Notre Dame High School, Norwich

“I’m in favour of removing the cap because I’m in favour of more Catholic 
schools. The reason new Catholic schools have not opened is there is canon law 
that says you can’t have a Catholic school that turns Catholics away. But I’m 
also in favour of schools that are diverse, inclusive and serve as wide a range 
of people as possible. There are some schools in London that are virtually 100% 
Catholic, and I’d be unhappy to work in a sector like that. As the Catholic 
population in this area increases, it really worries me that a new Catholic 
school might end up being full of only Catholic children – I’d want a school to 
be big enough for Catholics and for others who wanted to come.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe4376a71757df2a627a203681fe06bc1052a54%2F351_155_1307_1306%2F1307.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2fe4376a71757df2a627a203681fe06bc1052a54%2F351_155_1307_1306%2F1307.jpg>
Lucy Elgood, parent and teaching assistant, London

“Educating a child in a ghetto of any sort is a bad thing and a religious 
ghetto is as bad as any other. Getting rid of the cap would be wrong because we 
should be trying to be more inclusive, not less, particularly as the world is 
becoming more polarised. We know that selection isn’t fair, and faith schools 
disproportionately disfavour the poor. Children who won’t get into their local 
school if this cap on faith admissions disappears will have to travel further 
to school, their friends won’t live nearby, and it makes it harder to form a 
community. Transition to secondary is a very anxious time, and selecting by 
faith adds another layer of someone telling you you’re not good enough, and you 
don’t really know why.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09343f444ab0f8bb1615547c352b43b21cea187%2F491_196_1205_1205%2F1205.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20new%20schools%20be%20able%20to%20select%20all%20children%20by%20faith%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fshould-new-schools-be-able-to-select-children-by-faith%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09343f444ab0f8bb1615547c352b43b21cea187%2F491_196_1205_1205%2F1205.jpg>
John Adams, school governor and board member, British Humanist Association 

“How can people educated apart live harmoniously together? Do we, or do we 
not, want diversity in our schools? There is evidence that the 50% cap has had 
a real impact on improving diversity, and the idea we might want more 
separation – getting close to segregation – in the 21st century is shocking. 
The supposedly mitigating factors in the green paper – that a school might 
consider having an independent governor from a different religion or none – 
just gives tokenism a bad name. A governing body that is 100% from a single 
faith … who will they appoint, who will determine the degree of independence 
that person will have, and most of all, who on earth would want to do it? It’s 
a wholly retrograde step.”
 