
Recently, for reasons too odd to explain, I visited London zoo without 
intending to. I don’t go to zoos nowadays. I was quickly reminded why. A crowd 
were gathered by a compound. Behind a pane of glass, sitting with her back to 
us, was an adult western lowland gorilla. She was impossibly huge, almost too 
black and beautiful to be real. She resolutely refused to meet the public gaze. 
She looked straight ahead, into the simulacrum of a rainforest with which she 
had been provided. Disturbed by the sight, I took one look and left.

London zoo conducts its annual animal stocktake – in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/gallery/2016/jan/04/london-zoo-conducts-its-annual-animal-stocktake-in-pictures>
What is the role of the zoo in the 21st century? In the medieval past it was a 
menagerie, like the royal collection of heraldic beasts kept in the Tower of 
London, from where a polar bear would be allowed out to fish for its lunch in 
the Thames. In Georgian London, Jane Austen and Lord Byron ascended to the 
first floor of the Exeter Exchange in the Strand to gawp at a department store 
of exotic creatures. Among them was Chunee the Indian elephant, who, enraged by 
an abscessed tooth,accidentally killed his keeper 
<http://blog.oup.com/2016/02/elephants-in-britain-history/> and was shot and 
harpooned to death by a platoon of soldiers. Passersby wrote to the Times 
deploring the terrible roars of the pachyderm as he died. It was Chunee’s 
demise that prompted the creation of London zoo, as a more humane way to keep 
captive animals.

Now zoos look increasingly like sideshows. With natural history documentaries 
and the ability to travel globally, we can get our fix of charismatic megafauna 
on YouTube or in real life. The sight of a psychotic big cat obsessively 
prowling its cage seems truly anachronistic. When arecent BBC documentary 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07891ch> asked “Should we close our zoos?” it 
wasn’t the first to raise the question.

Yet with the advent of the “great acceleration” – the exponential increase in 
species extinction that began around 1950 – zoos may be more important than 
ever. As climate change and habitat depredation continue, they may one day be 
the only places to find animals we took for granted.

African elephants and rhinos now face serious threats to their future from 
poaching; 30,000 elephants arekilled each year for their tusks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/13/legal-ivory-sale-drove-dramatic-increase-in-elephant-poaching-study-shows>
.Cecil the lion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/shortcuts/2015/jul/29/cecil-the-lion-doomed-name>
 was shot by an American dentist last July because parts of sub-Saharan Africa 
are run for hunter tourists as extensions of a theme park. But proponents of 
trophy huntingclaim it is a vital way of supporting local economies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/30/save-lion-cecil-poachers-gamekeepers-south-africa-sustainable-ranching>
.

Cecil the lion's legacy: death brings new hope for his grandcubs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/28/cecil-the-lions-legacy-death-brings-new-hope-for-his-grandcubs>
Zoos also allow us to find new ways of conserving animals. London zoo’s 
scientific arm, the Zoological Society of London, does brilliant research work, 
such as itswhale strandings programme 
<https://www.zsl.org/science/research/uk-cetacean-strandings-investigation-programme-csip>
. Primatologists such as Frans de Waal draw on captive primates such as 
chimpanzees, orangutans and gorillas for essential insights into these 
creatures. As De Waal notes in his new book, Are We Smart Enough to Know How 
Smart Animal Are?,apes appear to ape us 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/01/books/review/are-we-smart-enough-to-know-how-smart-animals-are-and-the-genius-of-birds.html?_r=0>
 – even to the extent of using iPads.

Yet the walls of the zoo are symbolic of the barriers we have set up between 
us and other species. What we observe, we also destroy. The last zoo I paid to 
enter wasTaronga <https://taronga.org.au/taronga-zoo>, in Sydney. It was the 
only way I was likely to see the bizarre marsupials of the country. Taronga, 
set in Sydney Harbour, is a well-run establishment, and like most modern zoos, 
has excellent research projects. But watching its wombats and duck-billed 
platypuses, I thought of a more dolorous Australian zoo in Hobart, where, in 
1936, the last Tasmanian tiger, the thylacine, whimpered to death in a cold 
compound, the last captive specimen of its species. Zoos did nothing to save 
the thylacine. Historically, our appropriation of the natural world, especially 
ferocious in the colonial 19th century, is analogous tothe way we once stole 
people 
<http://www.slate.com/articles/life/the_history_of_american_slavery/2015/06/animated_interactive_of_the_history_of_the_atlantic_slave_trade.html?wpsrc=sh_all_dt_tw_ru>
. Any animal in captivity is where it shouldn’t be. In the 21st century, the 
inadvisability of keeping cetaceans such as orca and dolphins in confined pools 
is beyond doubt, and the outcry over the treatment of killer whales at SeaWorld 
in the US, stirred up by the documentaryBlackfish 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G93beiYiE74>, has resulted in the company 
announcingthe end of its breeding programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/17/seaworld-orcas-whale-protection-ocean-conservation>
.

Animals <https://www.theguardian.com/world/animals> aren’t here for our 
amusement. Earlier this year, a silverback gorilla named Harambe was shot in 
Cincinnati zoo when a four-year-old boy broke into his enclosure. Uproar 
ensued, but memories are short. In 1987, an 11-year-old boy was mauled to death 
by two polar bears at the Brooklyn zoo, after taunting them by throwing sticks 
and bottles. The bears were shot by the police.

Polar bears, like primates and cetaceans, provoke highly visible skirmishes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/20/worlds-saddest-polar-bear-chinese-shopping-centre>
 in this ambivalent war of ownership and care. Do we love or fear these beasts? 
In his forthcoming bookIce Bear 
<http://www.washington.edu/uwpress/search/books/ENGICE.html#contents>, Michael 
Engelhard relates the sensational story of Karoline Wolf, who “committed 
suicide by polar bear” at Frankfurt zoo in 1891, undressing and climbing into 
the den where her “singularly chosen, terrible comforter” shredded her flesh.

In 2007, Knut the polar bear was saved from being put down by Berlin zoo – 
principally because he was so cute – and made a profit of €5m for the 
establishment.He died four years later 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/science-environment-34073689>, drowning in his pool 
in front of his audience. Equally, when Copenhagen zoo culled a young giraffe 
andfed it to its lions 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/giraffe-killed-copenhagen-zoo-marius-fed-to-lions>
 recently, there was another roaring furore.

The zoo’s narrative is fatally blurred. Is it an aesthetic or scientific 
experience? Education or entertainment? Once we paid to see mentally disturbed 
humans in asylums; now we pay to see mentally disturbed non-humans in zoos. In 
2014, London zoo had to suspend its late openings whenbutterflies got trodden 
underfoot and a tiger was doused in beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/sep/04/boozy-zoo-parties-late-openings-london-zoo>
.

As the French philosopher of science and artist Chris Herzfeld notes in her 
new book, Wattana: An Orangutan in Paris, animals such as primates “show 
considerable goodwill in collaborating with humans”. We expect animals to act 
like us, as if they should be grateful for the fact that we’ve saved them, when 
we’re responsible for their peril in the first place. The zoo is a love-hate 
relationship. We owe our childhood love of animals to these places, yet as 
adults we know how cruel they can be.Zoos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/zoos> have played their part in the bridge 
of understanding between us and the rest of creation. Perhaps their time, like 
that of animal circuses and Bedlam, has been and gone.
 