
Imagine a Britain where the government pays every adult the basic cost of 
living. Whether rich or poor – or, crucially, whether you’re in paid employment 
or not – everyone gets the same weekly amount, with no strings attached. The 
harsh, punitive model of modern “welfare” is a distant memory; passing in and 
out of employment in the so-called gig economy is now something everyone can 
afford. The positive consequences extend into the distance: women are newly 
financially independent and able to exit abusive relationships, public health 
is noticeably improved, and people are able to devote the time to caring that 
an ever-ageing society increasingly demands. All the political parties are 
signed up: just as the welfare state underpinned the 20th century, so this new 
idea defines the 21st.

Welcome to the world of a unconditional basic income, or UBI, otherwise known 
as citizens’ income or social wage. It might look like the stuff of absurd 
utopianism, but the idea is now spreading at speed, from the fringes of the 
left into mainstream politics – and being tried out around the world. The UK 
Green party hassupported the notion for decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/jan/18/green-party-citizens-income-natalie-bennett-benefit>
: staunch backing for a version of UBI was one of its key themes at the last 
election. At its spring conference last month, the Scottish National party 
passed a motion supporting the idea that “a basic or universal income can 
potentially provide a foundation to eradicate poverty, make work pay and ensure 
all our citizens can live in dignity”. A handful of Labour MPs have started to 
come round to the idea – and serious work is being done among thinktanks and 
pressure groups, looking at how it might work in the here and now.

Meanwhile, there have been UBI-type policies and experiments in India and 
Brazil. These have suggested that, contrary to modern stereotypes about 
“welfare” sapping people’s initiative, a basic income might actually increase 
people’s appetite for work, by adding to their sense of stability, and making 
things such as childcare and transport more accessible. A pilot of a UBI-ish 
policy whereby people onbenefits are paid unconditionally is happening in 
Utrecht 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/26/dutch-city-utrecht-basic-income-uk-greens>
, in the Netherlands; other Dutch towns and cities look set to follow its 
example, and there are plans to pilot a moreambitious kind of basic income in 
Finland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/10/finland-universal-basic-income-ubi-social-security>
. On 5 June, the Swiss will vote in a referendum on a plan that would see all 
adults receive about£1,700 a month, with an extra £400 for each child.

And then there is the rising noise from Silicon Valley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/28/silicon-valley-basic-income>
. The California-based startup incubator Y Combinator has announced that it 
wants to fund research into UBI’s viability.Its president, Sam Altman, says 
<https://blog.ycombinator.com/basic-income>: “It is impossible to truly have 
equality of opportunity without some version of guaranteed income.” In New 
York, the influential venture capitalist Albert Wenger has beensounding off 
about a basic income <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tUZoAEMUWWs> for at least 
three years, claiming it offers an answer to a very modern question. If, as he 
says, “we are at the beginning of the time where machines will do a lot of the 
things humans have traditionally done”, how do you avoid “a massive bifurcation 
of society into those who have wealth and those who don’t”?

The idea of UBI has been around for years, voiced by such people as Thomas 
Paine, Martin Luther King and Milton Friedman

This Saturday, thousands of people are expected in central London for the 
latest demonstrationorganised by the anti-austerity alliance the People’s 
Assembly <http://www.thepeoplesassembly.org.uk/>. The top-line is pretty much 
as you would expect. “End austerity now” is the big slogan, accompanied by four 
key words: “health”, “homes”, “education” and, of course, “jobs”. But there too 
will be noise about UBI. A group called Radical Assembly, founded last May, is
organising what it terms the No Jobs bloc 
<http://occupylondon.org.uk/events/no-jobs-bloc-at-march-for-health-homes-jobs-and-education/>
: a subsection of the march for people sick of the daily grind, looking ahead 
to a world without it and convinced that technology is the answer. As they see 
it, the point shouldn’t be to argue for more, or better work, but to demand a 
world with very little paid work at all – and the key way to make that vision 
work is a basic income.

The idea cuts straight to the heart of the crisis being experienced by 
mainstream leftwing parties across Europe and beyond. For the UK Labour party, 
the concept of a basic income raises a painful question: how can you carry on 
styling yourself as the party of workers when traditional work is disappearing 
fast?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fa9906dd5e6da2788dc4514f87b7f72327cfde%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20scrap%20benefits%20and%20pay%20everyone%20%C2%A3100%20a%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20we%20scrap%20benefits%20and%20pay%20everyone%20%C2%A3100%20a%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30fa9906dd5e6da2788dc4514f87b7f72327cfde%2F0_0_4000_2670%2F4000.jpg>
 If the machines take all the jobs, we’ll need to disentangle the link between 
work and wages. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
As well as books such as Guy Standing’s The Precariat: The New Dangerous Class 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/apr/09/precariat-charter-denizens-citizens-review>
 (2011) andPaul Mason’s Postcapitalism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jul/17/postcapitalism-end-of-capitalism-begun>
 (2015), one recent text is talked about more than most among people interested 
in UBI.Inventing the Future 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327220/> was 
published last year andhas already created significant buzz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/03/retirement-retiring-age-77-strive-work-less-progress-challenge-bleak-prospect>
 in leftwing circles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/23/socialism-innovation-ipad-john-mcdonnell>
; its two authors, Alex Williams and Nick Srnicek, will be appearing at this 
year’s Glastonbury, and their work is the key inspiration behind what Radical 
Assembly have planned for this Saturday. The No Jobs bloc, in fact, echoes the 
slogans printed in bold type on the book’s cover: “Demand full automation, 
demand universal basic income, demand the future.”

Srnicek, 33, is from Canada: he came to the UK in 2009, and works as a 
freelance academic in London. He says he’s both thrilled and surprised by the 
idea of people marching in favour of what he and Williams advocate. “I’ve heard 
about the No Jobs bloc, and it sounds great,” he says.

A no-strings basic income? If it works for the royal family, it can work for 
us all | John O’Farrell
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jan/07/basic-income-royal-family-living-wage-economy>
As he explains, the concept of a basic income has been doing the rounds for 
centuries, and has been voiced by such people as the 18th-century radicalThomas 
Paine, Martin Luther King, and the free-market guru Milton Friedman. In the US, 
the Nixon administration of the 1970shad plans for a rightwing version that 
nearly made it into law 
<http://www.remappingdebate.org/article/guaranteed-income%E2%80%99s-moment-sun?page=0,2>
. Meanwhile, between 1968 and 1978, the US government did a series of 
experiments with a basic income in such places as New Jersey, Seattle and 
Denver, Colorado. It was also tried in the small Canadian town of Dauphin, 
Manitoba. Although it took years for the research findings to be published,they 
suggested that among the results had been a drop in hospital admissions 
<http://public.econ.duke.edu/~erw/197/forget-cea%20%282%29.pdf>, and a rise in 
the number of teenagers staying on in school.

This tangled history contains a few warnings about different political 
conceptions of the UBI idea. “The right tends to see it as a replacement for 
the welfare state,” says Snircek. “Basically, in their conception, UBI is a way 
to do away with benefits and marketise everything. And, obviously, that has to 
be warded off completely.”

He says he also has concerns about interpretations of the idea from some parts 
of the political left. “UBI has to be universal: it has to apply to everybody,” 
he says. “It’s problematic for some people that it includes the rich as well, 
but universal benefits have a political power that means-tested benefits don’t. 
It has to be unconditional. It can’t be means-tested. Everybody gets it, no 
matter what.

“The other aspect is, it should be as a high as possible. It can’t just be 
some middling level, like the Green party was proposing at the last election.” 
Their idea, he explains, was to pay everyone around £72 a week, roughly the 
same level as Jobseekers’ Allowance. “That would help people, but they would 
still have to go out and find a 40-hour job to survive, so it doesn’t do any of 
the political things that are so important.”

As Inventing the Future 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327220/> explains, 
these include boosting people’s bargaining power with employers, and UBI’s 
distinct feminist aspect: “One of my favourite stories from the experiments 
with UBI in Canada and the US is that they found that divorces went up. Women 
had suddenly got financial independence to leave bad and abusive relationships.”

The big theme that sits under Srnicek and Williams’s ideas is that of 
automation, and its effects on the place of work in our lives. A third of jobs 
in UK retail are forecast to go by 2025. The Financial Times recently reported 
on research predicting that114,000 jobs in British legal sector would be 
automated over the next 20 years 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c8ef3f62-ea9c-11e5-888e-2eadd5fbc4a4.html>. As and 
when automation reaches transport, all this could turn nuclear. Recent 
estimates have put the number of jobs in the US related to traditional trucking 
at 8.7m – which, when people are talking about automated haulage (in last 
month’s budget, for example, George Osbornepromised trials for driverless 
lorries 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/mar/06/driverless-lorries-tested-on-uk-motorways>
), gives a sobering sense of how huge the future changes to paid work could be.

“The technology we’re talking about today is really touching on areas that we 
thought were always going to be the preserve of humans: non-routine tasks, 
things like driving a car – but then also the automation of basic social 
interaction, like call-centre work, customer service work and all that kind of 
stuff,” says Srnicek. “A lot of jobs are going to be taken, possibly at a very 
rapid pace. That means that, even if it doesn’t lead to mass unemployment, 
automation leads to a massive shift in the labour market, and people having to 
find new jobs and new skills.”

How long does he think it will be before UBI becomes a credible part of 
mainstream politics?

“Well, I do think this is a longterm project; it’s not going to happen 
overnight,” he says. “You need to build it up over time. And you also need to 
find new revenues for it. So you need to betalking about the Panama Papers and 
tax havens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/07/panama-papers-taxes-universal-basic-income-public-services>
, and how you’re going to claw back tax revenues to pay for it.” The basic 
point is that something as ambitious as a basic income that allows people 
meaningful choices is going to cost, and the only way of bringing in the funds 
chimes with our rising concerns about tax avoidance and evasion – and, for that 
matter, global inequality and the fragile job markets that increasingly sit 
under it.

The key point, he says, is context: putting UBI alongside other plans and 
proposals, so as to flesh out the idea of a world beyond work, and what it 
would mean. “One big thing would be reducing the working week,” he says. “My 
preference is to implement a three-day weekend. We already have that in certain 
cases, because of bank holidays. We’re already used to it. And everybody always 
really enjoys it. That could plausibly be done in the next five years.”

Friday or Monday?

“I think we’ve got such a hate for Monday, that might be something we need to 
hold on to. So, maybe Friday.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb1f71c6e850a35dda8b31b00ba7716e07f8313%2F0_110_5172_3105%2F5172.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Should%20we%20scrap%20benefits%20and%20pay%20everyone%20%C2%A3100%20a%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Should%20we%20scrap%20benefits%20and%20pay%20everyone%20%C2%A3100%20a%20week%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fapr%2F13%2Fshould-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1fb1f71c6e850a35dda8b31b00ba7716e07f8313%2F0_110_5172_3105%2F5172.jpg>
 Caroline Lucas: UBI is ‘a deeply radical idea in terms of its feminist 
potential, and what we do in a world in which more and more work is going to be 
automated.’ Photograph: Action Press/Rex/Shutterstock 
The Greens’ sole MP, Caroline Lucas, is a fan of Inventing the Future 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/327220/>: “I love the 
way they talk about a basic income as something really transformative,” she 
says. She recently tabled anearly-day motion in the House of Commons about UBI 
<http://www.parliament.uk/edm/2015-16/974>. Thirty-two MPs signed up to it: 23 
from the SNP, with six from Labour, and two from Northern Ireland’s SDLP. The 
Tories and Lib Dems were conspicuous by their absence.

“This idea works on so many levels,” she says. “It’s a very practical policy, 
in terms of ensuring that people don’t fall between the cracks of the welfare 
system. But it’s also a deeply radical idea in terms of its feminist potential, 
and what we do in a world in which more and more work is going to be automated. 
It also gets you into a sense of contributing to your community, cleaning up 
the beach, visiting an elderly friend who might be lonely. There’s a whole 
freedom and liberation that it gives you, and I think it takes you into really 
deep questions about whether we really exist simply to spend athird of our 
lives working for someone else. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/feb/01/paying-everyone-a-basic-income-would-kill-off-low-paid-menial-jobs>
”

If all that sounds rather high-flown, she also emphasises the hard work that 
is being done on UBI’s basic economics. In this context, she mentions Compass 
(the pressure group that includes Greens, Labour members, and many people with 
no party attachment) and the RSA, formally the Royal Society for the 
Encouragement of Arts, Manufactures and Commerce,whose basic-income proposal 
was published in December 2015 
<https://www.thersa.org/action-and-research/rsa-projects/public-services-and-communities-folder/basic-income/>
.

Its author was Anthony Painter, the RSA’s director of policy and strategy. He 
says a lot of his initial interest in UBI came from his work on the board of an 
FE college in Hackney, east London, and the way that the local job centre took 
money from people who were going on its courses, so as to kick them into jobs 
instead. “This seemed to be the tip of an iceberg of a system that had gone 
haywire,” he says. So it was that in the spring of 2014, he began looking in 
depth at the various experiments with a basic income down the years, and how 
the idea might work in the 21st century. “Our starting point was, how do people 
get economic security, and why’s the current system going wrong?”

What was really interesting was the wider benefits of UBI, in terms of health, 
education and mental health
Anthony Painter 
His favourite example of a basic income is the model tried in Manitoba, and 
what happened as a result. “What was really interesting aboutit was the wider 
benefits of a basic income <http://www.canadiansocialresearch.net/ssrgai.htm>, 
in terms of health, education, kids staying in education for longer, better 
mental health and fewer hospital visits,” he says. “Whereas now, our entire 
conversation about welfare has been narrowed down to a single question: is 
someone in work, or not in work?”

The RSA proposed an annual UBI of £3,692 for everyone aged between 25 and 65, 
rising to £7,420 for pensioners. There would also be a temporary basic income 
for children up to four years old of £4,290 for a family’s first child, falling 
to £3,387 for other children as they come along, and down to £2,925 for all 
between the ages of 5 and 25. For people without kids, that would put the 
weekly UBI at£77 a week. Is that really enough?.

Matthew Taylor is the RSA’s chief executive. Between 2003 and 2006, he headed 
Tony Blair’s Downing Street policy unit. He’s more sceptical about the looming 
future of automation than some, but still thinks a basic income is the best 
route to greater security in an insecure economy. When I mention the argument 
that less than £80 a week is a rather small amount, he sighs.

“Let’s establish the principle and see that the world doesn’t collapse,” he 
says. “Then, by all means, if it does work and it does lead to a better 
society, there’s no reason why it shouldn’t grow. You’ve got to be practical 
about this. But let’s start the argument in a place where we’re most likely to 
win.”

Talking to this former Downing Street insider feels like proof in itself of 
how far the idea of a basic income has come. He says the fact that UBI is now 
discussed all over the left of politics and beyond shows how much everything is 
in flux, from the basics of the economy to the fundamentals of politics. This 
is an age in which ideas can quickly whizz from the radical fringes to the 
centre of political debate.

“There was a slightly kind of anally retentive obsession that people like me 
used to have when I was involved in New Labour – that if you float a dangerous 
idea, it’s kind of terminal for you,” says Taylor. “But I don’t think people 
feel like now. I think things can move much faster. And a basic income is one 
those things where if the argument was made in the right way, all the 
assumptions we have about how people would react could be blown away pretty 
quickly.”
 