
Elementary – box set review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jan/17/elementary-box-set-review>
On New Year’s Day, British viewers sat down to watch a new episode of Sherlock 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2017/jan/02/sherlock-recap-series-four-episode-one-the-six-thatchers>
 – the 11th broadcast since its launch in 2010 – and sighed as they realised 
that the show they loved had transmogrified into a programme all about the 
secret history of Sherlock Holmes’s best friend’s wife. “What happened to the 
mysteries?” they cried. “Isn’t this supposed to be a crime show? Oh Christ, 
we’re not getting anotherwedding episode 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwjf3rvOgL3RAhXlLcAKHak1BtsQFggeMAA&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2Ftvandradioblog%2F2014%2Fjan%2F05%2Fsherlock-recap-series-three-episode-two&usg=AFQjCNErEPlansWZDhpaAaCgbz-pR7XT7g&bvm=bv.143423383,d.ZWM>
, are we?”

Guys, let me reintroduce you to Elementary. If Sherlock is the party guest who 
bursts in late, superficially charms everyone in a slightly self-satisfied way 
and then never replies to your texts, Elementary, which reimagines Holmes in a 
modern-day New York, is the guy you actually want to be friends with. There’s 
no mucking about with Elementary. No convoluted backstories where Sherlock’s 
best friend’s wife’s former colleague once hid a USB stick. Head down, power 
through, let Holmes do his business and move on: that’s the Elementary way.

Even though it gave Sherlock a two-year head start, this week’s episode will 
be its 102nd. That is an extraordinary quantity of television. By the time 
Sherlock reaches that same milestone, we’ll all be crawling around on our hands 
and knees, blind from nuclear fallout, tweeting: “Saw that ending coming” with 
our seeping, blown-off stumps.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaRMBFMXyf-Q&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaRMBFMXyf-Q>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DaRMBFMXyf-Q&media=>
With most shows, a churn this great would be a warning flag. It’d be a sign 
that the series was leaning too hard on formula, grinding out a succession of 
near-identical episodes set to a rigid blueprint. You’d be looking at CSI, or 
NCIS, or any other US network procedural that aspires to nothing more than to 
simply exist. Happily, though, that isn’t the case with Elementary. In fact, 
having all these episodes has helped it immeasurably. The scarcity of Sherlock 
means that every new instalment has to feel like a world-beating event in and 
of itself. But with Elementary? If an episode doesn’t quite work, it’s no big 
deal. There’ll be another one along next week.

Want an arc about Moriarty? Check out the tail end of season one. Feel like 
exploring the relationship between Holmes and Watson? Watch the 12-episode 
season-three stretch. Just, for old time’s sake, want to see Sherlock Holmes 
actually solving stuff? Go crazy. There’s one where a vigilante superhero gets 
murdered, and one about a rogue cryogenic facility. There are shootings and 
poisonings and mysteries at every turn and, almost without fail, they’re solved 
by Sherlock in a rush of staccato babble in the final act. It isn’t a perfect 
series, but it does feel quite faithfully Holmesy.

Elementary makes much more of Sherlock’s addictive personality than other 
shows. This is a man in active drug recovery, more crumple than human, who at 
best looks like his relationship with sleep is both distant and abusive. True, 
he’s still a good-time oddball – because that’s the only real way to sell the 
notion of a coldly intelligent detective with a crippling opioid problem – but 
he feels like much less of a bulletproof alien than Cumberbatch. AndLucy Lui 
<http://www.imdb.com/name/nm0005154/>’s Watson, more partner than companion, is 
an absolutely perfect match for him.

Give Elementary a go. Dip in and out. Revel in the workaday mundanity of it. 
Swoon at the actual crime-solving he does. And thank your lucky stars that 
nobody does any bloody blogging in it.

Tuesday, 9pm, Sky Living 
<https://www.sky.com/watch/channel/sky-living/elementary>
 