
A tiny up-side of our current political chaos – Brexit, Trump and the rest – 
is the opportunity it affords citizenship teachers to explain some difficult 
concepts. Teaching 13-year-olds to understand parliamentary sovereignty and 
judicial independence can be tricky, but is helped by being able to show 
politicians angry that they cannot get the courts to bypass parliament and 
newspapers calling judges names. Teenagers like people they see getting yelled 
at; they empathise.

How the Tories picked free schools: chaotic, inconsistent and incompetent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/legal-battle-why-free-schools-succeed-and-fail>
It is less well known, though, that in the world of schools themselves, legal 
battles have also been upsetting the establishment. And it looks as if the 
Department for Education is feeling a little gun-shy about battles in court. 
Having pulled out ofmy battle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/15/legal-battle-why-free-schools-succeed-and-fail>
 with them over secret free school documents, they settled out of court in 
another important case last month.

In April the government changed the rules so that any academy wishing to open 
a school sixth form must meet two criteria. It must prove it can get at least 
200 pupils to attend, and it must offer at least15 A-level subjects 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/new-academy-sixth-form-rules-risk-closures/>. It’s a 
fatal rule for most schools, as their ability to maintain those numbers in the 
face of competition from further education colleges and large sixth-form 
campuses is limited.

Stopping the growth of small school sixth forms is not in itself a bad thing. 
They are notoriously expensive and, on average, pupils in them perform less 
well than those insixth-form colleges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/29/school-sixth-forms-outdated-colleges-comprehensive-education>
.

There was just one problem. No one seems to have told the eight regional 
schools commissioners, who approve new schools and close or send new management 
into failing ones, what the rules are. Back in May, one of the commissioners 
approved a sixth form at a school in Hornchurch, Essex. But a local further 
education college in Harlow was not amused and, along with the Association of 
Colleges, decided to test the decision in court.

Saddle your steed, Sir Greg Martin, overpaid superhead, and gallop out of our 
schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/greg-martin-superhead-failing-schools-durand>
It was expected to be an exciting battle. Commissioner decisions are largely 
hidden from view. Although the public is told if a new school or sixth form is 
approved, the reasons why are never provided. Neither can the public see the 
evidence submitted to influence the decision. The court battle would have 
changed this – the commissioner would have had to present the information used 
in the decision. For the first time, we would have had a glimpse of the way 
commissioners operate.

No such luck. Less than 24 hours before the hearing began a behind-doors 
settlement was agreed. Apparently, the school realised there was a flaw in its 
consultation evidence and asked the department to withdraw the approval, making 
the court case defunct.

Next year, we can expect to see another important battle – this time between 
the education department and leaders at the Durand Academy Trust. Fiona Millar
revealed last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/08/greg-martin-superhead-failing-schools-durand>
 how the national schools commissioner is trying to cancel Durand’s contract to 
run its schools, but is struggling. The trust is refusing to budge, claiming it 
has been treated unfairly, and has told the government it willfight it in court 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/durand-academy-trust-refuses-to-cut-ties-with-controversial-former-executive-head/>
, because at least that way “all the facts will be laid out”.

It is neither new that education can be litigious, nor is it a problem – the 
right to have rules or actions challenged under law is important. But 
improvements in transparency might reduce the need for some of this litigation. 
Opening commissioner decision making for all to see would make people less 
suspicious, allow grievances to be aired early and – ultimately – would prevent 
a situation where people get all the way to a court hearing before realising 
that, actually, their evidence was not really up to standard.
 