
After five years in the job of chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw 
will deliver his final annual general report as head ofOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> on Thursday morning – possibly 
to his own regret and almost certainly to the regret of education journalists, 
for whom life can sometimes be a little drab.

The 70-year-old former headteacher, whose reputation was forged in the 
classrooms of some of the most challenging schools in the country, and who 
nicknamed himself Dirty Harry after the Clint Eastwood character, has been a 
colourful figure in the education world, unafraid to upset pupils, parents, 
teachers and government ministers.

His final annual report is expected to focus on underperformance in further 
education <https://www.theguardian.com/education/further-education> colleges, a 
neglected part of the education system, because – as he pointed out with 
characteristic candidness on Channel 4 News during a visit to a college in east 
London – “most politicians don’t send their youngsters to these sorts of 
places”.


The report is also expected to reiterate Wilshaw’s concerns about the 
north-south divide in education, with secondary schools in the north and east 
Midlands still lagging behind those in London and the south.

Back in 2011, Wilshaw was recommended for the top Ofsted job by then education 
secretary Michael Gove, who was bowled over byWilshaw’s record as head teacher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/2011/sep/17/michael-wilshaw-interview> 
at Mossbourne academy in Hackney, east London. It is famed for its strict 
discipline policy and impressive results and has been copied in schools across 
the country.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-ofsteds-dirty-harry-bids-farewell-to-a-colourful-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d2a982ff272bdc60b18a155ef86964565ef633%2F0_13_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sir%20Michael%20Wilshaw%3A%20Ofsted's%20'Dirty%20Harry'%20bids%20farewell%20to%20a%20colourful%20career&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-ofsteds-dirty-harry-bids-farewell-to-a-colourful-career%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sir%20Michael%20Wilshaw%3A%20Ofsted%27s%20%27Dirty%20Harry%27%20bids%20farewell%20to%20a%20colourful%20career&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F01%2Fsir-michael-wilshaw-ofsteds-dirty-harry-bids-farewell-to-a-colourful-career%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F77d2a982ff272bdc60b18a155ef86964565ef633%2F0_13_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Ofsted chief Sir Michael Wilshaw watches a lesson at Park View school in 
Birmingham. Photograph: Andrew Fox 
Five years on and despite a major heart surgery, a bitter, public falling-out 
with the government and the so-calledTrojan Horse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/23/trojan-horse-park-view-academy-misinformation-nctl-tribunal>
 controversy in Birmingham schools, Wilshaw is proud of his record at Ofsted. 
As the Department of Eduction frequently points out, 1.4 million more children 
now attend good and outstanding schools than in 2010.

In his own words: “People who criticise us can’t remember the dire state that 
schools were in the 70s and 80s. There’s a long way to go but, withoutOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted> being there, I’ve no doubt 
standards will fall and we would go backwards, not forwards.”

In his sometimes turbulent time at the inspectorate, he suggested parents 
should be fined if they do not turn up for parents’ evening; he said teachers 
who leave at 3pm should be paid less; he has backedschools that ban 
“inappropriate wearing” of full-face veils 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jan/26/schools-inspector-issues-veil-warning>
 and issued a call to arms for maverick school leaders who are “battlers, 
bruisers and battle-axes” who will not put up with mediocrity.

Never boring, often controversial and always quotable, Wilshaw will be 
remembered for his courage in telling truth to power. He admits it has been the 
most difficult aspect of his job, but it has not deterred him from taking the 
government to task on issues includingunderperforming academy trusts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/mar/10/academy-chains-come-under-fire-from-ofsted-chief>
 and, most recently, plans to expand grammar schools to benefit the poor, which 
he dismissed as“palpable tosh and nonsense” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/05/michael-wilshaw-ofsted-chief-grammar-schools-theresa-may-poorer-children>
.

Asked about his own view of his legacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/ofsted-should-not-become-the-plaything-of-government>
, Wilshaw said he was most proud of the decision to scrap the “satisfactory” 
judgment in school inspections in favour of “requires improvement” – a move he 
says has improved the system.

The Guardian view on Ofsted: new chief put to the wrong test | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/07/the-guardian-view-on-ofsted-new-chief-put-to-the-wrong-test>
Though he has made enemies in his time at Ofsted, his passion for teaching and 
for improving the lives of the most disadvantaged in society is genuine and 
inspiring. In his recent Channel 4 interview, he described teaching as “the 
author of all professions”.

Russell Hobby, the general secretary of National Association of Head Teachers, 
welcomed the progress Ofsted made under Wilshaw and said he hoped Ofsted would 
continue to challenge the government under the new leadership of Wilshaw’s 
successor,Amanda Spielman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/10/amanda-spielman-next-ofsted-chief-inspector-ark-academies-ofqual>
.


“We stand at a turning point with Ofsted. The education system has been 
transformed since the inspectorate was created. The question now is whether 
Ofsted can keep pace,” he said.

“There have been encouraging changes in recent times, greater consistency 
between teams and a lighter burden for good schools. There is more work to do. 
Ofsted needs the courage to look beyond raw data and ask how the results have 
been achieved.


“We cannot build sustainably good schools if leaders are always in fear of one 
bad year. An adversarial inspection system generates a lot of noise but less 
progress. Our system may be on the edge of great things. We need a different 
approach to inspection if we are to make that leap.”
 