
What does poverty mean, how do we measure it, what causes it and what can we 
do about it? These were the questions addressed in Tony Atkinson’s first book,
Poverty in Britain and the Reform of Social Security 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/d/Books/Poverty-Britain-reform-social-security-B-Atkinson/B000L9547Y>
 (1969). The examination of these issues was to be a lifetime commitment and 
poverty was also the subject of his last book, Monitoring Global Poverty 
(2016), the major report of the commission on global poverty that he chaired 
for the World Bank. Tony, who has died aged 72, brought to all his work a 
searing intellect, clarity in the questions, analytical rigour and great care 
with the data.

He was also an expert in the theory of public policy and the empirical 
examination of its assumptions and implications. He founded the Journal of 
Public Economics, the leading journal in this field, and edited it for nearly 
two decades. His Lectures on PublicEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/economics> (1980), written with Joseph 
Stiglitz, was for many years the key text.

The basic questions in this area concern how we should set economic policy, ie 
taxes, prices, public goods and so on, when our tax tools are limited, 
information incomplete and many markets imperfect. It was concern for 
understanding how markets fail, and how public policy could improve market 
outcomes, that led Tony to take a stand against the naive and deeply damaging 
market fundamentalism of the 1980s and 90s. It was not only information and 
market failure that motivated him in thinking about policy, but also the 
distribution of outcomes.

The study of inequality was the third area in which he led the world and the 
one for which he is best known. Perhaps his most famous paper was On the 
Measurement of Inequality (published in the Journal of Economic Theory, 1970), 
in which he proposed what became known as the Atkinson Index. Essentially the 
index calibrates inequality by showing its “waste”. If the same social welfare 
could be attained by half as much total income, if it were equally distributed, 
then the Atkinson Index would be equal to one half. For an equal society it 
would be zero. The definition of inequality requires explicit statements of the 
meaning of social welfare, so emphasising, as Tony always did, that economics 
is a moral and social science.

His second book, Unequal Shares: Wealth in Britain  
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Unequal-Shares-Wealth-Britain-Pelican/dp/0140215107>
(1972), was a pathbreaking study. Towards the end of the 70s, Tony became a 
member of the Royal Commission on the Distribution of Income and Wealth, but it 
was dissolved byMargaret Thatcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/apr/08/margaret-thatcher-political-phenomenon-dies>
 in the summer of 1979, three months after she took office as prime minister. 
He would often point out, as always armed with detailed and carefully assessed 
data, that the 80s saw a dramatic increase in inequality of incomes in the UK; 
we moved from the “middle of the pack” in the OECD (the Organisation for 
Economic Co-operation and Development) to one of its most unequal countries.

Tony was the youngest of three sons of Norman, a carpentry teacher, and his 
wife, Esther. He was born in Caerleon, Monmouthshire, while his mother was 
evacuated to Wales during the second world war, and educated as a boarder at 
Cranbrook school in Kent. His mother had looked after around a dozen evacuee 
children during the war, and before going to university, Tony worked in a 
hospital in a deprived area of Hamburg.

He began studying mathematics at Churchill College, Cambridge, before 
switching to economics. At Cambridge, he met his future wife, Judith 
Mandeville, a fellow undergraduate, through the organisation Community Service 
Volunteers. They married in 1965. They shared and reinforced their commitment 
to tackling injustice. Tony took up the post of professor of economics at the 
University of Essex in 1971, at the age of 26, later holding chairs of 
economics at University College London, the London School ofEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/economics>, and the Universities of 
Cambridge and Oxford.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKhKcjzz2Myg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKhKcjzz2Myg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DKhKcjzz2Myg&media=>
 Sir Tony Atkinson discussing at the LSE what can be done about inequality, in 
2015 
He was amazingly prolific, averaging close to a book and seven published 
articles each year over a professional career of five decades. By the end of 
his life, Tony’s distinction was recognised across the world. For example, he 
was president of theEconometric Society <http://www.econometricsociety.org/>, 
of the Royal Economic Society, of the European Economic Association and of the 
International Economic Association. In the early 70s, he had been involved in 
the economic analysis of the potential effects of joining the European Economic 
Community prior to the referendum on joining in 1975, and he remained a great 
European.

The majority of his 21 honorary doctorates were from European universities 
outside Britain. He was knighted in 2000, and the following year was made a 
chevalier of the Légion d’Honneur. He was not only one of the world’s leading 
thinkers of recent times, he also inspired many – among themThomas Piketty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomas-piketty> – to keep working on 
inequality when the conventional political climate was driving it off the 
agenda.

What is perhaps less recognised about Tony was his ability to lead 
institutions. He was a creator and builder, from his invigoration of the Essex 
economics department early in his academic career to his time as a much-loved 
warden of Nuffield College, Oxford (1994-2005).

Some of his most creative years were spent at the LSE, where he was Tooke 
professor of economic science and statistics from 1980 until 1992. As its chair 
(1981-88), and withProfessor Michio Morishima 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/obituaries/professor-michio-morishima-550173.html>
, he essentially created the Suntory Toyota International Centre for Economics 
and Related Disciplines at LSE. It became one of the world’s outstanding 
research centres. His kindness and loyalty as teacher and friend are cherished 
by many across the world.

Tony’s decency, humanity and integrity were profound and extraordinary. He was 
charming and he could be very funny. As a colleague, he was always ready with 
support and wisdom.

He faced a diagnosis of cancer by just carrying on. Indeed, in the summer of 
2015 he produced another outstanding book, Inequality: What Can Be Done?, in 
which he showed what had happened to inequality, the forces shaping it and what 
could influence it; he had a list of 15 potential policies. He argued that you 
may or may not want to implement those policies, but it would be seriously 
wrong to claim that there was nothing we could do. It was a question of 
political will.

He is survived by Judith, their three children, Richard, Sarah and Charles, 
and eight grandchildren.

• Anthony Barnes Atkinson, economist, born 4 September 1944; died 1 January 
2017
 