
The number of people owning virtual reality headsets is predicted to grow to 
over 200 million by 2020 
<http://fortune.com/2016/01/21/200-million-vr-headsets-2020/>. With all this in 
mind I expect a surge in brands looking to introduce VR tech into their 
campaigns. Now we are looking at a bright new future for marketing thanks to 
this amazing creative tool. But, the marketing community always has the ability 
to foul up with its propensity to over-hype and under-deliver.


In a bid to avoid reaching that point we need to establish some ground rules, 
so we don’t underwhelm consumers and slam clients with a big bill for 
ineffective, poorly executed VR concepts. Here are the principles to follow:

Treat technology as the platform, not the idea

Technology should not be the starting point for creative. Sure, experiment and 
play around with concepts for VR – though current production costs means you’ll 
literally be sketching ideas out or modelling simple 3D online constructs. But 
any campaign must start with the brand story, the emotion you are trying to 
create and a clear sense of what you want the target audience to think, feel or 
do after their experience. VR needs an authentic role in telling the story if 
it’s not to be a gimmick and must not be shoehorned into the creative plan 
without reason.

Evoke emotion

VR allows users to stand in other people’s shoes and unlocks heightened 
empathy. It can help consumers understand the huge efforts made by athletes, 
musicians and even astronauts. Empathy is an incredibly strong prompt for 
action – brands looking to champion social causes and explain their brand 
purpose, take note. Brilliant apps such as Google’sAbbey Road VR experience 
<https://insideabbeyroad.withgoogle.com/en> are engaging and powerful additions 
to the format.

Tickle the senses

It’s easy to get carried away with the visual possibilities of VR to blast 
people’s eyeballs with a hyperkinetic DayGlo world, but don’t forget the other 
senses. Voices and sounds can swirl around users, emerge above, below and from 
over the shoulder to create a deep and rich 360-degree environment. 
Unsurprisingly, sound works well when trying to replicate the experience of a 
blind person and how they navigate the world. I foundNotes On Blindness: Into 
Darkness <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=W2eTgbyiY_0> a fascinating VR 
experience along these lines. Remember, sound and touch (in the form of haptic 
technology or Google’s Tilt Brush) can be powerful elements in VR storytelling.


Take inspiration from the world around you

VR does not have to be high concept to have an impact. Real people embracing, 
enthusing and sharing joy is infectious. Putting consumers into the heart of an 
authentic, emotionally upbeat scenario can pay dividends. Take a look at the 
BBC’s 360-degree video of the momentLeicester City fans celebrated their 
Premier League triumph 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-leicestershire-36192732> in an ordinary 
pub. See if you can create and capture some of the world’s everyday magic in a 
virtual environment.

Integrate

Again, to avoid VR becoming a flash-in-the-pan gimmick, brands need to think 
about how the VR element integrates into and joins up with the wider strategy 
of a campaign. Don’t treat VR as a standalone, one-off experience – decide how 
it fits with everything else you’re doing for your brand, like John Lewis has 
done with its in-store VR setup complementing its Christmas campaign this year. 
If you can’t work out where to squeeze it in, VR probably isn’t the right 
approach in this instance.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Bbdus1Ubrc&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Bbdus1Ubrc>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D-Bbdus1Ubrc&media=>
Personalise

Adding personal aspects unique to the specific user can greatly enhance the 
impact of the experience. From something relatively simple like inserting their 
name into the program in real-time, to pulling social media or previous 
customer data to tailor the creative, personalisation can forge a deeper 
connection that will leave a longer lasting impression.

Guy Bradbury is founding partner and executive creative director, Atomic London
 <http://atomic-london.co.uk/>

To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your 
inbox,sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership 
<https://register.theguardian.com/media/>.


All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except 
for pieces labelled “Paid for by” – find out morehere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sponsored-content>.
 