
Apsley House

Take a look inside some of the world’s most iconic homes – gallery
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/vaillant-warmer-homes/gallery/2016/nov/29/take-a-look-inside-some-of-the-worlds-most-iconic-homes-gallery>
Is any address grander than “Number One London”? Apsley House 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/apsley-house/> lives up to its 
legendary nom de plume, so-called because it was the first house on the north 
side of Piccadilly. Standing in solitude on Hyde Park Corner, the beautiful 
Georgian building, designed and built by architect Robert Adam in 1778, was the 
London home of Arthur Wellesley, the first Duke of Wellington.

Keen to cram his palatial residence full of treasure, Wellesley filled Apsley 
House with art and gifts from European rulers, amassing a dazzling collection. 
Wellesley and his wife splurged over £20,000 (neatly £3m in today’s money) on 
new furniture and decor for their centrally located pad. They also spent a 
staggering £64,000 accommodating a state dining room, extra bedrooms and the 
grand Waterloo Gallery. Even by today’s standards, that’s quite the house 
extension.

Casa Batlló 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70877e91c756a23ba7958d043523798371cb46fb%2F0_0_5130_3078%2F5130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70877e91c756a23ba7958d043523798371cb46fb%2F0_0_5130_3078%2F5130.jpg>
 Casa Batlló was originally a residential home. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
A home can intrigue and welcome you from the outside – and that’s certainly 
true of Antoni Gaudí’sCasa Batlló <https://www.casabatllo.es/en/> in Barcelona. 
Once a surreal residential home, and now a modernist museum, Gaudí first 
designed the building in 1897.

The original house was unremarkable but, after being bought by Josep Batlló in 
1900, a more colourful and creative idea came to fruition. Batlló wanted an 
out-of-the-ordinary home and, re-engaging Gaudí’s services to transform the 
building, he placed no limits on the boundary-pushing architect.

Gaudí’s renovation included curvaceous exterior walls, covered in a mosaic of 
coloured glass and ceramic discs, balconies shaped to give the impression of 
skulls and bones, varying window shapes and sizes and a “hump-backed” 
blue-tiled roof. The design was driven by symbolism and ambition, laced with 
Gaudí’s hallucinatory passion. A genuine spectacle, Casa Batlló plays with 
colour and light, demanding attention and inviting onlookers in.


E1027
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48bd2863f3a5b8733411e9daf77f7c6390e6f15%2F0_168_2618_3273%2F2618.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa48bd2863f3a5b8733411e9daf77f7c6390e6f15%2F0_168_2618_3273%2F2618.jpg>
 E1027, a cube on pillars. Photograph: GAELLE LE BOULICAUT / Figarophot/Camera 
Press 
Born in Ireland in 1878, Eileen Gray grew up in London. She moved to Paris in 
1902, at the peak of la belle époque, France’s most beloved and creative era. A 
skilled cabinet-maker, Gray was an expert in the lacquered screens and 
decorative panels that came to define art deco, and she opened her own gallery 
in 1922 to showcase her designs. Known for her chic and stylish interior 
design, characterised by chrome, steel tube and glass furniture, Gray became a 
leading light in modernism.

Encouraged by her peers, the Swiss-French architect Le Corbusier and the Dutch 
architect JJP Oud, she designed two homes in the Alpes-Maritimes region. The 
first, at Roquebrune-Cap-Martin, was built from 1926-1929. Restored in 2015,
E1027 <https://capmoderne.com/en/lieu/la-villa-e-1027/> is a cube-shaped home, 
balanced on pillars, but Gray’s innovative interior designs make it extra 
special. The positioning of light and shadow were carefully executed, but Gray 
designed the property to be lived in and enjoyed, from an adjustable table to 
suit any situation, to a gramophone trolley for consuming music in every room.

Fallingwater
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F800da4fde8388d49526b65b2af01ac1ab7c0f87a%2F0_261_5026_3016%2F5026.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F800da4fde8388d49526b65b2af01ac1ab7c0f87a%2F0_261_5026_3016%2F5026.jpg>
 Frank Lloyd Wright’s Fallingwater. Photograph: Archive Photos/Getty Images 
One of American architect and interior designer Frank Lloyd Wright’s most 
iconic designs,Fallingwater <http://www.fallingwater.org/> is a breathtaking 
building in Bear Run, Pennsylvania. Edgar Kaufmann, a Pittsburgh businessman 
and owner of Kaufmann’s department store, commissioned the country hideaway in 
1935.

In his late 60s when Kaufmann asked him to design this wonderful weekend 
retreat, Wright was keen to prove that his best years as an architect were not 
behind him: Fallingwater is testament to that. Partially built on a waterfall, 
the house is in harmony with its picturesque surroundings. The low-ceilinged 
interiors feel cosy and cave-like, protecting its occupants, and harness 
materials that reflect the wood and stone outside. Like a tree with many 
hollows, the house has several entrances, and Wright seems to have been 
inspired in every element of his groundbreaking design by the sound and motion 
of the waterfall.


The Homewood
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe520f35f055703f51a25c7512e96bd5630878245%2F0_0_5813_2886%2F5813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe520f35f055703f51a25c7512e96bd5630878245%2F0_0_5813_2886%2F5813.jpg>
 The Homewood is now a National Trust property. Photograph: Dennis Gilbert/Ntpl 
A modernist masterpiece, The Homewood 
<https://www.nationaltrust.org.uk/the-homewood> was designed by British 
architect Patrick Gwynne in 1938. A pioneer of the modernist movement, Gwynne 
is perhaps best known for the Serpentine restaurant in Hyde Park and York’s 
Theatre Royal extension, but his interest in domestic architecture, over a 
70-year career, changed the nature of the British home.

Set in beautiful Surrey woodland, Gwynne designed The Homewood as his family 
home, continuing to live there until his death in 2003. An unconventional but 
luxurious villa, the house mixes a minimalist interior with homely touches 
including a spiral staircase, fold-out bar, mood lighting and a sprung maple 
dance floor. The house, which is set in a 2.5 hectare (six-acre) Esher Common 
estate, is now a National Trust property and visitors can take a pre-booked 
guided tour between April and October.


The Barbican estate
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d91300bdbc077cc0c0a8fc5c056074a7fbaee48%2F337_0_4995_2998%2F4995.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Six%20of%20the%20most%20stunning%20homes%20ever%20built&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fvaillant-warmer-homes%2F2016%2Fnov%2F29%2Fsix-of-the-most-stunning-homes-ever-built%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8d91300bdbc077cc0c0a8fc5c056074a7fbaee48%2F337_0_4995_2998%2F4995.jpg>
 The Barbican is famous for its brutalist architecture and communal water 
feature. Photograph: Mariusz Kluzniak/Getty Images 
Described as a “brutalist” development, the Barbican estate 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Barbican_Estate> in London originated in a 1951 
design competition. Three architects who entered, Peter Chamberlin, Geoffry 
Powell and Christoph Bon, agreed that – should one of them win – they would 
work on the project collaboratively. Geoffry Powell triumphed, and his win not 
only gave birth to the Barbican residential complex, but also created the 
renowned architectural practice, Chamberlin, Powell & Bon, the country’s 
leading lights in post-war architecture. Built in a heavily bombed area of 
central London, the Barbican estate still houses more than 4,000 residents and 
is famous for its rough concrete exterior, lush balcony gardens, high rise 
towers and gloriously green, communal water feature. Although the complex is 
strikingly modernist, the estate houses remnants of the old London Wall, built 
by the Romans: the name Barbican is actually derived from the Latin word
barbecana, meaning a fortified outpost or gateway.
 