
Leaders of more than a dozen Caribbean countries are launching a united effort 
to seek compensation from three European nations for what they say is the 
lingering legacy of the Atlantic slave trade.

The Caribbean Community, a regional organisation, has taken up the cause of 
compensation for slavery and the genocide of native peoples and is preparing 
for what would likely be a drawn-out battle with the governments of Britain, 
France and theNetherlands <https://www.theguardian.com/world/netherlands>.

It has engaged the British law firm of Leigh Day, which waged a successful 
fight for compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/uk-compensate-kenya-mau-mau-torture>
 for hundreds of Kenyans who were tortured by the British colonial government 
during the so-called Mau Mau rebellion of the 1950s and 1960s.

Lawyer Martyn Day said his first step would probably be to seek a negotiated 
settlement with the governments ofFrance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>, Britain and Netherlands along the 
lines of the British agreement in June to issue a statement of regret and award 
compensation of £19.9m to the surviving Kenyans.

"I think they would undoubtedly want to try and see if this can be resolved 
amicably," Day said of the Caribbean countries. "But I think the reason they 
have hired us is that they want to show that they mean business."

Caricom is creating a reparations commission to press the issue, said Ralph 
Gonsalves, the prime minister of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, who has been 
leading the effort.

The legacy of slavery includes widespread poverty and under-development, 
Gonsalves said. Any settlement should include a formal apology, but contrition 
alone would not be enough, he said.

"The apology is important but that is wholly insufficient," he said in a phone 
interview on Wednesday. "We have to have appropriate recompense."

The notion of forcing the countries that benefited from slavery to pay 
reparations has been a decades-long quest. Individual countries includingJamaica
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jamaica> and Antigua and Barbuda already 
have national commissions.

Earlier this month, leaders from the 14 Caricom nations voted unanimously at a 
meeting in Trinidad to wage a joint campaign that those involved say would be 
more ambitious than any previous effort.

Each nation that does not have a national reparations commission agreed to set 
one up, sending a representative to the regional commission, which would be 
overseen by prime ministers. They agreed to focus on Britain on behalf of the 
English-speaking Caribbean, France for the slavery in Haiti and the Netherlands 
forSuriname <https://www.theguardian.com/world/suriname>.

Caribbean officials have not mentioned a compensation figure but Gonsalves and 
Verene Shepherd, chairwoman of the national reparations commission in Jamaica, 
both noted that Britain at the time of emancipation in 1834 paid £20m to 
British planters in the Caribbean, the equivalent of £200bn now.

"Our ancestors got nothing," Shepherd said. "They got their freedom and they 
were told 'Go develop yourselves'."

The British high commissioner to Jamaica, David Fitton, said in a radio 
interview on Wednesday theMau Mau <https://www.theguardian.com/world/mau-mau> 
case was not meant to be a precedent and that his government opposed 
reparations for slavery.

"We don't think the issue of reparations is the right way to address these 
issues," Fitton said. "It's not the right way to address an historical problem."

In 2007, marking the 200th anniversary of the British prohibition on the 
transportation of slaves, then prime ministerTony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> expressed regret for the 
"unbearable suffering" caused by his country's role in slavery.

After the devastating Haitian earthquake in January 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/jan/14/haiti-earthquake-rescue-operation>
, then French president Nicolas Sarkozy was asked about reparations for slavery 
and the 90m gold francs demanded by Napoleon to recognise the country's 
independence. Sarkozy acknolwedged the "wounds of colonisation" and pointed out 
that France had cancelled a ¢56m debt to Paris and approved an aid package that 
included ¢40m in budget support for the Haitian government.

Gonsalves said much more needed to be done and he hoped to begin an "honest, 
sober and robust" discussion with the European governments soon, championing 
the issue when he takes over as chairman of Caricom in January.

"You have to seize the time," he said.
 