
This year marks the fourth anniversary of Small Business Saturday 
<https://smallbusinesssaturdayuk.com/> in the UK, which launched in the US in 
2010 as an alternative to Black Friday and Cyber Monday.

The flash sales associated with those events pull in the crowds but 
disproportionately benefit larger retail firms such as supermarkets, department 
storesand – of course – Amazon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/nov/25/online-rush-for-bargains-kicks-off-black-friday-business-live?page=with:block-58383853e4b0cc60d3476fed>
.

The Small Business Saturday campaign, on the other hand, encourages people to 
support local, independent businesses in their communities. It is an 
opportunity for small enterprises of all kinds to attract new customers. In 
2015, an estimated £623m was spent with small businesses on this day, and of 
those who did buy something,48% said 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/finance/businessclub/12044119/British-shoppers-spent-623m-on-Small-Business-Saturday.html>
 they spent more than they would usually.

What are you doing to attract customers this Small Business Saturday? We want 
to know if you’ve seen an uplift in business, if your local area is planning 
anything special, and if you’re running promotions or entertainment to 
celebrate. We’ll pick the best pictures and stories to be featured in a gallery 
on theGuardian Small Business Network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network>.

You can share your news by clicking on the blue “contribute” button on this 
article or you can download the freeGuardianWitness app 
<https://witness.theguardian.com/apps> if you have a smartphone. Please use the 
description field to tell us more about the photo or video. No PR pictures 
please.

 * GuardianWitness <https://witness.theguardian.com/> is the home of content 
created by Guardian readers. Share your video, pictures and stories, and browse 
contributions submitted by others. Posts will be reviewed prior to publication 
on GuardianWitness, and the best pieces will feature on the Guardian site.  