
A monkey which sneezes in the rain and a “walking” fish are among more than 
200 new species discovered in the Eastern Himalayas in recent years.


A report 
<http://d2ouvy59p0dg6k.cloudfront.net/downloads/wwf_lhi_species_discovery_report__2015.pdf>
 on wildlife in Nepal, Bhutan, the far north of Myanmar, southern Tibet and 
north-eastern India has revealed discoveries in the past five years including 
133 plants, 26 species of fish, 10 new amphibians, one reptile, one bird and 
one mammal.

The discoveries include a new bird named the spotted wren-babbler, a striking 
blue-eyed frog and a lance-headed pit viper snake with an ornate yellow, red 
and orange pattern that could pass for a piece of jewellery, conservation 
organisation WWF said.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4d33766c93e947976840941bfc8d09beeafa8f%2F0_0_700_700%2F700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sneezing%20monkey%20and%20walking%20fish%20among%20new%20species%20discovered%20in%20Himalayas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sneezing%20monkey%20and%20walking%20fish%20among%20new%20species%20discovered%20in%20Himalayas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fed4d33766c93e947976840941bfc8d09beeafa8f%2F0_0_700_700%2F700.jpg>
 A sneezing snub-nosed monkey, nick-named Snubby, was discovered in the remote 
forests in Myanmar Photograph: Martin Aveling/Fauna & Flora international/WWF 
Scientists learned of the snub-nosed monkey – or “Snubby” as they nicknamed 
the species – from locals in the remote forests of northernMyanmar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/myanmar>, who said it was easy to find when 
it was raining because it often got rainwater in its upturned nose, causing it 
to sneeze.

To avoid the problem, snub-nosed monkeys spend rainy days sitting with their 
heads tucked between their knees, the report said.

Among the new fish found is a vibrant blue dwarf “walking” snakehead fish, 
found in West Bengal,India <https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>, which 
breathes air, can survive on land for up to four days and can writhe and 
wriggle up to quarter of a mile over wet ground between bodies of water.

But the report also warns of the threats facing the newly-discovered species, 
with just a quarter of the original habitats in the region still intact and 
hundreds of plants and animals living in the Eastern Himalayas considered to be 
globally threatened.

Climate change is the most serious threat to the region, while population 
growth, deforestation, poaching, mining, overgrazing, the wildlife trade, 
pollution and development of hydroelectric dams are all putting pressure on 
nature in the Eastern Himalayas.

Heather Sohl, WWF-UK’s chief adviser of species, said: “These discoveries show 
that there is still a huge amount to learn about the species that share our 
world.

“It is a stark reminder that if we don’t act now to protect these fragile 
ecosystems, untold natural riches could be lost forever.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ecedb2d73671656ee1927d909fd426681c5d76%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sneezing%20monkey%20and%20walking%20fish%20among%20new%20species%20discovered%20in%20Himalayas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sneezing%20monkey%20and%20walking%20fish%20among%20new%20species%20discovered%20in%20Himalayas&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2015%2Foct%2F05%2Fsneezing-monkey-and-walking-fish-among-new-species-discovered-himalayas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd3ecedb2d73671656ee1927d909fd426681c5d76%2F0_0_4896_2938%2F4896.jpg>
Impatiens lohitensis, one of 133 new plants discovered. Photograph: R.Gogoi & 
S.Borah/WWF 
Dechen Dorji of WWF Bhutan <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bhutan> said: 
“The discovery of 211 new species from one of the most biologically rich 
regions of the world is a celebration of the amazing gift of nature.

“With discovery, comes the important responsibility to continue protecting and 
caring for these precious gift that this world has been blessed with.”

WWF is supporting countries in the region to develop “green” economies that 
value nature and the services it provides to millions of people living in the 
Eastern Himalayas, for example through sustainable hydropower schemes and 
helping people adapt to climate change.
 