
John Swinney, Scotland’s deputy first minister, has promised that EU students 
will still receive free tuition at Scottish universities after Brexit, at a 
potential cost of £300m.

Swinney matched a similar pledge from the universities minister at 
Westminster, Jo Johnson, whosaid this week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/11/eu-student-funding-in-uk-to-remain-same-in-2017-despite-brexit-vote>
 that EU students arriving in autumn 2017 would be allowed to stay at English 
universities for the duration of their courses, and be eligible for loans and 
grants.

But Swinney, who is also Scotland’s education secretary, said UK ministers had 
not yet guaranteed that EU students would be granted visas to allow them to 
stay for the full duration of their courses, which can last up to five years.

Nicola Sturgeon tells EU nationals: 'You are not bargaining chips'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/17/nicola-sturgeon-brexit-referendum-eu-nationals-not-bargaining-chips>
He said EU students should also have access to post-study work visas. That 
policy was scrapped by the previous Tory-Lib Dem coalition in London but is 
being reassessed in a new pilot project for short-term post-study visas at a 
handful of English universities.

There is uncertainty over the future of EU students after Amber Rudd, the home 
secretary, outlinedplans for two-tier systems 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
 for less prestigious universities and courses. Other UK ministers have 
suggested that the rights of EU citizens after Brexit would depend on how UK 
citizens living elsewhere in the EU were treated.

“They are not cards to be played,” Swinney told the Scottish National party’s 
annual conference in Glasgow. “They are human beings. To use them as 
negotiating chips is obscene and we will have no part of it.”

The conference had already voted to devolve control over post-study work visas 
to the Scottish parliament after the controversy over the deportation threat 
facing an Australian family,the Brains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/20/australian-family-fighting-deportation-granted-visa-to-remain-in-uk>
, who came to Scotland in 2011 on a post-study visa that was withdrawn soon 
after they arrived.

Swinney has been under mounting pressure from universities, teaching unions 
and theNational Union of Students <http://www.nus.org.uk/> to guarantee that EU 
students would get free places at Scottish universities.That pressure 
intensified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/11/scottish-ministers-under-pressure-to-protect-free-tuition-for-eu-students>
 after Johnson’s announcement on Monday.

The policy, which is required under EU law because Scottish residents get free 
places, costs the Scottish government about £75m a year.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20Scotland's%20future%20in%20UK%20depends%20on%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20Scotland%27s%20future%20in%20UK%20depends%20on%20single%20market%20access%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F14%2Fnicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon: Scotland’s future in UK depends on single market access – video
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/14/nicola-sturgeon-scotlands-future-in-uk-depends-on-single-market-access-video>
About 13,500 EU students have places at present, and Scottish university 
undergraduate degrees normally take four years, with medicine courses lasting 
five years. That suggests the policy will cost at least £300m, assuming student 
numbers do not drop following theUK’s decision in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/britain-votes-for-brexit-eu-referendum-david-cameron>
 to leave the EU.

In further policy announcements, the SNP conference also heard Shona Robison, 
the Scottish health minister, pledge £30m for theChildren’s Hospice Association 
Scotland <http://www.chas.org.uk/> (Chas) to expand its services over the next 
five years. Michael Matheson, the justice secretary, announced £665,000 over 
the next two years to allow theScottish Women’s Rights Centre 
<https://www.scottishwomensrightscentre.org.uk/> to expand its services for 
women suffering domestic and sexual violence across the country.

In one of the liveliest debates of the conference so far, the Scottish 
government’s Brexit minister, Michael Russell, saidScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> would not be “spoken for” during 
negotiations for the UK to leave the EU, as delegates considered a motion on 
whether the country should prepare for a second independence referendum “if no 
viable solution to safeguard our membership [of the EU] as part of the UK 
exists”.

 Tabled by a former Yes Scotland adviser and SNP Holyrood candidate, Toni 
Giugliano, the resolution, which gave delegates their only opportunity to 
debate independence on the main conference floor, attracted passionate 
contributions from both sides, including a number from older members 
complaining they had not been picked to speak against it.

Speaking for the resolution, Russell said: “We have to go into these 
negotiations as a nation: we have to speak, discuss and act as a nation, and 
that is what we will do at every stage. We’ll go into the negotiations to speak 
about them, not to be spoken for. We will not accept the arrogant assumption 
that we can sit in the corner while someone else speaks on the behalf of the 
vital interests of Scotland.”

Earlier in the day, the SNP reacted angrily when a leaked list of the 
membership of Theresa May’s Brexit committee revealed that the Scottish 
secretary, David Mundell, would only attend “as required”.


Referring to comments by Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> about the possibility of 
a second independence referendum, Russell said: “The first minister stressed in 
what she said yesterday that it’s absolutely vital that we look after our 
national interest, and I will not be told what that national interest is by 
[Scottish Conservative leader] Ruth Davidson or [Scottish Labour leader] Kezia 
Dugdale or [Brexit secretary at Westminster] David Davis or Boris Johnson. 
We’ve been in this party long enough to know what the national interest is.”

Earlier in the debate, the SNP MP and justice spokeswoman Joanna Cherry 
challenged Westminster, saying: “We need to make it very clear to Ruth Davidson 
and her nasty rightwing colleagues down south that no amount of hectoring and 
bullying will prevent us holding a second independence referendum if necessary.”
 