
The full scale of the post-referendum political earthquake in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> has been demonstrated by a new poll 
which suggests Charles Kennedy’s once safe seat will fall to the Scottish 
National party, along with the seat Gordon Brown is retiring from in May.

Projected SNP landslide could see it form part of next UK government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/mar/04/poll-predicts-snp-general-election-landslide-in-scotland>
The poll by Lord Ashcroft – which is of a series of parliamentary seats across 
Britain – indicates that the SNP, led by Nicola Sturgeon, could win 56 of 
Scotland’s 59 parliamentary seats, according to the veteran polling analyst 
Mike Smithson. This would virtually wipe out the Labour party and theLiberal 
Democrats <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats> north of the 
border.

The projected success of the SNP would almost cancel out Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> gains in other parts of Great 
Britain, producing a dead heat between the two main parties on 7 May, according 
to Ashcroft’s projections.


The former Tory treasurer, who now insists he is an impartial pollster, 
suggested that the Tories and Labour would be tied on 272 seats each. Labour 
won 258 seats in 2010 while the Tories won 306 seats.

In a presentation to the ConservativeHome <http://www.conservativehome.com/> 
website, Ashcroft challenged David Cameron to “weaponise” himself – a play on 
the wording Ed Miliband is reported to have used to describe Labour’s tactics 
on the NHS.

Labour and the Liberal Democrats were shocked by signs of the depth of the SNP 
breakthrough despite losing the independence referendum in September.Charles 
Kennedy <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/charleskennedy>, the former Lib 
Dem leader, is five points behind the SNP in his Highlands seat of Ross, Skye 
and Lochabar. The poll placed the SNP in his seat on 40%, the Lib Dems on 35%, 
Labour on 9% and the Tories on 8%.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fsnp-set-for-56-of-59-scottish-seats-in-general-election-poll-suggests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425502792737%2Ffa0e7430-67f2-40f0-bb29-985ac3d62e65-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SNP%20set%20for%2056%20of%2059%20Scottish%20seats%20in%20general%20election%2C%20poll%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fsnp-set-for-56-of-59-scottish-seats-in-general-election-poll-suggests%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SNP%20set%20for%2056%20of%2059%20Scottish%20seats%20in%20general%20election%2C%20poll%20suggests&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2015%2Fmar%2F04%2Fsnp-set-for-56-of-59-scottish-seats-in-general-election-poll-suggests%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F4%2F1425502792737%2Ffa0e7430-67f2-40f0-bb29-985ac3d62e65-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Charles Kennedy is five points behind the SNP in his Highlands seat of Ross, 
Skye and Lochabar. Photograph: Martin Argles for the Guardian 
The Lib Dems had hoped that Kennedy, first elected in 1983 who has kept his 
distance from the coalition, would be safe. “I’m genuinely shocked about 
Kennedy,” one Lib Dem source said. Projections from the polling in eight 
Scottish seats suggests that Alistair Carmichael, the Scotland secretary, would 
be the only one of the Lib Dem MPs in Scotland to hold on, in Orkney and 
Shetland.

The one Lib Dem hope is that the likes of Kennedy will enjoy a personal boost. 
Ashcroft did not prompt voters by naming candidates, although he did ask voters 
to think of the candidates standing in the constituency. Smithson suggested 
that the SNP would fare less well if the poll had named candidates.

The deep threat to Labour is highlighted by a 28.5% SNP swing in Gordon 
Brown’s seat of Kirkcaldy and Cowdenbeath. The poll placed the SNP on 45%, 
Labour on 37%, the Tories on 10% and the Lib Dems on 2%. Labour will not 
benefit from any personal bounce in the seat because the former prime minister 
is standing down at the election.

The one crumb of comfort for Labour is that Jim Murphy, the party’s leader in 
Scotland, will hang on in East Renfrewshire. But Murphy is just one point ahead 
of the SNP by 34% to 33%. The Tories are on 26% and the Lib Dems on 2% behind 
the Greens on 3%. All the parties will treat the poll with caution. Ashcroft 
polled just eight of the 59 seats in Scotland.

Angus Robertson, the SNP general election campaign director, said: “These 
polls are very encouraging, but we aren’t taking a single seat or vote for 
granted in May. The most significant aspect of the findings is it confirms that 
the SNP’s surge in support is reflected every bit as much in areas of Scotland 
which voted no as a well as yes in the referendum.”

Murphy acknowledged that the polls were bad news for Labour but he sought to 
use the findings to highlight Labour’s central message in Scotland – that a 
vote for the SNP would help Cameron remain in No 10.


Murphy said: “There is no gloss that can be put on these polls. This is bad 
news for Scottish Labour but great news for the Tories. David Cameron will be 
rubbing his hands with glee when he sees these polls, because any seat the SNP 
take from Scottish Labour makes it more likely the Tories will be the largest 
party across the UK.

“It is a simple fact that in every election since before the second world war, 
the largest party has gone on to form the government. In May’s election, the 
biggest party will be either Labour or the Tories. This election is too close 
to call with Labour and the Tories running neck and neck. This poll makes clear 
that only Labour is big enough and strong enough to beat the Tories across the 
UK.

“We need to do everything we can to stop the Tories being the largest party, 
and the way to do that is to vote for Scottish Labour.

“We can’t let David Cameron back into Downing Street by the back door. That 
would be a disaster for Scotland, but it looks like that is what might happen 
if these polls in Scotland are repeated on election day.”

Ashcroft found the weaknesses of the party leaders as voters drew laughable 
comparisons. Miliband was likened to the cartoon character Elmer Fudd and a 
creme de menthe. Clegg was likened to Fred from Scoobie Doo, a Smart car, a 
bottle of Babycham and a chihuahua in a handbag. Cameron was likened to a 
Vesper Martini, a Mercedes, Dick Dastardly and Hugh Grant.
 