
The charm offensive, the modus operandi, of our last prime minister is being 
decommissioned. David Cameron’s reputation is being shredded. It is as though 
he is made of nothing. He disappeared so fast it is hard to remember he was 
ever really there. For six years, or until he deigned to leave ... until the 
recklessness of the referendum that is. Now, too, isthe recklessness of his 
foreign policy being exposed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/14/mps-deliver-damning-verdict-on-camerons-libya-intervention>
: the intervention in Libya with its horrible echoes of Iraq, done again 
without proper intelligence and soon shifting its goal, from the need toprotect 
civilians in Benghazi <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/benghazi-attack>, to 
regime change. Cameron’s aim, it seems, was to pose with Nicolas Sarkozy as a 
liberator. Never one to miss a photo-op! Libya slid into chaos and civil war. 
By then, Cameron had, of course, moved on – oras Obama said, become distracted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/10/david-cameron-distracted-libya-conflict-barack-obama>
.

This dangerous short-termism, combined with an entitlement to power, defines 
Cameron. Those trying to grasp the essential principles of Cameron’s rule find 
everything turns to dust in their hands. What did Cameron believe? Except that 
he could, and therefore should, be prime minister?

The House of Commons was at its most sentimental when it saw him off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/13/david-cameron-pmq-britain>
. A warm farewell for a man who failed in practically everything he set out to 
do. Oh, but Sam was there with the children, in one of her dresses. Isn’t he 
nice, really? Public service and all that? Well, no. This was not some 
overambitious intern who accidentally set off the fire alarm,this man was prime 
minister for six years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/16/how-will-history-remember-prime-minister-david-cameron>
. Libya is not the only failed state he is responsible for.

Brexit and its repercussions remain huge and unknowable, but it is his 
government’s commitment to deliberately shrinking our state that many will feel 
most.The shrinking state, where the government spends less and less on the 
things most people need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ng-interactive/2015/apr/29/the-austerity-delusion>
, from schools to legal aid to care, has been at the heart of what Cameron has 
done. The public purse gets tighter and this vision – supposedly Osborne’s – 
was waved through by Cameron. For if Cameron did the charm, Osborne certainly 
did the offensive.

There is an argument for saying it was Osborne’s budgets – often cruel, often 
aimed squarely at women and children – that helped Cameron lose the referendum. 
We were to be a high wage, low–welfare economy. The reality is a low-wage and 
low-welfare state. The boast of low unemployment has been achieved through 
zero-hours contracts and self-employment, which feels deeply insecure. The IMF 
repeatedly issued warnings over the imposition of such austerity, but Cameron 
chillaxed his way through it.

Social cohesion became a gated concept, for the few not the many. The dream of 
a modernised party was represented only by equal marriage, an essentially 
conservative move that cost Cameron little. The “acceptance” of homosexuality 
has become the fetish of the socially liberal. Sure, Cameron may well be that, 
although his sense of humour (Benny Hill, Michael Winner) points to a different 
generation.

Still, he and his besties are what they are: posh boys who, despite having 
very little experience of life, believe they can order the lives of others. 
Arrogance does not quite cover such an attitude, which leads them to maintain 
they know more about schools than teachers, more about hospitals than doctors, 
more about the economy than the IMF. This isn’t managerialism, it is narcissism.

Ordinary folk have paid a high price for Cameron’s consistent self-belief. 
Some even mistook it for strategy. He was heir to Blair in this 
self-conviction, but lacked any actual vision. His was the shiny veneer that 
hid the ruthlessness of what his ministers were doing. The Lib Dems were picked 
off easily enough. But he could not see off sections of his party.

That’s why the return of David Davis, who lost to Cameron in the 2005 
leadership contest, is significant. May is blowing Cameron’s legacy away like 
the froth on a weak cappuccino. Shemay not be as sure-footed as she first seemed
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/14/corbyn-lambasts-may-on-grammar-schools-in-boisterous-pmqs>
, but this Eton mess is gone. May has no need to talk to us about Pokémon. She 
lacks Cameron’s ease, but this is still something of a relief. His famous charm 
only worked on those who wanted to be fooled by it. Genuine charm, like actual 
manners, depends on being interested in others. Otherwise it’s just posh 
showing off. Cameron was only interested in others like himself. If one was 
“other” to him and his circle (and that’s most of us), he was merely polite in 
his patrician way. These bizarre class codes were then reinforced by those 
anxious to sing his praises. He was normal, hip, ordinary. What? All that, 
while he was putting the boot in via benefit caps. He could sell what Osborne 
served up. There was never any coherent vision of what this was for, of what 
kind of country he wanted to live in, beyond the world of country suppers.

His refusal to see that “reducing the deficit” was hammering the public sector 
too hard, his refusal to tackle abuse of the tax system, of being intensely 
relaxed about unaffordable house prices, the ongoing lack of investment in 
public provision, these were choices he made for others suffer the 
consequences. What did he mean when he talked airily of “social justice”? 
Again, nothing. Pig-gate did not do for him, perhaps because it was not real. 
He had already done way worse things to the entire country right before our 
eyes.
 