
On the evening of 8 November, the world gathered in front of TV screens for 
the news. In the early hours of 9 November, it began to dawn on us that what we 
were watching was no longer news but history. Not since 9/11 could many recall 
such a sense of incredulous dread, and asFlorida fell to Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live>
, I found myself seized by an eerie premonition. I saw schoolchildren turning 
over history examination papers in the future, to find a question as 
predictable and familiar to their generation as one about the origins of the 
second world war had been to mine: “Identify and analyse the parallels,” it 
would read, “between the 1930s and the 2010s.”

No one yet knows how 2016 will be remembered, and if Boris Johnson turns out 
to be right, we will wonder why anyone ever worried about the arrival of 
another “liberal guy from New York 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/nov/15/mcdonnell-urges-government-to-adopt-labours-pro-investment-fiscal-rules-politics-live>
” in the White House. If, however, pupils do one day have to answer that exam 
question, they might well begin by observing that we were every bit as slow as 
our forefathers to recognise impending catastrophe.

When David Cameron returned from Brussels in February 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/feb/19/eu-summit-all-night-negotiations-deal-cameron-live>
, brandishing his peace-in-our-time renegotiated EU membership terms – can 
anyone now even remember what they were? – it looked as if the referendum 
promised nothing more sinister than the entertaining spectacle of the 
government tearing itself apart. No one was surprised to seeIain Duncan Smith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/iain-duncan-smith>, Chris Grayling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling>, John Whittingdale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/john-whittingdale> and Theresa Villiers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresa-villiers> side with Vote Leave, 
butMichael Gove’s defection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/20/michael-gove-and-five-other-cabinet-members-break-ranks-with-pm-over-eu>
 was a bombshell. WhenJohnson followed a day later 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/21/boris-johnson-joins-campaign-to-leave-eu>
, “after a huge amount of heartache”, the audacity of the pretence that he was 
acting on deeply held anti-EU conviction fooled nobody. As thecolumnist Nick 
Cohen put it after the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/boris-johnson-michael-gove-eu-liars>
, “There are liars, and then there’s Boris.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e7f75bb5292d81d178cf048ff9bb4820c45117%2F0_0_2038_1351%2F2038.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F68e7f75bb5292d81d178cf048ff9bb4820c45117%2F0_0_2038_1351%2F2038.jpg>
 David Cameron at the European Commission in January. Photograph: Laurent 
Dubrule/EPA 
In Johnson’s defence, he wasn’t the only one exploiting Europe for personal 
ambition. Cameron’s motives for calling the referendum had little to do with 
principle and everything to do with neutralisingUkip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ukip>’s threat and silencing internal 
dissent. Europe had been a toxic nuisance to Tory leaders for 40 years, and 
back in 2006 Cameron famously blamed“banging on about Europe” for his party’s 
unpopularity <http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/5396358.stm> (“Instead of 
talking about the things that most people care about,” he declared, “we talked 
about whatwe cared about most”). By the time the campaign began, fevered 
speculation about its implications for the Tories left little room for much 
thought about the damage it could do to the country.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=2016%3A%20How%20do%20you%20report%20a%20year%20that%20changed%20the%20world%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmembership%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F22%2F2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video&media=>
2016: How do you report a year that changed the world? – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/membership/video/2016/dec/22/2016-how-do-you-report-a-year-that-changed-the-world-video>
The remain campaign imagined they’d put this right by orchestrating a chorus 
of hair-raising warnings. Everyone fromMark Carney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> to Richard Branson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/richard-branson>, the TUC to the IMF, 
warned of economic Armageddon. Such a powerful consensus seemed so 
self-evidently persuasive to remain campaigners that when voters said they were 
fed up with Project Fear, they refused to believe them and wheeled outPresident 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama>, only to give leave 
another boost in the polls. “Bring Obama back again!”Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> gloated gleefully. “Let’s 
have another visit!” The then Ukip leader was more attuned than most to the new 
populist mood of anti-elite resentment; and when Gove told us “the people of 
this country have had enough of experts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/09/michael-gove-experts-academics-vote>
”, liberals were so quick to ridicule him that few considered the possibility 
he might, in fact, be right.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd554644960193c0a26298b41054d81fcee13a8ac%2F0_0_3081_1894%2F3081.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd554644960193c0a26298b41054d81fcee13a8ac%2F0_0_3081_1894%2F3081.jpg>
 Boris Johnson and Michael Gove after the Brexit vote. Photograph: Stefan 
Rousseau/AFP/Getty Images 
In a year when the phrase “post-truth” entered the Oxford Dictionary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/nov/15/post-truth-named-word-of-the-year-by-oxford-dictionaries>
, andfake news helped win the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/fake-news-donald-trump-election-alt-right-social-media-tech-companies>
, facts were at best worthless and at worst a liability. Once again, many of us 
were slow to grasp the implications of this new paradigm. Focus groups of 
undecided voters told remain’s leaders that their minds would be made up by 
hard facts – and were taken at their word. Remain duly kept churning out data – 
Brexit wouldcost “£4,300 per household”, claimed George Osborne  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/17/brexit-uk-treasury-leave-eu-referendum>
– apparently unaware that no one likes to think, let alone admit, that what 
really informs their decisions is much more elusive and emotional. In the 
febrile new mood of 2016, remain’s threat that you would lose “vital EU funding 
for the farming, scientific and medical research and programmes that make a 
real difference in your local community” was no match for the potent promise of 
leave’s “Take back control”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617c18f40af1a20a9d46f2757856926b9a932c38%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F617c18f40af1a20a9d46f2757856926b9a932c38%2F0_0_3500_2334%2F3500.jpg>
 Anti-Brexit protesters in Berlin. Photograph: Hannibal Hanschke/Reuters 
For a fleeting moment, the campaign seemed almost festive, when Bob Geldof and 
Farage traded insults across the Thames from rival flotillas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/15/geldof-and-farage-flotillas-clash-on-thames-over-eu-referendum-video>
. The leave boats hadJoey Essex 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2015/mar/31/joey-essex-yawns-nick-clegg-speech-video>
 on board, while the 60s soul song The In Crowd blasted out from Geldof’s. The 
referendum had everyone talking, and optimists could feasibly mistake the 
national conversation for a unifying moment. But seven days before the vote, 
the mood darkened. Ukip revealed itsinfamous Breaking Point poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
, an almost exact copy of footage from a Nazi propaganda film; hours later, an 
idealistic youngpro-EU Labour MP was shot and stabbed to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/16/labour-mp-jo-cox-shot-in-west-yorkshire>
 on the street in her constituency by a Nazi sympathiser shouting “Britain 
first”. Even Farage privately admitted that Jo Cox’s murder would finish off 
leave’s chances, and liberals, though deeply shaken, assumed such grotesque 
ugliness couldn’t fail to bring the country to its senses. All the polls agreed.

They were wrong. On 23 June, 52% of us chose instead to vote for chaos; by 
breakfast the following morning,the prime minister had resigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/david-cameron-resigns-after-uk-votes-to-leave-european-union>
, and even Johnson and Govelooked shell-shocked 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/a-pyrrhic-victory-boris-johnson-wakes-up-to-the-costs-of-brexit>
. Within days, they would destroy one another ina Shakespearean bloodbath to 
succeed Cameron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/jul/01/newspapers-draw-on-shakespeare-to-report-goves-knifing-of-johnson>
. OnceAndrea Leadsom <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/andrea-leadsom>’s 
misapprehension that motherhood qualified her for the job had ruled her out, 
Theresa May was the only one left standing, and thusbecame our new prime 
minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/jul/11/andrea-leadsom-apologises-to-theresa-may-politics-live>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cdbf4c1d0e86eacd3c642e7e42608a89a2e362d%2F403_0_1148_2589%2F1148.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7cdbf4c1d0e86eacd3c642e7e42608a89a2e362d%2F403_0_1148_2589%2F1148.jpg>
 A group hug after Cameron resigned. Photograph: Kirsty Wigglesworth/AP 
But if the Tories’ leadership race was unedifying, Labour MPs could only look 
on with envy. Incensed by Jeremy Corbyn’s absenteeism during the referendum 
campaign, more than60 resigned from the shadow front bench 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/labour-shadow-cabinet-resignations-jeremy-corbyn-who-has-gone>
, and days later 172 voted no confidence in their leader. Corbynistas 
retaliated with a torrent of online abuse, much of it violent and misogynistic, 
anda brick through leadership challenger Angela Eagle’s window 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/12/angela-eagles-constituency-office-vandalised-after-leadership-bid-launch>
 put paid to any hope of a “kinder, gentler politics”. After an inflammatory 
summer of courtroom battles, allegations of MI5 infiltrators, rock star-style 
Corbyn rallies and squabbles over a £25 fee to vote,Corbyn was duly re-elected 
Labour leader 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/24/labour-leadership-jeremy-corbyn-wins-landslide-victory-party>
, and promptly vanished from view again.

Historians will probably argue for ever about why we voted to leave the EU, 
but none could conclude that immigration played little part.The 58% spike in 
hate crimes that followed the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/07/hate-surged-after-eu-referendum-police-figures-show>
 only confirmed what the result had already told us: our compassion for 
migrants had curdled into fearful hostility as the crisis in mainland Europe 
spiralled.Hungary declared a nationwide state of emergency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/sep/15/refugee-crisis-hungary-launches-border-crackdown-live-updates>
, and Italy replaced Greece as the people traffickers’ destination of choice, 
with 180,000 reaching its shores this year. The likelihood of drowning while 
crossing the Med narrowed from the previous year’s record of one in 269, to 
just one in 88; but sympathy hardened as the crisis became fatally entwined in 
public minds with the Islamic terror attacks rocking the continent.

Seven of the nine jihadis who attacked Paris late last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris-attacks>, killing 130, were reported 
to have smuggled themselves into Europe disguised as Syrian refugees. In March, 
Brussels became the next target, whenbombs at the airport and a metro station 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/brussels-attacks> killed more than 30 and 
injured 300. But July was to be the deadliest month: Bastille Day celebrations 
on a balmy night in Nice became a massacre whena Tunisian man drove a truck 
into the crowds <https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack>, 
killing 86 and injuring more than 400. Twelve days later, two 19-year-old 
jihadis forced an 85-year-old priest to kneel at his own altar in a Normandy 
church andslit his throat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/26/france-shock-second-isis-attack-12-days>
. In Germany,an Afghan asylum seeker ran amok with an axe on a train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/about-20-people-injured-in-axe-attack-on-train-in-germany>
,a Syrian refugee blew up a wine bar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/bomb-attack-southern-germany>, 
anotherhacked a colleague to death 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/24/man-with-machete-kills-woman-in-southern-germany>
 with a machete, and aGerman-Iranian teenage gunman went on a rampage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/22/munich-shopping-centre-evacuated-after-reported-shooting-germany>
, killing nine. Earlier this week, a Tunisian asylum seeker was was shot dead 
by Italian policeafter being identified 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/berlin-attack-german-police-leads>
 as the man who drove a truck into a Berlin Christmas market, killing at least 
12 people.

Measures that would only recently have been unthinkable were passed with 
little public protest. Denmark introduced a law authorising theconfiscation of 
jewellery and cash from asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/26/danish-parliament-approves-plan-to-seize-assets-from-refugees>
 to pay for their care, undeterred by UN warnings against fuelling “fear and 
xenophobia”.French seaside resorts imposed a burkini ban 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/24/the-guardian-view-on-frances-burkini-bans-ugly-politics-on-the-beach>
, leading to the surreal spectacle of armed policemen ordering Muslim women on 
beaches to undress, which was reversed not by public revulsion (opinion polls 
found two-thirds of French people in favour) buta court ruling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/02/burkini-ban-suspended-nice-court-france>
. When themigrant camp in Calais was bulldozed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/calais-refugees-hope-home-camp-greece>
, Britain agreed to take its unaccompanied minors, only for our tabloids to 
whip up outrage about arrivals who didn’t “look” under 18. A Tory backbencher 
proposedsubjecting them to dental tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
, to determine if they were deserving of British kindness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0c9f2542067d9839ae8f7788e121aa7299c4648%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe0c9f2542067d9839ae8f7788e121aa7299c4648%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 Wrecked boats and life jackets used by refugees crossing the Aegean, abandoned 
in Greece. Photograph: Aris Messinis/AFP/Getty Images 
The three biggest nationalities pouring into Europe were fleeing conflicts 
caused by events long predating 2016 and not confined within their borders. 
Fifteen years after western coalition forces first sought revenge for 9/11, 
Afghanistan and Iraq remain locked in bloody turmoil, but it was the tragedy of
Syria <https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> that horrified the world this 
year. Five years into civil war, the president, Bashar al-Assad, remained 
undefeated and the international community paralysed, unable to decide which, 
if any, side to support.

Diplomatic scruples did not inhibit Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, who was all too happy to 
fill the vacuum. Any hope that Russian airstrikes on Syria would be confined to 
Isis targets soon faded as Moscow subjected eastern Aleppo to the same ruthless 
bombardment that had oncereduced Grozny to rubble 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/sep/30/second-chechen-war-teenagers-diary>
. Cluster and barrel bombs rained down on civilian homes and hospitals, even a 
UN aid convoy, rendering Aleppo our Guernica and killing more civilians,
according to one NGO monitoring the war 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/russia-isis-civilian-deaths-united-nations-syria-2016-8>
 (the UN-sanctioned Syrian Network for Human Rights), than even Isis has. The 
world was shaken by footage of a shell-shocked five-year-old boybeing pulled 
from the wreckage of his home 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/boy-in-the-ambulance-image-emerges-syrian-child-aleppo-rubble>
, coated in grey dust, dazed – but still it wasn’t moved to act. “All the world 
has failed us,” a resident of Aleppo despaired. “The city is dying. Rapidly by 
bombardment, and slowly by hunger and fear of the advance of the Assad regime.” 
As the year drew to a close, the fall of Aleppo to Assad became inevitable, and 
from the ruins of one of the world’s oldest cities rose a resurgent Kremlin, 
restored as a global superpower.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90b7febb22cae0a05db98e14683b9790f83518c1%2F0_0_1800_1200%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F90b7febb22cae0a05db98e14683b9790f83518c1%2F0_0_1800_1200%2F1800.jpg>
 The bomb-damaged Bustan al-Basha district of Aleppo in November. Photograph: 
George Ourfalian/AFP/Getty Images 
A once faintly ridiculous figure, mocked in the west for his fondness for 
posing topless, Putin could plausibly claim to be the most influential world 
leader of 2016. For the first time in history, a Russian president was accused 
of deployingcyber warfare to influence the outcome of a US presidential election
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
. Putin denied the CIA’s charge, but few in Washington doubted that he was 
behind the Russian hackers who infiltrated Democratic National Committee email 
servers and the private email account of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, 
releasing material calculated to embarrass and undermine their candidate. Her 
rival had even urged Moscow to hack her account: “Russia, if you’re listening,”
he declared at a press conference in July 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
, “I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” In the words 
of one stunned Clinton aide: “This has to be the first time that a major 
presidential candidate has actively encouraged a foreign power to conduct 
espionage against his political opponent.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7e4163c3b8444e729023d4d0ef921cf3a1bc9db%2F0_0_4334_2938%2F4334.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff7e4163c3b8444e729023d4d0ef921cf3a1bc9db%2F0_0_4334_2938%2F4334.jpg>
 Vladimir Putin with Trump’s secretary of state, ExxonMobil CEO Rex Tillerson. 
Photograph: Sasha Mordovets/Getty Images 
But it was only one of many firsts in a US presidential election unlike any 
the world had seen. WhenDonald J Trump entered the race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/16/donald-trump-announces-run-president>
, few imagined the reality star and property tycoon with four business 
bankruptcies and two ex-wives behind him stood a chance against the most 
qualified Democratic candidate in history. This would be the year America 
elected its first female president, not the first leader of the free world to 
have never held public office. Pundits shook their heads and laughed back in 
January when Trump told a rally, “I could stand in the middle of 5th Avenue and 
shoot somebody and I wouldn’t lose any voters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jan/24/donald-trump-i-could-shoot-somebody-and-not-lose-votes-video>
.” Who was he kidding? Every bizarre step he took towards November’s vote was 
judged by sniggering pundits to be leading him farther from the White House.

Build a wall on the Mexican border to keep out all those Latino rapists? The 
idea was surely absurd. Punish women for having abortions? Even pro-lifers were 
appalled.July’s Republican Convention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/jul/24/republican-national-convention-look-back-in-pictures>
 was meant to confer respectability on Trump’s maverick campaign, but 
unravelled into farce after his wife,Melania, delivered a speech lifted 
verbatim from one Michelle Obama made eight years earlier 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/19/melania-trump-republican-convention-plagiarism-michelle-obama>
. Matters only got worse when Trump launched a Twitter attack onthe Muslim 
parents of a US soldier killed fighting in Iraq 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-muslim-father-khizr-khan-democratic-convention-speech>
. The following week he suggested a Clinton presidency could be dealt with by 
“the Second Amendment people”, by which he could only mean that they 
assassinate her.

When a tape emerged of Trump boasting in 2005 about grabbing women “by the 
pussy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
 and getting away with it because he was famous, he retaliated byinviting three 
women who had accused Bill Clinton of inappropriate sexual conduct 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/09/donald-trump-women-bill-clinton-sex-scandal-hillary-debate>
 to the next presidential debate. The tape was nothing but “locker room 
banter”, Trump scoffed, showcasing his unparalleled gift for post-truth 
politics with the solemn assertion: “Nobody has more respect for women than I 
do.” He announced his intention to jail Clinton if he won. Even George W Bush’s
former secretary for homeland security was appalled 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/11/us/politics/donald-trump-hillary-clinton-special-prosecutor.html?_r=0>
: “It smacks of what we read about tinpot dictators in other parts of the 
world.”

Trump dismissed as “liars” the 12 women who came forward to accuse him of 
having acted out his banter. Some, he sneered, weren’t even good-looking enough 
for him to sexually assault. “Look at her,” he mocked one. Of another: “That 
would not be my first choice.” In the campaign’s final weeks, what caution he 
ever had was thrown to the wind, as he led rallies in a mob chant of “Lock her 
up!”, “Build that wall!” and “Drain the swamp!” Channelling his new best friend 
Farage, he urged America to make 8 November “our independence day”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb463b3e1eb3067f54d20a82fa415b12649dbe86%2F0_0_4000_2630%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Feb463b3e1eb3067f54d20a82fa415b12649dbe86%2F0_0_4000_2630%2F4000.jpg>
 Donald Trump after winning the US election. Photograph: Saul Loeb/AFP/Getty 
Images 
As Noam Chomsky observed, “Every time Trump makes a nasty comment about 
whoever, his popularity goes up. Because it’s based on hate, you know. Hate and 
fear,”he warned 
<https://trofire.com/2016/05/31/noam-chomsky-says-trump-is-a-clown-must-be-stopped/>
, “reminiscent of something unpleasant: Germany, not many years ago.” Yet even 
at the 11th hour, whenthe FBI reopened its investigation into Clinton’s private 
email server 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/30/the-guardian-view-on-the-fbis-clinton-probe-exactly-the-wrong-thing-to-do>
, the polls still assured the world Trump could not win. And then, on 8 
November, a man widely described as a sociopathic bully, grandiose narcissist, 
dangerous demagogue and pathological liar, who scored higher than Hitler in an 
Oxford University study of psychopathic tendencies, became the 45th president 
of the USA. It was indeed “Brexit plus plus plus”, celebrated by America’s 
white supremacist “alt-right” movement with cries of“Hail Trump!” and rigid 
one-armed Nazi salutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
. In the words of veteran constitutional historian Professor Vernon Bogdanor, 
Trump’s election was “the most troubling political event in my lifetime. It’s 
not difficult to arouse nationalist passions. We saw that in the 1930s.”

The world waits to see whether President Trump will govern as he campaigned. 
So far he has appointeda Texan oilman and Putin ally as secretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-experience>
, puta retired general nicknamed Mad Dog in charge of defence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
, a climate change denier in charge of theEnvironmental Protection Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, and chosen forhis chief strategist the head of Breitbart news 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
. His foreign heroes are Putin and Farage, and his preferred medium for 
conducting international diplomacy isTwitter 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/realDonaldTrump>. At the very moment when America’s 
system of checks and balances has never been more necessary, his party controls 
the White House, the house and the senate.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd57fb84f25f3117f36c20341baa34d6e778b7fa2%2F0_0_4500_3003%2F4500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=So%20long%2C%202016%3A%20the%20year%20of%20the%20political%20earthquake&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fnews%2F2016%2Fdec%2F24%2F2016-in-review-world-news-syria-terrorism-brexit-trump-decca-aitkenhead%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd57fb84f25f3117f36c20341baa34d6e778b7fa2%2F0_0_4500_3003%2F4500.jpg>
 Hillary Clinton at a fundraiser in October. Photograph: Brendan 
Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images 
Meanwhile, the global institutions designed to keep us safe are in trouble. 
The UN secretary general used to be a household name, butBan Ki-moon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ban-ki-moon>’s only discernible achievement 
in eight years was to make himself and the UN so invisible that most of the 
world would struggle to recognise, let alone name, his successor taking office 
in January. (It’sAntónio Guterres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/antonio-guterres-next-un-secretary-general>
.) The head of the IMF, Christine Lagarde,has gone on trial in France 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/17/imf-head-christine-lagarde-tfrench-trial-bernard-tapie-affair>
 charged with criminal negligence, and Nato’s member states have failed to pay 
their dues for so long that they could hardly be surprised by Trump’s 
reluctance to carry on bankrolling an “obsolete” institution costing the US “a 
fortune”. The fourth estate’s future has become increasingly fragile, too, as 
readers and viewers defected to the raunchier wilds of social media, and 
politicians from left and right discovered they could escape scrutiny from the 
mainstream media by simply snubbing it. When Facebook is the primary source of 
many voters’ news, and a conspiracy theory as crazy asPizzagate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/05/pizzagate-lie-what-it-says-about-society-real>
 (which linked Hillary Clinton and other Democrats to a child-abuse network run 
from a Washington pizzeria) can command global attention, how the powerful will 
be held to account is no longer clear.

If western liberal democracy reached its high point with the fall of the 
Berlin Wall, by the end of this year its very survival began to look in doubt. 
AsTimothy Garton Ash put it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/29/europe-2015-walls-1989-paris-refugee-crisis>
, 2016 was “1989 in reverse”. The far right is on the rise across Europe;Marine 
Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> is a frontrunner in 
2017’s French presidential election; and even ifAngela Merkel holds on to power 
next year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
, the anti-immigration, populist, far-right Alternative for Germany is 
predicted to win seats in the Bundestag. It is with this fractured and 
fractious EU that Britain will negotiate the terms of its departure, cheered on 
by flag-waving tabloids, unconstrained by a functioning opposition, and we will 
finally find out what “Brexit means Brexit” means.

How did all of this happen? Following David Bowie’s death in January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/jan/11/david-bowie-dies-at-the-age-of-69>
, and Britain’s vote to leave in June,the actor Paul Bettany tweeted one 
suggestion <https://mobile.twitter.com/Paul_Bettany/status/746374626369019904>: 
“In January I dismissed my mate’s theory that David Bowie was the glue holding 
the universe together but I don’t know man... I don’t know.” After so many 
shockwaves and dramas, it was tempting to view the year as a freak surge of 
ahistorical exceptionalism, analogous to nothing and a law unto itself. History 
will see it differently. Just as the legacy of the great crash of 1929 took 
several years to manifest itself, so the consequences of the financial crash of 
2008 are only now becoming clear. There was nothing magical or inexplicable 
about 2016. We were merely reminded of what happens when most of us do not have 
enough money, and a few of us have much too much.
Additional research by Matilda Munro

• Where did it all go right? For a more positive view of the world in 2017, 
followthe Guardian’s Half Full online series 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/half-full-solutions-innovations-answers>
, with reports on innovative ideas and solutions to the challenges of the day. 
Wishing you all a happier new year.
 