
Go and sin no more, said he who knew all about fault and redemption 
<http://biblehub.com/john/8-11.htm>. And the people listened, but that was 
then. Today, neither disgrace, exile nor redemption are what they used to be.

Attack Michael Gove by all means. But not for his parenting | Suzanne Moore
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/michael-gove-son-parenting>
Thus we hear much in recent days from Michael Gove 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-37765648>, the former justice secretary, 
who rightly seemed to be in purdah, having offended much of the country with 
his shameless Brexit sophistry, having outraged his own party withacts of 
betrayal against his colleagues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/michael-gove-to-stand-for-conservative-party-leadership>
. He fell hard enough to encourage the expectation that he would stay down for 
at least as long as it took to rub the bruises and shake away the bracken.

But Weeble <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weeble>-like up he springs again, 
proclaiming that he always spake the truth, that contrary to what everyone 
knows, he never betrayed Boris Johnson and that, on the basis that no offences 
occurred, there is no reason why he shouldn’t be back in the cabinet.

He’s a talking point again, as he would wish, with a public considering anew 
his politics and even, last weekend,his parenting arrangements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/michael-gove-son-parenting>
. This is the fast-forward button stuck on manual; Lazarus on steroids. It 
identifies Gove as a man with a brassy neck. But it also marks him out as a man 
of his time.

Perhaps he is informed by the parallel refusal of his hero Tony Blair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tonyblair> to accept his fate as one from 
whom much of the public demands reflection and silence. If Gove is 
brass-necked, Blair boasts solid platinum.

The former premier will very publicly, without prompting and at any time of 
his choice, pronounceon the state of Labour 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/tony-blair-claims-labours-drift-8996440>, 
on the Middle East,on Brexit <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04ddsrg>, 
untroubled by the fact that every cause he espouses becomes weighted by his 
history and baggage. He must be on the stage, he cannot abide the circle, even 
at the front with a tolerable view, even when that seems most palpably 
appropriate. With charges still on file about a Labour party ruinously severed 
from its base, a war fought without justification, and a fortune amassed in 
unseemly fashion, Blair has proactively redeemed himself.

And perhaps he is right to do so, for he is a relatively young man, and we 
obviously have no clear idea of what we expect from those who offend or fall 
from grace. Should there be a sin-bin for purgatory of short duration? Or 
should they disappear from public view never to reappear: the path trod byJohn 
Profumo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2006/mar/10/guardianobituaries.conservatives>
, who spent 40 years after the Keeler scandal quietly doing charitable work in 
London’s East End.

Forty years may be an unreasonable ask: in this celebrity age, there is scant 
hope for any public figure of long-term rehab unwatched by the Sunday tabloids. 
But with Gove back in the game that Blair refused to leave; with Nick Clegg, 
post tuition fees, post the political immolation of the Liberal Democrats,back 
on his feet and again demanding attention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/17/brexit-offers-lib-dems-way-back-says-nick-clegg>
, one is entitled to ask whether the fallen are even trying to do the right 
thing.

It’s not us, it’s you and your expectations, they might say, and there could 
be something to that, for in America, there does seem to be a shorter, less 
arduous route to redemption for those who fail, misbehave or misspeak. 
Successful business folk are culturally permitted to go bankrupt and to 
blithely start again, for the business of the United States is business. Other 
public figures, scandalous one day, relaunched the next in politics and 
showbiz, can do the same thing. Consider Donald Trump, who misspeaks and 
misbehaves as if both were acts of devotion.He has been bankrupt six times 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/2016/live-updates/general-election/real-time-fact-checking-and-analysis-of-the-first-presidential-debate/fact-check-has-trump-declared-bankruptcy-four-or-six-times/>
; still, millions would make him president. There are no second acts in 
American lives, wrote F Scott Fitzgerald. Compatriots prove him wrong every day.

Surely there could be a protocol? Mid-range political scandal: two years on 
the backbenches

But we’re less readily forgiving in Britain. We feel Sam Allardyce 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/sep/28/sam-allardyce-history-suspicion-dream-job-ended-67-days>
, the fallen England football manager, should do his penance – as a schoolboys’ 
kit man on rainyHackney Marshes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/gallery/2016/sep/15/hackney-marshes-football-league-of-nations-in-pictures>
 perhaps – before even thinking of a return to the glamour and riches of the 
Premier League. We thinkMazher Mahmood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/21/mazher-mahmood-murdoch-fake-sheikh-jailed-news-uk-leveson-part-two>
, the “Fake Sheikh” of Fleet Street –imprisoned for perverting the course of 
justice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/21/sentence-for-mazher-mahmood-closes-one-chapter-but-the-legal-fallout-rumbles-on>
 – should not just be released to a life of obscurity, but should also be 
required to wear hisfake sheikh garb  <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-37563509>
for a further 10 years. We want piety behind a shroud, proof of repentance. 
What we’re getting is just the opposite.

Surely there could be a protocol for this? Mid-range political scandal: two 
years on the backbenches – no Question Time, no Daily Politics, home each night 
forNews at Ten <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b007mplc>. Gross public 
hypocrisy, gross incompetence: five years of silence culminating in a YouTube 
apology. With 1m likes, but not until then, you’re off the hook. For hubris and 
mere silliness, there could be justice tempered with mercy: a public 
ducking-stool event. ThinkEd Balls heffalumping on Strictly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/oct/31/strictly-come-dancing-fright-night-ed-balls-is-a-hit-with-his-mad-scientist-bit>
.

And then there is the full Profumo – hair shirt as standard, lifetime vow of 
silence – but that can only be for the egregious cases. Even then we must 
accept that those who offend the most, or fall to earth the hardest, may in 
time have a desirable role to play in the national cavalcade. Gove, on past 
evidence at the justice department, may yet have something to contribute 
towards reforming our wretched prisons. Blair, for all his deficiencies, speaks 
with clarity on the EU and his party winning elections.

The issue here is timing, who has the power to rehabilitate, and who should 
have it. For when the miscreant dictates the punishment, hasn’t something 
essential gone awry?
 