
I don’t think you can overestimate the negative effects of Kate Bush coming 
out for the Tories <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38144908>in a 
week this bad for the governing party. Endorsement-wise, she could be our Barbra
Streisand <http://graphics.latimes.com/celebrity-presidential-endorsements/>. 
Perhaps I’m missing an essential lobe, but I simply couldn’t muster the sense 
of personal betrayal that for some attended Kate’s love song to Theresa May. In 
fact, I haven’t been so irrationally amused since my belovedRichie Benaud 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/richie-benaud> revealed that his favourite 
television programme wasHollyoaks <http://www.channel4.com/programmes/hollyoaks>
. You’ve gotta laugh.

Richmond Park byelection: Tory Brexit voters switched to us, say Lib Dems
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
For Zac Goldsmith, alas, the giggles are in shorter supply. “I am a punter 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/people/profiles/zac-goldsmith-the-green-gambler-5384726.html>
,” he once claimed, inevitably sounding rather more likeJohn Aspinall 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Aspinall_%28zoo_owner%29> than someone 
feeding their benefits into a roulette machine in William Hill. “And a punter 
does not punt unless he has a chance of winning.” As I say, probably hasn’t 
spent time in many betting shops.

Either way, the erstwhile Richmond Park MP has contrived to pull off a 
stunning shitshow accumulator this year. In MayGoldsmith lost the London 
mayoral election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/may/06/uk-elections-sadiq-khan-ahead-in-london-mayoral-race-live-updates>
. And on Thursday nighthe lost his parliamentary seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
, having forced the byelection when the third Heathrow runway was announced, 
then stood as an independent unchallenged by his own Tory party, in a move so 
bogglingly cynical that even I couldn’t fully get my head round it. The 
Spectator’s Fraser Nelson fairly described Goldsmith’s resignation play as a
“hissy-fit” election 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/10/zac-goldsmith-stand-point-resignation/>. 
In the wake of the result, Zac’s younger brother, Ben, made a self-aware sortie 
on to Twitter to accuse the Richmond Park electorate of a “Brexit tantrum 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/BJGoldsmith/status/804586306827415552>”. Let’s hear 
much, much more from the Goldsmith family about the stupid toddler voters, 
please.

Unlike the opposition leader of the free world, Tim Farron, I can’t get 
overexcited about the significance of the Richmond Park result. Furthermore, 
the idea that the voters there were rejecting Goldsmith’s racist mayoral 
campaign as opposed to revoicing their overwhelming opposition to Brexit is 
total and utter wishful thinking. Still, let’s not be fussy. Instead, let’s 
argue about what to include in the farewell montage of Zac’s best bits.

Richmond doesn’t have a London postcode; Zac Goldsmith’s house may even have 
its own postcode

First, a big shout-out to that mayoral campaign against the eventual victor, 
Sadiq Khan, which misunderstood the city to a degree possible only in someone 
essentially insulated from it. Richmond doesn’t have aLondon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> postcode; Zac Goldsmith’s house may 
even have its own postcode.

It’s hard to pick a lowlight from those few weeks in spring. Peter Oborne 
classed the Tory strategy against Khan as sufficiently ghastly to warrant 
comparison with not just the openly homophobic effort againstPeter Tatchell in 
Bermondsey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/feb/22/defeat-in-bermondsey-defeat-for-left>
 in 1983 but the daddy of them all: the1964 Smethwick campaign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/15/britains-most-racist-election-smethwick-50-years-on>
, in which the local Tory party warned voters: “If you want a n***** for a 
neighbour, vote Labour.” You do have to doff your hazmat suit tothe leaflet 
Goldsmith sent to British Indians 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/davehillblog/2016/mar/16/london-mayor-race-negatives-hindu-jewels-leaflets-misfired>
, in which he claimed Sadiq Khan was basically after their jewellery. As he put 
it, with sledgehammer emphasis: “His party SUPPORTS A WEALTH TAX on FAMILY 
JEWELLERY.” Mate, at least he’s into theidea of tax. You were a non-dom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/nov/29/zac-goldsmith-non-dom-status>
, and only gave your status up when someone found out about it during your 
campaign to be MP. When the London result came in, Goldsmith declined to shake 
Khan’s hand. Maybe he was worried Khan would infect him with “extremism”, or 
have his watch off him, or something.

In the immediate aftermath of that campaign, there was only one debate: was 
Goldsmith too wet to say no to a racist campaign imposed on him, or was he 
simply a racist? His sister appeared to hint toward the former, “sad that Zac’s 
campaign did not reflect who I know him to be – an eco-friendly, 
independent-minded politician with integrity”. But a few months later Goldsmith 
insisted it was all him, and offered a classic drive-by statement of regret. 
“Of course I regret the portrayal of the campaign,” he said, suggesting 
“portrayal” – aka the media – was entirely to blame. I guess you just can’t win 
against the famously leftwing British press, as those heroically doomed Tories 
so often find.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frichmond-park-byelection-was-not-a-political-calculation-says-zac-goldsmith-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Byelection%20was%20not%20a%20political%20calculation%2C%20says%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frichmond-park-byelection-was-not-a-political-calculation-says-zac-goldsmith-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Byelection%20was%20not%20a%20political%20calculation%2C%20says%20Zac%20Goldsmith%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F02%2Frichmond-park-byelection-was-not-a-political-calculation-says-zac-goldsmith-video&media=>
Byelection was not a political calculation, says Zac Goldsmith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/dec/02/richmond-park-byelection-was-not-a-political-calculation-says-zac-goldsmith-video>
And so to the unconvincing pose of being an independent this time round. It is 
fair to say that Zac Goldsmith has always been a rebel very much in the 
“self-styled” category. “In 10 years’ time,”he mused in 2000 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2000/oct/15/features.review7>, “I 
might be an eco-terrorist. But I’ll take the most effective path, whatever that 
is.” Mmm. Youmight be an eco-terrorist. But as it turns out, you’re going to be 
a Tory MP for Richmond Park. It’s that classic fork in the road, isn’t it? A 
bit like when Chuck D could either have ended up in Public Enemy or as an 
accountancy trainee at PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Back then, Goldsmith was at least prudent enough to shy away from the idea he 
was a man of the people. “I do not need a career in this world,” he reflected 
loftily of his vast inherited wealth. This was much more convincing than the 
kind of pose to which he would eventually graduate – telling one radio show in 
May that “I’m hoping to do a Leicester City and zoom in from behind to win.” 
They’d been top since January.

10 lessons from the Richmond Park byelection result
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/ten-lessons-from-the-richmond-park-byelection-result>
As for “the most effective path”, forcing the byelection in protest at the 
runway decision was the exact opposite of that. One of the orthodoxies about 
Goldsmith was always that he was “an effective campaigner”, and yet his 
decision entirely took the pressure off the government. The Lib Dems have 
always been opposed to the third runway, so the issue didn’t even get 
any airplay in the campaign.

Only time will tell what he’ll do next. Maybe he will be an eco-terrorist. 
Maybe he’ll steal his daddy’s cue and make a living out of playing pool. Maybe 
he’ll wonder why this keeps happening, in which case I have a theory. If we may 
end in the betting shop, where we didn’t quite begin, it is often said of 
gamblers that they are not addicted to winning but to losing, since that is 
mostly all they know. Persisting is a form of self-loathing. As a man who has 
now asked his constituents to vote for him twice in six months, in such 
remarkably self-harming fashion, Zac Goldsmith may even wonder what it was that 
he really wanted.
 