
There’s very little point to our political class right now. The response to 
the NHS crisis has been nothing if not tediously predictable. The government 
roused itself from its slumber to say, in turn, thatthere’s no problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-denies-red-cross-claim-of-nhs-humanitarian-crisis>
, and anyway the problem is caused by feckless overusers of the NHS who show up 
at A&E with a broken nail.

Labour has shifted focus away from the NHS crisis. For what? | Owen Jones
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-nhs-labour-immigration>
Meanwhile, MPs from both major parties had the switch flipped in their heads 
that makes them link everything to immigration, causing their jaws to 
mechanically flap open and say: “Well,Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/11/nigel-farage-not-controversial-toxic-why-give-airtime-question-time>
 is basically right about everything but you should still vote for us because 
$ERROR (Reason not found, please restart your political process).”

Nadine Dorries tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/NadineDorriesMP/status/817859159110676481>: “It’s a reason 
why so many in northern Labour seats voted for #Brexit to stop spiralling 
levels of immigration and reduce pressure on #NHS”. It would be nice to think 
that Tories actually did care about “pressure on the NHS”. Just as it would be 
nice to think that when Labour politicians point out that immigration can have 
negative effects on the earnings of the low-waged, that their hearts really lie 
with the low-waged. But for that to be believable, we’d have to ignore the fact 
that the policy consensus on every other issue produces the opposite effect.

We keep hearing about “our ageing population” putting particular strain on 
health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/01/ageing-britain-two-fifths-nhs-budget-spent-over-65s>
 in the winter months. You’d think a reasonable policy response, even before we 
look at the numbers of beds in NHS A&E departments, would be to increase and 
improve the provision of social care that would keep elderly patients out of 
hospital in the first place.

Yet George Osborne’s myopic focus on “reducing the deficit”, combined with 
David Cameron’s political cowardice in passing the responsibility for 
implementing those cuts on to local government, have put the social care sector 
“beyond the crisis point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/12/social-care-crisis-funding-cuts-government-council-tax>
”. Hospitals are full of people who should not be there because the services 
which were supposed to act as first lines of defenceno longer exist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/25/huge-rise-in-hospital-beds-in-england-taken-up-by-people-with-malnutrition>
.

Add this to the expensive, top-down NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> reorganisation, which has seen a 
reduction in the number of hospital beds, and you are left with a situation in 
which the national provision of healthcare is simply inadequate to cope with 
peak demand.

Indeed, one of the issues with the way we approach the NHS politically, and 
the reason we see so many crises, is that we aim for “efficiency improvements” 
that cut vital services down to the bone, leaving providers with no slack 
capacity. If you want a system capable of dealing well in 95% of situations, 
you accept that it won’t cope 5% of the time. If you want a system that will 
cope with that 5% of peaks and outliers, you must accept that 95% of the time 
it will be “inefficient”. No amount of clever management can achieve the 
mathematically impossible.

Jeremy Hunt claims that the UK spends “a little bit more than the average for 
rich countries on our health services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-denies-red-cross-claim-of-nhs-humanitarian-crisis>
”. This is either a barefaced lie or a sign that he does not know what he is on 
about – and since he’s both smug and incompetent, it’s impossible to know which 
is true.

On a per-person-per-capita basis, the UK sits just over the OECD average for 
healthcare spending <http://stats.oecd.org/index.aspx?DataSetCode=HEALTH_STAT>, 
which is not an average of “rich countries” by the standards most people would 
understand it, as it includes Mexico, Slovenia and Greece. If we were to take a 
broad metric of matching per-person healthcare spend with, say, France, that 
would result in an approximate boost of around 12%, another £12bn a year (this 
year, not in 2020). If we were to match spending with Germany, we’d be talking 
almost 36%, a year-on-year increase of over £35bn. These are broad and ballpark 
figures and there’s room to debate the specifics, but it’s a stark reminder of 
just how little we really spend on our health system.

Corbyn has been talking about these issues for months, perfectly setting 
himself up to take full advantage of this and show how he’s been playing a long 
game. Now in the midst of a crisis that is seeing peopledying on trollies in 
hospital corridors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
, he’s decided to capitulate to theAndy Burnhams 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/16/take-back-control-immigration-debate-labour>
 andSteven Kinnocks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/07/labour-must-introduce-fair-immigration-system>
 of the party. Even for Corbyn, this is something special. Yes, it is trivially 
true to say that the additional demand caused by immigrants using the NHS does 
not help the situation, just as throwing pebbles down after an avalanche 
doesn’t help. But it is absolutely unsupportable to suggest that immigration is 
either a causal or a significant contributor to the current crisis.

The truth is that immigration only has negative impacts on people when they 
are already in trouble. If you’re in an area where one job in McDonalds gets 
6,000 applications, kicking out some Lithuanians won’t suddenly reinvigorate 
high-tech manufacturing.

The inconsistency exposes just how opportunistic the supposed “populism” of 
anti-migrant policies is. What’s worse is that the voters Labour is trying to 
win over with this ignorant blather don’t even believe them. They think they’re 
just putting it on to win votes.Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> are pushing a destructive line 
that scapegoats migrants and takes the pressure off a government which 
constantly demonstrates it is unfit for purpose. And the worst part of it all 
is it’s not even a good political strategy.

The only reason that migrant populations are even capable of putting pressure 
on our failing infrastructure is that it was failing before they got here. The 
“two-tier” “fair immigration” nonsense won’t fix the NHS, it won’t make wages 
higher in Stoke-on-Trent, and it won’t even win Labour the next election.

If our MPs really cared about these issues, they wouldn’t constantly try to 
pass the blame for their own failures on to people from other countries. They 
would hold their hands up, admit that they’ve been bungling it for decades, 
then get to work on the decades-long project of trying to fix their own mess. 
I’m not holding my breath.
 