
The shock is that people are shocked. Donald Trump thinks he is entitled to 
grope women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-forced-into-apology-as-sex-boast-tape-horrifies-republicans>
, grab their crotches, to describe sexual assault as some kind of banter. Trump 
wears his misogyny as proudly as his hair. Feel it, he says, go on see if it’s 
real. It’s real enough. He is telling it like it is, this is how men are with 
women. There is no difference between truth and lies. There is only power and 
its constant neurotic need to reassert itself.

His campaign is an anxiety performance. Machismo by its nature is always an 
exaggeration, an overcompensation. It works for losers precisely because it 
covers loss. Look, he says to the disempowered, white male, look at me and my 
phallic boasting. I will make you hard again.

His hatred of women, his refusal of their bodily autonomy, whether over sex or 
reproductive rights, is not suddenly being revealed. This is his lifestyle. Now 
he has crossed a line apparently. Well, the line is a moveable feast when you 
can hint at assassinating your opponent, at the black vote being rigged, at 
interviewers menstruating. Multiple choice offence is his USP. Suck it up, 
bitches.

And they do. Most senior Republicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have not withdrawn their 
endorsements. They just feel a bit queasy. Mostly because they have wives and 
daughters and stuff. Potential gropees. Poor men having their property tampered 
with. What a violation, but it’s not the worst. You think I am joking? I have 
been to Republican rallies where the stickers read: “My wife yes, my dog maybe, 
my gun never.”

Hilarious!

Now some of these guys think Trump has made unacceptable remarks. They must 
just mean “recorded”, as if sayingwomen are pigs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
,Mexicans are rapists 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/02/donald-trump-racist-claims-mexico-rapes>
,war vets are sissies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/04/us-military-veterans-donald-trump-petition-john-mccain>
 is just tickety-boo. They must sense and fear that Trump’s strength depends on 
defining what is weak and negating it. Nothing then is off limits.

The good guys are also out in force, telling us they don’t speak about women 
like this and have never heard anything like it. They are forever respectful. 
Well respectfully, they should shut up and listen. I have heard men speak like 
this all my life. The idea that men are suddenly discovering misogyny because 
of Trump is somewhat strange. Where have they been?

Trump is hardly the first entitled politico. Silvio Berlusconi and Dominque 
Strauss-Kahn bought the bodies of young women. Everyone at the IMF knew no 
woman could be alone with Strauss-Kahn. Westminster has its share of gropers 
and grabbers who know not what they do because they are “depressed”. Men let 
other men off the hook or, when confronted, say they didn’t realise the full 
extent of what was happening.

So I would rather hear from women and they are all over Twitter telling of the 
first time they were sexually assaulted, some at eight, 11, 13. A brother’s 
friend. A neighbour. A man on a bus.

The first time is when you realise that your body is up for grabs, that the 
sexual pleasure taken from it does not belong to you. Sex is something that is 
done to you, not done by you. And if it hurts, just grow to like the pain. This 
is the culture I grew up in, it’s the culture my daughters grow up in.

This absolute refusal to say misogyny involves all men because it is a system 
by which the abuse of women acts as a guarantor of masculinity is part of the 
problem.Women <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> have to modify 
their behaviour. Walk home that way, don’t wear that, don’t answer back, don’t 
drink too much, don’t post that selfie, smile before you run for your life. 
Believe it’s not all men or your life would not be worth living.

When one man speaks up applaud him. Here is Robert De Niro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/13/robert-de-niro-donald-trump-is-totally-nuts>
 who can’t take it any more. But where are the other guys who have had this 
tape for a while? Why, as it features Billy Bush, did they not put it out when 
Jeb Bush was being hammered in the primaries? Why did we need a tape to find 
Trump abhorrent?

Of course some women will continue to collude with these scumbags, they will 
vote for Trump, they will excuse him. Women are good at excusing men. If we 
weren’t, the human race would die out. Some women will look away, believing men 
can’t help it and carry on humouring the “banter”. You drop something in a 
restaurant and a guy says: “While you are down there love…” and you laugh 
because if you didn’t you might stick a fork in his eye. And you remember being 
14 and being bruised from mere “groping” but thinking yourself lucky because 
the worst didn’t happen. You think about how you knew the practice of misogyny 
long before you heard the theory, so wonder how the good guys are slightly 
baffled by it.

But now with Trump, there is evidence. On a tape. Had they not heard the 
stories women tell? Yes, America could still elect the manidolised 
<http://blogs.bookforum.com/review/2015/08/05/will-the-real-american-psycho-please-stand-up-why-donald-trump-was-patrick-batemans-hero/>
 by Patrick Bateman inAmerican Psycho. For misogyny is not some secret society, 
a form of freemasonry. It is mainstream. It is endorsed by Trump. It is not 
simply unacceptable, it is murderous.

Kill it dead.
 