
So America’s ruling classes have lost to a billionaire who plays at being a 
man of the people.Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>
 ran against the hierarchy of his own party, without the blessing of 
commentators or the big CEOs, without the speeches to Wall Street or the 
funding from Silicon Valley. Amid all the justifiable dismay expressed today, 
don’t forget one thing: Hillary Clinton was the establishment candidate; it was 
Trump who ran as the perennially unfancied outsider.

US election night 2016 – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/08/us-election-2016-polls-trump-clinton-live>
He remains an almost illicit politician, a preference you express in hushed 
tones. Look at the placards brandished last night by self-declared members of 
the “silent majority”. Just over a month ago, I rang round Trump voters in West 
Virginia and Pennsylvania – two of the states that went red last night. Among 
the things that struck me most forcibly was how sheepish they were about 
admitting publicly they were going to vote for the man. “He’s a jackass, but … 
” one began. Another: “I think he’s a total idiot, but … ”

But I’ll back him. But who else is there? But I’ve had enough. That was the 
tenor of nearly all the conversations – with a few citizens of one of the 
noisiest democracies on Earth then asking if I could keep their identities 
secret.

Well, let me add another but. Trump is an outsider politician leading an 
insurgency of self-declared outsider Americans: the white men who feel homeless 
in their own country and the coal-mining and rustbelt states that got written 
off by both parties – but that won’t produce outsider policies. A good chunk of 
the Trump base consists of people who consider themselves to be losers from 
four decades of political and economic orthodoxy. But Donald J Trump won’t be 
the president who reads the last rites for neoliberalism – for the simple 
reason that the empty-headed narcissist has no idea what to replace it with.

A revolt isn’t a revolution. The head prefects in our politics and media see 
disorder and immediately cry insurrection

This isn’t the mainstream view. Among the prefects of political and economic 
commentary, the standard thing to do this morning is to rehearse Trump’s fury 
at free trade, to look at the voters that most of them have never bothered 
talking to – and to squawk that America has struck out in a new and radically 
different direction. It’s a revolution! The pitchforks finally have their 
leader!

As Trump edged towards the 270-mark, one of the first emails I got was from a 
senior fund manager at the giant Fidelity group, declaring: “We are heading 
into a world of unprecedented political risk which calls into question the 
pillars of the post-WWII settlement.” At least as far as the economics go, that 
is just overheated nonsense.

First, it ignores just how protean Trump’s politics are. This is the man who 
just a few months ago in an off-the-record meeting at the New York Timestold 
senior journalists 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/02/29/politics/ted-cruz-new-york-times-immigration-tape/>
 that “everything is negotiable”. This is the Republican warrior whose most 
memorable photo is of him and his new wifelaughing along with his VIP guests 
Bill and Hillary Clinton 
<http://people.com/celebrity/hillary-clinton-and-bill-clinton-at-donald-trumps-wedding-photo/>
. This is the blowhard who can’t help contradicting himself. Take out the 
contortions, exaggerations and outright lies from the standard Trump riff – and 
you have next to nothing. All this makes him easily containable for the 
Republicans in the Senate and the House that he’ll need to work with .
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
What the head boys and head girls also miss is just how old-fashioned 
Trumponomics is. Look at the people around him. Among his top economic advisers 
isStephen Moore from the Heritage Foundation 
<http://www.heritage.org/about/staff/m/stephen-moore>, a conservative thinktank 
last seen laying down many of the policy planks for Ronald Reagan. Sure enough, 
the policies are pure Reagan: slashing red tape and business taxes, “a major 
tax cut” on income, a repeal of estate taxes and a hankering for high interest 
rates and sound money.

This sort of tax-cutting will cost trillions – up to $9tn over the next 
decade, according to some modelling. They will rip a hole through US public 
finances – especially if Trump brings them in alongside his spending spree on 
infrastructure. But his promise now is the promise that was made by Reagan, his 
adviserArthur Laffer 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/business/economy/arthur-laffer-has-a-neverending-supply-of-supply-side-plans-for-gop/2015/04/09/04c61440-dec1-11e4-a1b8-2ed88bc190d2_story.html>
 and the rest of the snake-oil salesmen: it will bring in more tax revenue over 
the long run.

None of this will be much help for his blue-collar voters. But then the 
property billionaire isn’t into sharing out the wealth, encouraging trade 
unions or paying workers more. It wasn’t so long ago thathe claimed 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/fact-checker/wp/2016/08/03/a-guide-to-all-of-donald-trumps-flip-flops-on-the-minimum-wage/>
 wages were “too high” – before flip-flopping and tweeting that America’s 
middle classes have had “no effective raise in years. BAD.” His latest position 
is that “I would like to see an increase [in the minimum wage] of some 
magnitude. But I’d rather leave it to the states.” Gee thanks, Donald!

Donald Trump wins US election: Obama offers congratulations – live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-us-election-2016-live-reactio>
You can see the paradox. Much of Trump’s base was voting against the great 
unravelling of America’s social contract. They were rebelling against Reaganism 
and its love for Wall Street over Main Street, its property boom and industrial 
bust. Yet what they’re about to get is more Reaganism, from a man whose glory 
years were the Reagan years. When that doesn’t work out, the new president will 
retreat further into his anti-immigrant, “decent people” rhetoric. If he need 
script lines, he can borrow some from the new British government.

A revolt isn’t a revolution. The head prefects in our politics and media see 
disorder and immediately cry insurrection. That’s what they did in Britain 
after the Brexit vote and it’s how they’ll mark 20 January, 2017, the date of 
President Trump’s inauguration. Just as they called those events wrong, so 
they’ll call the aftermath wrong.

You can overdo the comparisons, but let’s at least agree that Trump’s America 
and Brexit Britain share the same common tragedy: a large chunk of the public 
that’s had enough of the same-old failed orthodoxy, a technocratic elite that 
also knows it’s no longer working – and a political class unable to grasp any 
real alternatives.
 