
Think of it, to use the ingenious phrase coined by my colleague John Harris, 
as “Stasi capitalism 
<https://twitter.com/johnharris1969/status/793723050466406401>”. That might 
sound like an overreaction to the announcement of a new car insurance scheme, 
but hear me out.

Admiral has publicised a new service – firstcarquote – which it hopes will 
analyse the Facebook posts of first-time car owners, looking for evidence that 
they’re the kind of well-organised, conscientious types who will be safe on the 
roads. (It’s still a hope at this stage after Facebookappeared to call a halt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/02/facebook-admiral-car-insurance-privacy-data>
 to the scheme just two hours before launch.) If you use a calendar or 
bookkeeping apps, tend to write in short, coherent sentences and use lots of 
lists, you’ll look like a safe bet and might qualify for a discount. But if 
your social media history is chock-full of exclamation marks, with a heavy use 
of “always” and “never” rather than the more cautious “maybe”, that might 
suggest you’re a tad on the over-confident, even reckless side – and you’ll 
have to pay the full rate.

Admiral is hardly the first company to seek to exploit the data we generate 
about ourselves this way. Astoday’s Guardian report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/02/admiral-to-price-car-insurance-based-on-facebook-posts>
 points out, the health and life insurerVitality is willing to sell you an 
Apple Watch 
<https://www.vitality.co.uk/rewards/partners/active-rewards/apple-watch/> at a 
discounted price – just so long as you let the company keep an eye on how many 
steps you’re doing and it decides you’re getting enough exercise.

If that strikes you as sinister, there’s a good reason. You only have to have 
read a little dystopian science fiction to know that human beings have an 
aversion to being watched by machines – and an even greater aversion to being 
judged by them.

It was bad enough when it slowly dawned on people, the young especially, that 
their social media history could well be examined when they applied for a job 
or place at university. Whatever they put on their CV or résumé, a quick Google 
would reveal another, potentially more damning, picture. With that came the 
realisation that an active presence on social media came at the cost of 
privacy, that it was no longer possible to have a past that remained in the 
past, that even a minor episode of adolescent misbehaviour could live on – and 
have consequences.

But at least in those situations there was the consolation that any decision 
would be taken by a human being. The university or potential employer could 
look at your Facebook posts and judge them – and you – in the round. There will 
be no such discretion from – or right of appeal to – Admiral’s algorithm.

Of course, the company is oozing reassurance: it will be voluntary, it’s only 
for first-timers, it’ll only affect discounts not the basic price. But you’ll 
be forgiven for being sceptical. When everyone who agrees to being 
data-analysed qualifies for a cheaper rate, then the one who refuses – or fails 
the social media test – will, in effect, be paying a premium. The semantics may 
say otherwise, but that will be the reality. And if it works, of course its use 
will spread.

In a way, the Vitality case is the more troubling. As it stands, the Apple 
Watch scheme is just a clever way to incentivise exercise. But it will be very 
tempting for health insurers to start using the data they’ve picked up 
electronically from their customers to set their rates for basic healthcare 
coverage: higher premiums for those revealed to be taking the lifts rather than 
using the stairs. In the UK, where we have the NHS that may not be such a 
terrifying prospect. But in the US, where companies can deny you health 
insurance or charge unaffordable premiums, your social media profile could make 
a life-changing difference.

In the old days, intrusive, all-seeing surveillance was associated with the 
state. Governments are still watching us, of course. But these daysBig Brother 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/big-brother> is just as likely to be 
a big corporation; today’s Stasi agent is the phone in your pocket. What’s 
worse, it’s you who put him there – and told him everything he knows.

• This article was amended on 2 November 2016 as the launch of firstcarquote 
was halted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/02/facebook-admiral-car-insurance-privacy-data>
 just before it was due to launch. The second and third paragraphs and the 
standfirst have been revised.
 