
As Australia settles in for another long hot summer, the demand for 
air-conditioning is set to surge. In fact, with theWorld Meteorological 
Organisation stating that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/14/2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-on-record-un-says>
 2016 is likely to be the hottest year on record, it’s no surprise anestimated 
1.6bn new air conditioners are likely to be installed globally by 2050 
<https://eetd.lbl.gov/sites/all/files/lbnl-1003671_0.pdf>.

Powering all these units will be a challenge, especially on summer’s hottest 
days. In Australia, peak demand days can drive electricity usage to almost 
double and upgrading infrastructure to meet the increased demandcan cost more 
than four times what each additional air-conditioning unit costs 
<http://www.aip.com.au/pdf/Energy_%20White_Paper_2012.pdf>.

Yet an emerging sector of the solar industry is turning the searing heat of 
summer into cooling by using solar heat or electricity. For those developing 
the technology, the benefits of solar cooling are obvious: the days when 
cooling is needed the most are also the days when solar works best.

When combined with a building’s hot water and heating systems – which together 
with cooling account foraround half of the global energy consumption in 
buildings 
<https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/technology-roadmap-energy-efficient-buildings-heating-and-cooling-equipment.html>
 – solar cooling can drastically reduce reliance on grid energy and improve a 
building’s sustainability credentials. According to the International Energy 
Agency, solar could coveralmost 17% of global cooling needs by 2050 
<https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/technology-roadmap-solar-heating-and-cooling.html>
.

Driverless buses arrive in Australia: smart and green but what now for drivers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/19/driverless-buses-arrive-in-australia-smart-and-green-but-what-now-for-drivers>
Currently, such systems are still the exception. “It hasn’t got into the 
mainstream yet,” says Ken Guthrie, who chairs the InternationalEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy> Agency’s Solar Heating and 
Cooling Program.

Nevertheless, several solar cooling technologies are making their way to 
market. While off-the-shelf systems for most are still years away, a handful of 
businesses have already opted for purpose-designed solar cooling systems, which 
experts hope will convince others to follow their lead.

Echuca regional hospital in rural Victoria was one of the first to take the 
leap into solar cooling. In 2010, with support from Sustainability Victoria, 
the hospital designed and installed a solar heat–driven absorption chiller with 
engineering firmWSP consultants 
<http://www.wsp-pb.com/en/WSP-au-nz/What-we-do/Benchmark-Projects/Echuca-Regional-Hospital---Solar-Absorption-Chiller-VIC/>
.

A 300 sq m roof-mounted evacuated tube solar field feeds hot water to a 500 kW 
chiller that was set to save the hospital $60,000 on energy bills  
<http://www.greenlandsystems.com/Factsheet.pdf>and reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions by around 1,400 tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent per year.

The system was not designed to run entirely off solar (a gas-fired boiler 
takes up the slack on hot days), but “we have had days where we run 100% solar” 
for both cooling and hot water, says Echuca regional health executive project 
manager Mark Hooper.

The benefits of solar were clear enough that a larger 1,500 kW chiller, 
connected to a field of trough-shaped solar collectors that track the sun 
during the day, was installed during the hospital’s recent expansion and 
redevelopment. This second chiller started operating in November and an 
analysis of the resulting energy and emissions savings will be assessed in 
conjunction withCSIRO <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/csiro>.

Meanwhile, Stockland Wendouree shopping centre in Ballarat, Victoria, is 
trialling aCSIRO-designed solar cooling system 
<https://arena.gov.au/project/hybrid-concentrating-solar-thermal-systems-for-large-scale-applications/>
 with funding from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (Arena). 
Trough-shaped metal collectors on the centre’s rooftop collect solar heat that 
is used to dry out a desiccant matrix (much like the silica gel sachets in your 
shoebox) that dehumidifies air brought in from outside. The hot, dry air is 
then directed to an indirect evaporative cooler, which delivers cool, dry air 
into the shopping centre.

Transforming waste into fuel with Australian innovations, from tyres to sugar 
cane and agave
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/16/transforming-waste-into-fuel-with-australian-innovations-from-tyres-to-sugar-cane-and-agave>
The yearlong trial is still under way and hasn’t yet seen a full summer to 
calculate energy savings, but “it’s going very well,” says CSIRO’s Stephen 
White. The system is 50% more efficient than an earlier iteration of the design 
– an important improvement given many buildings don’t have the sprawling 
rooftop spaces of a shopping centre to mount large solar collector arrays.

With photovoltaic cells more affordable than ever, cooling systems that run 
off solar electricity are already commercially available. But solar thermal 
systems could still find a place in the market, according to Guthrie, 
especially for larger commercial buildings. “There’s no single solution,” he 
says.

Like any solar technology, solar cooling doesn’t work 24/7. Storing the solar 
energy collected during the day for use overnight is possible. Stockland’s 
system uses thermal oil storage, for example, and Echuca regional hospital has 
insulated its firewater tanks to store chilled water. But there are also 
efforts tostore heat or cooling from one season to the next 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seasonal_thermal_energy_storage> using 
underground storage tanks.

Whichever systems a building adopts, White says the benefits of solar cooling 
extend beyond electricity savings. “It’s not just about the cents per kilowatt 
hour avoided, but it’s also about the value of the asset itself,” he says.

For Hooper, the motivation was even simpler: “We did it to ensure that our 
children have a future.”
 