
It was the worst nuclear accident in history, directly causing the deaths of 
50 people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/26/not-a-year-went-by-without-a-chernobyl-funeral-30-years-since-disaster-hit>
, with at least an additional 4,000 fatalities believed to be caused by 
exposure to radiation.


The 1986 explosion at the Chernobyl power plant in Ukraine also resulted in 
vast areas of land being contaminated by nuclear fallout, with a 30-kilometre 
exclusion zone, which encompassed the town ofPripyat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/gallery/2016/apr/05/inside-abandoned-city-pripyat-30-years-chernobyl-in-pictures>
, being declared in the area round the facility.

Now two companies from China plan to build a one-gigawatt solar power plant on 
2,500 hectares of land in the exclusion zone to the south of the Chernobyl 
plant.

Ukrainian officials say the companies estimate they will spend up to $1bn on 
the project over the next two years 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/business/2016-10/27/content_27190925.htm>.

A subsidiary of Golden Concord Holdings (GLC), one of China’s biggest 
renewable energy concerns, will supply and install solar panels at the site, 
while a subsidiary of the state-owned China National Machinery Corporation 
(Sinomach) will build and run the plant.

“It is cheap land, and abundant sunlight constitutes a solid foundation for 
the project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/29/chernobyl-could-be-reinvented-as-a-solar-farm-says-ukraine>
,” says Ostap Semerak, Ukraine’s minister of environment and natural resources.

“In addition, the remaining electric transmission facilities are ready for 
reuse.”

In a press release, GLC state work on the solar plant will probably start this 
year and talk of the advantages of building the facility.

“There will be remarkable social benefits and economical ones as we try to 
renovate the once-damaged area with green and renewable energy,” says Shu Hua, 
chairman of the GLC subsidiary.

“We are glad that we are making joint efforts with Ukraine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> to rebuild the community for the 
local people.”

Radiation that escaped as a result of the explosion at Chernobyl reached as 
far away as the mountains and hills of Wales in the UK, and a substantial 
portion of the radioactive dust released fell on farmlands in Belarus, north of 
Ukraine.

Until now, the exclusion zone, including the town of Pripyat, has been out of 
bounds for most people, with only limited farming activity permitted on lands 
that are still regarded as contaminated.

Many former residents of the area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/07/chernobyl-30-years-residents-life-ghost-city-pripyat>
 are allowed back only once or twice a year for visits – to their old homes or 
to tend their relatives’ graves. However, a growing number of tourists have 
been visiting the Chernobyl area recently.

There has also been renewed interest in Chernobyl due to recent major 
engineering work at the plant, witha new steel-clad sarcophagus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/chernobyl-nuclear-disaster-site-covered-with-shelter-prevent-radiation-leaks-ukraine>
 – described as the largest movable land-based structure ever built – being 
wheeled into position over much of the structure, to prevent any further leaks 
of radiation.

As yet, neither the Ukrainians nor the Chinese have disclosed the safety 
measures that will be adopted during the construction of the solar plant.

Ecologists who have visited the exclusion zone around Chernobyl say that there 
is anabundance of wildlife in the area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/05/wildlife-thriving-around-chernobyl-nuclear-plant-despite-radiation>
, with substantial populations of elk, deer, wild boar and wolves.

Other researchers say there is still evidence of contamination 
<http://rsbl.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/5/3/356>, with limited insect 
activity, and disease in many smaller mammals
 