
Shortly after arriving at a makeshift military jail, at Camp Arifjan, Kuwait, 
in May 2010, I was placed into the black hole of solitary confinement for the 
first time. Within two weeks, I was contemplating suicide.

After a month on suicide watch, I was transferred back to US, to a tiny 6 x 
8ft (roughly 2 x 2.5 meter) cell in a place that will haunt me for the rest of 
my life: the US Marine Corps Brig in Quantico, Virginia. I was held there for 
roughly nine months as a “prevention of injury 
<http://solitarywatch.com/2012/08/11/defense-motion-describes-bradley-mannings-unlawful-pretrial-punishment-in-solitary-confinement/>
” prisoner, a designation the Marine Corps and the Navy used to place me in 
highly restrictive solitary conditions without a psychiatrist’s approval.

For 17 hours a day, I sat directly in front of at least two Marine Corps 
guards seated behind a one-way mirror. I was not allowed to lay down. I was not 
allowed to lean my back against the cell wall. I was not allowed to exercise. 
Sometimes, to keep from going crazy, I would stand up, walk around, or dance, 
as “dancing” was not considered exercise by the Marine Corps.

To pass the time, I counted the hundreds of holes between the steel bars in a 
grid pattern at the front of my empty cell. My eyes traced the gaps between the 
bricks on the wall. I looked at the rough patterns and stains on the concrete 
floor – including one that looked like a caricaturegrey alien 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grey_alien>, with large black eyes and no mouth, 
that was popular in the 1990s. I could hear the “drip drop drip” of a leaky 
pipe somewhere down the hall. I listened to the faint buzz of the fluorescent 
lights.

For brief periods, every other day or so, I was escorted by a team of at least 
three guards to an empty basketball court-sized area. There, I was shackled and 
walked around in circles or figure-eights for 20 minutes. I was not allowed to 
stand still, otherwise they would take me back to my cell.
6x9 <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/sixbynine/index.html> 
I was only allowed a couple of hours of visitation each month to see my 
friends, family and lawyers, through a thick glass partition in a tiny 4 x 6ft 
room. My hands and feet were shackled the entire time. Federal agents installed 
recording equipment specifically to monitor my conversations, except with my 
lawyers.

The United Nations special rapporteur on torture, Juan Mendez, condemned my 
treatment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/mar/12/bradley-manning-cruel-inhuman-treatment-un>
 as “cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment”, describing “the excessive and 
prolonged isolation” I was placed under for that period of time. However, he 
didn’t stop there. In a preface to the 2014 Spanish edition of the Sourcebook 
on Solitary Confinement, written by Méndez he stronglyrecommends 
<http://www.stopisolation.org/blog/preface-juan-mendez-sourcebook-solitary-confinement/>
 against any use of solitary confinement beyond 15 days.

As Mendez explains:

Prolonged solitary confinement raises special concerns, because the risk of 
grave and irreparable harm to the detained person increases with the length of 
isolation and the uncertainty regarding its duration. In my public declarations 
on this theme, I have defined prolonged solitary confinement as any period in 
excess of 15 days. This definition reflects the fact that most of the 
scientific literature shows that, after 15 days, certain changes in brain 
functions occur and the harmful psychological effects of isolation can become 
irreversible.

Unfortunately, conditions similar to the ones I experienced in 2010-11 are 
hardly unusual for theestimated <http://solitarywatch.com/facts/faq/> 80,000 to 
100,000 inmates held in these conditions across the US every day.

In the time since my confinement at Quantico, public awareness of solitary 
confinement has improved by orders of magnitude. People all across the 
political spectrum – including some who have never been in solitary or known 
anyone who has – are now beginning to question whether this practice is a moral 
and ethical one. In June 2015, US supreme court justice Anthony Kennedycalled 
<http://solitarywatch.com/2015/06/23/supreme-court-justice-kennedy-denounces-human-toll-of-solitary-confinement-and-invites-constitutional-challenge/>
 the prison system “overlooked” and “misunderstood”, stating that he welcomes a 
case that would allow the court to review whether or not solitary confinement 
is cruel and unusual under the US constitution.

The evidence is overwhelming that it should be deemed as such: solitary 
confinement in the US is arbitrary, abused and unnecessary in many situations. 
It is cruel, degrading and inhumane, and is effectively a “no touch” torture. 
We should end the practice quickly and completely.
 