
Stand back and look at yesterday’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2016> to see our future 
stretching far, far ahead. Everything that moves and breathes from now on will 
be infected by Brexit. It’s a dry rot whose tendrils will creep into every last 
aspect of national life, twisting around every newborn baby and frail pensioner.

Watch how it throttles this government that will not – and dare not – say what 
kind of Brexit will do least damage, because the rot sprouts from its own 
benches. Should we pity Philip Hammond, hammered hard by Nick Robinson onthis 
morning’s Today programme <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04hmqfl>? Robinson 
said we deserve an apology from this former car salesman, because the economy 
his party sold us at the election turns out to be a wreck that “does nothing 
you said it would”: higher inflation, more borrowing, living standards to fall 
and a national debt not seen in 50 years, despite Tories having described Ed 
Miliband’s more modest plans as “completely mad”.

Whose fault is this? The Brexit fanatics who misled just enough voters to 
expect shed-loads of EU money to be repatriated. Without Brexit, the government 
wouldn’t be much off course – but the chancellor dare not turn to the camera 
and say: you, the people, this is the self-harm you wished upon yourselves. So 
far, he chooses to suck it up.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Philip%20Hammond's%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Philip%20Hammond%27s%20autumn%20statement%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fphilip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights&media=>
Philip Hammond’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/nov/23/philip-hammonds-autumn-statement-video-highlights>
The missing £59bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-will-blow-59bn-hole-in-public-finances-admits-hammond>
 that the Office for Budget Responsibility attributes to Brexit uncertainty is 
at the moderate end of various forecasts: theBank of England’s is grimmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/03/bank-of-england-rate-cuts-2017-growth-forecast-inflation>
. TheOBR’s fan chart 
<http://budgetresponsibility.org.uk/download/economic-and-fiscal-outlook-november-2016/>
 shows it could be better or worse, but they only assumed the softest of 
Brexits: hard is beyond reckoning.

Robert Chote, chair of the OBR, often says all forecasting is landing a jumbo 
jet on a postage stamp, but this one is like sending a probe to a planet in 
another universe. When the OBR asked for information, the government refused to 
reveal any Brexit plans, sending a few nonsense lines from a Theresa May 
speech. When they asked how much they should add to their accounts for
sweeteners Nissan were vouchsafed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/30/nissans-post-brexit-deal-could-lead-to-colossal-bills-for-taxpayers>
, they were sent away with a flea in their ear.

Imagine if Theresa May and Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> from the start had stood 
up and declared their firm intent to protect the nation from grievous harm, 
whatever it takes. Staying in the single market, staying in the customs union, 
is vital in order to sustain living standards; yes, we will bargain as hard as 
we can for new EU rules on migration and there will be trade-offs, but we will 
not be responsible for any deal that we believe will inflict everlasting 
economic damage. Markets would have responded well and the pound would have 
taken a less precipitous plunge. But they dare not.

Hammond said in his conference speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/03/conservative-conference-philip-hammond-confirms-osbornes-austerity-timetable-has-been-dropped-politics-live>
: “The British people did not vote on June 23rd to become poorer, or less 
secure.” Soon he will have to develop that thought, and put to people the 
trade-offs ahead: what price do they think worth paying for complete control 
over our borders?

When the OBR asked, the government refused to reveal any Brexit plans, sending 
a few nonsense lines from a May speech

But May and Hammond are paralysed by the benches behind them, those who 
instantly shouted betrayal yesterday: experts? Ha! Who believes them? Not the 
Tory press, not the Iain Duncan Smith, John Redwood, Jacob Rees-Mogg brigade, 
now in full Trump-truth mode. The OBR comes under the same blistering assault 
as governor of the Bank of England, Mark Carney, for daring to suggest that 
Brexit might have any bad effect at all.

Let’s assume that all the expert forecasters are not 100% wrong, because 
that’s pretty rare. Since the OBR is middle range in its Brexit pessimism, 
let’s go with that £59bn. What could it buy? Hidden in the statement is a 
Treasury plan to cut spending again by an unthinkable 7%. Yet right now, the 
NHS and social care crisis leaves some hospitals with a quarter of their beds 
blocked for lack of home care, with380 care homes shut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/22/care-homes-insolvencies-autumn-statement>
 for lack of funds. The cut to the working allowance inuniversal credit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-rejects-calls-to-reverse-3bn-annual-cut-to-work-allowance>
 means the bottom third of the working population will take an even harder hit 
than in the last six years.

If research and development is the hope for the future, even with the extra 
added yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/autumn-statement-more-fifty-shades-of-grey-than-pride-and-prejudice>
, the UK will only spend 1.75% of GDP on this, compared with Germany’s 3%, 
which propels its world-wide exports. If councils could borrow to build 
genuinely affordable homes to rent and buy, that mortgage would turn to profit 
after 26 years.

These things could be affordable for £59bn, on the OBR’s soft Brexit estimate. 
If we get the hard Brexit the head-bangers are baying for, sending out a little 
squad to shout “Out now!”outside the Commons yesterday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/austerity-brexit-and-jams-readers-react-to-the-autumn-statement>
, then the cost would be far higher – and notional savings from avoiding such 
insanity even greater.

Autumn statement: what the economists say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/24/autumn-statement-economists-phillip-hammond-office-for-budget-responsibility>
These choices may not percolate through to most voters until this time next 
year, when purses and wallets feel the pinch and the NHS crisis is daily news. 
At some point May and Hammond will need to stop pretending it can all be 
smoothed over with absurd reassurances about the “strength and resilience” of 
the British economy. What stops them is the dry-rotters behind them. May’s hint 
of a transition period to avoid a cliff edge was greeted with more “betrayal” 
boos. But a transition that stretches on and may take us into a time when 
Europe itself transitions is the best hope.

Keir Starmer lays out the clearest case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/oct/12/keir-starmer-on-brexit-on-what-terms-should-we-leave-the-eu-video>
 for parliament, demanding May says what she wants. Parliament won’t vote 
against article 50: she would call a snap election and win like no party has 
ever won before. But it’s not giving away her hand to proclaim a determination 
to stay in the single market and the customs union. Only fear of her own party 
stops her setting out that strong negotiating position. Sooner or later she 
will have to face the “bastards” down, putting country before party. Sooner or 
later, Hammond will have to stop pretending the economy is OK: this worm will 
have to turn, no more taking the flak for an economic storm the Brexiters have 
brought down on his head.
 