
A wave of strikes affecting travel by rail and air are set to hit passengers 
next week as workers on Southern rail,London Underground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london-underground> and British Airways prepare 
for industrial action.

The biggest disruption could come in London 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> on Monday, when tube station staff are 
preparing to strike. From Tuesday, drivers for Southern’s rail network start 
three days of strikes, stopping all its trains from running.

Rising fares and crowded trains: the misery of Britain's rail users
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/31/rising-fares-and-crowded-trains-the-misery-of-britains-rail-users>
Last minute talks are to take place at Acas on Saturday after negotiations 
between London Underground and unions ended on Friday afternoon without 
agreement, meaning that members of theRMT <https://www.rmt.org.uk/home/> and 
TSSA <https://www.tssa.org.uk/> unions will walk out from Sunday evening for 24 
hours if there is no resolution then. The strike would see most tube stations 
in central London closed throughout Monday and only limited services in outer 
boroughs.

Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> for London said it would 
put on extra buses but, with more than 4m tube journeys made daily, roads and 
national rail services would be much busier than usual.

The dispute is over the effects of closing ticket offices and shedding 
hundreds of jobs in TfL’s so-called modernisation under the previous mayor, 
Boris Johnson. TfL now admits it cut too many jobs, after an independent review 
byLondon TravelWatch <http://www.londontravelwatch.org.uk/>, commissioned by 
the current mayor, Sadiq Khan, concluded that customers were struggling to find 
staff and get support when needed.

Khan said: “This strike is unnecessary and I urge the unions to call it off 
immediately. A lot of progress has been made and there is a good deal on the 
table. I strongly urge the unions to call off this strike which will cause 
misery and disruption to millions of Londoners.


“I have instructed TfL <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/tfl> to work around the 
clock throughout the weekend to continue negotiating to resolve this dispute. 
There is no reason for the unions to strike. I can assure Londoners that we 
will continue to do everything we can to avert this strike.”

Steve Griffiths, London Underground’s chief operating officer, called on 
unions to call off the strike, but said: “It is clear that some more staff for 
stations are needed. We have started to recruit them and will continue to work 
with the unions to implement the recommendations made in the review.”

Meanwhile, hundreds of thousands of rail passengers face a week of extreme 
disruption, with train drivers on strike on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday. No 
trains will operate on theSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> network, which serves south 
London, Sussex, Surrey and parts of Hampshire, and there will be major 
disruption on Thursday from the knock-on effects of the strike and a continuing 
overtime ban.

There appears to be little prospect of an imminent resolution to the dispute, 
which has focused on the issue of driver-only operation on trains, despite the 
offer of talks from Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, which have been 
accepted by the RMT and the drivers’ union,Aslef <http://www.aslef.org.uk/>. 
Mick Whelan, the general secretary of Aslef, said he was willing to attend but 
could not foresee any reason to call off the strike.

I work for Southern rail: this is why I am striking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2017/jan/07/southern-rail-train-driver-why-strikes-commuters>
On Friday, Grayling seized on a report by the rail regulator, the Office of 
Rail and Road, which declared that Southern’s driver-only operation would be 
safe, “with suitable equipment, proper procedures and competent staff in 
place”, giving recommendations that Southern has promised to implement. The 
transport secretary has commissioned ORR’s Ian Prosser, the chief inspector of 
railways, to set out principles to be applied nationally – potentially 
pre-empting further disputes on other franchises.

On Tuesday, thousands of British Airways cabin crew members will start a 
two-day strike over what their union,Unite <http://www.unitetheunion.org/>, 
described as “poverty pay”. The crew are predominantly young recruits to the 
“mixed fleet”, a branch that was set up by the airline at the time of the cabin 
crew strikes of 2010-11. New entrants earn as little as £12,000 basic salary, 
although the airline says full-time staff earn at least £21,000 a year after 
additional hourly payments, commission and allowances for flights they work.

The mixed fleet constitutes about 15% of BA’s crew, and the airline said it 
would ensure all customers reached their destinations next week despite the 
action. Some flights from Heathrow have been cancelled or “merged”, but 
passengers who have booked will be put on alternative departures the same day. 
A spokeswoman said: “We urge Unite to abandon its strike plans which are 
serving only to cause anxiety among our mixed fleet cabin crew colleagues who 
do a tremendous job for our customers.”

How the strikes will affect services

London Underground


From 6pm Sunday until the end of Monday, all stations in zone 1, including 
tube stations at all major rail interchanges, will be closed. Some limited tube 
services will run in outer boroughs, including Hammersmith to Heathrow on the 
Piccadilly line. Victoria line will be entirely closed. More buses will run but 
TfL says roads and railways will be extremely congested.

Southern


No trains will run on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday (bar a solitary peak-time, 
Caterham-Victoria train, not stopping within London). Limited replacement buses 
will connect Brighton and London and will take passengers to stations served by 
neighbouring train networks. There will be severe disruption on Thursday.

British Airways


Some Heathrow flights will be cancelled or rescheduled on Tuesday and 
Wednesday, but all booked passengers should fly on those days. Flights will 
operate as normal from Gatwick and London City.
 