
Chris Grayling <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/chrisgrayling> has denied 
that the chief inspector of railways is a “government placeman” after a union 
described the Office of Rail and Road (ORR) as a “servile shambles”, in 
response to a report saying it was safe for Southern rail drivers to operate 
train doors.

The transport secretary used an interview on BBC Radio 4 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b086tfbf> on Friday morning to reiterate his 
call for the Aslef and RMT unions to back down on their threat of strikes over 
driver-only operation, which was imposed in the autumn, despite fierce 
opposition from workers.

Grayling suggested the ORR had undermined the unions’ basis for strike action 
with a report concluding that driver-only operationwould meet legal 
requirements (pdf) 
<http://orr.gov.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0019/23671/gtr-southern-driver-only-operation-report-january-2017.pdf>
 for safety with minor updates to monitoring equipment.

Southern rail: RMT agrees to direct talks with government
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/southern-rail-rmt-agrees-to-direct-talks-with-government>
“The one thing that Ian Prosser, our chief inspector of rail safety, is not is 
a government placeman,” Grayling told Radio 4’s Today programme. “He’s a very 
respected independent figure who says things as he thinks they are, and I think 
[Thursday’s] report provides an opportunity for everybody to get back around 
the table.”


Grayling’s comments came after Mick Cash, the RMT general secretary, greeted 
Prosser’s report with scorn, saying: “Therecent derailment at Watford 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/16/torrential-rain-travel-chaos-england-floods>
, where the guard evacuated the train alone, has been completely ignored, which 
shows what a servile shambles the ORR really is.‎

“RMT will continue to fight for rail safety, despite this coordinated attack 
from government, their wholly owned regulators and the ripoff train companies.”

Southern services, already known for their unreliability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/aug/25/businesses-cost-southern-rail-cancelled-meetings>
, werebeset by strikes throughout 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/13/my-life-shouldnt-be-dictated-by-southern-rail-strikes>
, most recently in December, when a walkout by Aslef driversshut down the 
entire network 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-cancels-all-services-as-strike-continues-for-third-day>
 for three days.

Aslef and the RMT, which represents conductors, fear a move towards 
driver-only operation is the first step towardseliminating the role of conductor
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/17/robotic-technology-advances-ousting-white-collar-workers>
, leaving drivers to operate trains carrying up to 1,500 passengers alone.

Southern rail drivers split planned six-day strike in two
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-drivers-split-planned-six-day-strike-in-two>
Workers say the role of conductor is essential to public safety 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/16/southern-rail-strikes-driver-says-lifesaver-guards-have-to-stay>
 and the smooth running of services. In the event of a crash, the driver may be 
injured, while even minor incidents onboard, such as a false fire alarm, can 
lead to severe delays if the driver has to get out of their cab to investigate.

Nevertheless, in a statement accompanying the report, Prosser said: “Following 
a thorough review of GTR-Southern’s method and implementation of driver-only 
operation, ORR is satisfied that with suitable equipment, proper procedures and 
competent staff in place, it is a safe method of working.”

Aslef drivers are to strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/04/southern-rail-strike-cut-from-six-days-to-three>
 on Tuesday, Wednesday and Friday next week, and a further three days towards 
the end of January. The RMT, whose conductors walked out on 27 days in 2016, 
has no more strike action planned.

On Thursday, Aslef and the RMT accepted a government invitation to fresh talks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/05/southern-rail-rmt-agrees-to-direct-talks-with-government>
 to resolve the dispute. However, Grayling told Today a deal could only be 
reached if drivers abandoned their strike plans. “I don’t think anybody can 
deliver the right solution with a gun to their head,” he said.


Rail chiefs or unions: can passengers trust either of them? | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/04/all-aboard-failing-train-service-lack-of-accountability-commuters>
“Let’s have talks without preconditions, let’s set aside the strike action, 
let’s address the issues of concern that they’ve got. But what we have got is a 
very clear independent report saying there is not a safety issue.”

Grayling brushed aside a suggestion that he was setting conditions for talks. 
He also sought to acquit Southern’s owner, Govia Thameslink Railway, of 
responsibility for thepoor running of the service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/may/14/southern-rail-fixes-least-punctual-train-route-by-changing-timetable>
, which was ranked bottom of therail network’s passenger satisfaction table 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/30/southern-rail-ranks-bottom-of-customer-satisfaction-table>
 last June, ahead of a spate ofdelays, cancellations and industrial action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/05/southern-apologises-axes-341-trains-day-new-timetable>
.

An RMT <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> spokesman said the government 
had not replied to the union’s letter accepting the invitation to talks.

Mick Whelan, Aslef’s general secretary, said: “You will know that the current 
trade dispute has been caused bySouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> rail’s imposition of 
driver-only operation without any agreement, and as such, your offer to meet 
does not provide a rationale for my union to call off next week’s strike.”
 