
The Labour party has called for an investigation into disclosures that the 
civil servant who awardedSouthern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> its rail franchise did so while 
owning a large share in a consultancy that had been advising the troubled 
operator’s parent company.

Andy McDonald, the shadow transport secretary, said the disclosures by the 
Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/rail-franchise-boss-peter-wilkinson-gave-southern-contract-client-consultancy>
 exposed “the murky world of rail franchising” and he pressed for an 
investigation by the head of the civil service.

“It is clear that the relationship between the Department for Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport>, private companies who profit from 
our railways, and lobbying and consultancy firms is uncomfortably close,” he 
said.

McDonald’s call for an investigation centres on Peter Wilkinson, who had been 
hired by the Department for Transport (DfT) to be its franchising director.

Wilkinson was involved in awarding the Southern, Thameslink and Great Northern 
franchises to Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/23/firstgroup-loses-thameslink-franchise-go-ahead-joint-venture>
 in May 2014.

Rail franchise mandarin's board gave Southern contract to client of his company
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/rail-franchise-boss-peter-wilkinson-gave-southern-contract-client-consultancy>
For 20 months after he was recruited to the department, he was a director and 
the joint main shareholder of First Class Partnerships (FCP), a transport 
consultancy he had been managing since 2002. He was employed by the DfT as a 
contractor under an agreement with FCP.

Govia had been a longstanding client of First Class Partnerships and had been 
paying it for advice six months before the franchise was awarded.

Whitehall documents show the DfT eventually concluded that Wilkinson had a 
clear conflict of interest between his shares in FCP and his government work, 
as the arrangement in which he had been seconded from FCP “feels very 
uncomfortable”.
 Peter Wilkinson, a civil servant at the Department for Transport. Photograph: 
BBC Parliament 
McDonald said: “For complete transparency, it is essential that the secretary 
of state [for transport] refers these allegations to the head of the civil 
service so they can be investigated.

“Without a full and open investigation that addresses these alleged conflicts 
of interest in the awarding of the GTR franchise and other franchises, 
suspicions will remain about how these rail contracts are awarded.

“Passengers, taxpayers and stakeholders need answers if they are to have any 
confidence in our railways and how they are being run.”

Referring to Wilkinson, Louise Ellman, the Labour chair of the House of 
Commons transport select committee 
<http://www.parliament.uk/business/committees/committees-a-z/commons-select/transport-committee/>
, said: “There are unanswered questions about his role at the department.”

The DfT has said that while Wilkinson worked as its interim franchising 
director between January 2013 and October 2014, there were strict procedures to 
prevent conflicts of interest, while FCP also implemented measures to ensure 
any conflicts of interest were avoided.

In a statement, a DfT spokesperson said: “The department regularly contracts 
and recruits people with relevant industry and commercial expertise, to help it 
achieve the best result for passengers and taxpayers. We have robust safeguards 
to guard against any conflicts of interest.

“Decisions on franchise awards are taken by the department following a fair 
and open competition. Each franchise award is subject to thorough and 
independent audit.”

Since November 2014, Wilkinson has been the DfT’s managing director of rail 
passenger services on an annual salary of £265,000.

Trade unions allege he is “the hatchet man” driving the Southern rail dispute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/peter-wilkinson-the-man-the-unions-say-is-driving-the-southern-rail-strike?CMP=Share_AndroidApp_Gmail>
, after he told a public meeting that he and others wanted to “break” train 
drivers.

* If you would like to pass on information in confidence, you can send a 
message via the Guardian’s SecureDrop service (see howhere 
<https://securedrop.theguardian.com/>).
 