
You work in an office, study at a further education college, want to visit 
your nan in her care home. Whoever you are, wherever you go, you rely on the 
trains to take you there. Except you can’t rely on them – not at all.

The only thing predictable about the service is that it’s always awful: the 
train you want is odds-on to be late or cancelled. If the next one is running, 
it’s so crammed you can’t get on. Every commute brims over with aggro. Wedged 
in overcrowded carriages,fellow passengers suffer panic attacks 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/10/fed-up-commuters-threaten-a-fare-strike-amid-southern-rail-delay/>
. The local newspaper reports how other commuters have missed work so often, 
they’ve lost their job; how students have missed exams or holidaymakers haven’t 
made flights.

Rail minister resigns as Southern commuter chaos continues
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/15/rail-minister-claire-perry-resigns>
You read about a single mother forced to give up being a lawyer 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/southern-rail-city-lawyer-issues-legal-threat-to-crisishit-operator-a3293451.html>
 in London because dodgy trains mean she can never get home to put her son to 
bed. And you and everyone else are paying thousands each year for this 
shambles. To stand for dozens of miles and have extra hours, needless anxiety 
and gratuitous misery added on to your daily commutes.

If any of this sounds like you then my commiserations – for you are obviously 
a Southern Railway passenger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/12/take-southern-rail-franchise-off-operator-urges-sadiq-khan>
.

At any other time, this summer’s chaos on the trains would have dominated the 
front pages. Even amid the turbulence of Brexit, it is still producing 
political ructionsas big as the 50-foot hole 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-36826936> that opened up under a 
south London track yesterday. This month, thetransport select committee held an 
emergency session 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/04/calls-strip-southern-rail-operator-franchise-govia-thameslink>
 to find out why the service is in meltdown. Last week MPs staged anurgent 
debate in Westminster Hall 
<http://www.mariacaulfield.co.uk/news/enough-enough-say-mp%E2%80%99s-during-westminster-hall-debate>
, where they laid into Southern as a “joke”, “awful”, “terrible” and “rubbish”. 
Then they lambasted the government.

In turn, Claire Perry admitted she was “ashamed to be the rail minister 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-07-13/debates/16071335000001/GoviaThameslinkRailService>
”, but vowed to try to fix the situation “until I am kicked out”. The very next 
evening she quit. The new transport secretary, Chris Grayling, spent Monday 
hurriedly holding meetings on Southern, which is “top of [his] priority list” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-36820234>.

Britain is hardly short of political crises at the moment, but Southern surely 
counts as one. In an era of private-sector failure, this is one of the most 
extensive. Consider: Southern runs among the most economically important train 
services in the country.It manages 156 stations 
<http://www.southernrailway.com/southern/company-info/>, covers 414 miles of 
track, and is responsible for around 600,000 journeys each day.

This is privatisation in name only. GTR is paid billions by the government

And it’s part of the largest train franchise in Britain, Govia Thameslink. 
Also known as GTR –majority owned by the Go Ahead group 
<http://www.govia.info/about-us/> – it ferries commuters from across the south 
coast into London Bridge and Victoria. It takes tourists and business 
travellers to Gatwick and Luton airports. Its empire stretches from 
Peterborough to Tonbridge to Bognor Regis and Brighton. In a country that has, 
stupidly, bet everything on London, GTR is utterly crucial to the national 
economy.

And it does an appalling job. It cancels more trains than all the other rail 
firms in Britain put together. It boasts the worst record on significant 
lateness. It is the worst performing train operator of the lot. And it shows 
little sign of improving.

Its response last week to the cancellation of so many Southern trains was to 
issue a new timetable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/05/southern-apologises-axes-341-trains-day-new-timetable>
, removing one in six of its trains. Of all the oddities thrown up by rail 
privatisation, this must rank among the oddest: a train company in the business 
of running fewer trains.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78bbecea05cb89bc2b6deb6cb2c507b8d3522f1f%2F0_50_4462_2678%2F4462.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20is%20a%20story%20of%20rail%20failure.%20But%20the%20real%20agenda%20is%20to%20crush%20the%20unions%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20is%20a%20story%20of%20rail%20failure.%20But%20the%20real%20agenda%20is%20to%20crush%20the%20unions%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78bbecea05cb89bc2b6deb6cb2c507b8d3522f1f%2F0_50_4462_2678%2F4462.jpg>
 Southern rail passengers protest at Victoria station, London, July 2016. 
Photograph: Matthew Chattle/Rex/Shutterstock 
Perhaps the sheer stretch of GTR’s network is part of the problem, even though 
Perry claimed just two years ago that that would help it “deliver a step-change 
on key routes 
<http://www.railwaygazette.com/news/passenger/single-view/view/uks-biggest-rail-franchise-launched.html>
”. Running services into London Bridge during a botched overhaul hasn’t helped. 
And going by the evidence GTR has given to parliament, it also inherited 
investment-starved services. But GTR’s boss Charles Horton comes from failed 
franchise Connex. In his first interview in his current job, headvised 
passengers forced to stand to take a later or slower service 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/if-you-want-a-seat-travel-later-on-a-slower-train-top-rail-firm-boss-tells-commuters-9772106.html>
. And with staff morale at rock bottom he has ended up in a huge clash with the 
unions.

Southern has been crippled by industrial action. Horton also regaled MPs with 
stories of “sick-note strikes 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/transport/sicknote-strike-southern-rail-conductors-call-in-ill-1000-times-in-a-month-a3256451.html>
”, although David Boyle – whoseblogs on the Southern mess 
<http://davidboyle.blogspot.co.uk/2016/07/southern-rail-failings-driver-writes.html>
 have become a must-read – has found no evidence to back that up. Boyle instead 
discovered that employees are so fed up they will no longer do voluntary 
overtime – leaving the company with too few staff for its advertised services.

But the fundamental problem must be the most farcical privatisation even by 
the comedic standards of British railways. Because this is privatisation in 
name only. GTR is paid billions by the government – which then takes their 
ticket receipts and even refunds customers if the trains are delayed. This 
makes it unlike any other train company in Britain – and gives GTR no incentive 
to attract more customers or to stop annoying them. In effect, Horton and his 
executives are government agents paid lavishly for failing to provide a service.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05cae360628901bd8d40a4fcfa6cc40c58b92d05%2F5_838_3954_2372%2F3954.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Southern%20is%20a%20story%20of%20rail%20failure.%20But%20the%20real%20agenda%20is%20to%20crush%20the%20unions%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Southern%20is%20a%20story%20of%20rail%20failure.%20But%20the%20real%20agenda%20is%20to%20crush%20the%20unions%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F19%2Fsouthern-rail-failure-crush-unions%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05cae360628901bd8d40a4fcfa6cc40c58b92d05%2F5_838_3954_2372%2F3954.jpg>
 ‘Southern cancels more trains than all the other rail firms in Britain put 
together.’ Photograph: Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
We have a transport company that can’t really transport, and vast management 
fees paid to executives who clearly can’t manage. And the government acts as an 
apologist for a private company that’s meant to be providing a public service. 
Meanwhile, no apologies are forthcoming – in factthe boss of Go Ahead, David 
Brown, has just seen his annual pay soar above £2m 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/news/uk/boss-of-the-uks-worst-rail-franchise-see-pay-packet-soar-above-2million-a3270111.html>
, and the dividend payout to his shareholders has jumped to £37m. Someone is 
making a lot of money out of grotesque failure.

This is not just an issue for southern commuters, though – it’s a montage of 
everything wrong with business in Britain. Rather than strip GTR of its 
franchise, Tory ministers have instead made its conditions less onerous. Brown 
should be hauled in front of parliament to explain the chaos. Instead, he acts 
like an absentee landlord while officials at the Department for Transport say 
theycouldn’t run the service as well as Southern does 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-07-13/debates/16071335000001/GoviaThameslinkRailService>
.

Southern Railway is in a mess. Here’s a three-point plan to untangle it | 
Andrew Allen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/southern-railway-passenger-protest-industrial-action>
The question is why the government is going so easy on a failed train company. 
One answer comes from GTR’s dispute with the unions. The train firm wants to 
bring in driver-only trains, without guards to open and close the doors. The 
idea commands enthusiasm in Whitehall. It would certainly make rail management 
cheaper, if not safer.

But to strip trains of conductors requires the crushing of one of the 
last holdouts of organised labour. That’s not my extrapolation – it comes from 
DfT directorPete Wilkinson, who a few months ago told a public meeting 
<http://www.croydonadvertiser.co.uk/department-transport-says-break-train-drivers/story-28783309-detail/story.html>
, “We have got to break them [union members]. They have all borrowed money to 
buy cars and got credit cards. They can’t afford to spend too long on strike 
and I will push them into that place.”

Civil servants are supposed to be impartial, but this one wants to drive trade 
unions “out of my industry”. Mind you, Wilkinson has worked in Whitehall as 
well as in the City.He lives in Vienna 
<http://www.renaissancetrains.com/pete-wilkinson.html> but commutes to 
Britain. He’s a gamekeeper comfortable setting policy for the poachers. And he 
and his colleagues appear to be using Southern to take on the unions, in much 
the same way Thatcher usedIan MacGregor and the National Coal Board 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2009/mar/09/miners-strike> to break the 
miners.

An industrial dispute by proxy, a dysfunctional privatisation pushed by 
ideologues: our railways are in for an 80s revival for all the wrong reasons.
 