
South Africa’s vibrant contemporary music scene melds African, American and 
European styles, to constantly push the boundaries. What should you check out 
when you’re there? It depends on whom you ask. Younger South Africans will 
recommend a mix of rap and kwaito, a variant of house music featuring the use 
of African sounds and samples, while a more mature crowd favour getting closer 
to jazz and soul music artists.

South Africa’s best bars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-south-africa/2016/nov/15/south-africas-best-bars>
Jacquelyn Kwenda (alias Jackie Queens) is an independent musician, activist 
and lover of “reading/thinking/ideas [and] things”. She’s also one to ask if 
you’re looking to experience Cape Town’s nightlife. Kwenda recommendsWax On 
<https://www.facebook.com/WaxOnSA/>, a vinyl-only affair held at the end of 
every month. The mandate is simple: “Two turntables, two DJs, once a month. 
Vinyl only. No other restrictions on music.” The bouncers might let you in for 
free before 9pm.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe3618e7675b8066e4cab09aea0a1f336b6c5581%2F479_108_2977_1786%2F2977.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe3618e7675b8066e4cab09aea0a1f336b6c5581%2F479_108_2977_1786%2F2977.jpg>
 It’s strictly vinyl-only at Wax On 
Wax On founder Paul Mamabolo is passionate about the wide-ranging music on 
offer: “All I know is that I started finding interesting sounds and expression 
when I began looking outside what is the most accessible and current,” he says.

Concerts SA project manager Nailla Dollie meanwhile, is a big fan of Jazz In 
The Native Yards <https://www.facebook.com/nativeyards/>, a monthly event held 
in Gugulethu, Cape Town. It’s hosted at Kwa-Sec, just around the corner from 
the acclaimed Mzoli’s butcher shop. Kwa-Sec is one of the many venues Concerts 
SA has partnered with to make live music more accessible and to create a 
touring circuit for musicians. Special moments, such as when sonic futurist and 
innovator Pops Mohamed rocked the audience with rap royalty Jitsvinger, are 
commonplace here, as is the growing list of inspiring talent, such as the 
Amandla Freedom Ensemble and Nono Nkoane.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650164f12b5f31743d038a7d48aa1f57d36b88a5%2F0_298_4464_2678%2F4464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F650164f12b5f31743d038a7d48aa1f57d36b88a5%2F0_298_4464_2678%2F4464.jpg>
 Local rap star Jitsvinger. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Elsewhere in Cape Town, there’s The Crypt <http://www.thecryptjazz.com/> for 
lovers of live music, especially the jazz-inclined variety. Recently reopened 
after a brief closure period, The Crypt’s Tuesday night jam sessions are great 
to attend – more so if you’ve brought your instrument along for the ride. 
Weekly programming caters to a palate that strays at times from the traditional 
jazz fray, and takes in everyone from Sylvia “Mama Kaap” Mdunyelwa on the 
traditional side, to the fast-paced salsa of the Afro Fiesta band.

For parents with children in tow, Kwenda recommends the free summer concert 
series held at theV&A Waterfront <http://www.waterfront.co.za/>. The 
Amphitheatre venue is surrounded by cafes and restaurants, that stock all sorts 
of treats. There are theme parks, too, in case the kids start getting restless 
during performances. Listen out for the gong sounds of reggae collective The 
Rudimentals, as well as the return of jazz supremo Lana Crowster. The events 
are free; just bring positive vibes.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70ac789e2ba356f7afb87cd3333f47b107fd44fa%2F0_659_4692_2815%2F4692.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20music%20lovers%3A%20sounding%20out%20the%20best%20experiences&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fsouth-africa-for-music-lovers-sounding-out-the-best-experiences%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F70ac789e2ba356f7afb87cd3333f47b107fd44fa%2F0_659_4692_2815%2F4692.jpg>
 Live jazz at the V&A Waterfront. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 


Over in Johannesburg, Christine Msibi, communications and project manager of 
Jozi Unsigned, has the inside track on the city’s emerging musical talent. 
Every first weekend of the month, Msibi, who also works with Concerts SA as a 
music promoter, can be found in Soweto getting down and busy. As curator of the
Soweto Arts and Craft fair <https://www.facebook.com/sacfmarket/>’s music 
stage, she seeks out the newest of the new in terms of live bands. Recently, 
Msibi’s love for anything live has seen her booking Yeoville Radio, Leomile and 
Johnny Cradle, among others. Entrance is R20 (£1.15). The fair itself features 
local designers selling crafts and merchandise at affordable prices. There’s 
also delicious food on offer and art. It’s a great afternoon out, suitable for 
the whole family.

All the biggest names in South African jazz can be found at highly respected 
jazz clubThe Orbit <http://www.theorbit.co.za/>, both on stage and in the 
audience. With two stages split over a converted warehouse, the venue is 
situated in the Braamfontein district, surrounded by coffee shops, record 
stores, restaurants and other clubs. TheAfrikan Freedom Station 
<http://afrikanfreedomstation.withtank.com/> is another great spot for anyone 
looking for more traditional African sounds. Situated on the edge of historic 
Sophiatown, this intimate cafe, gallery and live music venue specialises in 
African jazz, poetry and spoken word. The cryptic Malcolm Jiyane, painter and 
composer, has performed at The Station on many occasions, as have traditional 
Sesotho raconteur Mpho Molikeng and Sello Galane, the one-time Malombo member 
and passionate advocate of indigenous African music forms such askiba. Besides 
the regular live music programming, there are various film screenings. Entrance 
fees range between R50 (£2.90) and R80 (£4.60) and performances generally start 
at 8pm.

 Looking to hit up Durban? Consider the Luthuli Museum 
<http://luthulimuseum.org.za/>, the legendary Jazzy Rainbow 
<http://www.therainbow.co.za/> and plush The Chairman 
<http://www.thechairmanlive.com/>. The latter venue has paid host to iconic 
jazz drummer Louis Moholo. Despite being well into his seventies, he is still 
delighting crowds decades after his groundbreaking outfit, The Blue Notes, took 
their influential sound to Europe.

Let the music play.
 