
Being located at the very southern tip of Africa has its advantages: no other 
country on the continent has beaches as long or as diverse as those in South 
Africa. Its 3,200km coastline is not just a fringe between its landscapes and 
the sea, but one of its star attractions, as colourful and diverse as the 
people of the rainbow nation.

Why is it so varied? For a start, the coast runs down both the east, Indian 
Ocean-facing side of the country and the west, Atlantic-facing side, straddling 
latitudes from a tropical 27 degrees south to a temperate 35 degrees. Its 
waters are warmed by two different currents: the warm Agulhas on the east, 
sweeping southwards, and the cold Benguela on the west, washing northwards. Its 
seas are characterised by both monstrous waves and tiny rockpools, ferocious 
back currents and mirror-calm bays. In short, when it comes to beaches, South 
Africa’s pretty much got it all, making it a destination beloved by 
holidaymakers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e610ae6dcfe5ec8a32b046b019e42be36b355f%2F0_36_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F34e610ae6dcfe5ec8a32b046b019e42be36b355f%2F0_36_6000_3599%2F6000.jpg>
 Swim with penguins at Boulders Beach. Photograph: Rebecca Yale/Getty 
Images/Flickr Open 
South Africa’s best bars
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-south-africa/2016/nov/15/south-africas-best-bars>
Its wildest and least populated stretches of coastline are to the west. It is 
here, facing the Atlantic ocean’s strong swells and breezes, that you can try 
your hand at watersports. From the little, characterful town of Langebaan, try 
kitesurfing atKiteLab <http://kitelab.co.za/> or sailing and fishing at Elite 
Charters <http://www.elitecharters.co.za/>. Or, between August and September, 
go inland to witness a carpet of flowers that extends to the horizon – endless 
yellows, pinks and whites that glow against vivid blue skies.

Not that the entire coast of South Africa is totally uninhabited. Cape Town 
has beaches of all descriptions within half an hour’s drive from its city 
centre. At Boulders Beach, enormous granite rocks tumble from the coast into 
the water and provide a playground for hundreds of penguins that you can swim 
with. The flat, golden sands of Muizenberg are popular with families andsurfers 
can take lessons <http://www.garysurf.co.za/> in the gentle, warm waves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49eacdc296d94840781f3e4f5ab5a52e092956b8%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F49eacdc296d94840781f3e4f5ab5a52e092956b8%2F0_0_2592_1555%2F2592.jpg>
 Head to Hermanus for whale watching. Photograph: dr322/Getty Images/iStockphoto
On the other side of the bay, it’s not so much the water that attracts as the 
social scene. To appreciate the elegant mansions built into the hill, take a 
picnic or play ball, head to pretty Llandudno cove. To see and be seen, visit 
Clifton where the body-beautiful gather to preen and capture their best 
selfies. For something slightly wilder, drive to Noordhoek and gohorse riding 
<http://www.horseriding.co.za/> on the long strip of white sand. Or for the 
ultimate sundowner, head to Camp’s Bay, and join the hedonistic party lovers 
turning up the music, bringing out the beach bats and celebrating sunset with a 
cold Castle beer or Cape sauvignon.

It’s not just here that people are having fun along the coast. At Hermanus, a 
couple of hours’ drive from Cape Town, thousands converge every year between 
June and November to celebrate whales swimming into bays just off the coast; to 
see them up close, trytaking a boat trip 
<http://www.southernrightcharters.co.za/>. At Jeffrey’s Bay, along the Garden 
Route, there are some of the best right-hand surf breaks in the world.Take a 
lesson at the local surf school <http://www.jbaysurfschool.co.za/> and then 
party beside bonfires under the moon and Milky Way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabe60911cccab44cae68d581e5b900efc4bdaa6d%2F0_0_8000_2866%2F8000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fabe60911cccab44cae68d581e5b900efc4bdaa6d%2F0_0_8000_2866%2F8000.jpg>
 Clifton is the place to see and be seen. Photograph: Jon Arnold Images/Getty 
Images/AWL Images RM 
For those who take pleasure in natural rather than man-made attractions, there 
are coastal parks and hikes aplenty. Nature’s Valley, for instance, joins with 
the unspoilt Tsitsikamma Forest, and theOtter Trail 
<http://www.otterhiking.com/>; if you have five days spare, take a 60km coastal 
walk that is considered to be one of the finest in South Africa. Or if you have 
just a day, try Robberg Peninsula, near the hip Plettenberg Bay, which is home 
to hundreds of seals that can be spotted on abeautiful coastal trail 
<http://www.gardenrouteadventureguide.com/robberg-hiking-trail.html>.

Just further north, in KwaZulu-Natal, are some of the country’s most popular 
holiday resorts, where waters are warm and Blue Flag family-friendly beaches 
plentiful; take a swim at Margate, Ramsgate, Umhlanga Rocks and Umdloti. Or, 
just before the Mozambique border, at iSimangaliso, you can gosnorkelling and 
diving <http://www.sodwanadiving.co.za/> at Sodwana Bay Marine Reserve 
<http://www.nature-reserve.co.za/sodwana-bay-national-park.html>. Here you will 
find unspoilt coral reefs amid an ocean teeming with life, from gigantic whale 
sharks and leatherback turtles to millions of tiny migrating sardines.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81c26215d432079a9ac0288f41f4889379ea8285%2F0_186_5906_3544%2F5906.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%20for%20beach%20lovers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africa-for-beach-lovers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81c26215d432079a9ac0288f41f4889379ea8285%2F0_186_5906_3544%2F5906.jpg>
 Tsitsikamma Forest offers coastal paths. Photograph: ysbrandcosijn/Getty 
Images/iStockphoto 
In fact, there’s so much to do and so many different kinds of beaches in South 
Africa that it’s slightly tricky to know what to pack. A swimsuit, hat and 
sunglasses are essential, of course. Then again, you might need jodhpurs for 
horse riding, hiking shoes, flippers, and some party gear too. Or, 
alternatively, you could take nothing at all. On one beach, Mpenjati, in 
Trafalgar, nudism is now permitted. Which at least makes packing simple …
 