
Wondering where the locals head to people-watch over a steaming flat white? In 
Cape Town, the artsy Woodstock suburb is the epicentre of the city’s coffee 
scene:Tribe Coffee Roasting <http://www.tribecoffee.co.za/> delivers a daily 
fix to residents from its perch in theWoodstock Foundry 
<http://www.woodstockfoundry.co.za/> complex, amid jewellery boutiques and edgy 
furniture emporiums. They also have a branch in the central business district 
tucked into a BMW motorcycle showroom.

At the trendy Old Biscuit Mill <http://www.theoldbiscuitmill.co.za/>, where 
hipsters congregate by the thousands each Saturday for theNeighbourgoods Market 
<http://www.neighbourgoodsmarket.co.za/cape-town>, Espresso Lab Microroasters 
<http://www.espressolabmicroroasters.com/espressolab%20intro.html> occupies a 
stark-white corner that resembles a science lab. And up the road, inside the 
Woodstock Exchange shopping centre,Rosetta Roastery 
<http://www.rosettaroastery.com/> is a sleek cafe where stylish baristas are 
passionate about the single-origin brews they serve up.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4344bdb69b5f6ddf811ceb08248915e46bf3e79%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20coolest%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20coolest%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa4344bdb69b5f6ddf811ceb08248915e46bf3e79%2F0_346_5184_3110%2F5184.jpg>
 Durban’s pioneering Factory Cafe is set in the site of an old factory 
South Africa for shoppers: where to find the hottest designer talent
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-south-africa/2016/nov/15/south-africa-for-shoppers-where-to-find-the-hottest-designer-talent>
If you’re looking for your fix closer to the central business district, check 
outHaas <http://haascollective.com/coffee/>, a gallery-cafe on Buitenkant 
Street where the canvases are as striking as the caffeine. Or tryOrigin Coffee 
Roasting <http://www.originroasting.co.za/>, which was at the forefront of the 
country’s coffee renaissance, and sells everything from French press to Turkish 
to cortados from its flagship cafe in De Waterkant.

While Cape Town may be the hub of South Africa’s coffee scene, Johannesburg 
and Durban have their own stalwarts boasting cult followings. In Jo’burg, 
Saturday brunch atSalvationcafe <http://www.salvationcafe.co.za>, in the lively 
open-air 44 Stanley retail complex, is something of an institution, with an 
eclectic mix of locals grazing on French toast with halloumi and pesto, washed 
down with a cappuccino.

In the vibrant Braamfontein district of Jo’burg, Father Coffee 
<http://www.fathercoffee.co.za> is a minimalist blond-wood espresso bar that 
serves ristrettos, macchiatos, and affogatos alongside classic lattes and flat 
whites. You can’t miss the bright-pink coffee roaster presiding over4th Avenue 
Coffee Roasters <http://www.4thavenuecoffee.co.za/where__when/>, a friendly 
neighbourhood fixture in the pedestrian-friendly Parkhurst suburb.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b7ad9197ffd62c66b822f65054801f346ad460%2F0_0_5611_2455%2F5611.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20coolest%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=South%20Africa%E2%80%99s%20coolest%20cafes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fdiscover-south-africa%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fsouth-africas-coolest-cafes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F59b7ad9197ffd62c66b822f65054801f346ad460%2F0_0_5611_2455%2F5611.jpg>
 Old Town Italy doesn’t just sell great coffee - it also boasts a market, 
bakery, deli, butcher and bar 
Over in Durban, Factory Cafe – as the name suggests – is set within the Colombo
 <http://colombo-coffee-tea.myshopify.com> coffee roasters, on the site of an 
old factory; Durbs owes much of its coffee fanaticism to this popular — and 
passionate — pioneer.Old Town Italy <http://oldtown.co.za/#experience>, a 
newcomer in the posh seaside enclave of Umhlanga, would do any Italian 
connoisseur proud: the cavernous space boasts a market, bakery, deli, butcher 
and bar, among other things, and the coffee is sublime.

And in the heart of the city, two formerly run-down districts are in the midst 
of a revival — and where there is urban renewal afoot, good coffee is never far 
behind. In the Station Drive area,Savior <http://www.saviorbrandco.co.za/about> 
is a leather atelier, boutique, and coffee shop, all under one roof. Over in 
the Rivertown precinct,8 Morrison Street <http://8ms.co.za/about/> is a massive 
warehouse converted into mini-pods housing local fashion, accessories, and 
skincare brands — alongsideFirebird Coffee Works <http://8ms.co.za/289/>, a 
pint-size space featuring a behemoth restored Probat roaster.
 