
What does it mean to love your country? What does it mean to defend its 
sovereignty? For some of the leaders of the Brexit campaign, it means reducing 
the United Kingdom to a franchise of corporate capital, governed from head 
offices overseas. They will take us out of Europe to deliver us into the arms 
of other powers.

British-EU relations predicted to be resolved by 2020, says Liam Fox
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/26/british-eu-relations-to-be-resolved-by-2020-says-liam-fox>
No one embodies this contradiction as much as the man now charged with 
determining the scope of our sovereignty: the new international trade secretary,
Liam Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/26/british-eu-relations-to-be-resolved-by-2020-says-liam-fox>
.He explained his enthusiasm for leaving Europe thus 
<http://www.conservativevoice.co.uk/long-read-in-the-hot-seat-with-liam-fox-transcript/>
: “We’ll be able to make our own laws unhindered by anyone else, and our 
democratic parliament will not be overruled by a European court.” But of all 
the people Theresa May could have appointed to this post, he seems to me the 
most likely to ensure that our parliament and lawsare overruled by foreign 
bodies.

Fox looks to me like a corporate sleeper cell implanted in government. In 
2011, heresigned his post 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/14/liam-fox-resignation-letter> 
as defence secretary in disgrace after his extracurricular interests were 
exposed. He had set up an organisation called Atlantic Bridge, financed in 
large part by ahedge fund owner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/11/michael-hintze-liam-fox-backer>
. It formed a partnership with a corporate lobbying group called the American 
Legislative Exchange Council, which is funded bytobacco, pharmaceutical and oil 
companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/16/lessons-atlantic-bridge-questioning>
. Before it was struck off by the Charity Commission, it began assembling a
transatlantic conclave 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/15/liam-fox-atlantic-bridge> of 
people who wished to see public services privatised and corporations released 
from regulation.

He allowed a lobbyist to attend his official meetings, without government 
clearance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/15/liam-fox-resignation-editorial>
. He made misleading statements about these meetings,which were later disproved 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2011/oct/09/defence-secretary-fox-holed>. 
It seems extraordinary to me that a man with such a past could have been 
brought back into government, let alone given such a crucial and sensitive 
role. Most newspapers have brushed his inconvenient history under the political 
carpet. He is, after all, their man.

It's extraordinary that a man with his past has been brought back into 
government – let alone given such a crucial role

At every turn he promotes the millionaires’ agenda while urging that the 
social contract, which makes this country more or less habitable, be ripped 
apart. He wants “asystematic dismantling of universal benefits 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9922579/Liam-Foxs-speech-to-the-Institute-of-Economic-Affairs-in-full.html>
 ... turning them into tax cuts”. He has argued for a three- to five-year
holiday from capital gains tax 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9922579/Liam-Foxs-speech-to-the-Institute-of-Economic-Affairs-in-full.html>
. He wants to “freeze public spending for at least three years and probably 
more”, and toderegulate the labour market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2012/feb/22/liam-fox-business-tax-cuts>, 
making workers easier to fire. He suggests that access tohousing benefit should 
be limited 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9922579/Liam-Foxs-speech-to-the-Institute-of-Economic-Affairs-in-full.html>
 for people under 25.

This is the man who has been put in charge of making new trade agreements. 
What he wants to do with them ispretty clear 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/u-k-trade-chief-seeks-to-calm-u-s-jitters-over-brexit-1469477274>
. “We need to see a reinvigoration of our transatlantic relationship,”he argues 
<http://www.liamfox.co.uk/news/new-priorities-new-vision>. “We have a 
low-regulation and low-taxation environment, which is only likely to improve 
outside the EU.” Improve, in this context, means becoming yet more hostile to 
human welfare, social mobility and the defence of the living world.

One of the legitimate complaints against the EU is its determination to drag 
us into treaties that claim to be about trade but are really about releasing 
multinational corporations from democratic control. Three of the agreements it 
is trying to impose – theTransatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
 (TTIP), theComprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement 
<http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/what-ceta> (CETA) and the Trade in Services 
Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/jun/03/wikileaks-documents-trade-in-services-agreement>
 (TiSA) – make a mockery of parliamentary sovereignty.

They threaten to reduce to the lowest common denominator the laws protecting 
us from predatory finance, the exploitation of workers, food adulteration, 
climate change and environmental destruction. They threaten to force the 
privatisation of public services. They would allow corporations to sue 
governments for compensation in offshore tribunals that, unlike the European 
court Fox professes to hate,are unaccountable, opaque and wildly imbalanced 
<http://corporateeurope.org/trade/2012/11/chapter-4-who-guards-guardians-conflicting-interests-investment-arbitrators>
. The EU has no mandate to strike such agreements: a consultation on the 
offshore tribunals TTIP proposes attracted 150,000 responses,97% of which were 
negative 
<http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/news/2015/jan/13/new-levels-ttip-rejection-revealed-commission%E2%80%99s-public-consultation>
.

Think TTIP is a threat to democracy? There’s another trade deal that’s already 
signed | Nick Dearden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/ttip-trade-deal-agreements-ceta-eu-canada>
Leaving Europe should enable us to leave behind biased, destructive treaties 
of this kind; we will, after all, have torenegotiate most of our trade 
agreements 
<http://blogs.lse.ac.uk/brexitvote/2016/04/12/trade-relations-will-remain-unchanged-post-brexit-claims-lord-lawson-hardly/>
. But by putting the Fox in charge of the chicken coop, May seems determined to 
replace them with something even worse.

The corporate army is already at the gates. The Republican senator Tom Cotton 
proposes that Britain should join the North American Free Trade Agreement 
(Nafta). Using the kind of international tribunals that TTIP threatens to 
impose, Nafta hasundermined labour rights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/04/nafta-20-years-mexico-regret>
 andenvironmental protection 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/01/08/3737250/keystone-opponents-and-the-tpp/>
. It hasblocked attempts to produce more progressive laws 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/right-and-us-trade-law-invalidating-20th-century/?page=0,5>
 and greatly restricted legislative sovereignty. Whether we formally join 
Nafta, or connect to that trading area through TTIP or through another such 
agreement, the results will gravely threaten our sovereignty – unless 
negotiations are run on an entirely different basis.

In response to the Philip Green scandal, May says she wants to “tackle 
corporate irresponsibility” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/25/theresa-may-reform-capitalism-philip-green-bhs-scandal>
 and “reform capitalism so that it works for everyone, not just the privileged 
few”. We have no idea what she means. But here’s where it should begin. Before 
her government starts negotiating any new trade treaties, it should open a 
public consultation about their purpose and scope. The UK’s trading 
relationships should be debated in parliament and the people of this nation 
should be allowed to determine how much control over national life our 
representatives should retain, and how much should be ceded to international 
agreements and international bodies.

Cameron was right, Britain is broken. But it’s businessmen who are to blame | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/26/broken-britain-lives-on-in-sports-direct-and-bhs>
Does this mean a referendum? If we can be trusted to decide whether or not to 
share our sovereignty with Europe, should we not also be trusted to decide 
whether or not to share it with transnational capital?

But the Conservative vision of sovereignty is highly selective. People such as 
Fox appear to hate much of what others love about this country: the NHS, our 
public broadcasters, our social safety net, the protection of the countryside, 
the notion that power resides in the people rather than in corporations and 
their shadowy lobbyists. There are traitors in our midst, who would rip down 
our most treasured institutions on behalf of the transnational elite and its 
offshore holdings. This, it seems, is what they mean by taking back control.

• A fully linked version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 