
Space insiders will be watching events in California carefully on Saturday. If 
all goes well,SpaceX <https://www.theguardian.com/science/spacex> will attempt 
its first launch since the explosion of 1 September 2016, which grounded its 
rocket fleet.

The accident destroyed not only the Falcon 9 rocket but also its payload, the 
Amos 6 communications satellite. It inflicted considerable damage on one of 
Cape Canaveral’s launch pads too.

SpaceX rocket explodes on launch site in Florida during testing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/01/spacex-explosion-launch-site-florida>
This weekend’s launch will take place from Vandenberg Air Force Base 
<http://www.vandenberg.af.mil/>, California, and carry 10 small communications 
satellites into orbit forthe company Iridium <https://www.iridium.com/>. They 
are part of a constellation know asIridium Next <https://www.iridiumnext.com/> 
that will replace the company’s existing satellites, which were launched over a 
five-year period starting in 1997.

The new satellites have been designed in France and built in the US by Thales 
Alenia Space and Orbital ATK 
<https://www.thalesgroup.com/en/worldwide/space/space?LangType=2057> at a cost 
of $3bn.
The Iridium constellation uses six orbital planes to circle the world and 
provide voice and data relay services. In total, 66 new satellites will be 
launched across seven launches that Iridium has contracted SpaceX to provide.

SpaceX has traced its September explosion to a tank of helium in the rocket’s 
second stage that split during an engine trial. Saturday’s launch will be the 
crucial test of whetherSpaceX <https://www.theguardian.com/science/spacex> 
engineers have understood the problem enough to correct it.

The launch window is just one second long. Either the rocket launches at 
17:54:34 GMT or the attempt is scrubbed for the day. The launch window then 
occurs about five minutes earlier the next day.




 