
Democracy is often on a collision course with economic elites, sometimes in 
less subtle ways than others. Spain’s current plight is one such example. Last 
month, the country’s Socialist leaderPedro Sánchez 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/01/pedro-sanchez-resigns-as-leader-of-spains-socialist-party>
 was toppled in a party coup, paving the way for his fellow MPs to abstain in a 
vote to allow the conservative Mariano Rajoy to resume office. For many 
traditional Socialist voters, Rajoy’s Popular party is the political wing of a 
venal, corrupt right-wing establishment: allowing them to form a minority 
government was an act of betrayal. But Sánchez’s subsequent revelations exposed 
the machinations of powerful Spanish interests.

What’s happened to Spain’s socialist party? Well, it’s like Britain’s Labour | 
Miguel-Anxo Murado
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/30/what-happened-spain-socialist-workers-party-like-labour>
After two elections that marked the collapse of the country’s two-party system 
but failed to produce a governing majority, Sánchez had attempted to assemble a 
leftwing alliance, much like the one that governs in neighbouring Portugal. His 
ambition had been to form a government alongsidePodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> – a recently formed party that 
emerged from movements protesting against cuts that have devastated Spanish 
society – and backed by Catalan nationalists.

But this week, Sánchez revealed that he was blocked by powerful corporations, 
including banks and Spanish telecoms giant Telefónica. These interests run El 
País, the country’s largest newspaper. Unless Sánchez allowed Rajoy to return 
to power, or accepted a new round of elections, El País would launch a vicious 
campaign against Sánchez. A coalition withPodemos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/podemos> was simply intolerable.

Here was direct interference in Spanish democracy by unaccountable vested 
interests to stop a progressive government taking power. “Sánchez has 
recognised the pressure of the oligarchic powers and that it was a mistake not 
seeking an agreement with us,” says Podemos leaderPablo Iglesias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/pablo-iglesias>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b5b187bf4c1807ecc28dabdbf8a54e6cede2ce%2F0_66_4460_2676%2F4460.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spain%20can%20halt%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20slide%20to%20the%20populist%20right%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spain%20can%20halt%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20slide%20to%20the%20populist%20right%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F52b5b187bf4c1807ecc28dabdbf8a54e6cede2ce%2F0_66_4460_2676%2F4460.jpg>
 Pedro Sánchez: ‘A man riven with regret.’ Photograph: Javier Soriano/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Indeed, Sánchez is a man riven with regret. He had attempted to form an 
alliance with the centre-right Citizens’ party – another beneficiary of the 
implosion of the two-party system. But it was all a ruse: Podemos was asked to 
back such an alliance, even though it meant signing up to rightwing economic 
policies that would have been impossible to accept. It was nothing more than an 
attempt to blame Podemos for preventing Rajoy’s return to power.

Spain’s Socialists are now in a terrible situation. Their grassroots are 
alienated, while the triumphant conservatives know they can coerce the 
Socialists to back their regressive budgets, threatening a snap election that 
would decimate their rivals if they refused. The Spanish Socialists were 
already halfway to suffering the fate of their Greek sister party, Pasok, which 
so alienated its natural supporters that they defected en masse to Syriza. The 
Catalan socialists are enraged by the party leadership’s actions, and could 
even split. Podemos can now position itself as the real opposition. But that is 
of little comfort to Podemos’ base, who could now endure years more of a 
conservative government that they had every hope of overturning.

What is happening in Spain is revealing about events far beyond the country’s 
borders. In Britain, Jeremy Corbyn’s internal opponents quite legitimately 
point to the Labour party’s abysmal poll ratings. It says much about the state 
of European social democracy that Labour’s polling is higher than almost all of 
its sister parties across the Channel. When Tony Blair won hislandslide 1997 
victory <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2001/jun/08/uk.electionspast>, 
social democrats were on the march across the European continent, including in 
Germany, France, Italy and Scandinavia.

Today’s social democratic parties are haemorrhaging support to the new left, 
the populist right and civic nationalism. The German social democratic 
leadership may be committed to the sort of “third way” politics some would like 
Labour to adopt, but in the latest poll they languish at 22%. The French 
Socialists face being beaten by the far-right Front National in the first round 
of next year’s presidential elections. Sweden’s social democrats hang on to 
power by their fingernails, while their Nordic allies are exiled from power. 
Italy’s centre left is a rare exception, but its only hold on power is 
precarious and challenged by the rise of the populistFive Star Movement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/five-star-movement>.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9811f74123743d410703718916455994252608f%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Spain%20can%20halt%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20slide%20to%20the%20populist%20right%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Spain%20can%20halt%20Europe%E2%80%99s%20slide%20to%20the%20populist%20right%20%7C%20Owen%20Jones&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fspain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe9811f74123743d410703718916455994252608f%2F0_0_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 May 2012: demonstrators in Barcelona mark the anniversary of the beginning of 
the ‘indignados’ movement in Spain. Photograph: Emilio Morenatti/AP 
The core base of European social democratic parties has fragmented: between 
younger and older voters; university-educated and working-class voters in small 
towns; between those hostile to immigration and those who are not. The fury 
exchanged between centre-left and radical left forces acrossEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is, all too often, a deflection 
from an uncomfortable truth: that neither has so far produced a convincing 
answer to how these multiple divisions can be straddled, and how a viable 
electoral coalition can be produced that would win power.

It is frustration at unaccountable elites that produced Podemos in the first 
place: its whole narrative has been vindicated. Five years ago, millions of 
Spaniards who were disillusioned with the political establishment and 
determined to make it pay for a crisis not of their making mobilised across the 
country. Without these so-calledindignados 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/15/spain-15-m-movement-activism>
, Podemos and its allies would never have emerged as mass political forces. 
Podemos has much to teach other European leftists about how to communicate 
beyond traditional comfort zones. But Podemos’ results in June’s elections were 
disappointing: it had expected to eclipse the Socialists as the second party, 
and was traumatised when it failed to do so. In other local elections it 
routinely underperforms its opinion poll ratings. The party is now engaged in 
profound soul-searching, debating how to democratise the party’s own internal 
structures to re-engage with the mass movements that produced it.

If Europe's centre-left clings to discredited ideas, it will die | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/europe-centre-left-spain-socialist-party-leader-coup>
If Podemos capitalises both on disillusionment with the Socialists and the 
Popular party, it could provide an example for the left across Europe. If it 
fails to do so, there could be terrible consequences across the continent. 
Rightwing populism is on the march, and it is making considerable inroads into 
working-class communities that traditionally opted for the left. If discontent 
continues to sweep the western world – or if there is another crash – then the 
populist right will be well placed to gain.

The old social democratic model is crumbling, but there is no guarantee that 
progressive forces will fill the vacuum it leaves. In Poland, the left has 
effectively ceased to exist: politics is a debate between David Cameron-style 
liberal conservatives and rightwing populism. If the left fails, Polandisation 
beckons for European politics. No pressure, Spain: but Europe’s future may 
depend on you.
 