
When men were served alcohol in cans bearing slogans such as “consent can’t 
come after you do” and “nipples are nipples” at a recent event in Adelaide, 
their reaction was as good as the brewers could have hoped for.

The nine women behind the start-up brewing company Sparkke Change Beverage Co 
<http://www.sparkke.com/> aim to start conversations by wrapping political 
messages around drinks, then pouring them right into the masculine heartland of 
pubs, clubs and bars.

“We are disrupting and infiltrating the Aussie beer culture, which is a white, 
male-dominated space where there are a lot of decision makers,” says one of the 
co-owners of Sparkke, Sarah Barrable-Tishauer. The Canadian former actor 
provides marketing expertise to the Australian social enterprise.


Sparkke is one of a wave of social enterprises specifically aimed at 
empowering women. Whether it’s beer, fashion or fabric, these companies want to 
use business to start conversations around feminist issues.

Trash to treasure: the social enterprises transforming recycling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/21/social-enterprises-transforming-recycling>
For example, when the women behind Sparkke trialled their cider, beers and 
“hard lemonade” at theBeer <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> & 
Bubbles laneway event in Adelaide in November, they found the men that crowded 
around the stand stayed to chat.

First, they were interested that the women serving were the owners and 
brewers. Head brewer Agi Gajic is one of only a few Australian female brewers 
aged under 30 and has previously worked with Sydney brewer Young Henrys.

Then the slogans on the cans got them talking.

“We actually had a lot of long conversations with people about the issues, 
especially about the fact that we were promoting a social agenda on beer cans,” 
says Barrable-Tishauer.

“The aim is to start conversations and create positive change for the issues 
that we are promoting on our cans. This hasn’t been a profit-driving business, 
as we are in the start-up mode … but, hopefully we can turn this into a 
full-time role for all of us,” she says.

Not everyone has appreciated the slogans. “There has been some criticism from 
people who feel that they don’t want to be preached at, when they are just 
trying to drink a beer, but enough is enough and it is not about sugar-coating 
issues to make people feel comfortable. It is actually about disrupting that 
space and using it as a tool to generate that conversation,” says 
Barrable-Tishauer.

“As we now live in a post-Trump, post-Brexit, post-Pauline Hanson world, it is 
really important that these issues are at the forefront and in bottle shops and 
in bars and in places where people are having important conversations.”

Sparkke is only just completing its first run of brewing and canning, having 
successfully raised $100,000 from aPozible fundraiser 
<https://pozible.com/project/the-sparkke-change-beverage-co> in December. 

People who participated in the Pozible campaign have voting rights to decide 
on future slogans. And with Sparkke donating 10% of sales towards the causes 
promoted on its cans, supporters get to vote on where those funds are directed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsparking-change-social-enterprise-serves-up-feminism-with-beer-and-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0315bc10d5567fd9e0eb060e0a0b1d400ca2e4b1%2F0_92_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sparking%20change%3A%20social%20enterprise%20serves%20up%20feminism%20with%20beer%20and%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsparking-change-social-enterprise-serves-up-feminism-with-beer-and-fashion%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sparking%20change%3A%20social%20enterprise%20serves%20up%20feminism%20with%20beer%20and%20fashion&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2017%2Fjan%2F09%2Fsparking-change-social-enterprise-serves-up-feminism-with-beer-and-fashion%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0315bc10d5567fd9e0eb060e0a0b1d400ca2e4b1%2F0_92_2000_1200%2F2000.jpg>
 Sparkke winemaker Sarah Lyons (left) and head brewer Agi Gajic (right). 
Photograph: Sparkke 
The initial run of beverages is apple cider emblazoned with “consent can’t 
come after you do”; alcoholic ginger beer with “boundless plains to share” (a 
prompt on asylum seekers); pilsner with “change the date” (in support of 
Indigenous concerns about Australia Day); and alcoholic lemonade with “nipples 
are nipples” (in support of gender equality).

In February, they plan to launch a sparkling wine 
<http://www.sparkke.com/sparkke-homepage#row-388-1004> in aid of marriage 
equality.

The Sparkke team hope to create their own brewery co-op, but for now are 
operating out of a brewery at Willunga, in South Australia. According to 
Barrable-Tishauer, the products should be available online and in bars and some 
bottle shops .

Creating social enterprises can empower women in many different ways, says 
Carolyn Hardy, the chief executive of the charityHamlin Fistula Ethiopia 
<https://hamlin.org.au/>. Outside her full-time role at the charity for women 
suffering childbirth injuries, Hardy has set up an online business for women in 
the Pacific region.

Pacific Artisan <http://www.pacificartisan.com/> launched in June as an online 
marketplace for crafts and jewellery for the women who were mostly selling 
their goods locally, or to haggling tourists off cruise ships.

A former senior adviser to the United Nations Trust Fund to End Violence 
Against Women 
<https://www.linkedin.com/title/senior-advisor%2C-united-nations-trust-fund-to-end-violence-against-women?trk=mprofile_title>
 in New York, Hardy says she has witnessed the benefits that flow to 
communities when women are empowered through business.

“What I am trying to do is to open up a much bigger market where they can 
increase the volume of what they are selling, and sell it at a reasonable 
price,” she says.

“It will help them to sell more and provide a far more sustainable income. It 
should also be safer and it will be decent work.”

While Hardy’s aim is to empower women, she says the women she is supporting 
are unlikely to use the word “feminism” to describe what they are doing.

“For them, it is all about livelihood, survival, income for them and their 
children, and choices that come through financial independence.

Craft and community: the Australian women helping refugees into work
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/nov/17/craft-and-community-the-australian-women-helping-refugees-into-work>
“For most of them, their children have more opportunity and are more likely to 
be in school, they have more choices, they have a much bigger voice because, 
all of a sudden, they have much more economic parity with other people, with 
men in their villages and their husbands.”

Another online social enterprise with feminist aims is The Fabric Social 
<http://thefabricsocial.com/>, a fashion website that reinvests 5% of its 
revenue into the Asian communities producing its bags and garments.

It works specifically with women affected by armed conflict and makes a 
donation from every sale to the anti-landmine organisationAPOPO 
<https://www.apopo.org/en/>. Every item sold results in one square metre of a 
mine field being cleared.

The business was launched two years ago by three Australian women who met 
while in New Delhi, India. They had been doing volunteer work, inspired by the 
gender rights and disarmament activistBinalakshmi Nepram 
<http://www.womenhavewings.org/home/whw-courage-award22/>. 

The co-founder Sharna de Lacy says The Fabric Social has set up three 
manufacturing projects (two in India and one in Myanmar) and managed a turnover 
of up to $40,000 in 2016.

Fiona McAlpine, who is also a co-founder, says that while the financial 
results may not thrill an investor, the business is growing at a rate they are 
pleased with. “We do have grand plans,” she says.

De Lacy says feminism is at the heart of everything they do: “When we are 
looking for partners, we look for strong women-led organisations and we look 
for strong feminist leadership.”
 