
Mike Ashley <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley>, Sports Direct’s 
founder and majority shareholder, has blamed the Unite union for the company’s 
problems in an angry outburst at the retailer’s annual shareholder meeting.

In a packed meeting of more than 120 people at the head office in Shirebrook, 
Derbyshire, Ashley was challenged by the union’s assistant general secretary, 
Steve Turner, over a pledge to offer shop-floor staff 12-hour contracts instead 
of zero hours.

Sports Direct warns of falling profits at AGM showdown – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/sep/07/sports-direct-annual-general-meeting-showdown-mike-ashley-business-live>
Turner said he would not be surprised if few workers took up the offer as most 
were working much longer hours every week.


Ashley told Turner that the 12-hour promise did not mean Sports Direct would 
reduce hours for those who worked longer.

He said: “This is probably your fault we are in this situation because we 
can’t talk to you in an open manner.

“I’ve made a commitment to make a difference and I’m trying so don’t pull me 
down. Don’t do the whole showboating thing. It will make me turn away and the 
only people who suffer are people that work at Sports Direct.”
Sarah Butler (@whatbutlersaw) 
Ashley to Unite: don't do the whole show boating thing. It will make me turn 
away, the only people who suffer are people that work at SD
 <https://twitter.com/whatbutlersaw/status/773476639871234048> September 7, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/whatbutlersaw/status/773476639871234048> 
Ashley’s comments came as Sports Direct faced an angry response from 
shareholders and employees attending its annual meeting despite the embattled 
retailer’s pledges to treat workers better and improve its corporate governance.

Investors criticised chairman Keith Hellawell and majority owner Ashley for 
the way the company was run while union representatives cast doubt on a 
commitment to improve working practices.

Shareholders are seeking to unseat Hellawell for presiding over a 
deteriorating financial performance andconditions at Sports Direct’s warehouse 
at Shirebrook that MPs have likened to a Victorian workhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/22/mike-ashley-running-sports-direct-like-victorian-workhouse>
.

A string of major investors, including Hermes Investment Management, CalPERs, 
CALSTRS and the Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/02/sports-direct-global-pension-funds-vote-against-mike-ashley-re-election>
 have all come out in opposition to him.


The UK investors Legal & General, Aberdeen Asset Management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/25/sports-direct-corporate-governance-criticised-investor-forum>
 and Royal London have also lost patience with Hellawell,the former chief 
constable of West Yorkshire police who has been chairman since 2009 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/05/from-sutcliffe-to-drugs-policy-the-career-of-keith-hellawell>
.

Sports Direct said before the meeting that Hellawell had offered to resign at 
the weekend but then agreed to stay on 
<http://www.investegate.co.uk/sports-direct-intl---spd-/rns/further-update-following-working-practices-report/201609070700101397J/>
.

The company also warned that profits would fall heavily this year, by about 
21% as margins shrink, costs rise and it spends more on buying property. This 
sent its shares down more than 10% on Wednesday morning, however, by lunchtime 
they had recovered to be only 6% down.

Hellawell offered to quit before the company released a critical report on 
working conditions on Tuesday and with most big shareholders’ votes cast before 
the AGM. He told the meeting that the board had asked him to stay to lead a 
change in working practices, but he would stand down if the majority of 
independent shareholders voted against him at next year’s AGM.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F679f3b26621cd2c7dbd959062f348bfb2b1b71e3%2F0_132_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20founder%20Mike%20Ashley%20lashes%20out%20at%20Unite%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20founder%20Mike%20Ashley%20lashes%20out%20at%20Unite%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F679f3b26621cd2c7dbd959062f348bfb2b1b71e3%2F0_132_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Staff in the Shirebrook warehouse where the Guardian went undercover to 
investigate working practices. Photograph: Joe Giddens/PA 
Hellawell said Sports Direct had reached a “watershed moment” and told the 
meeting: “You can be assured that things will improve as we move forward.”

Speaking afterwards, Hellawell told the Guardian that Sports Direct’s board 
had not moved to make changes earlier, despite years of criticisms, because 
they had not been given correct information about working conditions.

“We were acting on the information we had,” he said. “One of the biggest 
disappointments is we found that information was not correct.”


Euan Stirling, head of stewardship at Standard Life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/standardlife>, Sports Direct’s biggest 
shareholder after Ashley, told the meeting his company had voted against 
Hellawell and all his fellow non-executive directors.


He said: “We are longstanding shareholders in the company and have engaged 
with senior executives and non-executives over many years, sadly to little 
effect. The responses to our inquiries have been either unconvincing or 
non-existent.”

Stirling said Standard Life, which holds 5.8% of Sports Direct shares, 
believed Ashley, who is executive deputy chairman, should stay on the board but 
that the rest of the board needs strengthening, particularly the “crucial role 
of chairman”.

The £22bn railway industry pension fund, meanwhile, said it had voted against 
all the board. Chris Hitchen, the fund’s chief executive, said: “It is a 
serious decision not to support an entire board. However … we have lost all 
confidence that the board of Sports Direct is acting in the interests of all 
shareholders.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd9c5df296b101a6952ebb248d0a7d95431c3009%2F448_74_1902_1141%2F1902.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sports%20Direct%20founder%20Mike%20Ashley%20lashes%20out%20at%20Unite%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sports%20Direct%20founder%20Mike%20Ashley%20lashes%20out%20at%20Unite%20union&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fsep%2F07%2Fsports-direct-board-turned-down-chairman-keith-hellawell-resignation%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd9c5df296b101a6952ebb248d0a7d95431c3009%2F448_74_1902_1141%2F1902.jpg>
 Keith Hellawell. Photograph: Darren Staples/Reuters 
Sports Direct – which has admitted to problems at its warehouse, including a 
“six strikes” policy that put workers in fear of losing their jobs –made a 
series of concessions to staff before the meeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
. These included guaranteed hours for shop workers on zero-hours contracts and 
a pledge to put a worker’s representative on the board.

It stopped short of guaranteeing hours for more than 4,000 workers at its 
Shirebrook warehouse,where the Guardian uncovered a climate of fear and 
employees effectively working for less than the minimum wage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/09/how-sports-direct-effectively-pays-below-minimum-wage-pay>
.

Hellawell told the AGM that Sports Direct had failed its employees and said: 
“We will stop anything we believe is unfair to our workforce.”

An employee also confronted Ashley with claims about sexual and racial 
harassment. Sports Direct is bringing in a nurse and a welfare officer at 
Shirebrook and a whistleblowing system after vowing “zero tolerance” of 
harassment.
Thomas Colson (@tpgcolson) 
#SportsDirect <https://twitter.com/hashtag/SportsDirect?src=hash> employee 
addresses Mike Ashley: raises numerous allegations of sexual and racial 
harassment
 <https://twitter.com/tpgcolson/status/773470668226699264> September 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/tpgcolson/status/773470668226699264> 




Sports Direct ditches zero-hours jobs and ups worker representation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/sports-direct-to-ditch-zero-hours-contracts>
The retail analyst Nick Bubb said of the earlier profit warning: “Today’s news 
of falling profits and soaring capital expenditure [with no board changes and 
no take-private move by Mike Ashley] will bring the City down to earth.”


The views of investors other than Ashley will be hard to ignore after the City 
regulator introduced changes to voting rules which, in some circumstances, can 
give greater sway to the views of minority investors.


Last year, Hellawell’s position as chairman was secure because he was 
supported byAshley <https://www.theguardian.com/football/mike-ashley>, who 
controls 55% of shares. Non-executive directors require a majority of 
independent shareholders to be reappointed. After a series of scandals and poor 
trading, more investors are expected to oppose Hellawell after 28% voted 
against his re-election or abstained last year.

Sports Direct said it would spend about £300m on buying and developing 
property this year. It saidMichael Murray, the boyfriend of Ashley’s daughter 
and a commercial property novice, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/04/boyfriend-of-mike-ashleys-daughter-gets-key-sports-direct-role>
 would continue to head the real-estate division.

In a presentation for an “open day” at Shirebrook, the company said it wanted 
to be seen as the “Selfridges of sports retail” 
<http://www.sportsdirectplc.com/~/media/Files/S/Sports-Direct/documents/open-day-presentation-7-september-2016.pdf>
. Big suppliers such as Adidas and Nike have grown weary of the bargain 
basement feel of Sports Direct’s stores and have favoured its rival JD Sports 
with their top trainers.

Sports Direct sought to quash speculation that Ashley, who owns 55% of the 
company, would capitalise on the depressed share price by buying back all of 
the business he founded in 1982.
 