
More than £1bn has been wiped off the stock market value of the spread-betting 
industry after the City regulator announced a clampdown to protect 
inexperienced retail customers from unexpected losses on complex trades.

The Financial Conduct Authority said it was concerned about people opening 
online accounts with spread-betting providers without understanding the 
products they were trading. A representative sample of customer accounts found 
that 82% lost an average of £2,200 on the products, known ascontracts for 
difference (CFDs) 
<http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk/publications/technical_notes/spread-betting.htm>
.

The regulator proposed a series of measures 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-proposes-stricter-rules-contract-difference-products>
 to protect consumers, including standardised risk warnings, compulsory 
disclosure of total profit-loss ratios across all clients, limits on trading 
using small amounts of capital and banning companies from using bonuses to 
tempt people to start trading.

Shares in publicly traded spread-betting companies plunged after the 
announcement. Shares in IG Group, the biggest operator, plummeted by 32% to 
532p, wiping more than £900m off its value.

IG said some companies’ marketing of CFDs fell short of appropriate standards 
and the FCA’s proposals could be good for customers. The proposals did not 
appear to apply to firms offering CFDs from outside the UK, where standards are 
often lax, it said.

CMC Markets dropped by 30% to 125p, cutting its market value by more than 
£160m. Founded and run by Peter Cruddas, the Brexit backer and former 
Conservative party treasurer, CMCfloated on the stock market 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jan/13/brexit-backer-peter-cruddas-to-sell-250m-cmc-markets-shares>
 in February at 240p a share and has since lost more than 45% of its value. The 
fall knocked about £90m off the value of Cruddas’s 57% stake in the company.

AIM-listed Plus500 lost 28%, or £160m, as its shares tumbled to 388p, and 
shares in Playtech, which makes gambling software, also fell.


CFDs are derivative products that allow people to gamble on price movements in 
shares, commodities and currencies without owning them. Customers can increase 
the size of their trades by putting down a small amount of capital to maximise 
potential gains and losses.

A leverage ratio of 100:1 lets someone take a £10,000 position with a £100 
deposit. The FCA proposedlimiting leverage to 25:1 
<https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/fca-proposes-stricter-rules-contract-difference-products>
 in a customer’s first year of trading and 50:1 for more experienced consumers.

The potential losses for spread-betters were demonstrated in January 2015 when 
the Swiss central bank unexpectedly removed the cap on the franc’s value 
against the euro 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/jan/15/currency-markets-switzerland-franc>
.

 IG said at the time the move could cost it as much as £30m after customers 
with no means of paying racked up thousands of pounds of losses from betting 
against the franc. IG also took a hit by closing customer positions at worse 
prices than it was able to get in the market.

The number of companies authorised by the FCA for retail CFD business has 
roughly doubled to 97 since 2010. The longest-established companies started in 
the 1970s and 80s by offering bets to relatively knowledgeable clients, but 
there are now about 125,000 active UK customers and 400,000 based overseas, 
with a total of £3.5bn on deposit with providers.


Christopher Woolard, the FCA’s director of strategy and competition, said: “We 
have serious concerns that an increasing number of retail clients are trading 
in CFD products without an adequate understanding of the risks involved, and as 
a result can incur rapid, large and unexpected losses.


“We are introducing stricter rules for CFD products to ensure the sector 
addresses the shortcomings identified and firms make sure that retail clients 
are aware of the high risks involved in trading these complex products.”

The FCA has been examining the industry since July 2015. In February, it told 
companies todo more to protect customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/feb/02/fca-orders-financial-betting-firms-protect-customers>
 from losses after finding that checks on their suitability and warnings about 
risk were inadequate.

Jake Green, a partner at law firm Ashurst, said the regulator’s proposals 
showed it was intervening in products, rather than enforcing good conduct, 
which could lead to some companies folding or being taken over.


“This will come as a shock to the UK industry, which received detailed 
briefings from the FCA earlier in this year, where this was not indicated,” he 
said.

The FCA has asked the industry and other interested parties for comments on 
its proposals by 7 March 2017.

 