
Read the spread betting firms’ responses to the Financial Conduct Authority’s 
proposed clampdown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/spread-betting-industry-loses-1bn-after-city-watchdog-steps-in>
 and you’ll notice an absence of outrage. The firms didn’t squeal that a 
heavy-handed regulator is treading on ground it doesn’t understand. They didn’t 
protest that their clients are all financial sophisticates who have a deep 
appreciation of the perils that can lurk within leveraged products like 
contracts for difference.

Instead, there was acceptance that cooperation was the only credible stance to 
adopt, even when the FCA had just caused share prices across the sector to 
crash by more than a third. The spread betting firms knew this moment was 
coming. Sooner or later, even a half-awake regulator was bound to notice that 
it was a bad idea to allow retail customers to risk their wealth by playing at 
being old-style proprietary traders at an investment bank.

The firms are probably amazed their winning run has lasted so long. 
Authorities in the US introduced caps on leverage half a decade ago because 
they could see that an inexperienced retail punter wishing to trade, say, 
currencies on a 200 times leverage ratio plainly doesn’t understand the risks.

What is financial spread betting and why do most people lose at it?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/what-is-financial-spread-betting-why-do-most-people-lose-money>
To put it in hard numbers, 200 times leverage means that a customer can put up 
cash collateral of £1,000 and trade a currency pair worth £200,000. It sounds 
appealing until the losses arrive, as they usually do in volatile markets 
populated by hardened professionals. The FCA says 82% of clients lose money on 
contracts for difference. The statistic has been an open secret for years. The 
high loss ratio is the reason why the industry is so addicted to celebrity 
endorsements and high-profile sports sponsorships – it is constantly in need of 
fresh mugs.

The FCA’s remedies are sensible. Yes, of course, we must all have the freedom 
to risk our shirts on derivative financial instruments if we really wish. But 
it is right that the regulator should make the process harder. Many of us would 
regard the proposed new leverage limit of 25 times for inexperienced clients, 
and 50 times for everybody else, as still racy, but it would be an improvement 
on the current set-up. Risk warnings and disclosure of profit-loss ratios are 
just common sense add-ons.

Foreign operators, it should be noted, will still be able to offer whatever 
leverage they like to UK customers. That is a shortcoming in the reforms but 
maybe, as the FCA suggests, banning such firms from advertising their offers in 
the UK will be a practical remedy.

The real question is why it took the FCA so long to act. The answer is that it 
has been fiddling around ineffectually for years with warning letters, 
firm-specific interventions and attempts at pan-European harmonisation. A 
straightforward cap on leverage, as the US understood, was always a better 
solution. A few European countries have already moved in that direction; others 
will probably follow the UK’s example. Well played, Andrew Bailey, new boss at 
the FCA, for arriving at the obvious conclusion that escaped his predecessors.

Drax diversification could fuel brighter future

You know Drax: it’s the company that burns coal in a large power station in 
North Yorkshire while getting with the low carbon programme by converting to 
biomass. It has been an unstable existence, to put it mildly. Coal-fired 
producers are at the mercy of commodity markets. Meanwhile, biomass, or wood 
pellets, are not everybody’s idea of green energy and a chancellor can change 
the subsidy regime overnight, as George Osborne did in his 2015 budget, doing 
serious damage to Drax’s share price.

But here comes new Drax, in pursuit of diversification. The company proposes 
paying £340m to buy Opus Energy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/drax-coal-opus-energy-gas-plants>
, a supply business serving small- and medium-sized businesses. It will also 
get into the gas turbine game by acquiring four development projects that could 
each cost £80m to £100m to build.

These would be heavy outlays for a company with a stock market value of 
£1.3bn, but you can understand why the shares rose 12%. Drax is attempting to 
gain control of its own destiny and both new adventures should be low risk, at 
least compared with the current assets.

Opus, even if not obviously cheap at 10 times earnings, is a growing company 
and Drax already owns a supply business. Gas-fired turbines are a sound 
long-term bet as the UK’s energy mix shifts towards solar and wind, creating a 
need for capacity that can fill the gaps in generation. Drax’s variety – gas 
plants that can switch from idle to full speed in 10 minutes – may not succeed 
in the next round of capacity auctions, but they should be needed one day.

There is just one potential pitfall: the Opus purchase depends on Drax winning 
EU state aid approval for subsidies to burn more wood pellets. In short, Drax 
can’t afford Opus without the subsidy. Drax’s chief executive, Dorothy 
Thompson, is confident of a thumbs up. If she’s right, the “retooling for a 
post-coal future” deserves applause. Drax would look less like a hard-luck 
story and more like a solid business again.

Sorrell’s pay: defending the indefensible

Defending Sir Martin Sorrell’s £70m pay package is not easy, but Sir John 
Hood, chair of WPP’s remuneration committee, could surely do better than
pleading that the fixed salary component is just like any other chief 
executive’s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/06/sorrell-salary-wpp-pay-sir-john-hood>
. Come on, Sir John, inviting us to look at the £1m is ridiculous when it’s the 
£69m that causes the outside world to think boardroom pay is out of control.

 