
Last year the government imposed the biggest increases in civil court fees 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2015/mar/05/civil-claims-fee-increases-harm-uk-justice-system>
 in recent history. The hikes of up to 620% have been widely criticised by many 
in the judicial system; Britain’s most senior judge said that “justice has 
become increasingly unaffordable to most”. So what does it mean for ordinary 
people involved in civil litigation?

Take the case of a woman we shall call Amanda Hicks, a social worker from 
London. In 2013 she entered into a business venture with an old family friend. 
Over the course of several months she paid him more than £20,000. She says he 
never delivered what he promised and, eventually, stopped returning her calls.

Hicks has receipts for all the payments and a detailed record of all her 
exchanges with him. As a social worker she is used to producing court documents 
and has put the whole saga into a statement. Looking back she says she feels 
foolish for making payment after payment, and hugely upset and angry at how she 
was treated by someone she trusted as a friend.

Since then she has been trying to get her money back. She confronted the 
defendant at home and he shut the door on her. She reported him to the police, 
who interviewed him. He attended with a lawyer and answered “no comment” to 
every question. The police told her she would have to pursue the matter in the 
civil courts.

Top UK judges denounce 'dangerous' increase in court fees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jan/26/top-uk-judges-denounce-dangerous-increase-in-court-fees>
Some things haven’t changed: legal aid is not available for civil cases, and 
law firms will not take on claims like this on a “no-win, no-fee” basis. If 
Hicks privately paid a solicitor to bring the claim, the costs to trial would 
probably exceed the amount of the claim. That makes no financial sense and so 
Hicks, like an increasing number of people, will be a “litigant in person”, 
running the case herself with support from Citizens Advice and other law 
centres.

Citizens Advice is where I first met Hicks in 2014. She was in the process of 
reporting the matter to the police. I advised her to continue. I also wrote a 
“letter before claim” to the defendant, demanding the money and threatening 
litigation if he failed to pay. As often happens in cases like this, he never 
responded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fcourt-fees-increase-price-justice-human-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ecc209f5595323d96f381ba2ad55f7d3fda6bab%2F0_201_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Staggering%20price%20of%20legal%20fees%20comes%20with%20a%20human%20cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fcourt-fees-increase-price-justice-human-cost%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Staggering%20price%20of%20legal%20fees%20comes%20with%20a%20human%20cost&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F06%2Fcourt-fees-increase-price-justice-human-cost%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2ecc209f5595323d96f381ba2ad55f7d3fda6bab%2F0_201_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Your home insurance policy may include legal expenses cover. Photograph: Joe 
Giddens/PA 
However, since 2013, when Hicks’s money was “stolen,” the cost of bringing her 
case 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/fees-for-civil-and-family-courts/court-fees-for-the-high-court-county-court-and-family-court>
, even without paying a lawyer, has very much changed. If you issue a claim 
online, thereby entitling you to a discount, the court fees begin at £25 for a 
claim of up to £300, rising to £185 for a claim of £3,000 to £5,000. However, 
the fee jumps to £410 once your claim exceeds £5,000, and to 4.5% of the value 
of the claim once it hits £10,000. For claims in excess of £100,000, the fee is 
now 5%. The amount you must pay is only capped once your claim goes over 
£200,000. In such cases the fee is a whopping £10,000.

These are massive hikes: someone making a claim for £190,000 in 2013 would 
have paid a fee of £1,080, rising to £1,315 in 2014. Now it’s £9,500 - a 780% 
increase in two years.

In 2013 Hicks would have paid a fee of £340 to begin her claim. It is now 4.5% 
of the claim value, so £900. A hearing fee of £545 must also be paid before 
trial. That means the out-of-pocket cost to Hicks to get judgment is almost 
£1,500.

Court fees can be added and included in a judgment. However, in many cases 
this provides scant comfort. If you are suing a dishonest friend, a crooked 
lettings agent, or a dodgy financial adviser, all of whom I have recently 
encountered via Citizens Advice, getting judgment is no guarantee of getting 
paid. Defendants change addresses, wind up their companies and ignore demands. 
Often, identifying a bank account or property to enforce against is the only 
real pressure point. That itself takes more time and more court fees.

City law firms charging up to £1,100 an hour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/feb/05/city-law-firms-charging-up-to-1100-an-hour>
The upshot is that Hicks is in an invidious position. She can pay the fees and 
pursue the defendant. But even if she wins her case she may never get the 
£1,500 back. Or she can drop the case, let her former friend off scot free and 
say goodbye to £20,000.

Of course, it is not a surprise to most people that court proceedings are 
expensive and difficult. In recent years there has been an increase in 
litigants in person, and perhaps a perception that as a society we are now 
quicker to sue. However, in my experience at Citizens Advice that is not the 
case. Most clients I see are surprised how rapidly their options against an 
unresponsive defendant are exhausted, and apprehensive about committing to 
full-blown litigation.

The new problem caused by the court fee rises, however, is that the economics 
of suing often no longer computes. Even if you shoulder the burden of running 
the case, paying thousands, rather than hundreds, of pounds in court fees makes 
little sense if the defendant may not honour the judgment.

This is a particular issue for claims for £5,000 or more, as can be seen from 
the figures above. The fact is, however, that many ordinary people end up 
claiming between £5,000 and £30,000 for a building project, rental or personal 
business venture gone wrong. These are everyday claims, but the fees are 
amounts that everyday people cannot afford to lose.

Hicks says she is determined to continue – she wants her money back and 
justice to be done. However, that is tempered with the realisation that she has 
already lost, and by calling on the court’s assistance she may well be throwing 
good money after bad.

The government is looking at court fees again this year – and the indications 
are that they will rise further. However, based on my experience at Citizens 
Advice, if many of the court fee rises are not reversed, people will in a very 
real sense be priced out of justice.

Ned Beale is an honorary legal adviser at Camden Citizens Advice and a partner 
at law firm Trowers & Hamlins LLP

Tips for dealing with the fee increases:

• Do your due diligence. Only pay money to someone you are confident can and 
will honour a debt. National chains and well-established independents most 
likely will. Sole traders and fly-by-night and offshore companies are 
higher-risk.

• Get an insurer to pay. Many home insurance policies include legal expenses 
cover as a freebie or paid-for add-on. Check if a builder/contractor etc has 
their own policy - and ask to see a copy.

• If you are on benefits, apply for a court fee reduction.
 