
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was facing 
angry demands on Monday to reverse his appointment of a man accused of fanning 
the flames of neo-Nazism and white supremacy as his White House chief 
strategist.


The selection of Stephen Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/stephen-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-white-house-staff>
, the executive chairman of the far-right website Breitbart News and the CEO of 
Trump’s presidential campaign, deepened the fears of liberal activists that the 
Trump administration would embolden and enable antisemites, racists and 
misogynists.

The president-elect also named Reince Priebus, a more mainstream Republican 
figure, as chief of staff, setting up the prospect of an internal power 
struggle between Priebus and Bannon.

Condemnation of Trump’s decision was swift and widespread. US House minority 
leader Nancy Pelosi said of Bannon’s appointment: “There must be no 
sugarcoating the reality that a white nationalist has been named chief 
strategist for theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fkellyanne-conway-on-steve-bannon-criticism-look-at-his-whole-resume-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Kellyanne%20Conway%20on%20Steve%20Bannon%20criticism%3A%20'Look%20at%20his%20whole%20resume'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fkellyanne-conway-on-steve-bannon-criticism-look-at-his-whole-resume-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Kellyanne%20Conway%20on%20Steve%20Bannon%20criticism%3A%20%27Look%20at%20his%20whole%20resume%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fkellyanne-conway-on-steve-bannon-criticism-look-at-his-whole-resume-video&media=>
Kellyanne Conway on Steve Bannon criticism: ‘Look at his whole resume’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/15/kellyanne-conway-on-steve-bannon-criticism-look-at-his-whole-resume-video>
Michael Keegan, president of the progressive pressure group People for the 
American Way, said: “By choosingSteve Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/stephen-bannon> as chief strategist, Trump 
has made clear that he intends to carry the racism and antisemitism of his 
campaign straight into the White House. The website Bannon ran is a home for 
the white nationalist right that elevates racist, xenophobic, antisemitic 
tirades and conspiracy theories.”

Keegan called on the Republican party to denounce the move. “Congressional 
Republicans <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> need to stand up 
and call out Trump for choosing Bannon as a senior adviser and ‘equal partner’ 
to Trump’s chief of staff. This isn’t about partisan politics; no one with 
Bannon’s record should be anywhere near the White House.”

What do Bannon and Priebus tell us about Trump's coming reign? | Richard Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/14/steven-bannon-reince-priebus-donald-trump-reign-deplorables>
Bannon, 62, a former naval officer and Goldman Sachs banker, will have Trump’s 
ear as hischief strategist 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/steve-bannon-chief-strategist_us_5828e1d4e4b0c4b63b0d33d7?utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=The%20Morning%20Email%20111416&utm_content=The%20Morning%20Email%20111416+CID_2805f2dbf244b80f71dbdbb0cb31c8ef&utm_source=Email%20marketing%20software&utm_term=Steve%20Bannon>
 and senior counsellor, it was announced on Sunday. In August he was appointed 
chief executive of the Trump campaign, and he was the mastermind of a stunt at 
the second presidential debate in which Trump held a press conference with 
three women who accused Bill Clinton of sexual assault.

Bannon also encouraged Trump to paint rival Hillary Clinton as part of a 
global conspiracy made up of the political, financial and media elite, a 
message that many felt carried antisemitic overtones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6386c2b01bfa0a4bcf13356afef04c79832f19b%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Bannon%3A%20appointment%20of%20'white%20nationalist'%20must%20be%20reversed%2C%20critics%20declare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Bannon%3A%20appointment%20of%20%27white%20nationalist%27%20must%20be%20reversed%2C%20critics%20declare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff6386c2b01bfa0a4bcf13356afef04c79832f19b%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Protests against the election of Donald Trump outside Trump Tower in New York. 
Photograph: Pacific Press/LightRocket via Getty Images 
Most notoriously, he is executive chairman of Breitbart News, an online 
linchpin of the so-called “alt-right” movement, associated with efforts to 
preserve “white identity”, defend “western values” and oppose multiculturalism. 
Its headlines have included Would You Rather Your Child had Feminism or 
Cancer?, Birth Control Makes Women Unattractive and Crazy and There’s No Hiring 
Bias Against Women in Tech, They Just Suck at Interviews.

One headline described conservative commentator Bill Kristol as a “Republican 
spoiler, renegade Jew”. Another referred to Democratic congresswoman Gabby 
Giffords, who was shot in the head during a massacre five years ago, as “the 
gun control movement’s human shield”.

‘A sense that white identity is under attack’: making sense of the alt-right
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/23/alt-right-movement-white-identity-breitbart-donald-trump>
Democrats were appalled by the choice of Bannon, linking him to the Ku Klux 
Klan. Adam Jentleson, a spokesman for Senate Democratic leader Harry Reid, 
said: “It is easy to see why the KKK views Trump as their champion when Trump 
appoints one of the foremost peddlers of White Supremacist themes and rhetoric 
as his top aide.”

Congressman Adam Schiff said Bannon’s selection was unsurprising but 
disturbing. “His alt-right, anti-Semitic & misogynistic views don’t belong in 
WH,” Schiff said on Twitter.


Jon Lovett, a former speechwriter for Barack Obama, tweeted: “My stomach 
dropped when I saw the Bannon news, but not because I was surprised. It’s just 
our worst fears in the grim wide open ... With a white nationalist senior 
advisor, Trump is not just ignoring the impact of his rhetoric – he is actively 
terrifying the country.”

Activists accused Trump of bringing fringe hatred into the mainstream. The 
Southern Poverty Law Center, an anti-hate speech watchdog, wrote in an open 
letter: “Bannon presided over a news empire where he, according to former 
staffers, ‘aggressively pushed stories against immigrants, and supported 
linking minorities to terrorism and crime’.

It added: “Under Bannon, Breitbart published a call to ‘hoist [the Confederate 
flag] high and fly it with pride’ only two weeks after the Charleston massacre 
when the country was still reeling from the horrors of the murders. Under 
Bannon, Breitbart published an extremist anti-Muslim tract where the author 
wrote that ‘rape culture’ is ‘integral’ to Islam. Worse perhaps, Bannon 
personally insinuated that African Americans are ‘naturally aggressive and 
violent’.

“Mr Trump, during your victory speech, you pledged to be a president for ‘all 
Americans’ and to ‘bind the wounds of division’ in our country. If you mean 
what you say, you must rescind your appointment of Bannon.”

Nihad Awad, executive director of the Council on American-Islamic Relations, 
said: “The appointment of Stephen Bannon as a top Trump administration 
strategist sends the disturbing message that anti-Muslim conspiracy theories 
and White nationalist ideology will be welcome in the White House. We urge 
President-elect Trump to reconsider this ill-advised appointment if he truly 
seeks to unite Americans.”

Republicans have sought to accommodate Trump after his hostile takeover of the 
party – former presidents George HW Bush and George W Bush called to offer 
congratulations – but some were fiercely critical of the Bannon appointment. 
Breitbart News was staunchly pro-Trump and hammered Republican leaders.

John Weaver, a party strategist who worked for Ohio governor John Kasich’s 
presidential campaign, tweeted: “The racist, fascist extreme right is 
represented footsteps from the Oval Office. Be very vigilant, America.”

Bannon’s personal conduct has also been under scrutiny. He was charged in 1996 
with misdemeanor witness intimidation, and domestic violence with traumatic 
injury and battery. The charges were dropped after his wife, Mary Louise 
Piccard, did not show up at trial.

In a sworn court declaration following their divorce in 2007, Piccard said 
Bannon had objected to sending their twin daughters to an elite Los Angeles 
academy because he “didn’t want the girls going to school with Jews”. Bannon 
has denied saying this.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbccbbc34915451636d3055012eeed40cdef4caa4%2F0_360_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Steve%20Bannon%3A%20appointment%20of%20'white%20nationalist'%20must%20be%20reversed%2C%20critics%20declare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Steve%20Bannon%3A%20appointment%20of%20%27white%20nationalist%27%20must%20be%20reversed%2C%20critics%20declare&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsteve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbccbbc34915451636d3055012eeed40cdef4caa4%2F0_360_5400_3240%2F5400.jpg>
 Members of the New York police department’s counter-terrorism unit guard Trump 
Tower on Monday. Photograph: Mark Lennihan/AP 
Neil Sroka, communications director of the liberal group Democracy for 
America, said that giving Bannon a senior role in his White House “should 
disabuse everyone of the notion that Donald Trump is going to govern any 
differently than the bigoted, hate-fueled, and divisive campaign he ran for 
president.

“Bannon is a disgusting, white ethno-nationalist propagandist and the mere 
idea that he’ll be whispering in the ear of someone who will call himself our 
commander-in-chief is a stain on the presidency.”

Neither Priebus nor Bannon has any policy experience. Although Priebus was 
given the senior job as a reassurance to mainstream Republicans, Bannon’s post 
is expected to wield significant influence, similar to that of Karl Rove during 
George W Bush’s administration.

In announcing the appointments, Trump mentioned Bannon first: “Steve and 
Reince are highly qualified leaders who worked well together on our campaign 
and led us to a historic victory,” he said, describing them as “equal partners”.


Trump’s campaign manager, Kellyanne Conway, told reporters at Trump Tower in 
New York on Monday: “I’ve worked closely with both of them. I think it’s a 
great team. And I’ll continue to work closely with both of them in some 
capacity to be decided. They complement each other. They both have the most 
important thing: the ear of the boss.”

Asked about Bannon’s record at Breitbart, Conway replued: “I worked very 
closely with Steve Bannon. He’s been the general of this campaign. And frankly, 
people should look at the full résumé. He has got a Harvard business degree. 
He’s a naval officer. He has success in entertainment. I don’t know if you’re 
aware of that. And he certainly was a Goldman Sachs managing partner. Brilliant 
tactician.”

On Capitol Hill, House majority leader Kevin McCarthy defended the appointment 
of Bannon, saying the president-elect always gets to pick his team. The 
California Republican said: “I do not know Steve Bannon ... I’ve always 
believed in giving someone a chance. I don’t like to prejudge people.”

He asked reporters if they should be held responsible for what was published 
by their outlets: “Are we putting everything that was on Breitbart under him?”

Priebus himself also defended the anti-establishment media executive, saying 
the two made an effective duo as they helped Trump pull off last week’s 
stunning victory over Clinton. “Together, we’ve been able to manage a lot of 
the decision making in regard to the campaign,” Priebus told NBC’s Today. “It’s 
worked very, very well.”


He sought to distance Bannon from the incendiary headlines on his website, 
saying they were written by others.

Priebus, chair of the Republican National Committee, threw in his lot with 
Trump, even as other Republicans turned against him, a gamble that has paid 
off. He is part of the Washington establishment that Trump pledged to 
challenge, which could lead to tensions with Bannon.

Breitbart News was supportive of Trump and a sworn foe of House speaker Paul 
Ryan, who has close ties to Priebus, also from Wisconsin. Trump has long 
encouraged internal rivalries in business and copied the strategy in his a 
presidential campaign that used three different managers, sowing the seeds of 
factional struggles.
 