
Can’t investors see that the next US president is completely untested in 
office, is an economic isolationist and a geopolitical accident waiting to 
happen?Apparently not 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
. Or, rather, the investment world decided such worries can wait for another 
day.

Wall Street cheers peaceful transfer of power after Trump election victory - 
live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/blog/live/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-on-edge-as-us-presidential-election-heads-for-tense-climax>
The election of Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
provoked only brief panic. The Nikkei index in Japan, a real-time barometer as 
results from the US states arrived, fell 5%, but European markets were calm. 
The FTSE 100 index, after a brief plunge, regained all the ground lost in the 
first hour of trading. The US dollar was broadly stable against major 
currencies, as was the US Treasury market.

There are several possible factors at work. First, even under a president who 
has never held elected office, dollar-denominated assets remain investors’ 
first choice as a safe port in a storm. Where else would the money go? China is 
at risk of trade tariffs under Trump. Japan is a land of no growth with an 
overvalued currency. The eurozone now faces its own political uncertainties in 
the form of an Italian referendum in December and elections next year in 
France, Germany and the Netherlands. After Brexit and Trump, the European 
continent’s establishment could be the next to feel the heat; if so, prepare 
for the next euro crisis.

Second, the first economic impact of a Trump presidency could be a mini-boom 
in the US. He has promised massive tax cuts and higher spending on defence and 
infrastructure. He may struggle to convince a hawkish Congress, even a 
Republican-dominated one, that it is affordable to slash the rate of business 
tax from 35% to 15%. But one has to believe that some version of the 
tax-cutting agenda will be enacted, bolstering short-term consumption and 
growth in the US.

Third, Trump dropped some of the rabble-rousing rhetoric in his acceptance 
speech. His words were anodyne. He did not mention trade tariffs, a wall along 
the Mexican border or deportations. There was encouragement for those who 
believe Trump in office will be a different beast from the candidate who saw 
gains in making outlandish statements.

Stock markets defy predictions of slump after Trump victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/stock-markets-defy-predictions-of-slump-after-trump-victory>
Can the calm last? Surely not. The apparent enthusiasm for a “reflation trade” 
under a tax-cutting, free-spending Trump will be tested sooner or later. Risks 
are everywhere. Even a watered-down version of the promised trade tariffs would 
bring huge uncertainties, not least the possibility of sharp devaluation in the 
Chinese yuan, a prospect that was supposedly terrifying for financial markets 
at the start of the year.

For those who believe 45% tariffs on Chinese goods, and 35% on Mexican ones, 
could never happen, Neil Williams, the chief economist at fund managers Hermes, 
makes a useful point. “Super 301” powers under the 1974 Trade Act allow the 
president to impose tariffs without congressional approval on countries deemed 
to be engaged in “unfair” trade practices.

Meanwhile, Janet Yellen, the market-friendly chair of the Federal Reserve, 
could be defenestrated and nobody yet knows the makeup of the supporting cast 
around Trump.

The biggest danger, of course, remains foreign policy. Investors have been 
strangely happy to ignore geopolitical risks for years, but a US president who 
is vague about his commitment to Nato at a time of Russian expansionism is 
something entirely new and dangerous.

Such financial risks cannot be modelled neatly in an investor’s spreadsheet of 
corporate earnings, but their potential to overturn investment assumptions is 
real. For the time being, financial markets can shrug their shoulders at the 
arrival of President Trump and pretend he is a blank page. The complacency is 
unlikely to last.

Sainsbury’s may appreciate Argos distraction

The purchase of Argos would be a distraction, said critics of Sainsbury’s, but 
shareholders might appreciate some alternative entertainment at this juncture. 
The core supermarket business has become reliably dull: profits fall in a 
market that is always described as challenging, but it’s hard to say 
Sainsbury’s should be doing anything different.

The underlying pre-tax profit decline in the first half was 10% to £277m with 
like-for-like sales 1% weaker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/sainsburys-prices-first-half-sales-fall>
. The dividend, a flexible distribution these days, was also a 10th lower, a 
nod to the equally tough trading conditions expected in the second half.

The parallel Argos adventure, however, does at least offer the possibility of 
escape from the grind of squeezing out supermarket efficiencies. The challenge 
of integrating two large supply chains is formidable but the strategy itself 
looks low-risk. If cross-selling opportunities exist, great; if not, at least 
Sainsbury’s can bank a few cost savings. The plan is for the long term, which 
is perhaps why the share price is unexcited, but there is no evidence to date 
that Sainsbury’s management is about to drop the Argos ball.

Warning letter is the least Mike Ashley deserves

A stiff letter from the headmaster – aka Iain Wright, chairman of the business 
select committee – and a warning about future behaviour is the leastMike Ashley 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/mike-ashley> deserves.

The Sports Direct founder and chief executive, reports Wright, initially 
claimed an MP had planted the recording camera among the sandwiches during the 
committee’s now-famous tour of the Shirebrook warehouse on Monday. As 
explanations go, that was of the dog-ate-my-homework variety.

Wright says he will overlook Ashley’s lame excuse this time, assuming it was 
“a spur of the moment misjudgment,” buthe still wants to know the full story 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/mike-ashley-asked-to-explain-camera-mps-sports-direct-visit-warehouse>
. Quite right, too: the culprit deserves exposure for amateurism alone.
 