
If you want to get an idea of England’s prevailing mood, go to the Midlands. 
That wasn’t a bad principle to apply to the general election, when the 
Warwickshire town of Nuneaton became abyword for the Tories’ defeat of Ed 
Miliband’s Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/12/can-the-explanation-for-labours-election-failure-be-found-in-nuneaton>
 party. Now, with the news that the Labour MP Tristram Hunt isresigning a seat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 that was destined to disappear under boundary changes, triggering a 
byelection, the same idea looks very relevant again.

Tristram Hunt to quit as MP to become V&A director
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
Suddenly all eyes are on Stoke-on-Trent: a post-industrial city haunted by the 
decline of its pottery industry that lies within the official boundaries of the 
West Midlands, but which also has a distinct flavour of the north-west. In 
Jeremy Corbyn’s office, Stoke is presumably already a signifier for panic, 
anger and the frustration of trying toaccomplish a relaunch 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/labour-jeremy-corbyn-reboot-shows-why-he-has-to-go-populism>
 in the midst of an escalating political firefight. It could be his Waterloo. 
There again, he and his party are not the only ones who are faced with a 
defining challenge.

Which brings us to Ukip. Though the Londoncentric media still regularly 
announces its imminent extinction (Diane James lastedjust over a fortnight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/04/ukip-leader-diane-james-resigns-after-just-18-days-in-job-reports>
 as the party’s leader back in the autumn), the party is still here. Its new 
boss, Paul Nuttall, is talking about a fresh injection of energy and purpose: 
“new atmosphere, a new attitude, a new era, a new Ukip,” he recently boasted. 
No sooner had Hunt announced that he was quitting than “party sources” were 
reportedly confirming that Nuttall was being urged to run. If that’s true, it’s 
not hard to see why: Stoke-on-Trent Central is precisely the kind of seat where 
Nuttall’s aspirations to“replace Labour” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-elected-as-ukip-leader>
 might conceivably take wing.

Origins of Labour’s disarray in Stoke | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/15/origins-of-labour-disarray-in-stoke>
At the 2015 general election, Ukip came second 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/politics/constituencies/E14000972>, just ahead of 
the Tories, having improved on their 2010 showing by 18 percentage points. They 
may have still trailed Labour by 5,000 votes, but then came the EU referendum, 
in which support for Brexit in the city as a whole came in atnearly 70% 
<http://election.news.sky.com/referendum/stoke-on-trent-3010>.

I spent time there in the buildup to the vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jun/14/labour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video>
 and found a case study in the working-class disaffection that is now causing 
Labour no end of disquiet. Though local Labour people were energetically 
campaigning for remain, whole streets were set on voting the other way. Leave 
was doing a brisk trade among not just white voters but also British-Asian 
people. There was a sense of a long-dormant political relationship between 
party and people that had now reached the point of an indifference tinged with 
bitterness: perhaps Hunt’ssudden arrival in the city, in 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/apr/02/tristram-hunt-stoke-selected> 
– after a career as an author, academic, TV face and New Labour apparatchik – 
had only made things worse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstoke-on-trent-brexit-corbyn-waterloo-byelection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d51fed4eaecc9e28151a25f1b43ba1198295671%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stoke-on-Trent%20is%20the%20Brexit%20heartland%20that%20could%20be%20Corbyn%E2%80%99s%20Waterloo%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstoke-on-trent-brexit-corbyn-waterloo-byelection%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stoke-on-Trent%20is%20the%20Brexit%20heartland%20that%20could%20be%20Corbyn%E2%80%99s%20Waterloo%20%7C%20John%20Harris&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fstoke-on-trent-brexit-corbyn-waterloo-byelection%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d51fed4eaecc9e28151a25f1b43ba1198295671%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Tristram Hunt has been MP for Stoke-on-Trent Central since 2010. Photograph: 
Christopher Furlong/Getty Images 
In that sense, I sensed strong echoes of Scotland in 2014, captured in 
something Hunt himself told me. “[As with] the Scottish referendum, I’m worried 
about the aftermath,” he said as he handed out remain leaflets outside a 
shopping centre. “I’m worried about whether there’ll be more splintering of the 
vote.” In the heat of the campaign, this perhaps translated as a warning, which 
still stands: that onceLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
voters get in the habit of not doing what the party tells them, there’s no 
knowing where it will end.

Perhaps Nuttall will do a Nigel Farage, and prove frit, insisting that someone 
else takes on the challenge. Maybe Labour, which still has a strong councillor 
base and a long history of local dominance, will pick a good local candidate 
and stay put. If the troubled pro-Corbyn “movement” Momentum is still capable 
of campaigning not just for the Labour leader but for the survival of the 
party’s values, it might want to think of Stoke as the temporary frontline in 
the fight against rightwing populism, and give the campaign everything it has 
got; clearly, Ukip will do the same. In that sense, this byelection will 
provide a fascinating sense of post-referendum politics, and whether the two 
forces competing for working-class Brexit voters are prepared for the fight.

For Labour, there is much to worry about. When I was there, no one I spoke to 
had cottoned on to the idea that Corbyn was a new kind of leader, supposedly 
set on reconnecting the party with its supposed “core” vote. All too often he 
was seen as just another embodiment of a metropolitan world light years away, 
who was at odds with what scores of people thought about immigration. The 
political scene was replete with fascinating details – such as the fact that 
one of Ukip’s leading lights isTariq Mahmood 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/labour-campaigner-standing-ukip-candidate/story-25928214-detail/story.html>
, a barrister and former Labour member who left the party in 2014 over its 
stance on Europe. And there was already evidence of what local disaffection 
with Labour could mean. Circa 2006, Labour had lost support to the fascist 
British National party; in 2015, itceded control of the city council to a 
coalition 
<http://www.stokesentinel.co.uk/groups-agree-coalition-stoke-trent-city-council/story-26501567-detail/story.html>
 split between the Tories, Ukip and a grouping called the City Independents.

We should keep one eye on the looming contest in the Cumbrian seat of Copeland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/22/labour-copeland-byelection-jamie-reed-ukip-tories>
, but Stoke’s byelection is an altogether bigger story. Late last year,Richmond 
Park 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/02/lib-dems-unseat-zac-goldsmith-in-richmond-park-byelection>
 offered a story of what 48:52 politics might mean in places that backed 
remain; now we’re about to get a very vivid sense of changed political 
realities on the other side of the Brexit divide, in a city that has already 
served notice of its fraying relationship with a party that once considered it 
a heartland. Hold on tight: as Labour pinballs from crisis to crisis, for the 
first time in far too long somewhere chock-full of ghosts is going to tell us a 
hell of lot about the future.
 