
The formal consent of the Stormont assembly would be required before Brexit 
because the process would “drive a wedge” betweenNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> and the Irish Republic, the 
supreme court has been told.

On the third day of the politically sensitive hearing, legal consensus over 
the UK’s unwritten constitution began to fray as lawyers from Belfast and 
Edinburgh argued that even parliament on its own cannot trigger article 50 of 
the treaty onEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>.

Submissions by Northern Ireland QCs and Scotland’s lord advocate introduced an 
extra dimension of political and legal complexity into Theresa May’s attempt to 
take the UK out of the EU. If successful, they would force the government to 
obtain the support not only of MPs and peers at Westminster but also the 
approval of the devolved legislatures.

So far most of the dispute inside the packed, neo-Tudor courtroom has focused 
on whether the government or parliament has legitimate authority to trigger 
Brexit by giving formal notice to Brussels under article 50 of the UK’s 
intention to depart. Because of the urgency and significance of the 
constitutional issues, for the first time 11 justices are sitting together on 
the supreme court bench to hear the case.
What is the article 50 appeal about? 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/2016/08/explainer-interactive/embed/embed.html?id=2f00ae48-ade6-4d35-ace1-1024cc0ac8d8>
There was passing reference in court to the House of Commons debate on Brexit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-debate-plan-labour-pmqs-call-for-government-to-publish-its-brexit-plan-politics-live>
held on Wednesday, but Lord Pannick QC, who represents the lead claimant, Gina 
Miller, told the justices: “Only an act of parliament can lawfully confer power 
on the [government] to give notification under article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/article-50-supreme-court-hearing-brexit-full-act-parliament>
. The law is not altered by a motion in parliament. A motion in parliament 
cannot effect the legal issue in this case.” The government’s QC, James Eadie, 
has already indicated thatany bill put before parliament would only contain a 
“one-line” statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/foreign-policy-controls-article-50-ruling-upheld-supreme-court>
.

David Scoffield QC, who represents politicians and civil rights groups across 
Northern Ireland’s divided community, told the court that leaving the EU would 
involve “driving a wedge” between the Irish Republic and Northern Ireland.

He agreed with arguments presented by other claimants that ministers could not 
trigger Brexit on the basis of residual prerogative powers and that 
parliamentary authority would be required. The government’s assertion of its 
powers “are cavalier – with both a large ‘C’ and a small ‘c’,” Scoffield said, 
referring back to the English civil war and 17th century battles between 
parliament and the crown.

But he then went on to argue that the Good Friday agreement and the 1998 
legislative settlement of the Troubles had created additional rights for the 
people of Northern Ireland, many aspects of which, like the north-south 
ministerial council, stipulated close cooperation within the EU between 
governments in Belfast and Dublin.

“The agreement expressly said that the UK and Ireland would develop close 
cooperation as partners operating within the EU,” Scoffield said. “It required 
the implementation of EU programmes on an all-Ireland and cross-border basis.”

Numerous bodies have a “clear operational remit” to work together across the 
island. “The [Good Friday] agreement makes it clear that the elements hang 
together and are interlocking,” Scoffield added. Even control over 
international relationships with the Irish Republic has been transferred to the 
Northern Ireland assembly.

Ronan Lavery QC – who represents Raymond McCord, a campaigner for victims’ 
rights in Northern Ireland whose son was killed by loyalist paramilitaries – 
went further, telling the supreme court that Good Friday agreement transferred 
sovereignty out of parliament’s hands.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnorthern-ireland-assembly-consent-required-before-brexit-supreme-court-hearing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c921e1ef8a004f1ac3c3367a871f01208cc1fb%2F0_130_3459_2075%2F3459.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Stormont%20assembly's%20consent%20required%20before%20Brexit%2C%20court%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnorthern-ireland-assembly-consent-required-before-brexit-supreme-court-hearing%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Stormont%20assembly%27s%20consent%20required%20before%20Brexit%2C%20court%20told&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fnorthern-ireland-assembly-consent-required-before-brexit-supreme-court-hearing%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc2c921e1ef8a004f1ac3c3367a871f01208cc1fb%2F0_130_3459_2075%2F3459.jpg>
 Raymond McCord, a campaigner for victims’ rights in Northern Ireland, arrives 
at the supreme court. Photograph: Daniel Leal-Olivas/AFP/Getty Images 
“It would be unconstitutional for the UK to withdraw from the EU without the 
consent of the people of Northern Ireland,” Lavery said. “Being part of the EU 
was part of the [1998] constitutional settlement. There has been a transfer of 
sovereignty under the Good Friday agreement and the Northern Ireland Act. The 
people of Northern Ireland now have sovereignty over any constitutional change 
rather than parliament. The notion that parliament is supreme or has primacy 
has gone.”

Triggering article 50 without the agreement of the Stormont assembly, Lavery 
said, undermines the principle of “consent and self-determination” expressed by 
the Northern Ireland Act.

James Wolffe QC, Scotland’s lord advocate, who represents the views of the SNP 
government, referred to the Sewel convention, which says that if Westminster is 
introducing legislation on issues that have been devolved it “normally” has to 
seek the consent of the devolved assemblies in Edinburgh, Belfast and Cardiff.

“I do not assert that the Scottish parliament has a veto on withdrawal from 
the EU,” Wolffe told the judges, “but the question of whether the Scottish 
parliament consents is a matter of constitutional significance.” The Sewel 
convention, he said, “entitles these legislatures to have a voice in the 
decision”.

The UK needs a new Act of Union to prevent it breaking once and for all | 
Kezia Dugdale
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/07/uk-needs-new-act-union-stop-break-brexit-scotland>
Earlier Dominic Chambers QC, who represents Deir Dos Santos, the second main 
claimant, told the court that ifTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> triggered Brexit without 
proper parliamentary approval she would be acting “unlawfully”.

“Parliament is supreme,” Chambers said. “No person or body can override or 
nullify legislation. These EU law rights [acquired through the 1972 European 
Communities Act] are enshrined in parliamentary legislation.

“By triggering article 50 these statutory rights will be nullified and 
overridden. The absence of parliamentary authorisation for the executive to 
override primary legislation ... will be contrary to the doctrine of 
parliamentary sovereignty and therefore it will be acting unlawfully.”

Chambers said that the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty was “forged on 
the battlefields of the 17th century in the [English civil war] between crown 
and parliament”.

During the hearing, Lord Sumption’s ties have drawn pointed comments from 
those watching online. On Wednesday, he sported a colourful 2012 Olympic Team 
GB tie.


On another day Sumption had what appeared to be a piano keyboard design 
dangling from his neck. Was the Olympic tie a subliminal message to reassure 
patriotic readers or a gesture of support for the master of the rolls, Sir 
Terence Etherton, one of the three high court judges condemned by the Daily 
Mail as “enemies of the people”? Etherton was an Olympic fencer.

 The hearing continues.
 