
More than 15,000 homes have been left without power by storm Barbara as 
millions took to the roads to avoid rail engineering works and make it home for 
Christmas.

Severe weather warnings remained in place for Christmas Eve, with a Met Office 
warning of wind, snow and ice for northern parts of the country.

Winds of 60-70mph were expected across the west and north-west of Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, with gusts up to 120mph recorded on 
the summit of Cairn Gorm on Friday. Properties in Aberdeenshire, Moray and on 
the Western Isles lost power.

Scottish and Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> 
Electricity Networks confirmed its engineers had restored power to 14,855 
homes, while they were working to help a further 445 customers in the north of 
Scotland.

Storm Barbara: fears over Christmas travel as Met Office issues warnings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/22/storm-barbara-fears-over-christmas-travel-as-met-office-issues-weather-warnings>
The worst of the storm conditions were forecast to be in the far north of the 
country and the Western and Northern Isles, but disruption to power supplies 
and travel was expected to be felt across the UK.


The Met Office issued yellow warnings 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/warnings/#?tab=map&map=Warnings&zoom=5&lon=-3.50&lat=55.50&fcTime=1482451200>
 of snow and ice for parts of Scotland and flood alerts are in place for the 
Highlands and Western Isles, as well as Skye and the Scottish Borders.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frail-chief-defends-line-closures-for-christmas-engineering-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F443481f3cb1b636afc7bd66041d6eea8a6f077a6%2F0_0_2398_1438%2F2398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Storm%20Barbara%20cuts%20power%20on%20busiest%20day%20for%20Christmas%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frail-chief-defends-line-closures-for-christmas-engineering-works%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Storm%20Barbara%20cuts%20power%20on%20busiest%20day%20for%20Christmas%20travel&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Frail-chief-defends-line-closures-for-christmas-engineering-works%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F443481f3cb1b636afc7bd66041d6eea8a6f077a6%2F0_0_2398_1438%2F2398.jpg>
 Strong winds have disturbed travel in some parts of the UK. Photograph: Andy 
Buchanan/AFP/Getty Images 
The AA warned motorists to be “very savvy” when driving in a “nasty cocktail 
of potential road disruption”, and Cumbria police warned of high winds and 
rain, urging people to drive slowly and only if necessary.

More travel misery in the north is expected on Boxing Day, with a further 
amber alert for Storm Conor now being issued for the far north of the country.

Amber “be prepared” wind warnings are in place for northern and western parts 
of Scotland for Friday afternoon, evening and overnight into Christmas Eve. The 
Met Office warned about potential structural damage – more likely across the 
north-west of the warning area – as well as disruption to power supplies and 
travel, with restrictions on bridges and disruption to ferries.

Brent Walker, the Met Office’s deputy chief meteorologist, said: “Storm 
Barbara is crossing the Atlantic and will pass close to the north-west of the 
UK during Friday, bringing the potential for some disruption to power supplies 
and travel, and possibly structural damage.”

The Local Government Association, which represents hundreds of councils in 
England and Wales, said it was issuing renewed advice on how to deal with flash 
floods and had stockpiled more than 1m tonnes of salt to grit roads.


Rail disruption is expected to cause more trouble for holidaymakers, with a 
number of lines closed for an extended period asNetwork Rail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/network-rail> carries out up to 200 
improvement projects costing £103m.


The company defended the scheduling. Network Rail’s chief executive, Mark 
Carne, told BBC Breakfast: “The reality is, this is the best time of the year 
for us to do this sort of huge engineering project because the numbers of 
people travelling by train is about half of what it is on a normal weekend or a 
normal day.”

No trains will operate to or from London Paddington between Christmas Eve and 
Thursday because ofwork to build Crossrail. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/19/crossrail-documents-reveal-fears-over-welfare-of-workers>
 As a result, Heathrow Express services will be suspended for six days and 
Great Western Railway trains will terminate at Ealing Broadway.


ScotRail commuters given free week of travel after disruption
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/16/scotrail-commuters-free-week-travel-after-disruption>
Southern rail warned passengers to expect a severely reduced and disrupted 
service between 31 December and 2 January owing toa strike by conductors. The 
Rail, Maritime and Transport union has confirmed the three-day action will go 
ahead. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/17/baggage-handlers-down-suitcases-as-britons-get-ready-for-wave-of-strikes>

Engineering work will also affect passengers travelling in Manchester and 
Cardiff.

The annual festive shutdown means no trains will run on Christmas Day and only 
limited services on Boxing Day. That could push more travellers into cars; the 
AA predicted up to 12m cars would be on the roads on Friday.

The AA’s John Snowling said: “It’s likely to be very busy at peak times on the 
major routes as the Christmas getaway coincides with commuter traffic. With 
Christmas falling on a weekend, many people will start their break from Friday, 
but almost a third of our members will be making their journey on Saturday and 
more than a fifth will be travelling on Christmas Day to visit friends and 
family.”

Highways England said 448 miles of roadworks on motorways and major roads had 
been suspended or completed, leaving 98% of roads free of works until 3 January.


The roadside rescue firm Green Flag estimated that almost 500,000 people would 
break down between 15 December and 15 January – equivalent to one every 11 
minutes.


The coach operator National Express reported last month that its bookings for 
Christmas Day were up by more than a third compared with last year, and demand 
for seats on Boxing Day had risen by almost a fifth. It is running its biggest 
Christmas service, with 50% more coaches on 25 December than last year.

The travel association Abta said Friday was expected to be the busiest day for 
airports as people left to spend Christmas overseas. More than 4.5 million 
people will be heading abroad from the UK between 18 December and 2 January.

Heathrow said the most popular day for flights in the week leading up to 
Christmas would be Friday, with more than 118,000 departing passengers.

Planned strikes by British Airways cabin crew on Christmas Day and Boxing Day 
have been suspended, the Unite union confirmed.

Members of the Unite union were to walk out in a row over pay and conditions, 
but after talks at conciliation service Acas, a revised offer will be put to a 
ballot of union members.

Unite’s general secretary, Len McCluskey, said: “It will be for our members 
now to decide if British Airways has done enough to meet their concerns.”
 