
Storm Barbara is threatening to play havoc with Christmas getaway plans as 
winds are forecast to reach up to 90mph.

Around 12m cars are expected to hit the roads on Friday and conditions are 
likely to be challenging across most of the UK, with predictions of heavy rain 
adding to concerns.

The Met Office has issued weather warnings 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/warnings/#?tab=map&map=Warnings&zoom=5&lon=-3.50&lat=55.50&fcTime=1482364800&regionName=os>
 for all UK regions apart from east and south-east England (including London), 
alerting people to the risk of poor driving conditions and surface water 
flooding.


In Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, where amber “be 
prepared” warnings have been issued, winds could hit 90mph, leading to 
restrictions on bridges and ferry crossings and possible disruption to power 
supplies. Elsewhere, gusts of 60-70mph are expected.

Grahame Madge, a Met Office spokesman, said: “The main part of Barbara will be 
further north. However, there’s a squally front moving across the UK associated 
with Barbara, which will bring strong winds and sharp bursts of rain.

“We have issued a yellow [be aware] warning, given that there will be many 
people on the roads, extending from the north-east right down to the 
south-west.”

Fog delays pre-Christmas flights from London airports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/22/fog-delays-pre-christmas-flights-from-london-airports>
The RAC suggested people should travel on Thursday or on the afternoon of 
Christmas Eve, when conditions are forecast to be more forgiving.

Rod Dennis, spokesman for RAC Traffic Watch, said: “The weather is taking a 
decided turn for the worse as we near Christmas itself, and drivers are going 
to need to be on their guard.

“Heavy downpours and extremely gusty winds will join forces to make the going 
tough for anyone driving on Friday especially. Early indications are that more 
storms could also roll in in the days to come.”

The winds are expected to gradually ease during Friday evening, except across 
the Northern Isles, and Saturday will be more settled before a further spell of 
windy weather moves in on Christmas Day.

The Met Office has issued yellow warnings for Scotland, Northern Ireland, 
northern England and the West Midlands on 25 December, with gusts expected to 
hit 50-60mph.

UK heading for warmest Christmas Day ever, according to bookies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/12/uk-warmest-christmas-day-ever-bookies-weather>
Scotland experienced high winds on Thursday, resulting in the cancellation of 
some ferry services.Fog caused disruption to flights 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/dec/22/fog-delays-pre-christmas-flights-from-london-airports>
 at Heathrow, Gatwick and London City airports on Thursday morning but later 
cleared up.

The Local Government Association, which represents more than 370 councils in 
England and Wales, said its members were fully prepared for the possibility of 
storms, floods, snow, sleet and high winds.

People who have power cuts are advised to dial 105 – a new, free national 
phone line <http://www.powercut105.com/> – if the weather affects their 
electricity supply.

Despite the winds, the UK is still on course for an unseasonably mild 
Christmas Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/12/uk-warmest-christmas-day-ever-bookies-weather>
. Temperatures are expected to hit double figures across most of the country 
and 14C, or even higher, in London and Aberdeen.

The warmest Christmas Day temperature officially recorded is 15.6C, registered 
in Edinburgh in 1896 and Killerton, Devon, in 1920. Madge said the Met Office 
did not currently expect that temperature to be beaten, but added: “We could 
see levels very close to those and there’s always the possibility we could see 
a record.”
 