
Parts of Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> are experiencing 
heavy snow showers and winds of more than 80mph as Storm Conor makes its 
presence felt across the north of Britain.


Orkney and Shetland and the northern tip of the mainland are the areas being 
hit hardest by the southern fringe of the Boxing Day storm. The centre of the 
storm is north of the UK, nearer Norway.

An amber “be prepared” weather warning is in place for the Highlands and 
Northern Isles on Monday, with lesser yellow warnings issued for much of the 
rest of Scotland where winds are reaching 50mph to 60mph.

The latest weather front is following a similar track to Storm Barbara, which 
left about 25,000 homes in the north of Scotland without power on Friday.

The Met Office said wind speeds of 85mph were affecting Shetland on Monday 
morning. The gusts were due to rise to as much as 95mph, with Orkney to face 
gusts of 75mph-80mph.

Met Office duty forecaster Matt Roe said: “It’s pretty windy elsewhere. We’ve 
got around 60mph on the west coast. Elsewhere, it’s a pretty blustery day, up 
to around 40mph, maybe 50mph.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fstorm-conor-brings-heavy-snow-and-high-winds-to-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a24772fea26cff0234716027f630577e146eedf%2F0_0_3500_2438%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Storm%20Conor%20brings%20heavy%20snow%20and%20high%20winds%20to%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fstorm-conor-brings-heavy-snow-and-high-winds-to-scotland%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Storm%20Conor%20brings%20heavy%20snow%20and%20high%20winds%20to%20Scotland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F26%2Fstorm-conor-brings-heavy-snow-and-high-winds-to-scotland%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0a24772fea26cff0234716027f630577e146eedf%2F0_0_3500_2438%2F3500.jpg>
 Boxing Day shoppers on Edinburgh’s Princes Street. Photograph: Jane Barlow/PA 
“We’ve got some fairly heavy showers too and these are falling as snow across 
central and northern parts of Scotland. There are some fairly heavy snow 
showers across the Highlands as well.

“It’s basically a cold windy day across Scotland with a mix of everything. 
There’s frequent lightning as well with some of those showers in the north.”

Travellers have been urged to check for any disruption before setting off. 

On Monday, Traffic Scotland reported sporadic wintry showers on roads such as 
the M8, M90 and the A720 Edinburgh City bypass.

High wind warnings were in place on bridges such as the Clackmannanshire 
Bridge, Forth Road Bridge, Dornoch Bridge and Erskine Bridge.

Ferry operator CalMac warned that services across the network were subject to 
delays or cancellation at short notice due to Storm Conor.

The Scottish Environment Agency had four flood alerts in place on Monday for 
Caithness and Sutherland, Orkney, Shetland and the Western Isles. Alerts and 
warnings that were in place for more southern parts of Scotland are no longer 
in force.

Roe said: “We’re on the southern fringe. The southern extent of the strongest 
winds will be moving eastwards across more northern parts of Scotland during 
the afternoon. The north of Scotland will be feeling the brunt of Storm Conor, 
particularly the Northern Isles.”

The wintry conditions come after parts of Scotland were badly disrupted by 
weather in the days before Christmas.

There were also unseasonably warm temperatures on Christmas Day, with the 
mercury rising to 15.1C in Dyce, Aberdeenshire.
 