
With a soaring number of tenants falling into financial difficulties as they 
battle increasing rental costs, charities have identified a “worrying trend” of 
escalating debt for those who are frozen out of home ownership.

Debt charity StepChange says the number of renters contacting it with 
difficulty paying off debt in the four years to 2015 more than doubled, rising 
139%, in exclusive figures given toThe Observer. The average sum owed is 
£10,829 each, made up of unsecured debts including overdrafts, loans, credit 
card debt and rent arrears – which have reached an all-time high of £922.

“The rapid rise in the proportion of our clients living in rented 
accommodation is very concerning,” says Mike O’Connor, chief executive of 
StepChange. “People renting their homes are increasingly vulnerable as rents 
grow far faster than wages, and we are seeing more and more people struggling.”

Landlords clamp down on the rise of subletting without approval
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/02/landlords-clamp-down-subletting-without-approval-leaseholders-tenants-repercussions>
Figures from separate findings by charity National Debtline show that the 
number of people seeking help with rent arrears doubled, to 14% of callers, 
over the past five years. “This worrying trend is likely to continue,” says 
Joanna Elson, chief executive of the Money Advice Trust, the charity behind 
National Debtline.

Yet rents continue to rise. Figures from the Office for National Statistics 
published last week revealed that UK tenants paid 2.6% more for rent in 
February than they did a year previously. Demand for rented property has soared 
as wannabe buyers have found themselves priced out of the housing market, in 
turn driving up rents.

“Static incomes, increasing costs and greater demand than supply is pushing 
rents up. It’s not surprising that renters are the ones suffering debt issues,” 
says Dan Wilson Craw from campaign group Generation Rent.

The future of renting

According to the latest figures from the HomeLet Rental Index, the typical UK 
rental property now costs £744 a month, while those in London are an 
eye-watering average of £1,521.

Homelessness charity Shelter revealed last month that the typical tenant in 
England has spent more than £40,000 on rent over the past five years.

But the renting landscape is only set to get worse. Changes to the taxation of 
buy-to-let properties and a hike in stamp duty are expected to push up costs 
for landlords, “and as a result push up rents for tenants” in 2016, according 
to the Association of Residential Letting Agents.

Campaigners are calling for stronger protection for tenants. “Until we have 
limits on how much rents can go up by there will be no real protection from a 
landlord who wants to raise rents, says Craw. “We’d like to see rent rises 
limited to inflation.”

Renters are increasingly vulnerable – we are seeing more and more people 
struggling
Mike O'Connor, StepChange 
Shelter argues for long-term contracts for renters, with minimal increases in 
rent. “Many renters in Europe enjoy greater stability, and there’s no reason 
our tenants can’t as well,” says Campbell Robb, chief executive of Shelter.

Meanwhile, renters are significantly less likely to have the savings that 
could prevent them from falling into severe problem debt if they find 
themselves unable to meet bills. According to StepChange, only 41% of renters 
have at last £1,000 in savings compared with 76.2% of homeowners.

What to do if you’re struggling

■ Take steps to slash the sum. Check any benefits or grants you are entitled 
to using variousonline calculators 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?client=safari&rls=en&q=www.entitledto.co.uk+and+www.turn2us.org.uk&ie=UTF-8&oe=UTF-8&gfe_rd=cr&ei=HjH9VuD_N9GDbPnVutgE>
. Citizens Advice can also help you check you’re getting everything you’re 
entitled to. Housing benefit is used to help pay rent if you are on a low 
income, but a freeze taking effect this month is expected to see hundreds of 
thousands of low-income renters face shortfalls. “This will make it very 
difficult for many renters to plug the gap,” says Craw.


■ There are some rules around how much rent you pay. A tenancy agreement or 
contract is usually for a fixed term of six or 12 months – your landlord cannot 
usually raise rents during this period. However, if this term has ended and you 
haven’t signed a new agreement you will be on a “periodic tenancy”. This gives 
little protection from rent rises or eviction.

■ Try negotiating with your landlord if you are worried. You might be able to 
include terms in your contract agreeing not to raise rents over the period of 
your tenancy.

■ Similarly, speak to your landlord and explain you can’t afford next month’s 
rent. Ask to pay over a period of time of, say, a few months. If this is 
refused contact a charity such as Shelter for advice, or contact a debt 
counselling service. You may be able to appeal toa tribunal for rent disputes 
<http://england.shelter.org.uk/get_advice/tribunals/rent_asssessment_committeees>
 if you think the rent is too high.

■ If you are struggling with outgoings, some simple budgeting may help. 
MoneySavingExpert.com <http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/banking/Budget-planning>
 offers a free tool designed to help you stop spending more than you earn.

■ Use other methods to reduce bills. You may be eligible for help with your 
energy bills, which are among the biggest outgoings.

As a first step contact your supplier to see if it can help. Elsewhere, the 
home heat helpline <http://www.homeheathelpline.org.uk> is a free, confidential 
service to assist and can offer information on rebates. Call 0800 33 66 99 or 
get in touch via its web chat service.

■ You could switch suppliers to bring down the cost of various utility bills, 
including home phone, broadband and energy. Use a free service such as 
which.co.uk/switch or www.uSwitch.com.

■ If you are struggling, avoid credit card debt, on which interest rates 
frequently exceed 20%. If you are already saddled with this, one possibility is 
to get an interest-free credit card, which allows you to pay nothing on your 
debt for a set period. You will pay a balance transfer fee, usually a set 
percentage of the debt transferred. Find details of such cards atMoneyfacts 
<http://moneyfacts.co.uk>.

‘I’m paying off about £12,000 of debts’
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fgeneration-rent-driven-into-debt-overdrafts-loans-arrears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc5d7862163f1d2638a260395dd231347ca86414%2F0_403_2940_1764%2F2940.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Struggling%20generation%20rent%20is%20being%20driven%20into%20debt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fgeneration-rent-driven-into-debt-overdrafts-loans-arrears%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Struggling%20generation%20rent%20is%20being%20driven%20into%20debt&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fapr%2F04%2Fgeneration-rent-driven-into-debt-overdrafts-loans-arrears%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdc5d7862163f1d2638a260395dd231347ca86414%2F0_403_2940_1764%2F2940.jpg>
 Domonique Abruzzo worries how she will manage if rents keep rising. 
Photograph: Stephen Shepherd for the Observer 
I’m scared to move even, though I’ll have to one day – it’ll only mean another 
rent rise
Domonique Abruzzo 
Domonique Abruzzo, 27, endlessly worries about not being able to afford her 
rent. She earns about £17,700 a year as a claims assessor for a health insurer. 
Without a significant rise in her salary over coming years, she wonders how she 
will make ends meet if rents keep rising.

At present, she rents a room in a two-bed house in Bradley Stoke, Bristol. “I 
set aside about £600 a month to cover the rent and bills,” she says. “But I’ve 
also got student loans, a personal loan and credit card debts built up over the 
years of meeting living costs to pay for – there just isn’t enough spare cash.”

She says rental increases have come “in waves” since she started renting, aged 
18. “The last flat I lived in a few years ago was a one-bed and that was £550 
which was loads on my salary, but today you’re looking at £650 for a room in a 
shared house in Bristol. I’m lucky as we’ve managed to negotiate with the 
landlord to fix our rent until we move out, but I will be hit by future rises.”

She can’t save towards buying her own property. “I’m paying off about £12,000 
worth of debts built up during my time renting, and one month I couldn’t pay. 
Luckily as I’m a good tenant I was able to split the rent across two months.” 
Anxious about her situation, she contacted StepChange for advice on how to 
manage her money.

She adds: “I’m scared to move even, though I’ll have to one day – it’ll only 
mean another rent rise. I can’t relocate to a much cheaper part of the country 
as my job isn’t there, so I’m stuck, and worry about sinking further into debt.”
 