
The current University and College Union (UCU) strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/25/uk-university-lecturers-strike-over-pay>
 means that thousands people in various roles in higher and further education 
will join the picket line or simply won’t turn up for work today. This is 
likely to affect you, the ordinary students, as your tutors will be 
unavailable, your queries will remain unanswered and your essays unmarked.

Working as a casual? Zip your lip and do as you're told
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/22/working-as-a-casual-zip-your-lip-and-do-as-youre-told>
What is wrong with these people, you may ask. Why should you have to suffer 
the consequences of this strike? After all, lecturers have nice, well-paying 
jobs. They can spend their summers doing nothing. And they don’t have to deal 
with screaming school kids either. What more do they want?

Well, the union highlights a variety of issues, from the pay gap between 
employees to the alarming rise in casual teaching contracts. These issues are 
well-documented and backed up by statistics, but you may not be moved by 
figures about employment contracts, gender inequality, workload problems, 
management pressure, stress levels and diversity issues. So let me give you a 
first-hand account of life as a lecturer today.

Let’s start with a familiar situation. You have submitted your work, and, 
understandably, you want the marker to devote their utmost attention to it. 
Believe me, we are on the same page here: this is exactly what I want to do. 
Yet, I can’t concentrate on your essay properly. I keep thinking about my 
fixed-term contract which ends in the next few weeks. I am thinking about what 
else I could sell on eBay to be able to pay the rent.

Universities save money by not employing lecturers during the summer months. 
According todata from the UCU <https://www.ucu.org.uk/stampout>, 46% of 
universities use these casual contracts.

Let’s imagine that I get lucky, and am offered a couple of summer jobs 
teaching elsewhere or marking school essays. Let’s say the jobs overlap. Now I 
have a lot of work and little time for sleep. I have to pack my things, move to 
a different city, only to be uprooted and move again in September when a 
university wants want to employ me as a lecturer again. This means moving house 
twice within three months, with no holiday, two jobs, no time to prepare 
lectures for September and no research.

Want to improve teaching in universities? Value those who teach
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jan/11/want-to-improve-teaching-in-universities-value-those-who-teach>
And what does this mean for you, the students? In September you will listen to 
lectures that are hastily put together and delivered by people who are on the 
brink of exhaustion. So much for the quality of teaching.

Now let’s talk about research. Your university prospectus tells you that 
you’ve joined an institution that pays particular attention to research. It 
encourages staff to integrate research into their teaching. It is delighted to 
announce a strong performance in the latest Research Assessment Framework (Ref).

It sounds inspirational, but my – your lecturer’s – reality looks like this: 
this summer, instead of completing my contracted academic monographs and 
articles, and working towards an even stronger Ref contribution, I will be 
teaching English at another university. There won’t be a second left for 
writing after all the preparation and 21 hours of class contact per week.

Still not convinced? Let’s have a look at another familiar situation. Have you 
ever wondered why your seminar tutor is unavailable when you have a query or 
why she or he does not have an office or contact hours? Chances are that your 
tutor is on a zero-hours contract. This means that this person is only paid for 
the hours he or she spends in the classroom, teaching. The time spent preparing 
the course, attending meetings and, at some institutions, marking assignments, 
is not covered by this type of contract. It does not include sick pay or a 
guaranteed number of hours.

Lecturers often spend most of the day on public transport, commuting between 
different institutions, trying to get enough scraps of employment to survive 
financially. I’ve had five of these jobs. They feel like hell on earth. You 
don’t know what you are teaching until a few days before the start of the 
course, and you are paid months afterwards. You have no rights in the 
department.

Having spent between four and 10 hours preparing lectures and seminars, and 
then replying to students’ emails, you are paid £35 (five months later). You 
have to keep reminding your employer that you are owed money. Your travel 
expenses can be sky high, and they are not reimbursed. Receiving £35 for four 
hours of preparation plus two hours of teaching minus transport costs (say, 
£10, optimistically) equals £4 per hour.

Casual contracts are ruining universities for staff and students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/feb/12/casual-contracts-are-ruining-universities-for-staff-and-students>
Finally, about gender equality. As a female lecturer from an ethnic minority, 
I am at the very bottom of the pecking order. I have not one, but two, glass 
ceilings to break. I am supposed to inspire and empower my female students, but 
here I am, a woman with a substantial publication record, all kinds of teaching 
qualifications and 13 years of experience, still begging for another fixed-term 
contract. My survival is decided by a system that cares neither about me, the 
lecturer, nor about you, my students.

You are paying a lot of money for your education, in some cases as much as 
£9,000 a year. Universities market themselves as prestigious places where you, 
the student-customer, can obtain a high-quality product: a degree delivered by 
knowledgeable and experienced experts in the field.

In reality, your lecturers are often precariously employed, underpaid, and 
sometimes even on the brink of homelessness. This strike is as much about your 
lecturers as about you, the students. I am sure that you don’t want your 
prestigious education to be delivered by people with no rights and no future.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us at highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com
 