
When I walked into a classroom to deliver my first lecture, early in 2014, I 
was terrified. Not long out of undergraduate studies myself, I felt like an 
imposter. Nervousness flooded every inch of my body and, once the lecture had 
finished, it immediately became a blur in my mind.

My students have paid £9,000 and now they think they own me
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/18/my-students-have-paid-9000-and-now-they-think-they-own-me>
It took time for my confidence to grow but I slowly began to have more faith 
in my teaching. Engaged and responsive students fuelled my enthusiasm and 
boosted my self-esteem. As I began to understand classroom dynamics, I was able 
to adapt my lesson plans in response to a particular session or group rather 
than focusing my energy on making sure I got through every slide and remembered 
every point. Standing in front of a room of students began to feel normal.

But our mandatory student feedback surveys are crushing that confidence. They 
report that I seem “inexperienced” and the block that I teach is 
“uninteresting”.

The point about inexperience is accurate, of course; some of the staff I teach 
alongside have taught for 20 years, while I have taught for 20 hours (over two 
and a half years of PhD research). What’s more, those 20 hours have been passed 
my way in bits and pieces, spread across numerous courses and year groups, 
meaning that I rarely have long enough to learn student names or get used to a 
group dynamic. In terms of content, I have little control over what I teach and 
I am often called upon at the last minute, with little time to prepare.

I have always jumped at the opportunity to gain teaching experience. I know 
that it is essential if I am to secure an academic post after my PhD – 
otherwise I am unlikely to be even considered for roles that involve teaching. 
I also relish the opportunity to share my knowledge and enthusiasm for my 
subject. I want to inspire students in the same way that my lecturers inspired 
me.

Graduate teaching assistants deserve more than £4.40 per student per week
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/mar/08/university-graduate-teaching-assistants-pay-phd-academic>
Perhaps I’m just not cut out to teach. I have often asked myself this. But 
observations and feedback on my teaching practice from academics and fellow PhD 
researchers (from both within and outside of my discipline) have always been 
positive, encouraging and constructive. So what is happening with the student 
feedback?


Perhaps the issue is not with feedback from students, but with the way 
feedback is collected and used. I often teach on courses taught by up to five 
members of staff: each tutor teaches a segment of the course, which are all 
linked by a common theme. But the student feedback surveys do not take this 
fragmented structure into account. Instead, students are asked to respond to 
broad questions about the course as a whole: “What did you enjoy?” and “What 
could be improved?”.


I don’t blame the students for the negative feedback. In my department, these 
surveys are distributed in the final 10 minutes of a 50-minute lecture. I don’t 
think this set-up is conducive to thorough contemplation: they’re already eager 
to get away and may not be inclined to put in the effort to provide useful 
feedback.


Add to this the well-reported problem of gender bias 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/womens-blog/2015/feb/13/female-academics-huge-sexist-bias-students>
 in student evaluations and the value of these surveys disintegrates further. 
Are students reacting to the fact that I am a woman, as well as a young one?


Teaching at a university means constant pressure - for about £5 an hour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/dec/04/phd-student-poor-pay-making-me-want-to-quit>
Rather than encouraging young researchers to improve their practice, negative 
feedback from students at this very early stage can have a detrimental, 
demotivating effect. But as university students become consumers, more emphasis 
is placed on consumer responses and demands. So, rather than being guided 
through the early stages of teaching, PhD students are being exposed early on 
to the bruising student-consumer market.

Institutions should question how useful this feedback can really be to their 
long-term academic success. Perhapsstudent feedback is just a waste of 
everyone’s time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jul/01/student-surveys-are-a-waste-of-everyones-time>
 – as well as putting PhD students off university teaching careers.


Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 