
Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed that the Scottish government is to explore how 
to allow Northern Irish women to obtain free access to abortions in Scotland’s 
NHS hospitals.

Scotland’s first minister, during a visit to Dublin on Tuesday, said that the 
Edinburgh devolved government would hold talks with the Scottish NHS that may 
enable women fromNorthern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> to have terminations for free 
on the health service.

Across the UK, the NHS has so far refused to pay for abortions for women from 
NorthernIreland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ireland> who travel to 
Britain. The procedure is only available in Northern Ireland’s hospitals when 
the pregnancy poses a direct threat to the mother’s life. It is illegal in all 
other cases.

Last week. Patrick Harvie MSP, the leader of the Green party in the Scottish 
parliament, said it can cost between £400 and £2,000 for a woman from Northern 
Ireland to obtain an abortion at a private clinic in Britain.

Illegal pills and trauma: how Northern Ireland's abortion ban affects women
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jan/05/abortion-in-northern-ireland-women-share-their-experiences>
The supreme court in London is considering an application from a Northern 
Irish teenager 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/02/northern-ireland-nhs-abortions-supreme-court-law>
, who, as a 15-year-old, had to go to England to terminate a pregnancy. She is 
challenging the NHS’s refusal to fund abortions for women from Northern Ireland.

Sturgeon said: “I was asked a question specifically in parliament about the 
scenario where a woman from Northern Ireland chooses to access an abortion in
Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> and whether they should be 
charged for that or not.

“Now I said that we would explore that, so we are looking in terms of the 
process and will discuss with the NHS what would happen now routinely, and 
whether there are options to change that, to make the process safer for the 
women concerned.

“My view is that if a woman is going to access an abortion then the important 
thing is that it is as safe as possible … I am not putting a timescale on it 
but I will report back to parliament in due course.”

An estimated 2,000 women a year have to raise the money to travel to private 
English clinics and hospitals from Northern Ireland to have terminations.

However, there is strong opposition from both unionist and nationalist members 
of the Northern Ireland assembly to liberalising the province’s strict 
anti-abortion laws. The Abortion Act 1967 was never extended to Northern 
Ireland andan attempt to ease the law 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/11/northern-ireland-abortion-laws-easing-voted-down>
 to include cases of fatal foetal abnormalities and pregnancy via sexual crime 
was rejected this year.

Sturgeon was speaking at an event organised by IBEC, the Irish employers’ 
organisation, on the second day of her official visit to Ireland. Later on 
Tuesday she will become the first leader of Scotland to address the Irish 
parliament when she will deliver a speech in its upper house, the Seanad.

Before her lunchtime speech, Sturgeon said she would press London to retain an 
open border between the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland and this was 
central to her discussions with the British government over the impact of 
Brexit.

“It is absolutely essential to maintain an open border … It is important to 
emphasise the unique status of Ireland, the peace process and the Good Friday 
agreement, and keeping an open border. Out of all of the things that we no 
doubt find disagreements on in terms of Brexit – what does it mean and what 
paths the UK take – I would hope that something everybody in the UK and also in 
theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> can agree on is that 
there has to be solutions found to avoid some of the implications of Brexit for 
the island of Ireland,” she said.

Ireland faces partition again. Preserving the peace is critical | Emer O’Toole
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/26/northern-ireland-republic-peace-brexit-border>
She also addressed what she called the “ill will” that exists between London 
and Brussels since the EU referendum.

Sturgeon said: “I don’t think ill will on this is inevitable but I think it 
will occur if the UK continues to display the kind of attitude towards this 
whole situation that it has been doing. But I don’t think ill will is 
inevitable and that is related to the issue of a plan. If the UK gets itself 
into a position that is clear, reasonable about what it’s trying to achieve 
then there may be scope to have a relatively harmonious process that delivers a 
compromise position.

“There is no plan at present and anyone who tries to suggest otherwise is just 
indulging in hope over reality. I think Whitehall has been discovering day by 
day just how complicated the whole situation is. Do I have confidence that 
there will be a coherent plan? As I say, the jury is out on that and it is 
still not highly clear to me how the UK gets from where it is now to having a 
clear consistent plan by the end of March.”
 