
Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> will 
call for a fundamental shift in the devolution settlement when she sets out the 
Scottish government’s proposals this week for keeping Scotland in the European 
single market.

In what appears to be a return to her harder line on Scottish independence, 
when she described a second referendum as “highly likely” immediately after the 
UK’s vote to leave the EU, Sturgeon will warn Theresa May that if her proposals 
are “brushed aside”, she will push for another vote on independence.

The SNP’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Alex Salmond, underlined this position 
in an interview on Sunday Politics Scotland, when he said that the options set 
out in the paper were: “One: keep the UK within the single marketplace; 
secondly, if that’s not possible, keepScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> within the single marketplace; and if 
that doesn’t happen and the UK is unwilling to listen to Scotland’s 
representations, then it’s very likely there will be an independence referendum 
within the next two years.”


At the heart of the paper, which will be published on Tuesday, is a 
Norway-style framework to maintain Scotland’s place within the single market if 
the rest of the UK opts for a hard Brexit.

In proposals that amount to a significant bundle of new powers for Holyrood, 
Scotland’s first minister is expected to call for the devolution of regulatory 
powers over goods, trade and business, which the Scottish government hopes 
would allow the country to remain in the single market.

Arguing that the repatriation of powers from Brussels to the UK must not 
result in a “Westminster power grab”, Sturgeon will press for devolution of 
immigration powers and employment rights in order to maintain protections for 
EU nationals and Scottish workers that are likely to be lost in the event of 
Brexit.

Although May told Sturgeon she was “willing to listen to options” after their 
initial meeting following her appointment as prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jul/15/theresa-may-nicola-sturgeon-holyrood-article-50-decision>
, the chancellor, Philip Hammond,appeared to rule out the prospect of special 
concessions for Scotland on trade or immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/01/scotland-will-not-get-special-brexit-concessions-says-philip-hammond>
 in the Brexit deal when he visited Edinburgh at the beginning of December.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20UK%20government%20lacks%20%E2%80%98coherent%20position'%20on%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Nicola%20Sturgeon%3A%20UK%20government%20lacks%20%E2%80%98coherent%20position%27%20on%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F03%2Fnicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video&media=>
Nicola Sturgeon: UK government lacks ‘coherent position’ on Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/03/nicola-sturgeon-uk-government-lacks-coherent-position-on-brexit-video>
The proposals, based on the advice of the standing council of experts set up 
by the first minister after June’s referendum, will form the basis of the 
Scottish government’s negotiations at the joint ministerial committee meetings 
for the devolved nations with Westminster over the coming months.

Writing in the Sunday Herald, Sturgeon described the paper’s publication as an 
important moment for Scotland, “but … also a hugely important moment for those 
living elsewhere on these islands, as we seek to exert a positive influence on 
the Brexit process for the whole of the UK”.

She added: “That’s why maintaining Scotland’s current position in the European 
single market will be at the heart of the proposals we publish this week. 
However, if that is not possible, then we will also be outlining ways in which 
this could be achieved for Scotland even if the rest of the UK leaves. Doing so 
will involve the devolution of new powers to Edinburgh.”

She added: “But regardless of what happens with the single market, there are 
further powers being repatriated from Brussels which should be devolved to the 
Scottish parliament. It would add insult to injury if being dragged out of the 
EU were to be accompanied by a Westminster power grab.”

Sturgeon acknowledges that implementing the Scottish government’s propsals 
will require “cooperation, imagination and flexibility”, but that she expects 
the UK government to fully engage with them “in line with its clear previous 
commitments”.

However, she goes on to caution May: “If our interests cannot be protected in 
this process, or are indeed brushed aside by the UK government, then the people 
of Scotland should have the option of considering independence. That is why we 
are consulting on legislation that would allow another independence referendum 
to take place if necessary.”

Salmond told the BBC show he was confident that Sturgeon could win a second 
independence referendum. The former first minister said: “What it depends on is 
the arguments, and in a situation where the UK government is determined to 
sever Scotland’s European links, then I think that would bring many people who 
were previously sceptical about independence on to the yes side.”

Scotland’s Brexit minister, Michael Russell, said the UK government had “an 
overriding obligation” to take the proposals seriously after 62% of the 
Scottish electorate voted to remain in the EU, adding that this was “the first 
serious attempt by any government in the UK to address the challenges thrown up 
by the Brexit vote”.

The Scottish secretary, David Mundell, said that the UK government would 
consider the proposals carefully, if the plans were “credible and backed up by 
evidence”. “I also hope they commit to working closely with us – a team UK 
approach – to get the best possible deal. That is how we will get the right 
deal for the whole of the UK – and the right deal for the UK will be the right 
deal for Scotland”.
 