
In the UK, suicide is the leading cause of death 
<https://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/a-to-z/s/suicide> among young people between 
10-34,according to Office for National Statistics figures released for 2015 
<https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/deaths/bulletins/suicidesintheunitedkingdom/2015registrations>
. Suicide leaves parents, partners and families devastated and broken, as I 
know only too well followingthe death of my own son Christopher by suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/mar/23/student-suicide-depression-debt-recession>
 in 2009. As chairman of the charityPapyrus Prevention of Young Suicide 
<https://www.papyrus-uk.org/>, I know that I am not alone in feeling that the 
way in which coroners determine death in such cases can perpetuate stigma 
around suicide.

Why the stigma of suicide hurts so much | Tim Lott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/men-stigma-suicide-michael-mansfield>
Papyrus represents and works with hundreds of families who have been touched 
by suicide. We are angry that our loved ones were allowed to die; that not 
enough was done to keep them alive. And we are angry that the current 
government has not taken this issue seriously enough.

In February 2013 I met the newly appointed chief coroner Peter Thornton QC 
<http://www.coronersociety.org.uk/chief_coroner> to express my view that it is 
fundamentally wrong to apply the criminal standard of proof, “beyond reasonable 
doubt”, when determining the cause of death in suicide, which means that many 
suicides are recorded as undetermined deaths. I was encouraged that Thornton 
was receptive to my view when he wrote to me in March 2013 saying: “I am 
supportive of the change which would reduce the standard of proof for suicide 
to the civil standard and have expressed the view to the Ministry of Justice.”

Yet, even with the support of their own chief coroner, the government has 
continued to accept the use of the criminal standard in reaching suicide 
conclusions. In fact the MoJ has steadfastly refused to change the way that 
coroners reach a suicide conclusion, despite our persistent requests. This 
leads those of us campaigning on this issue to conclude that they want to 
deliberately suppress the figures around the number of people who take their 
own life each year.

Coroners are understandably reluctant to reach a verdict of suicide. Many 
families who have lost loved ones to suicide, particularly when the deceased 
are their children, do not want to hear that they ended their own life. Yet the
stigma that exists around suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/16/men-stigma-suicide-michael-mansfield>
 is still very damaging and not helped by high-profile examples where coroners 
have concluded that the deceased died because of an accident, or where a
narrative verdict <http://www.inquest.org.uk/help/handbook/section-4-3-verdicts>
 has been returned when the evidence clearly shows that the person took their 
own life.

New analysis by Professor Colin Pritchard at Bournemouth University suggests 
that if coroners used the civil standard of proof - “on the balance of 
probabilities” - we would see a30-50% increase in recorded suicides 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/edition/news/thousands-of-suicides-hidden-to-comfort-grief-stricken-families-5fhkspfbx>
. His research validates the view held by Papyrus that the current arrangements 
mask the true number of suicides in the UK.

The stigma that exists around suicide prevents young men especially from 
seeking the help and support they need

In correspondence with the MoJ, it is clear that the department’s view is that 
using a criminal standard of proof does not necessarily criminalise suicide. 
The coroner must establish “beyond reasonable doubt” that the deceased person 
had intended to end their own life. Papyrus believes that the notion of 
“intent” is important in this context: in English criminal law, intention is 
one of the types ofmens rea, “guilty mind”, that, when accompanied by an actus 
reus, “guilty act”, constitutes a crime. It is surprising that we use a 
criminal concept and a criminal standard of proof to determine the outcome of 
an act that was decriminalised by the Suicide Act of 1961. Many still use the 
phrase “committed suicide”, which can be offensive and perpetuates a sense of 
criminality.

In a November 2014 meeting with the then justice minister Simon Hughes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/dec/18/simon-hughes-minister-justice-liberal-democrats>
, the MoJ argued that a change to the law would offend faith groups. In 
Papyrus’s view the determination of a cause of death should be about 
establishing the facts, not about appeasing any particular sector of the 
community.

The House of Commons health committee interim report on suicide prevention 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/19/mps-urge-government-uk-suicide-rates>
 was published just a few weeks ago. The committee supports our objective to 
see a change to the way in which a suicide conclusion is reached. It also 
supports many of our key campaign areas: more timely support for young people; 
clearer media guidance around the reporting of suicide; support for those who 
have been touched by suicide; training for GPs and others. It will be 
interesting to see how the government responds to this report.

The stigma that exists around suicide prevents young men especially from 
seeking the help and support they need. But many suicides are preventable and 
removing stigma around suicide is key in reducing the number of people who take 
their own life. Ourhelpline <https://www.papyrus-uk.org/> receives thousands of 
calls each month from young people who are distressed, along with parents and 
carers who have no idea how to deal with a suicidal child.

It’s time we took suicide seriously. By being honest about the number of 
people who end their own life, we will be able to keep far more of our young 
people alive.

• For professional advice on suicide prevention in young people, if you are 
concerned about someone who may be suicidal or are at risk yourself, contact 
Papyrus on 0800 068 4141 or text 07786 209 697 or email pat@papyrus-uk.org . In 
the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National 
Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support 
service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries canbe found here 
<http://www.suicide.org/international-suicide-hotlines.html>
 