
Supermarket shoppers can pick up everything they need for Christmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> dinner for eight people 
for less than £20 this year, a survey has found.

The cost of buying 11 Christmas dinner essentials – including a turkey, plum 
pudding, fresh vegetables and cranberry sauce – comes out at £19.82, or £2.48 a 
head, after shopping around for the best prices at Aldi, Lidl, Asda, Morrisons 
and Iceland, Good Housekeeping magazine found in its annualfestive shopping 
basket cost survey 
<http://goodhousekeeping.co.uk/consumer-advice/news-views/go-to-aldi-for-the-best-value-christmas-dinner>
.

Good Housekeeping tracked the price of the 11 products across 10 major 
supermarket chains and found prices were the cheapest since it began its survey 
eight years ago. The overall cost has dropped 10.8% since 2009, when the price 
for Christmas dinner was £2.78 a head.

The reduced cost of groceries at Aldi and Lidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> was the main contributor to the 
fall in the overall price of the Christmas dinner shopping basket compared to 
2015, according to Good Housekeeping.

Food prices generally have been driven down in recent years as the big four 
supermarkets – Tesco, Asda, Sainbury’s andMorrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> – have reacted to the rise of 
German discounters Aldi and Lidl with aggressive price cutting.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsupermarket-shoppers-christmas-dinner-cost-survey-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b479287f801a5eac4d310d3519ea258a4725d6%2F0_1153_4230_2846%2F4230.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Supermarket%20shoppers%20can%20get%20their%20Christmas%20dinner%20for%20%C2%A320%20%E2%80%93%20survey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsupermarket-shoppers-christmas-dinner-cost-survey-uk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Supermarket%20shoppers%20can%20get%20their%20Christmas%20dinner%20for%20%C2%A320%20%E2%80%93%20survey&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fsupermarket-shoppers-christmas-dinner-cost-survey-uk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa5b479287f801a5eac4d310d3519ea258a4725d6%2F0_1153_4230_2846%2F4230.jpg>
 A typical Christmas dinner. Photograph: Dan Matthews for Weekend magazine 
However, supermarkets have warned that prices are likely to rise next year as 
thefalling value of the pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/19/the-post-brexit-pound-how-sterlings-fall-affects-the-uk-economy>
 against the dollar and euro following the vote to leave the EU pushes up the 
price of imported products and ingredients.

Of the 11 foods tracked by Good Housekeeping to provide a Christmas meal with 
all the trimmings, six have gone down in price, including turkey, and three 
have stayed the same as last year. Only the prices of Christmas pudding and 
mince pies have increased, as the price of imported raisins, butter, flour and 
sugar has jumped since 2015, due to a combination of factors including the 
collapse of the pound and weaker supplies.


Aldi  <https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi>was the cheapest supermarket 
for those wanting a one-stop shop, where the ingredients for Christmas dinner 
for eight cost just £22.03. Aldi’s basket is 11% cheaper than last year’s 
winner, Iceland, which this year falls to third place (£24.81), behindLidl 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/lidl> in second place (£24.57). The most 
expensive basket was fromMarks & Spencer  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/marksspencer>(£49.40) followed by Waitrose
 <https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose> (£40.02).


“Supermarket shoppers will be relieved to see Christmas essentials are still 
so affordable,” said Caroline Bloor, the consumer director of Good 
Housekeeping. “While five of the supermarkets have cheaper baskets this year, 
it’s mainly thanks to the big decrease in the cost of these groceries atAldi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/aldi> and Lidl that the overall basket is 
significantly cheaper. So think carefully where you shop or you could end up 
paying twice as much.”

Tony Baines, the joint managing director of corporate buying at Aldi, said: 
“At Aldi, our customers get the same quality as M&S andWaitrose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/waitrose>, but at prices significantly 
cheaper than Iceland. We know that this is more important than ever at 
Christmas time.”


Budapest's Christmas markets: winter made cosy and cool
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2016/nov/27/budapest-hungary-christmas-markets-cakes-cocktails-hot-springs>
This year’s Christmas Dinner Index, from analysts Mintec 
<https://www.mintecglobal.com/>, which compares the cost of a slightly 
different basket of products including turkey, vegetables and pork, found that 
the price of the festive meal rose by 1% year-on-year and is still lower than 
both 2013 and 2014.

Potato prices rose 52% in the year to November, it said, as bad weather hit 
yields and delayed planting and harvesting, while similar conditions 
contributed to a 65% rise in onion prices. Parsnips were up 14%, but carrot 
prices were down year-on-year thanks to lower demand in Europe, where domestic 
supplies were higher.

Strong demand in China and worries about lower production in the UK sent pork 
prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/18/bringing-home-the-bacon-price-of-pork-hits-two-year-high>
 higher by 14% year-on-year. But that was offset by a 2% drop in turkey prices, 
which accounts for a larger proportion of the meal and weighs more heavily on 
the index.

But Mintec warned shoppers that there could be further price rises ahead. “It 
is worth noting that prices are likely to rise in December as demand continues 
to increase,” it said. “So stocking up on turkey and pork early is probably the 
best course of action.”

Good Housekeeping’s £2.48 a head Christmas dinner: the 11 ingredients

 * Turkey: Asda – £8 (2.8-4kg)

 * Potatoes: Aldi – 29p (2kg)

 * Stuffing mix: Asda and Morrisons – 30p (2 x 85g)

 * Brussels sprouts: Aldi – 58p (2 x 500g)

 * Carrots: Aldi – 29p (1kg)

 * Parsnips: Aldi – 58p (2 x 600g)

 * Cranberry sauce: Lidl and Asda – 55p (200g)

 * Christmas pudding: Aldi and Lidl – £3.49 (907g)

 * Brandy butter: Aldi and Lidl – £1.25 (200g)

 * Mince pies: Lidl – £1.49 (12 pack)

 * Christmas cake: Iceland – £3 (2 x 400g)

 * Total – £19.82 
Cost of a one-stop Christmas shop

 * Aldi – £22.03

 * Lidl – £24.57

 * Iceland – £24.81

 * Tesco – £28.08

 * Asda – £29.68

 * Morrisons – £31.12

 * Co-op – £31.26

 * Sainsbury’s – £35.40

 * Waitrose – £40.02

 * M&S – £49.40
 