
The supreme court will deliver its eagerly awaited judgment next Tuesday on 
whether ministers or parliament have the legal authority to trigger Brexit.

The court’s president, Lord Neuberger, will read out a brief summary of the 
decision at 9.30am on 24 January. Lawyers for the main parties will have 
received advance notice shortly beforehand.

The ruling by the 11 justices will resolve whether the government, through its 
inherited use of royal prerogative powers, can formally initiate article 50 of 
the treaty onEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> (TEU) 
without the explicit approval of MPs and peers.

Article 50 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> begins the 
process of the UK’s withdrawal from the EU. If a majority of justices decide, 
as is widely expected, that parliamentary support is required, then the 
judgment is expected to specify that a legislative act is needed.

Devolved assemblies in Edinburgh, Cardiff and Belfast will also read the 
judgment closely to see whether it grants them any procedural or consultative 
role in the process of triggering Brexit. The judgment will test the 
significance of theSewel convention 
<http://www.gov.scot/About/Government/Sewel/KeyFacts>, which says that if 
Westminster is introducing legislation on issues that have been devolved it 
“normally” has to seek the consent of the devolved parliaments.

The panel of 11 justices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/05/senior-judges-prepare-to-hear-brexit-supreme-court-appeal>
 is the largest ever assembled for a single case since the law lords were 
created in 1876. Such judicial mass mobilisation is recognition of the 
constitutional significance and political sensitivity of the hearing. The court 
normally sits in panels of five; an odd number is always required to ensure 
there cannot be a tie.


Article 50 of the TEU states that any member state may leave “in accordance 
with its own constitutional requirements”, an undefined term that has allowed 
the two sides to pursue rival interpretations. The case has opened deep rifts 
in the consensus over the UK’s unwritten constitution.

The case was conducted on the basis that article 50, and therefore Brexit, 
cannot be reversed once begun.A separate legal challenge is due to take place 
in Dublin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/further-brexit-court-cases-to-be-launched-in-dublin-and-london>
 this spring to test its revocability. Another is due to be heard in London to 
establish whether the UK automatically quits the single market or European 
Economic Area when it leaves the EU.

The lead claimant in the supreme court case is the investment manager Gina 
Miller <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/gina-miller>. Miller, who says she 
has received death threats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/gina-miller-the-woman-behind-the-article-50-legal-challenge>
, has said her case is about asserting parliamentary sovereignty and not an 
attempt to reverse Brexit.


The reading of the summary by Neuberger is expected to last only five minutes. 
Lead counsel from the main parties will be given sight of the judgment an hour 
and a half in advance of its delivery.


Draft versions of judgments are often circulated to parties involved in a case 
several days beforehand. Government sourceshave already signalled 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/government-brexit-supreme-court-theresa-may-article-50>
 that they expect to lose the main point of their appeal and have begun 
drafting versions of a bill to put before parliament approving Brexit.

Fair Deal for Expats is one of the claimants in the case. Its chairman, John 
Shaw, said: “Fair Deal for Expats eagerly awaits the judgment of the supreme 
court. [Our] members have been involved in this case from the outset, standing 
up for the 2 million British people who live in other EU countries. Many of 
them were not allowed to vote in the referendum, yet they count among those 
most profoundly affected.

“It’s of the utmost importance to those people that a proper debate takes 
place in parliament about their future and they’re not sidelined in a rush to 
give notice under article 50, without knowing what the future holds for them. 
We hope that the government ensures that it does everything it can to protect 
British citizens in the EU and their families, whatever the outcome of the 
case.”
 