
Lending to consumers has reached its highest level since before the banking 
crisis according to figures from theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor>, which will reveal 
on Tuesday if it is imposing restrictions on banks to cool down overheating 
parts of the economy.

According to the Bank 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/statistics/Pages/mc/2015/oct.aspx>, consumer 
lending increased at an annualised rate of 8.2% in October, the highest level 
since February 2006. A further category of loans and advances, which includes 
lending to buy new cars, jumped by 9.6%, the highest for 10 years.

The continued surge in spending by consumers on their credit cards, or using 
money from ultra-cheap personal loans, has raised concerns among debt 
charities. It follows remarks last week by the Bank’s chief executive, Andy 
Haldane, that consumer credit was expanding at a “rate of knots”.

Peter Tutton, head of policy at the debt charity StepChange 
<http://www.stepchange.org/Contactus.aspx>, said: ““It is vital that 
responsible lending standards do not relax at a time when many households are 
still financially vulnerable, otherwise we risk repeating the mistakes that led 
to the large and unsustainable credit balances we saw in the run-up to the 
financial crisis. The consequences of these mistakes continue to cause problems 
today and must not be allowed to happen again.”

Haldane told the Treasury select committee last week that the Bank’s financial 
policy committee, set up to avoid booms and busts, would want to look at 
consumer credit “fairly carefully”.

The verdict will be announced on Tuesday when the Bank will reveal if it 
intends to use powers for the first time to force banks to bolster their 
capital positions. These so-called countercyclical buffers require banks to 
build up more capital during a benign economic environment, although the Bank 
could impose measures to cover only troublesome hotspots such as mortgages or 
commercial property.

The Bank will also announce the outcome of annual health checks on the biggest 
lenders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/mar/30/bank-of-england-stress-tests-to-include-fears-of-global-crash>
 to determine if they are strong enough to withstand the repercussions of a 
sharp slowdown in China and prolonged deflation in the UK.

Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist of Pantheon Macroeconomics, said the Bank 
would prefer to target specific areas rather than impose wide capital 
increases. But he doubted that such measures would be imposed this week. 
“Consumer credit has picked up, but the ratio of unsecured credit to household 
incomes is very low,” he said.

The growth in consumer lending has been propelled by lower interest rates, 
helped by predictions that the Bank of England will not raise interest rates 
until well into 2016.

But there has also been fierce competition among credit card providers. For 
instance, consumers on “best buy” deals can obtain 0% financing for up to 37 
months and the Bank’s data showed that consumers had outstanding balances of 
£62.8bn on their credit cards in November, up £100m on the month before.

While there are signs that mortgage lending is picking up, the number of 
mortgages granted remains at only about half the levels reached before the 
start of the financial crisis in 2007.


Last month lenders issued 121,438 mortgages worth £19.7bn, down slightly on 
the month before. But the number of loans for buying a home rather than 
remortgaging edged ahead to 69,630 from 69,102 the month before.


At the peak of mortgage market activity in 2006-07, lenders were granting 
about £30bn a month in loans, with house purchasing running at about 
120,000-130,000 a month compared with about 70,000 currently.

Separate data from the National Association of Estate Agents (NAEA) revealed 
that more properties are becoming available to buy, but the number of house 
hunters is dropping.

The number of properties available to buy per branch increased by 16% from 37 
in September to 43 in October. But demand for property dropped slightly from an 
average of 342 house-hunters per branch in September, to 336 in October.

The NAEA’s managing director, Mark Hayward, said: “Although it is great to see 
supply growing and demand falling – albeit by just 2%, we cannot rest in the 
knowledge that the housing market is on the ‘road to recovery’. What we’re 
seeing is a seasonal uplift.

“Those selling their homes are keen to push through sales before Christmas, 
hence the uplift in properties entering the market, but with the average sale 
taking between nine and 12 weeks, it’s unlikely transactions will be pushed 
through before Christmas now. Buyers are holding off until January to kick off 
the new year with a house hunt.”
 