
The plight of the orangutan and the south-east Asian forests it inhabits has 
kept the palm oil industry on the defensive for decades. As the industry now 
expands at breakneck pace intoAfrica <https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa>
, conservationists fear slaughtered gorillas, chimpanzees and bonobos could 
become its new symbol unless significant changes are made.

This is the conclusion of a recent report 
<http://www.un-grasp.org/videos-resources/publications/> produced by the Great 
Apes Survival Partnership at the United Nations Environment Programme. 
According to the report’s authors, conservationists and industry must work 
together to protect Africa’s great apes and avoid the destruction caused by the 
palm oil industry in Malaysia and Indonesia.

“Lessons learned from south-east Asia showed that fighting oil palm 
development doesn’t really work,” says Marc Ancrenaz, an orangutan expert with 
the NGO Hutan who co-authored thePalm Oil Paradox 
<http://www.un-grasp.org/videos-resources/publications/> report. “Oil palm 
development is going to stay and to expand. Rather than ignoring the 
consequences [...], conservationists should better engage with this industry to 
try to influence their practices on the ground.”

The stakes are high. The bonobo, for example, is only found in one country, 
the Democratic Republic of the Congo, and 99% of its range (the area where 
biologists know or expect a species to live) is suitable for oil palm 
production.

No-go zones

The report’s authors, including a number of the world’s top primatologists, 
recommend that palm oil companies must start by implementing “no-go zones” to 
ensure forests housing so-called “priority populations” of gorillas, chimps or 
bonobos remain untouched.

Liberia: the growth of a new palm oil frontier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/20/liberia-africa-palm-oil-frontier-communities-land-gvl-plantations-sinoe-county>
Serge Wich, a professor at Liverpool John Moores University and report 
co-author, says prioritising populations may mean losing some small, fragmented 
populations that, he says, have almost no chance of long term survival, but it 
would ensure the survival of the bulk of Africa’s great apes, all of which are 
either listed as critically endangered or endangered.

Employing strict no-go zones for apes would prevent many palm companies from 
fully developing their concessions. Currently, limited resources mean 
governments often grant large concessions with little information on wildlife 
populations, forest structure or local communities. Companies therefore often 
have to enforce their own sustainability standards when it comes to clearing 
land.

To date, however, ape populations are rarely taken into account either by 
governments or companies. By working with conservationists, companies can help 
fund on-the-ground surveys to establish no-go zones for apes and other wildlife.

The establishment of new oil palm plantations doesn’t just lead to habitat 
loss for apes. An increasingly fragmented and accessible forest means a 
potential increase in poaching for bushmeat or revenge killing of apes that 
feed on nearby crops after their forest food sources are destroyed.

To deal with this, the report’s authors recommend companies incorporate best 
management practices, such as gaining certification through the Roundtable on 
Sustainable Palm Oil, installing a no-kill policy for apes and other wildlife, 
and creatingwildlife corridors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/sep/29/palm-oil-wildlife-forests-ecological-study-borneo-malaysia>
 for animals to move through and around plantations.

In addition, the scientists say all palm oil companies must employ full-time 
environmental management teams and invest in monitoring of great apes and other 
wildlife near the concession to make sure populations are thriving.

Faltering progress

Yet many current projects on the continent do not instil confidence that the 
industry has learned any lessons from south-east Asia. A hugely controversial 
plantation in Cameroon, formerly run by Herakles Farms but now by SG 
Sustainable Oils Cameroon, has beencriticised 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2013/08/endangered-chimps-and-forest-elephants-found-in-rainforest-to-be-logged-for-palm-oil/>
 for the location of its concession in chimpanzee territory. Meanwhile a 
massive oil palm plantation in the Republic of the Congo operated by Atama has 
beenfaulted 
<https://news.mongabay.com/2016/02/prospective-congo-palm-oil-plantation-wrecking-prime-great-ape-habitat/>
 for logging gorilla habitat.

“Certainly many of the same mistakes are being made,” says Wich. But he points 
toOlam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/07/palm-oil-africa-deforestation-climate-change-land-rights-private-sector-liberia-cameroon>
, an agribusiness with palm oil operations in Gabon, as an example of a firm 
that “seems to be moving in the right direction”. 

Olam has set aside more than 50% of its flagship concession as high 
conservation value forest, including protecting both chimpanzee and gorilla 
populations on site. In conducting great ape surveys, Olam found not only 
chimpanzees and gorillas in the remote parts of its concession but also ample 
evidence of a thriving bushmeat trade. It then worked with partners such as 
Gabon’s national park system and WWF.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fafrica-great-apes-palm-oil-industry-support-unep-forests-gorillas-chimpanzees-bonobos-olam-wwf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1cd62385d623e2d76ef3cbb0fd9cf1b9008316%2F0_205_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Survival%20of%20Africa's%20great%20apes%20requires%20palm%20industry%20support%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fafrica-great-apes-palm-oil-industry-support-unep-forests-gorillas-chimpanzees-bonobos-olam-wwf%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Survival%20of%20Africa%27s%20great%20apes%20requires%20palm%20industry%20support%2C%20says%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F21%2Fafrica-great-apes-palm-oil-industry-support-unep-forests-gorillas-chimpanzees-bonobos-olam-wwf%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8b1cd62385d623e2d76ef3cbb0fd9cf1b9008316%2F0_205_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A chimp caught on camera in Olam’s concession area. The company plans to 
conduct full wildlife surveys every few years, in the meantime keeping track of 
wildlife through camera trapping. Photograph: Olam 
“I think they set a good example and now it is time for others to follow,” 
says Wich, though he adds that new revelations prove even Olam has a lot of 
work to do. Olam has recently beencriticised 
<http://www.mightyearth.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/12/Palm-Oil-Black-Box-PrintApproval4.pdf>
 (pdf) for allegedly clearing 20,000 hectares of forests since 2012. Olam does
not dispute 
<http://olamgroup.com/news/olam-internationals-response-to-mighty-earth-and-brainforest-report/#sthash.HlWzyDKW.dpbs>
 it has cut down forests, even those used by great apes.

Olam does not have a “no deforestation” policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jan/26/worlds-largest-palm-oil-trader-criticised-progress-deforestation-wilmar>
. It argues this is because of the unique situation of working in Gabon; the 
central African country is one of the most heavily forested nations on the 
planet and has high unemployment and little agriculture investment, meaning 
much of the food is imported.

“Gabon has a right and an essential need to develop its agriculture sector to 
diversify its economy, improve food security to feed its people and create new 
livelihood opportunities, while also protecting its natural forests,” said 
Sunny Verghese, CEO of Olam, in a statement responding to the report.

The example of Olam – lauded on one hand, criticised on the other – proves the 
complexity of palm oil in Africa and its perils. But if great apes are to 
survive the palm oil boom, companies and conservationists must find common 
ground.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>. 
 