
In the darkness of Calais, as the British government looks on, refugee 
children huddle in blankets on the ground 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/theresa-may-policies-calais-rough-sleeping-children-camp-refugees-tories>
. More than1,000 remain in shipping containers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/31/1000-children-left-in-calais-refugee-camp-say-charities>
,stranded in the demolished camp 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/28/calais-france-rebukes-britain-over-abandoned-refugee-children>
 that billows with smoke. At night, volunteers had to watch over the children as
people traffickers and men who exploit girls for sex stalked the site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/27/calais-camp-police-detain-young-people-amid-chaotic-scenes?CMP=share_btn_tw>
.

But are they genuine? That’s the real issue. As Conservative MP David Davies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/child-refugees-dental-tests-verify-age-david-davies>
 put it: “I don’t want to vilify anyone, and I would like to see genuine 
children being brought in, but I think we have got a right to raise this 
question.” We are now firmly in the politics of “the genuine”: the political 
and media narrative that says some people who ask for help are real and others 
– the vast majority – are fakes. This implication is not confined to one 
instance, but rather is increasingly how Britain responds to any group in need: 
from foreign children begging for refuge to disabled people struggling without 
benefits.

It showed itself back when the Conservatives began to roll out sweeping 
disability cuts 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/9263502/Iain-Duncan-Smith-Im-not-scared-to-light-the-fuse-on-disability-reform.html>
 in 2012 as government ministers and the rightwing press combined faux concern 
for the “vulnerable” with the claim the welfare bill was riddled with fraud and 
abuse. TheDaily Mail reported in June 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3585783/The-car-scam-drive-crackers-Lottery-grandmother-given-20-000-car-reveal-thousands-driving-brand-new-vehicles-paid-pretending-disabled.html>
 how “thousands are driving off in vehicles paid for by YOU”, peddling the myth 
that huge numbers are faking disability in order to milk a car from the state – 
while declaring the scheme is meant for “genuine” disabled people.

The genuine v fakes narrative can stigmatise whole groups of individuals under 
the guise of trying to help them

How we tell the genuine from the fakes varies: sometimes it’s proposed dental 
exams or x-rays to check children’s bone density 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/19/refugees-teeth-britain-children-calais-europe>
, other times it’s medical tick-box assessments to test how far the disabled 
can walk. But when suspicion is the default setting, the goalposts are ever 
shifting. A teenager can meet the requirements necessary to be approved for 
refugee status by the British authorities, but one look at a photo and the Sun 
can declare he’s “35 if he’s a day”. A disabled person can be judged as 
eligible for social security for life only to be retested and have it removed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/22/we-cant-help-being-disabled-reassessment-hysteria-scroungers-cheating-system>
.

At its most manipulative, the genuine v fakes narrative can be deployed to 
stigmatise whole groups of individuals under the guise of trying to help them. 
Critics can not only introduce invasive,harmful fit-for-work testing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/16/fit-for-work-tests-serious-toll-mental-health-work-capability>
 regimes out of apparent necessity but promote obscenely callous acts – be it 
leaving lone children to sleep outside or sanctioning disabled people’s 
benefits – with the reassurance that they aren’t, of course, talking about the 
genuine. On the contrary, it’s all been done to ensure support goes to those 
who truly need it.

In reality, this line of thinking not only suggests that the people who are 
not genuine – say, 19-year-old refugees – don’t deserve help, it also creates a 
excuse to not help anyone at all. “I’d support a benefit system for real 
disabled people but all the scroungers make it impossible,” goes the argument. 
Or “I’d obviously help a refugee child, but how can we if we can’t tell who’s 
actually a child?”

Kindertransport hero’s daughter urges UK to welcome Calais refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/29/kindertransport-heros-daughter-urges-uk-to-welcome-calais-refugees>
What it is doing fundamentally is setting us against each other, introducing a 
poisonous paranoia into daily discourse that says we should look with suspicion 
at anyone who asks for help. It starts to eradicate empathy, as it is based on 
the premise that compassion – here, a limited good – will be saved for the few 
real people in need, and society has no reason or duty to care about the rest.

The consequence is that this country can now sit by comfortably as fellow 
human beings suffer. Crying refugee children, paraplegics, cancer patients. The 
first question becomes not “how can I help?” but “are they genuine?”. It is not 
a coincidence that the people who are being abandoned happen to be the most 
vulnerable: those who in any other circumstance a so-called civilised society 
would be the first to give help to. But rather, it’s a symptom of how rotten 
things have become. In the politics of the genuine, ultimately, no one is 
worthy of help.
 