
The history of the fossil fuel industry can feel like it is told in 
complicated deals the public isn’t meant to understand. This is what is 
happening in Sweden. The government-owned energy company, Vattenfall, is 
demanding the sale of its coal mines and power plants based in Germany to a 
Czech company, EPH. The deal includes some of Germany’s largest coal mines – 
and three of the top 10 most polluting coal plants inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. They are going to a deeply 
unattractive buyer – EPH, a company hell-bent on burning as much coal as 
possible.

In the next couple of weeks, Swedish prime minister, Stefan Löfven, is facing 
a stark choice. On one hand, he could approve the sale of the most 
climate-destroying assets in Europe, breaking his own election promises in the 
process. Or, he could promote a transition to keep coal in the ground – and 
support a liveable climate – in an unprecedented decision by a government to 
keep fossil fuels in the ground.Coal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/coal> is the most polluting of all 
fossil fuels, and lignite or ‘brown coal’ is the most polluting type of coal 
and the greatest threat to EU climate goals.

The deal has implications much wider than just European policy. If it goes 
ahead, it will give an excuse for countries like Australia and Japan to 
continue burning coal, multiplying the negative climate impact – and shredding 
Sweden’s ‘clean’ image in the process.

By selling off these filthy coal assets, they will no longer be on Sweden’s 
books but the mines will be expanded and the brown coal will be burnt by 
someone else, imperilling humanity. If you applied this approach to slavery, a 
trading company would sell their slaves to amore brutal owner 
<https://sandbag.org.uk/site_media/pdfs/reports/EPH-Vattenfall.pdf> to clear 
their conscience while undermining abolition.

For the last four years, EPH has been buying up 
<http://www.energypost.eu/ephs-takeover-vattenfalls-lignite-assets-ring-alarm-bells-berlin-stockholm/>
 dirty coal mines and plants across Europe. It now has one billion tonnes of 
coal and 5GW of coal power plants.

The company has proved to be faceless, brandless, shareholders-less, 
unaccountable – and already responsible for 6% of European power sector C02 
emissions. EPH exploits the loopholes in the EU climate and energy package, 
which allows it to keep burning fossil fuels despite European agreements to 
limit emissions from coal power stations.

Löfven’s sale would put four power plants in EPH’s hands as well as five open 
cast mines.

 EPH says it will expand the mines – something, which all Swedish parties 
promised that they wouldn’t allow during the elections. The whole deal could 
add abillion tons <http://gofossilfree.org/sweden/> of carbon dioxide 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/1749979868582271/> to the atmosphere. This is 
equivalent to 24 years of emissions from Sweden.

Löfven is hoping the world isn’t paying attention to this deal. But we are. 
Just last month, 4,000 people shut down Vattenfall’s coal operations in Ende 
Gelände – the world’slargest ever 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/27/europes-biggest-polluter-protesters-lignite-mine-germany-direct-action>
 act of civil disobedience against fossil-fuel burning.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fsweden-should-keep-coal-in-the-ground-not-sell-it-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f4144e494711572f89088b5f2a3800db137e17%2F0_0_2600_1722%2F2600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sweden%20should%20keep%20coal%20in%20the%20ground%2C%20not%20sell%20it%20off%20%7C%20May%20Boeve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fsweden-should-keep-coal-in-the-ground-not-sell-it-off%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sweden%20should%20keep%20coal%20in%20the%20ground%2C%20not%20sell%20it%20off%20%7C%20May%20Boeve&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fjun%2F02%2Fsweden-should-keep-coal-in-the-ground-not-sell-it-off%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F78f4144e494711572f89088b5f2a3800db137e17%2F0_0_2600_1722%2F2600.jpg>
 Hundreds activists block the Vattenfall coal-loading station during protests 
at the company’s open-cast mine in Welzow, Brandenburg, Germany. Photograph: 
Tim Wagner/350.org 
The Vattenfall sale brings to mind the fight to stop the Keystone XL pipeline 
– a point at which we draw a line in the sand and say no to fossil fuels. This 
only happened after an unprecedented wave of actions and President Obama saw 
the writing on the wall. Since then, he has been bold in standing up to the 
coal and tar sands industry.

A large majority of Swedes oppose the sale of brown coal. The positive global 
impact of transitioning the brown coal regions away from a business that 
threatens human survival and towards new cleaner economies cannot be 
underestimated. Another future is possible. Will prime minister Löfven listen 
to public opinion and live up to the promises he has made?

 * 350.org <http://350.org/> is joining workers and communities in calling on 
the Swedish government to stop this sale. You can join too. The next 
demonstration against the sale will take place in Stockholm on 3 June.  