
What is it like to give up a career to study for a PhD and chase an academic 
job? The risks may seem high, particularly in a sector beset by funding cuts 
and increasing use of casual contracts. By switching from client meetings, 
large teams and corporate salaries to student one-to-ones, lone study and 
fierce competition for early-career grants, the move to academia can feel like 
a leap of faith.

But many people do it – we spoke to three career-change academics about the 
highs and lows of making the switch.

Why are many academics on short-term contracts for years?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/feb/04/academic-casual-contracts-higher-education>
‘The university converts you to its rhythm’

Jeannie Holstein, assistant professor in strategic and public sector 
management at the University of Nottingham and former business leader

I switched careers after the takeover of the business I was in charge of; a UK 
subsidiary of a German china company. I did an executive MBA and had every 
intention of going back to business, but I found the way higher education 
operates really interesting and I began to study that.

Universities are so complex. It sounds funny, but when I arrived I found it 
frustrating that the automatic doors to my class opened too slowly – I was used 
to rushing around everywhere. But over time the university converts you to its 
own rhythm.


The key thing to remember is that the demands aren’t easier, they’re 
different. In a senior role in industry, you are never really left alone. 
You’re answerable every minute, your time belongs to somebody else.


As an academic, I don’t sit dreaming with my feet on the desk, but there is 
time to be lost in my thoughts. That’s balanced with being on-call for 
students. I find that quite an enjoyable demand – they’re why we’re here.

The role and place of the academic is changing – and it's a good thing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2013/nov/13/academic-job-changing-flexibility-university>
Ultimately, it suits me better. In business, you need to have the answers all 
the time, you have to stand up and say you’ve got the answers, even if you 
don’t. In academia, you are allowed to not have the definite answer. You can 
explore and think about it first.

‘It’s important to go in with your eyes open’

Alexi Marmot, architect and professor of facility and environment management 
at UCL

I spent a long time at university; I did a master’s and a PhD before setting 
up my own business, so academia was familiar turf for me. My two careers have 
complemented each other – throughout my years of practice, I worked out where 
the gaps in my knowledge were and to some extent I’ve been able to fill them 
through research.

There are real strengths and weaknesses on both sides: there are deadlines in 
business – you’re so focused on dealing with clients and meeting the brief on 
time and in budget. In academia, you get time to reflect.


Still, there are huge demands. I didn’t really understand workaholism until I 
got to the university. Your job is to extend knowledge, and there’s no end to 
that. Teaching is very rewarding, though – you know when you’ve done well. You 
can tell when you’ve captured your students’ attention, and that’s such a high.


I would advise professionals contemplating an academic role to go in with 
their eyes open. If you take it all in, you will experience brilliant things – 
the creativity of young people, for example. But the role comes with certain 
obligations, and you need to be aware of that.

Too many science PhDs? Not if unis train them for careers outside academia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/blog/2014/sep/15/university-producing-too-many-science-phd>
‘You have to steel yourself for going back to the bottom of the ladder’


Leah Tomkins, senior lecturer in organisation studies at the Open University 
and former management consultant

I spent 20 years in management consulting with traditional blue-chip 
businesses. Then I had that feeling – common in your 30s, I think – that I’d 
like to do something a bit more fulfilling.


I did a part-time BA in psychology at Birkbeck, then a part-time PhD, which I 
completed in four years – my experience in business made me good at time 
management. I really loved it and wanted to carry on – I think doing a PhD 
part-time is a great way to road-test a different career before you make the 
change.

But you really have to steel yourself for going back to the bottom of the 
ladder. It’s like being an adolescent again; you don’t know a lot but you think 
you do. And I’ve taken a big salary hit – but I’m not doing it for the money.

Coming from business has been really useful for my studies. I’ve been able to 
build on what I learned about organisations in my previous career and answer 
questions that I had while at work.

My advice for people in the same situation is to go with it. If you want to do 
it, you have to make the leap – no matter what the spreadsheet says. Is anyone 
ever 100% sure they have made the right choice? Probably not.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 