
When a format has been alive longer than you have, its place in your life is 
more like that of a family member than a programme. Desert Island Discs wound 
itself round my heart like a parent in aSeamus Heaney 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/seamusheaney> poem, an inimitable 
combination of constancy and range, the steady soporific tempo of its theme 
tune bookending a conversation that never hit the same spots twice, or at 
least, never in the same order.

Somewhere around the turn of the century, Sue Lawley began to irritate the 
hell out of me, for reasons that were hard to articulate because they were 
mainly very unfair. I used to hate the way she’d start the university segment, 
“and then … Oxford”, elongating, even caressing the word as if it were made of 
purest, gold-plated caviar. I got it into my head that whenCarl Djerassi 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2007/apr/15/healthandwellbeing.features1>
, inventor of the pill, chose Mahler’s Kindertotenlieder as his favourite 
track, she said “Really? The Mahler?”, doing a solid impression of a person 
who’d forgotten Djerassi’s daughter had killed herself. (I just went back and 
listened to it again, and this is completely wrong: she just says “Mahler” 
matter-of-factly.) The truly memorable thing about that interview was that she 
unearthed, in the rigorous research process, the fact that Djerassi had a 
cross-trainer at home which he used naked; Lawley, disapproving by default, had 
something that she could legitimately disapprove of and she sounded tickled 
pink.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa770de1cbd3d9f7a93be02ef23cad3edefbac64d%2F726_1102_3398_2038%2F3398.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphonies%20in%20sea%20%E2%80%93%2075%20years%20of%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphonies%20in%20sea%20%E2%80%93%2075%20years%20of%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa770de1cbd3d9f7a93be02ef23cad3edefbac64d%2F726_1102_3398_2038%2F3398.jpg>
 Change of tunes … Kirsty Young. Photograph: Abigail Zoe Martin/BBC/BBC 
Then, of course, Kirsty Young <https://www.theguardian.com/media/kirsty-young> 
took over, and it wasn’t the same. It was as wildly different as two people 
doing the same job could be, and I missed Lawley as sorely as an aunt, with 
total amnesia for all the rude and baseless things I’d said about her. But 
Young owned the island: she owns it still. When she leaves, most likely to 
start a social enterprise that links war-ravaged teenagers to tech giants, the 
consolation that the format is larger than the presenter will be very thin. She 
has the rare and simple gift of sounding warmly interested in people’s lives, 
which is the best way to approach almost everybody, except David Cameron.

The programme rarely makes news – it isn’t Vanity Fair, it doesn’t explode any 
landmines. Things are incredible in retrospect – Diana Mosley’s Holocaust 
denial was quite a marmalade-dropper – but the show offers a valuable snapshot 
of an era. This is partly because it prides itself, still, on an anti or, 
rather, pre-celebrity approach to human achievement, whereDavid Nott 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07djzyq>, a doctor who has performed 
reconstructive surgery in the Gaza Strip, is as noteworthy asDavina McCall 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b084tjzt> (you can imagine a world in which 
someone would say Nott is much more noteworthy than McCall, but that world is 
not this desert island). Partly it’s because it’s often looking back on a 
person’s life, by which time most things they want to spring upon the world 
have already been sprung. But one gets the sense that if someone did try to 
drop a bombshell – sayEdwina Currie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2002/sep/30/conservatives.politics> hadn’t 
already told everyone about her four-year affair with John Major and tried to 
tell Young – they would be delicately informed that it wasn’t required.

Since so much of what we consider a revealing interview is in the things we 
didn’t already know, this makes it hard to define exactly why Desert Island 
Discs feels so intimate. The research is sterling, it leaps off each 
conversation. So that helps. But naturally – and this is where all plaudits 
really belong toRoy Plomley <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p009y898> (no, I 
didn’t know it was spelt like that either) – the music cracks open even the 
most reserved character. The act of sharing one’s favourite songs is, in 
itself, so personal, so truthful, that to try to then introduce any reserve, 
let alone any caginess or defensiveness, would be both difficult and obscurely 
unnecessary. You are, by definition, showing your human face, even if you’re 
pretending to like Bartók more than you actually do; you could re-fix your mask 
to talk about your early life, but really, why would you?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dec7b4949695271c94e83417fad5da2b9198207%2F0_107_5250_3149%2F5250.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Symphonies%20in%20sea%20%E2%80%93%2075%20years%20of%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Symphonies%20in%20sea%20%E2%80%93%2075%20years%20of%20Desert%20Island%20Discs&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F28%2F75-years-of-desert-island-discs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0dec7b4949695271c94e83417fad5da2b9198207%2F0_107_5250_3149%2F5250.jpg>
 Roy Plomley, creator and original presenter of Desert Island Discs, in 1980. 
Photograph: John Downing/Getty Images 
The one exception to this – except David Cameron – is some actors, who sound 
like a person playing a person who has been invited onDesert Island Discs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/desert-island-discs>. It is a 
dangerous game, imperilling your soul to pretend to be someone else, as George 
Bernard Shaw once sort-of said.

With that intimacy, the programme brings – not always, but memorably – 
rumination on death. It is impossible to talk honestly about one’s life, 
leastways over the age of 40, without talking about those you’ve lost.Emma 
Thompson <https://www.theguardian.com/film/emma-thompson> had some brilliantly 
personal choices, including her friend Patrick Doyle, who wrote a song about 
her house, but the one that created its own neural pathway in the nation’s 
brain is her father, Eric, narratingThe Magic Roundabout 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2002/oct/10/netnotes.markoliver>. Her 
memories of him, while moving in their careful particularity, were universal in 
the kernel – that her favourite thing was to make him laugh. It was a moment, 
of thousands, that made you feel closer to your species.

Naturally, there is a sharp piquancy to an interview with a person who is now 
dead, painful but nourishing, like calling someone’s voicemail to hear their 
voice. I strongly discourage, if you’re wearing mascara, going back to listen 
to Victoria Wood’s choices.

Everybody normal has their own Desert Island Discs shortlist, periodically 
refreshed as a new phase starts or ends, ready like the packed bag of a man on 
the run. Mine sometimes has an accidental Radio 4 theme – for ages, I would 
have had Rob Brydon singing “Danny Boy” onI’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b006qnwb>. He got knocked off by Jesse’s 
tear-jerking rejection song inToy Story 2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2000/feb/04/6>, but that was my baby-years 
list – tired and emotional, watching too many cartoons – and it needs a refresh.

The curious thing is that the openness from the interviewees is rewarded by a 
kind of dignified interest from the listener, an instinctive rejection of 
prying or prurience; I remember far more about people’s musical choices than I 
do about their personal lives. I couldn’t tell you thing one aboutRalph Fiennes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/ralphfiennes>’s family, but I can scarcely 
look at him, 17 years later, without hearing Nina Simone singing “Feeling Good 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p00941wp>”. There is nothing like the 
disappointment of a subject who just doesn’t like music that much, and stuffs 
their choices with “amusing” Victorian music hall hits and spoken word. Yet it 
is, frankly, incredible how rare that is – unless there is a cutting-room floor 
somewhere, full of tone-deaf Nobel prize-winners. Music as an expression, not 
just of oneself but of one’s best self, seems to be a thread running through us 
all, weaving us into a meaningful tapestry.

Except David Cameron.

• There is a comprehensive Desert Island Discs archive at bbc.co.uk 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00zwlh8>.
 