
Existing homeowners can lock into low interest rates – and sail through the 
Trump and Brexit years safe in the knowledge their mortgage will not rise – 
following the launch of a raft of attractive 10-year fixed-rate home loans.

According to data provider Moneyfacts, the number of 10-year fixed-rate deals 
has soared from just eight three years ago to more than 120 now. In the 
meantime, the average interest rate on such deals has fallen from 4.2% to 3.2%. 
The cheapest 10-year deal, from Coventry building society, has an interest rate 
of just 2.59%.

HSBC raises mortgage rates and pulls 'cheapest-ever' fix
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/06/hsbc-raises-mortgage-rates-pulls-cheapest-ever-fixed-rate-end-record-low-interest>
Borrowers looking to remortgage can also choose seven-year fixes that start at 
an interest rate of 2.19%.

Broker firm John Charcol reckons 10-year lock-ins make sense for more mature 
borrowers looking to remortgage, but come with too many early repayment 
penalties to suit first-time buyers. “With protracted Brexit negotiations 
likely, we are recommending customers lock into a five- or 10-year fixed rate 
sooner rather than later,” says product technical manager Simon Collins. 
“Forthcoming French and German elections could add to economic uncertainty, 
while many unknowns exist as to what will happen during a Trump presidency. 
With such rates at virtually historical lows, John Charcol is urging customers 
to take action now to protect themselves against likely rate increases.”

Knowing exactly how much your monthly mortgage is going to be for the next 
decade, no matter what happens to the Bank of England base rate, is clearly 
attractive – but there is a premium to pay. The very cheapest two-year fixes 
are priced at around 1.34% (Santander and Nationwide), while the best five-year 
fixes are charging 1.99% (Virgin Money). That compares to the 2.19% for 
seven-year fixes (Coventry and Woolwich), or the 2.59% you’ll pay for the 
best-value 10-year deal (Coventry). For someone with a £150,000 mortgage, 
locking in for 10 years with the Coventry would mean monthly payments of £680, 
while a two-year fix with Santander or Nationwide would cost £589 a month.

We are recommending customers lock into a five- or 10-year fixed rate sooner 
rather than later
Simon Collins, John Charcol brokers 
So the peace of mind comes at a price – in this case around £100 a month – but 
someone taking a 10-year fix won’t have to go through the rigmarole of 
remortgaging in two years’ time, paying fees and facing potentially higher 
interest rates in the future.

The biggest drawback to taking out a long-term fix, however, is what happens 
if you need to break it for any reason, such as redundancy, divorce or a job 
move. Any early repayment charges can be shockingly high, even after many years 
of paying off a loan. For example, Santander charges a fee of 6% of the amount 
borrowed if a homeowner quits the mortgage any time within the 10- year period. 
In the case of someone borrowing £150,000, that means they would be charged a 
hefty £9,000 even nine years into paying the mortgage.

But as Simon Collins of John Charcol points out, not all seven- or 10-year 
deals have such punitive charges. Coventry charges a sliding scale starting at 
5% in year one, dropping to 1% at year five through to 10. Borrowers can also 
take their 10-year deal with them if they move home, with nearly all the 
mortgages portable from one property to the next.

But given that the typical homebuyer is likely to move three times before they 
hit 45, and eight times over their life, locking into a very long-term deal 
when young is not sensible. Collins says the ideal candidate for a 10-year deal 
is someone in their mid 40s or older who has a decent amount of equity, 
children in secondary school and a relatively safe job who are therefore 
unlikely to move for the forseeable future.

It’s notable that most of the 10-year deals require a large deposit. For 
example, Coventry’s 2.59% rate is only available to those able to put down 50%. 
However arrangement fees, typically around £1,000, are little different to the 
fees borrowers have to pay for a two-year deal. So if you keep bouncing from 
one two-year fix to the next, you’ll pay around £5,000 in arrangement fees over 
a decade compared to the one-off £1,000 on a 10-year deal.

Fix your mortgage rate now if you’re worried about Trump and Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/mortgage-rates-fixed-deals-brexit-trump>
The best deals for those happy to lock in for a long time

10-year deals

• Coventry building society: 2.59% fixed to 31 March 2027, £999 arrangement 
fee, maximum loan-to-value (LTV) 50%. Early repayment charge of 5% until 2019, 
3% until 2022, then 1% thereafter.

• Barclays/Woolwich: 2.59% fixed to 30 April 2027, £999 arrangement fee, 
maximum LTV 60%. Early repayment charge of 6% for the first seven years, then 
3% thereafter.

• Barclays/Woolwich: 2.89% – same as above except the maximum LTV is 80%.

Seven-year deals

• Coventry: 2.19% (50% LTV), 2.29% (65% LTV), 2.49% (75% LTV) and 2.79% (85% 
LTV) all fixed to 31 March 2024, £999 fee. Early repayment charge of 5% for the 
first year, 3% until 2020, then 1% thereafter.

• Barclays/Woolwich: 2.19% (60% LTV) and 2.49% (70% LTV) fixed to 30 April 
2024, £999 fee. Early repayment charge of 5% for the term.
 