
“Take back control” drove the Brexit vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/take-back-control-brexiteers-immigration-policy-johnson-davis-fox>
, and Theresa May is alarmingly clear: immigration control comes first – even 
if leaving the single market devastates the economy. But with the existing 
border control system under extreme stress, checks or visas for 100 million EU 
arrivals each year will mean a vast increase in workload for a Border Force 
that is already overstretched. Here’s just one practical reality that makes 
Brexit look more shocking by the day.

This Brexit plan will divide Britain and Ireland once more | Diarmaid Ferriter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/10/brexit-plan-divide-britain-ireland-uk-border>
May missed all her targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/nov/23/theresa-may-home-secretary-government-migration-target-fail-likely>
 when she was in charge of immigration as home secretary, so she knows better 
than anyone the impossibility of cutting net migration down to “tens of 
thousands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/20/theresa-may-drops-migration-target-deadline-after-mocking-corbyn-in-pmqs>
”. She knows UK border controls are inadequate: police find 10,000 people each 
year who have entered ports in the backs of lorries, and Dover’s Tory MP 
Charlie Elphicke claims many more, never detected,step straight into the arms 
of traffickers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/31/dismantle-calais-camp-modern-slave-trade-traffickers>
.

Public sector cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/tories-labour-councils-ministers-conservative-shires>
 have not spared the service that is supposed to security-check all arrivals at 
a time of a raised terror threat. The new home secretary, Amber Rudd, went to 
Heathrow in July to see how her Border Force performs. She might have expected 
our biggest port to be the best run, and on her visit she saw all the desks 
fully manned, with minimal queues at passport control and plenty of smiles.

What she probably wasn’t told was how many of those desks were staffed by 
people pulled in from everywhere else, including HMRC tax officers from 
Newcastle, who were put up in hotels. (Can HMRC spare them, when they are only
checking 4% <> of self-assessment tax forms?)

Had she asked staff about their workloads, they probably wouldn’t have told 
the truth, governed as they are by a regime of terror and targets. I spoke to 
some Border Force staff, on condition of strictest anonymity, meeting them 
miles away from Heathrow for fear of disciplinary action if they were caught 
talking to a journalist. With no culture of transparency, this service punishes 
whistleblowers.

Here’s what they told me: after the public row over gigantic queues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2012/jul/09/heathrow-passport-queues-london-olympics>
 before the 2012 Olympics, strict targets were set: non-EU passengers must 
queue for no more than 45 minutes, EU for 25 minutes, and fast-track first 
class just 15 minutes. These targets must be met 95% of the time.

At present, they are met 70% of the time, and staff shortages mean that civil 
servants brought in from elsewhere get just a few days’ training. “All they can 
do is a basic passport scan,” say these whistleblowers. “Training and 
experience matter. We can feel whether something is wrong about who they say 
they are, where they’ve been, for how long and how often. We notice their 
demeanour, their nerves.” It takes experience to spot children being 
trafficked. E-gates detect fewer suspicious cases.

The message of Brexit was mixed. Now we are told it was simply a referendum on 
immigration
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/the-message-of-brexit-was-mixed-now-we-are-told-it-was-simply-a-referendum-on-immigration>
If members of the public complain about long queues with too few passport 
desks open, staff issue a reply from a printed sheet they’re given: “All 
available Border Force officers are currently deployed and working to protect 
the public; border security remains our number one priority.” An honest reply 
would go something like this: “We haven’t got enough staff, we’ve had cuts, 
we’re on our knees working all hours and still missing our targets. Many more 
passengers are coming through and we don’t have time to scrutinise them. Sorry. 
Did you vote for these cuts?”

With everyone manning the desks, paperwork piles up behind the scenes: asylum 
claims are rising again and people stopped can wait hours to be checked. Staff 
are taken off customs: “Guns and drugs don’t matter as much as queues,” one 
officer says. They sometimes fail to claim the £2,000 fines from airlines that 
bring people in with inadequate documentation because they miss a five-day 
deadline for claims.

Staff hired now are on new contracts, with flexible annualised hours so they 
can be made to work overtime, extra days or to cancel holidays at short notice, 
“a nightmare for parents with childcare”, I was told. As a result, there is 
high turnover. “We’re at least 300 short,” these officers reckon. Managers deny 
it – but fixed official quotas of staff have been abolished.

Visa checks on people from non-EU countries are weaker, they claim, now visa 
offices abroad have been closed. “There are no standard interviews for student 
or visitor visas now. But you can’t rely on written references and 
qualifications,” says one officer who has worked overseas. “You need to see 
applicants to detect people who are not what they say they are.” During the 
present “surge”, there is only one forgery specialist each shift, instead of 
two or three: “They’re run off their feet.”

This isn’t just staff grumbling: the rightwing, anti-public sector Adam Smith 
Institutereported last month 
<http://www.adamsmith.org/news/britains-beleaguered-border-force-stretched-to-breaking-point>
 that the Border Force is “starved of funds and neglected”. Responsible for 
screening 225 million passengers a year arriving in the UK, it claims about 
4,000 “high-risk” flights are landing without proper security checks.

Passenger numbers have risen by 20% since 2010 and are set to continue rising 
by 2% a year, while Border Force funding is cut: spending per passenger is down 
25%. Some technology is 14 years out of date, while £1bn was wasted on afailed 
e-borders system 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/03/flaws-in-home-office-security-forcing-staff-to-rely-on-incomplete-intelligence>
. Last year’s National Audit Officereport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/dec/03/flaws-in-home-office-security-forcing-staff-to-rely-on-incomplete-intelligence>
 warned that the Advance Passenger Information System was collecting only 86% 
of arrivals. The system cannot check them all “in sufficient time to prevent 
high-risk travellers from starting their journey to or from the UK,” the report 
said. That leaves 16.5 million people a year unchecked before arrival.

Brexit will bring far worse problems. Half of all arrivals are from the EU, 
currently waved through on a scan to check their identity. But plans afoot at 
the Home Office suggest EU migrants will need to prove they have a skilled job 
lined up and can speak English. “We would need to check all these jobs were 
genuine – very difficult and very time-consuming,” says one officer. It might 
require doubling the Border Force.

“Take back control” was a brilliant play on people’s fears. What the people 
swayed by it and everyone else should know is that controlling our post-Brexit 
borders will be phenomenally expensive and difficult. And how closed the UK is 
going to feel to our neighbours.
 