
The Apple iPhone was thought to be safe from cyber attack. Not any more. First 
to reveal its vulnerabilities was the FBI, which in April paid $1.3m to an 
unknown source for ahacking tool 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/fbi-apple-iphone-secret-hack-san-bernardino>
 to break into an iPhone. Then in August, the US tech giant has found itself 
hit by atext message scam 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/25/apple-ios-update-arab-activists-iphone-spyware>
 believed to have originated from a private Israeli security company.


These are just the security breaches we know about. Such is the avalanche of 
new cyber threats facing big brands like Apple that they arepaying hackers 
millions of dollars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/aug/22/bounty-hunters-hacking-legally-money-security-apple-pentagon>
 to search for chinks in their digital armour. Yet even these huge sums are a 
pittance compared with the growing global industry for formal cyber security 
services,valued at $75bn <http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3135617> per year. 

Keeping on top of cyber crime threats has jumped to the top of boardroom 
agendas at most companies over the past year and a half, saysTalal Rajab 
<https://www.techuk.org/about/our-staff/programmes/item/3115-talal-rajab>, head 
of cyber and national security programmes at techUK.

The reasons are not hard to guess. Cyber attacks are now a virtual constant 
for large companies. US security firm Symantecestimates 
<https://www.symantec.com/security-center/threat-report> more than half a 
billion personal records were lost or stolen last year. Nor do cyber crooks 
need to be super-geeks any more; off-the-shelf criminal software is now widely 
available on thedark web <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/darknet>, 
according to Rajab.

Cyber attacks could be bigger threat to our banking system than bad debts
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/oct/24/cyber-attacks-could-be-bigger-threat-to-our-banking-system-than-bad-debts>
 Media attention and the consequent brand damage that security breaches cause 
also push companies to act. Along with Apple,TalkTalk, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/23/talktalk-criticised-for-poor-security-and-handling-of-hack-attack>
HSBC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/29/hsbc-online-banking-cyber-attack>
 and extramarital online hook-up serviceAshley Madison 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/aug/20/ashley-madison-hack-your-questions-answered>
 are among other recent high-profile victims of hacker attacks. A study by 
cyber security firm FireEye found more thanhalf (54%) of US consumers 
<https://www.fireeye.com/company/press-releases/2016/new-fireeye-research-reveals-the-impact-of-high-profile-security.html>
 felt more negatively towards companies that had suffered data breaches.

Regulators are beginning to crack the whip. In May the EU published a reform 
of data protection rules 
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/feb/08/huge-rise-hack-attacks-cyber-criminals-target-small-businesses>
 that could see companies fined up to €20m, or 4% of global turnover, if they 
are found guilty of data negligence. “That’s a real tangible punishment for 
companies if they come across an attack and they aren’t adequately protected,” 
says Rajab.

Corporate executives may be increasingly aware that they need to act on cyber 
security, but that doesn’t necessarily mean that they know what to do. Most 
don’t, says Andrew Rogoyski, UK head of cyber security at IT services firm CGI.

“People have been working in general security for many years, but the really 
high demand for cyber security has only taken off in the last five years, which 
doesn’t really give the education and jobs system time to react,” he states.

The skills shortage is exacerbated by the maverick character of many cyber 
experts and the lack of career progression for them in large corporations. 
“Typically, they are called in to do a job, but then there’s nowhere for them 
to go,” says Rogoyski. As a consequence, many end up leaving in-house roles in 
preference for external advisory firms.

CGI has close to 200 specialists working solely on cyber advisory work, making 
it one of the largest such teams in the UK. The cyber services industry is a 
boom market, populated by giant IT services companies, global defence firms and 
software manufacturers right through to small, highly specialist start-ups.

FBI confirms it won't tell Apple how it hacked San Bernardino shooter's iPhone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/apr/27/fbi-apple-iphone-secret-hack-san-bernardino>
Asked how much companies typically spend on cyber protection, Rogoyski says it 
differs from company to company depending on their size and vulnerability. 
Banks, utilities and retailers with a strong online presence tend to prioritise 
the issue most, he says. As a general rule of thumb, 5% of a company’s IT spend 
goes on IT security. “In truth, you only really know when you’ve spent too 
little,” he adds.

Norway-based certification firm DNV GL is one of those looking to increase its 
foothold in the market. The company, which employs about 40 cyber specialists 
across its international operations, has just opened a new office in 
Peterborough, offering product testing and advisory services.

The company hopes to exploit the need by business to show that it is taking 
cyber security seriously by offering independent verification of companies’ 
data protection practices, especially those in critical infrastructure sectors 
such as energy or oil and gas. Despite its youth, the cyber security field is 
already awash with industry standards, says DNV GL’s head of operational 
excellence, Matthew Freeman.

One of the challenges that large companies will face is integrating an array 
of new technologies with older, more bespoke systems. The wider a company’s 
net, the bigger the possible holes.


As long as there are cyber criminals, even the most accredited company can’t 
be complacent. Not only will a company’s internal systems be evolving 
continuously, so too will the potential threats, says Freeman: “What you 
absolutely can’t do is do an assessment now and assume that it will remain 
current without checking it.”

 