
Thousands of steelworkers’ jobs are threatened as Indian company Tata 
threatens to walk away from its loss-making business in the UK. The move is 
causing shockwaves over the health of Britain’s manufacturing industry; but it 
is also a strong indicator of changing political and economic winds inIndia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/india>.

We bailed out the bankers. Welsh steelworkers deserve no less | Michael Sheen
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/30/bailed-bankers-welsh-steel-workers-port-talbot-tata>
When Tata Steel acquired the steel giant Corus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/corus> in 2007, it generated some cheers 
in India, but also raised eyebrows. The cheers were loudest among those who saw 
this as a macho declaration of Indian corporate arrival on the global scene. 
The purchase by Tata Steel of a company that was four times larger than itself 
made it at a stroke the fifth largest steel producer in the world and the first 
Fortune 500 multinational company from India.

But there were concerns over both the timing and the price at which the 
purchase was made. To fend off a Brazilian rival, Tata had to pay a 70% premium 
over the stock price. This was hefty for a company already in financial trouble 
with a large debt burden. AndTata <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tata> 
paid only $4bn (£2.8bn) of the estimated $14bn final price out of its own funds 
– the rest was borrowed, mainly from Indian public sector banks.

Why were taxpayer-funded banks so willing to lend to a big conglomerate to buy 
up an overpriced European company, even as they denied loans to Indian farmers 
and small-scale producers? The sense of reversal of colonial roles might well 
have played a role. The deal was lauded by politicians as a sign that Indian 
industry had come of age as a global player, and so prudent considerations were 
simply cast aside.

Repayment of those loans was supposed to be made out of the profits of Tata 
Steel Europe. But those profits never came. At the time of acquisition Corus 
made an annual profit of about $800m, but since then the company has shown only 
losses – despite numerous rounds of restructuring, job cuts, asset sales and 
“modernisation”. In the past six months the companyhas shed around 3,500 jobs 
<http://qz.com/650551/tata-steels-desire-to-get-rid-of-its-uk-business-shows-how-unlucky-its-corus-takeover-was/>
 in the UK, but the financial indicators look worse than ever. This could 
result from incompetent management, but it also reflects worsening global 
conditions.

No one in the world really expects much dynamism from the European economy in 
the coming years
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20rise%20and%20fall%20of%20the%20British%20steel%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20rise%20and%20fall%20of%20the%20British%20steel%20industry%20%E2%80%93%20video%20explainer&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmar%2F30%2Fthe-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer&media=>
The rise and fall of the British steel industry – video explainer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/video/2016/mar/30/the-rise-and-fall-of-the-british-steel-industry-video-explainer>
In Europe steel demand has been falling continuously over recent years, and 
there is fierce competition as Chinese exporters lower prices to cope with 
their own massive over-capacity. No one in the world really expects much 
dynamism from the European economy in the coming years.

By contrast, Indian steel demand is still increasing, if slowly, and the 
Indian operations still make profits. Tata Steel is now hugely weighed down by 
the UK business, which also accounts for around a third of its total debt. The 
charm of owning a big British company may no longer be enough to compensate. 
Instead, the urge is to cut losses and move out of an area that does not look 
likely to generate profits anytime soon.

Maybe the company also hopes the mere threat of exit will make the British 
government react by providing more subsidies – a technique that has worked in 
the past in India and elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Ftata-decision-india-britain-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57f16a75c4a019c6d205a8a1f6fab44598590e0%2F0_0_4998_2999%2F4998.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tata%20tried%20to%20turn%20the%20tables%20on%20Britain.%20It%20failed%20%7C%20Jayati%20Ghosh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Ftata-decision-india-britain-steel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tata%20tried%20to%20turn%20the%20tables%20on%20Britain.%20It%20failed%20%7C%20Jayati%20Ghosh&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fmar%2F31%2Ftata-decision-india-britain-steel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe57f16a75c4a019c6d205a8a1f6fab44598590e0%2F0_0_4998_2999%2F4998.jpg>
 ‘The Indian businessman Vijay Mallya fled to the UK and is now ensconced in 
his mansion in a London suburb.’ Photograph: Saurabh Das/AP 
But this episode could also reflect collateral damage from another corporate 
scandal currently enthralling India. The flashy liquor baronVijay Mallya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/10/indian-drinks-mogul-vijay-mallya-leaves-country-owing-1bn>
, whose companyKingfisher Airlines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/nov/12/vijay-mallya-kingfisher-broke-india>
 (named after the beer his other company produces) collapsed, was also a major 
beneficiary of largesse from Indian banks. He now has unpaid debts of about 
£730m that he’s failed to pay for several years. Since he is also an elected 
member of the upper house of parliament, voted in by the ruling Bharatiya 
Janata party, this has caused a political outcry.

When the supreme court of India indicted him 
<http://www.thehindu.com/news/national/supreme-court-had-indicted-vijay-mallya-for-sheer-abuse-of-law/article8377956.ece>
 for abuse of law and ordered him to pay up or face the consequences, Mallya 
fled to the UK and is now ensconced in his mansion in a London suburb. He has
offered to pay 
<http://indianexpress.com/article/business/companies/vijay-mallya-tells-supreme-court-he-is-willing-to-pay-rs-4000-crores-of-bank-loans/>
 just over half of what he owes in six months’ time, an offer yet to be 
accepted. But his story must have raised concerns within Tata and among other 
large Indian businesses with huge debt – that even if the government spares 
them, the Indian courts may not.

So for now, Indian corporate chiefs planning to invest in the UK are more 
likely to be looking at real estate, rather than at multinational businesses.
 