
Sir Nicholas Serota <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/nicholas-serota>
, director for nearly 30 years of Tate, is one of the most towering figures in 
the UK and international cultural world: the man who opened Tate Modern and 
turned contemporary art in Britain from a minority sport undertaken by 
eccentrics into a part of everyday culture, embraced by legions of visitors not 
just to that venue but the many new galleries that have sprung up around 
Britain over the past decade.

Tate to name Maria Balshaw as new director to succeed Serota
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/11/tate-to-name-maria-balshaw-as-new-director-replacing-nicholas-serota>
This giant figure’s successor as director is likely to be – assuming her 
appointment is approved by the prime minister, Theresa May –Maria Balshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/feb/09/maria-balshaw-whitworth-manchester-art-gallery>
, currently director of both the Whitworth, Manchester University’s art gallery 
andManchester City Galleries <http://manchesterartgallery.org/>. Only the brave 
would attempt to follow Serota, and Balshaw – who becomes one of only a handful 
of women in very senior leadership roles in the arts in Britain – is certainly 
that. Her irrepressible enthusiasm, easy charm and skilful negotiation of the 
political and financial labyrinths of the cultural world have helped her forge 
a highly successful career. Recently, she has undertaken a wholesale renovation 
(and extension) of the Whitworth, compelling critics and visitors to take 
notice of it almost by sheer force of will. (Staging popular exhibitions by, 
among others,Marina Abramović 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/marina-abramovic>, Cornelia Parker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/cornelia-parker> and Elizabeth Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/elizabeth-price> has helped.)

Perhaps most significantly, though, Balshaw has been a crucial part of 
Manchester’s forceful self-reinvention, working with the retiring council chief 
executive,Sir Howard Bernstein 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/sir-howard-bernstein-tand-down-from-manchester-council-chief-executive>
, to write the arts into the city’s “northern powerhouse” script. As part of 
that role, she negotiated with the Treasury for a£78m government grant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/dec/05/guardian-view-manchester-cultural-space-one-kind-factory-another>
 to transform the former Granada TV studios into theFactory 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/nov/25/rem-koolhaas-wins-factory-design-project-as-manchester-goes-dutch>
, a new arts space that, the council hopes, will combine the scale and 
capabilities of Tate Modern’s turbine hall and the Royal Opera House.

Balshaw’s name had been widely circulated as a potential successor to Serota, 
so in many ways her appointment is no surprise – not least as she herself, 
refreshingly, has made no particular secret of her ambitions. She always wanted 
Tate, and she has got it – precluding disasters at No 10. Doubts from inside 
the art world about her suitability for the role have centred not on her 
capability as a leader or skill as a political operator (both of which are 
absolutely necessary for running Tate) but her deep knowledge of art.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-maria-balshaw-director-nicholas-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcfe7715b2c508bb1ba1b476b0c678458c0e291c%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tate%20welcomes%20Maria%20Balshaw%20%E2%80%93%20a%20leader%20of%20charm%2C%20guts%20and%20skill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-maria-balshaw-director-nicholas-serota%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tate%20welcomes%20Maria%20Balshaw%20%E2%80%93%20a%20leader%20of%20charm%2C%20guts%20and%20skill&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Ftate-maria-balshaw-director-nicholas-serota%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdcfe7715b2c508bb1ba1b476b0c678458c0e291c%2F0_0_4928_3280%2F4928.jpg>
 The ultimate player-manager … outgoing Tate director Sir Nicholas Serota. 
Photograph: Niklas Halle'N/AFP/Getty Images 
That’s partly down to her background: she has worked her way up not through 
curatorial jobs, like many museum or gallery directors. Rather, she started out 
asa junior academic in Birmingham before working for Arts Council England 
<http://www.whitworth.manchester.ac.uk/about/staff/drmariabalshaw/> in the West 
Midlands. From there, in 2004, she became one of the first cohort ofClore 
fellows <http://www.cloreleadership.org/fellowships.aspx>, mid-career arts 
professionals selected for their leadership potential and put through a year of 
intense training and study. (Her peers on the scheme included the man she later 
married,Nick Merriman 
<http://www.manchestertourismconference.co.uk/project/director-the-manchester-museum-university-of-manchester/>
, who is director of Manchester Museum; between them they have four children. 
In her private hours she is a keen yogi, making regular trips to India – and is 
known, too, for her love of a dashing outfit.)


In this career path she is unlike Serota, the ultimate player-manager, who 
could curate as good aCy Twombly 
<https://www.google.co.uk/search?q=Cy+Twombly+fguardian&ie=utf-8&oe=utf-8&gws_rd=cr&ei=nDJ2WL7yE8vca-6YtPAO#q=Cy+Twombly+guardian>
 exhibition as anyone in the world and, despite his heavy institutional 
responsibilities, seem completely up to date on the work of young artists. At 
the same time, each of the galleries in Tate’s flotilla has an expert, highly 
knowledgable chief, and arguably the most important task for the overall 
director of the organisation is to forge a set of new strategic ambitions, now 
thatTate Modern’s Switch House extension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/jun/14/tate-modern-switch-house-review-brain-fizzing-art-pyramid>
 has opened and that thelong-delayed Tate St Ives’s renovation 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/about/projects/tate-st-ives-phase-two/tate-st-ives-project-refurbishment>
 is under way.

One of the great challenges will be, in a financially unstable environment, to 
balance the claims of each of the galleries – St Ives, Liverpool, the two in 
London – whenTate Modern <https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/tate-modern> 
outpaces the rest of them so heavily in income, visitors, reputation and 
glamour. Balshaw is a formidable fundraiser and she will need to redouble her 
efforts if she is to keep Tate on an even keel. She will need to find ways to 
cajole, persuade and charm the government into taking culture seriously – 
presumably through making arguments about its potential to help economic growth 
in a post-Brexit world. Gutsy and confident, Balshaw will tackle all this 
head-on, with her trademark zest. If comparisons between her and Serota are, at 
the moment, inevitable, she will soon forge her own path.
 