
Meat should be taxed to encourage people to eat less of it, so reducing the 
production of global warming gases from sheep, cattle and goats, according to a 
group of scientists.

Several high-profile figures, from the chief of the UN's climate science panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2008/sep/07/food.foodanddrink> to the 
economist Lord Stern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2009/oct/26/palm-oil-initiative-carbon-emissions>
, have previously advocated eating less meat to tackle global warming.

The scientists' analysis, published in the journal Nature Climate Change 
<http://www.nature.com/nclimate/journal/v4/n1/full/nclimate2081.html>, takes 
the contentious step of suggesting methane emissions be cut by pushing up the 
price of meat through a tax or emissions trading scheme.

"Influencing human behaviour is one of the most challenging aspects of any 
large-scale policy, and it is unlikely that a large-scale dietary change will 
happen voluntarily without incentives," they say. "Implementing a tax or 
emission trading scheme on livestock's greenhouse gas emissions could be an 
economically sound policy that would modify consumer prices and affect 
consumption patterns."

There are now 3.6 billion ruminants on the planet – mostly sheep, cattle and 
goats and, in much smaller numbers, buffalo – 50% more than half a century ago. 
Methane from their digestive systems is the single biggest human-related source 
of the greenhouse gas, which is more short-lived but around 30 times more 
potent than carbon dioxide in warming the planet.

Emissions from livestock account for 14.5% of all human-caused greenhouse 
gases,according to the UN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2013/sep/26/greenhouse-gas-emissions-livestock>
. It estimates that this could be cut by nearly a third through better farming 
practices.

Pete Smith, a professor of soils and global change at the University of 
Aberdeen, and one of the authors of the report, said: "Our study showed that 
one of the most effective ways to cut methane is to reduce global populations 
of ruminant livestock, especially cattle."

He said methane from livestock could only be reduced by addressing demand for 
meat at the same time.

The scientists say not enough attention has been paid to tackling greenhouse 
gases other than CO2, especially in the ongoing UN climate talks,which last 
convened in Warsaw in November 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/25/warsaw-climate-talks-end-cop19-2015>
.

The only way the world could avoid dangerous tipping points as temperatures 
rise would be by cutting methane emissions as well as CO2 emissions from 
sources such as energy and transport, they argue. Reducing livestock numbers, 
they point out, would also avoid CO2 emissions released when forests are 
cleared for cattle farms.

William Ripple, a professor in the College of Forestry at Oregon State 
University, and another of the authors, said: "We clearly need to reduce the 
burning of fossil fuels to cut CO2 emissions. But that addresses only part of 
the problem. We also need to reduce non-CO2 greenhouse gases to lessen the 
likelihood of us crossing this climatic threshold."

The farming industry said the tax proposal was too simplistic. Nick Allen, 
sector director forEblex <http://www.eblex.org.uk>, the organisation for beef 
and lamb producers in England, said: "To suggest a tax is a better way to cut 
emissions seems a simplistic and blunt suggestion that will inevitably see a 
rise in consumer prices.

"It is a very complex area. Simply reducing numbers of livestock – as a move 
like this would inevitably do – does not improve efficiency of the rumen 
process, which takes naturally growing grass that we cannot eat and turns it 
into a protein to feed a growing human population."

Allen said reducing emissions was an important goal for the industry. He 
added: "Grazing livestock have helped shape and manage the countryside for 
hundreds of years. They bring significant environmental benefits that can 
significantly mitigate the negative effect of emissions. It is unfortunate that 
in recent years they have become an easy scapegoat for emissions, despite the 
fact that the livestock population is generally falling."
 