
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> has 
pledged to retrieve £2bn lost to the exchequer via tax avoidance, continuing 
the recent tradition of chancellors using set-piece speeches to target 
aggressive planning schemes.

A combination of new and previously announced initiatives will account for the 
haul, as Hammond also promised to press ahead with new sanctions onadvisers who 
facilitate tax avoidance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/16/labour-trade-unions-demand-action-temp-agencies-tax-avoidance-scheme>
.

In his autumn statement to the Commons, Hammond said: “The government is 
committed to tackling tax evasion, avoidance and aggressive tax planning … but 
we must constantly be alert to new threats to our tax base, and be willing to 
move swiftly to counter them.”

Philip Hammond admits Brexit vote means £122bn extra borrowing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammond-brexit-vote-borrowing-autumn-statement>
He said he would close salary sacrifice schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/21/philip-hammond-tax-employee-benefits-autumn-statement-gyms>
 where employees are allowed to pay for perks such as gym memberships out of 
gross earnings, “shut down inappropriate use of the VAT flat rate scheme” and 
“introduce a new penalty for those who enable the use of a tax avoidance scheme 
that HMRC later challenges and defeats”.

The government also said it would “clarify the application of the VAT 
zero-rating for adapted motor vehicles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2012/may/29/vat-what-how-much-why> to stop 
the abuse of this legislation, while continuing to provide help for for 
disabled wheelchair users”.

“These measures, and others set out in the autumn statement document, raise 
around £2bn over the forecast period,” Hammond said.

The measures received a mixed reception from the tax profession, especially 
those targeted at advisers on avoidance schemes.

Frank Haskew, the head of the tax faculty at the Institute of Chartered 
Accountants in England and Wales (ICAEW), said: “The public is rightly 
concerned about tax avoidance, and we support efforts to tackle it.

“ICAEW already has a professional code of conduct in relation to tax advice 
and we have been working with the government to ensure that our code continues 
to be fit for purpose and retains confidence.

“Although we do not have the details yet, the government needs to ensure any 
new rules are properly targeted only to tackle those advisers that promote 
aggressive tax schemes.

“If the measures are too widely targeted, there is a danger that reputable 
professional advisers could still end up being caught in the crossfire when 
advising on legitimate tax planning, while the real targets escape any penalty.”

The chancellor also attacked so-called “disguised earnings 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2016/apr/16/should-we-all-post-tax-returns-online>
” – often known as perks – which are payments made to an employee so as to 
bypass the payment of PAYE and national insurance.

Hammond said: “At the budget we committed to removing the tax benefits of 
disguised earnings for employees, and I am now going to do the same for the 
self-employed and employers, raising a further £630m over the forecast period.”

He also attacked salary sacrifice schemes, where costs such as the cost of gym 
memberships are taken out of gross earnings, thereby providing the employee 
with a tax saving.

Sue Robinson, an employment tax partner at the accountancy firm EY, said: 
“People who use such schemes for benefits such as health screening and mobile 
phones and tablets will be among those who see their tax bills rise.

“Many of those benefits in kind are often portrayed as ‘perks’ for the higher 
paid, but the expansion of the salary sacrifice model over recent years will 
mean that large numbers of basic rate taxpayers will be impacted, particularly 
in sectors such as the health service.”
 