
Tax <https://www.theguardian.com/money/tax> accounts for more than half of the 
total cost of the average family’s Christmas alcohol shop, a study by the wine 
and spirits industry has found. While alcohol duties are typically higher per 
head in Finland, Ireland and Germany, British consumers pay more alcohol tax 
than the citizens of most other European Union member states.

In the UK, a family spending £171.66 stocking the drinks cabinet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/03/morrisons-supermarket-wine-sherry-bargains-top-buys-fiona-beckett>
 for the festive season will hand over £88.19 of that sum to the Treasury. By 
comparison, the total cost of the equivalent amount of alcohol in France would 
be £136.89, with just £43.52 going to the taxman.

According to the Wine and Spirit Trade Association (WSTA), which commissioned 
the research, 50% of the total cost of alcohol in the UK is accounted for by 
Treasury-imposed duties, while in France the levy represents on average just 
32% of the cost.

“Comparing the wine and spirit tax regime in the UK to that in France puts the 
UK’s high rate of excise duty firmly in the spotlight,” said WSTA’s chief 
executive, Miles Beale.

The numbers were produced by comparing a festive-season shop consisting of 
five bottles of wine, two bottles of champagne, two bottles of other sparkling 
wine, three bottles of spirits, two bottles of port, 24 cans of beer and 12 
ciders.

WSTA is warning that the price of wines and spirits will rise in the new year, 
whenmanufacturers and importers begin to pass on the extra costs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/nov/03/morrisons-supermarket-wine-sherry-bargains-top-buys-fiona-beckett>
 triggered by the fall in sterling’s value that followed the decision to leave 
the European Union.

“In addition, with inflation levels rising to 1.2% in November, spirits prices 
will increase and wine will be hit again,” said Beale. “And that is also why 
it’s vital there is no increase to duty on wine and spirits at the next budget 
in March. The chancellor can provide welcome relief for businesses that have 
some extremely testing times ahead.”
 