
The ubiquitous takeaway paper cup, with its plastic lid and cardboard sleeve, 
has transformed the coffee industry.


Drinking hot beverages on the go has become so popular that UK coffee shops 
hand out about 7m cups a day, working out at more than 2.5bn a year. Yet 
reportedlyfewer than one in 400 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/29/switch-disposable-coffee-cups-for-reusables-urge-campaign-groups>
 cups is recycled.

The design of these cups – lined with polyethylene to prevent the paper going 
soggy – makes recycling difficult and costly; the cups cannot be recycled with 
other paper waste as they require specialist processing to separate the plastic 
lining.

Growing awareness around this problem prompted the Liberal Democrats to call 
for a tax on coffee cups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/31/ministers-reject-calls-for-charge-on-disposable-coffee-cups>
, like the 5p levy on plastic carrier bags. Tim Farron, leader of the Lib Dems, 
said a cup tax would trigger a “culture change”, encouraging people to adopt 
reusable cups. The governmentrejected the call 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/31/ministers-reject-calls-for-charge-on-disposable-coffee-cups>
, claiming coffee chains were already doing enough to tackle the problem.

Modern life is rubbish: we don't need all this packaging
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/dec/06/modern-life-rubbish-dont-need-packaging>
Not everyone outside of Westminister was convinced by a tax either. The 
plastic bag charge has been successful because people have easily adapted to 
carrying reusable bags with them, but reusable coffee cups are bulkier and 
require cleaning, says Wouter Poortinga, professor of environmental psychology 
at Cardiff University. “We should also focus on other instruments we could use 
– like education or providing an alternative,” he says.

What’s more, with takeaway coffee being an indulgence, consumers may simply 
not notice a small price increase.

Whether reusable cups are more environmentally friendly than paper cups is 
another sticking point. Despite some coffee shops selling reusable plastic cups 
and offering a discount for customers using one, there is a lack of lifecycle 
analysis on whether they offer a reduced environmental footprint.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfea853ef69e07768f33d895f23aee973630548f%2F0_222_3624_2174%2F3624.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taxing%20coffee%20cups%20is%20not%20the%20answer%3A%20here's%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taxing%20coffee%20cups%20is%20not%20the%20answer%3A%20here%27s%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fdfea853ef69e07768f33d895f23aee973630548f%2F0_222_3624_2174%2F3624.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
This data can help inform sustainable purchasing decisions. Thicker plastic 
bags, known as bags for life, for example, require more carbon to produce than 
carrier bags. As such, they need to beused 14 times 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/291023/scho0711buan-e-e.pdf>
 to become the more environmentally friendly alternative they are marketed as.

“Nobody who manufactures a reusable cup has told me carbon-wise what that is 
the equivalent to in paper cups,” says Martin Kersh, executive director of the 
Foodservice Packaging Association and executive board member of the Paper Cup 
Recovery andRecycling <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/recycling> Group.

While he would not discourage coffee shops from selling reusables, Kersh says 
it would be wrong for people to buy a reusable cup and then only use it once or 
twice.

The good, the bad and the ugly: sustainability at Nespresso
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2015/may/27/nespresso-sustainability-transparency-recycling-coffee-pods-values-aluminum>
The solution

James Capel, chief executive of waste management company Simply Waste 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/waste>, believes the industry should 
focus its energy on recycling existing cups more efficiently. In 2013, the UK’s 
first two specialist plants for recycling coffee cups opened. The following 
year, Capel co-founded Simply Cups to help businesses segregate and transport 
their cups to these plants.

Simply Cups is currently working with Costa, Pret a Manger and McDonald’s, 
collecting cups from a few of their stores on trial basis. Last month, Costa 
announced it was expanding its coffee cup recycling trial scheme, collecting 
used coffee cups in its 2,000 stores, which are collected by waste management 
company Veolia to be recycled in a specialist plant.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8be3ff058aea7d4cfa694bfe719b2ce30492a72%2F49_265_2819_1691%2F2819.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Taxing%20coffee%20cups%20is%20not%20the%20answer%3A%20here's%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Taxing%20coffee%20cups%20is%20not%20the%20answer%3A%20here%27s%20why&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsustainable-business%2F2016%2Fdec%2F06%2Ftaxing-coffee-cups-is-not-the-answer-heres-why%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe8be3ff058aea7d4cfa694bfe719b2ce30492a72%2F49_265_2819_1691%2F2819.jpg>
 Photograph: Bryan Thomas/Getty Images 
While Costa’s move is a step in the right direction, people who buy a takeaway 
coffee will not necessarily return to a Costa store to recycle the cup. Only a 
reported14% of Costa’s coffee cups 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/costa-s-coffee-cup-recycling-leaves-a-bitter-taste-0lkcpt9hv>
 were recycled during the pilot programme across 45 stores in London and 
Manchester.

Having coffee cup recycling points in town centres is another possible 
solution. Simply Cups partnered with Hubbub, an environmental charity, to 
launch a three-month coffee cup recycling scheme 
<http://www.manchestereveningnews.co.uk/business/business-news/giant-coffee-cups-cause-stir-12016098>
 in Manchester. Hubbub has installed large coffee cup bins in the city centre 
and Simply Cups collects them to be recycled. Waitrose, Greggs, KFC and other 
high street coffee retailers have given financial support to the campaign.

Yet there still needs to be greater cooperation and investment from businesses 
to solve this problem, says Capel. “It tends to be the smaller businesses that 
will just get on with it, but bigger businesses tend to drag their heels a bit 
more,” he says. “When you’re talking about supply chains and different people 
being involved, it can be difficult communicating that message all the way 
through an organisation – and it can also add some costs.”
 