
Let me raise a glass to your festive generosity. You, the taxpayer, have 
showered your charity on the needy and deserving: otherwise known asAtos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> and Capita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, two private companies that 
have been givenmore than £500m of your money 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/27/private-firms-500m-governments-fit-to-work-scheme>
 since 2013.

Your munificence is boundless: you don’t expect returns from your donations, 
given to these companies to provide effective personal independence payment 
assessments (PIP) for disabled people. No: despite years of being solemnly told 
that there simply isn’t enough money to properly fund services and the welfare 
state, you have made it your mission to look after the hard-done-by 
shareholders of state-dependent companies.

Private firms earn £500m from government's fit-to-work scheme
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/27/private-firms-500m-governments-fit-to-work-scheme>
I realise it’s Christmas and anger should be reserved for burning the sprouts 
or arguing over the TV remote, but seriously, you should be teed off. Companies 
such as Atos and Capita are paid to carry out what are, frankly, pretty
degrading government tests on sick and disabled people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/12/benefits-assessment-ptsd-benefit>
 to see if they really do deserve benefits.

Many claimants fail these tests, forcing them to endure a long period of 
anxiety and worry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/27/the-punitive-treatment-of-our-daniel-blakes-by-the-benefits-system>
, and then go through a stressful appeal process. According to figures obtained 
by the Daily Mirror, six out of 10 of the 90,000 claimants who appealed overPIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/11/iain-duncan-smith-pip-payments-punish-poor-ill-dying>
 decisions won at tribunal. So the companies get a fat cheque, courtesy of HM 
Taxpayer, disabled people get treated appallingly, and all for what?

This is, in the grand scheme of things, a rich country. One of the richest 
countries that has ever existed, in fact. The problem is how we decide to 
allocate the nation’s huge wealth, much of it concentrated in all too few 
hands. Hundreds of millions are doled out to companies like Atos andCapita 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/capitagroup>, while our government does 
all it can to prise paltry sums of money from the hands of disabled people.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fapr%2F06%2Fcarers-versus-atos-image-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Carers%20versus%20Atos's%20attempts%20to%20protect%20its%20image%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fapr%2F06%2Fcarers-versus-atos-image-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Carers%20versus%20Atos%27s%20attempts%20to%20protect%20its%20image%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2012%2Fapr%2F06%2Fcarers-versus-atos-image-video&media=>
Carers versus Atos’s attempts to protect its image 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2012/apr/06/carers-versus-atos-image-video>
Just look at the society in which we live. Banks plunge the country into 
economic calamity, get bailed out with huge sums of money and yet so little is 
asked in return. Train companies that offer an embarrassing, uncomfortable 
service in exchange for rip-off ticket prices get subsidised to the tune of 
billions. Accountancy firms get lucrative state contracts to help draw up tax 
laws, then tell their wealthy clients how to get around them. The state has to 
step in to top up wages that millions cannot afford to live on, while landlords 
charging extortionate rents get billions in housing benefit. I could go on. And 
yet – while those at the top enjoy the generosity of the state – our country 
strips social security away from disabled people, fails to build housing, 
provide jobs with a decent living wage, and hacks away at essential services.

Atos <https://www.theguardian.com/society/atos> and Capita are just two 
striking examples, but there are countless others. It is unjust, unfair, but 
above all, it defies basic common sense. This is, to repeat, a wealthy country. 
Let’s start spending that wealth on people who need it, not the failed vested 
interests which certainly do not.
 