
The chief inspector of schools, Sir Michael Wilshaw, has claimed that the UK 
faces a “teacher brain drain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
” as newly qualified educators move abroad to find work. But actually it’s not 
just the warmer climate of places such as the Middle East that’s so appealing 
to the UK’s best teachers all of a sudden – it’s the warmer professional 
climate that the international schools offer that’s really alluring. That, 
along with tax-free pay and gratis accommodation.

But instead of looking at the real reason teachers are leaving, Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw> – in his arrogance – is 
firing warning shots at the teaching profession and saying, among other things, 
that teachers who have trained in our system should make a contractual 
commitment to teach in the UK for the first few years of their careers.

UK schools suffering as newly qualified teachers 'flock abroad'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
This will do nothing to address the real problems afflicting our education 
system <https://www.theguardian.com/education>. These words of warning come 
from a man who was instrumental – along with Michael Gove – in creating the 
problems in the first place. Wilshaw was instructed by Goveto raise standards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/10/michael-wilshaw-ofsted-smear-campaign-dfe-leak>
 not long after he took office in 2012. Ofsted suddenly got nasty. Helpful, 
patient guide dogs became ruthless, feral attack hounds, and were let loose on 
any school in the country they saw fit to rip to pieces. Any weakness in a 
school was ruthlessly exploited, and the results were catastrophic. Outstanding 
schoolswere downgraded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/feb/09/ofsted-chief-scrapping-satisfactory-rating>
 to just good. Good schools were suddenly deemed to be coasting, and 
satisfactory ones were rebranded as requiring improvement, a slightly more 
diplomatic way of saying “inadequate”, the fourth and most damning of verdicts. 
Suddenly nothing, it seemed, could ever be good enough.

An outstanding verdict – like a pardon for a death-row prisoner – became 
something that schools strove tirelessly to achieve, and, needless to say, the 
teaching profession rapidly lost heart. Stories of concern began circulating 
between school networks and online about inconsistencies within Ofsted’s own 
judgments, and before long the inspectorate knew it was in trouble. After 
toying with the wildly impractical idea of double inspections, it finally 
succumbed to pressure and purged some1,200 inspectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/jun/30/ofsted-learn-instead-alternative-inspections-headteachers-schools-naht>
 deemed “not good enough” in June 2014.

By then, of course, the damage was done. The government has failed to hit its 
teacher recruitment target 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/10/teachers-are-leaving-as-government-falls-short-on-recruitment-nao-finds>
 for the fourth year in a row, yet the heads of education secretary Nicky 
Morgan, schools minister Nick Gibb and the leaders of the department for 
education remain firmly wedged in the sand. Teachers of all shapes and sizes – 
from struggling fledglings, to those deemed outstanding and at the height of 
their careers – have been steadily leaving the profession, many to new career 
paths altogether, keen to forget their UK teaching nightmares. And there are 
many others who cannot leave teaching, and so will take their talent abroad, 
where they are valued much more highly. It would be incredibly naive to believe 
that this mass exodus had nothing to do with the recent behaviour of Ofsted.

So now Wilshaw, approaching the end of his tenure as Ofsted’s chief inspector, 
is trying to shape some sort of credible legacy. “We need to talk up the 
profession, and highlight the nobility of teaching,” he barked on Radio 4’s 
Today programme. This comes from the same man who claimed,in this very newspaper
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/jan/23/chief-inspector-schools-michael-wilshaw>
 back in 2012: “If anyone says to you that staff morale is at an all-time low, 
you know you are doing something right.”

This is the last throw of the dice for a desperate man responsible for ending 
many promising teaching careers

Wilshaw may well live to regret those ill-chosen words. They have arguably 
been the catalyst for everything that has gone so badly wrong for UK education 
ever since. His latest attempt to try to force newly qualified teachers to 
remain in the UK for the first two years of their careers, by means of magical 
golden handcuffs (details yet to be confirmed), is little short of blackmail. 
It’s also indicative of the systematically punitive measures he has delighted 
in imposing upon so many in the teaching profession during his tenure. It is 
the last throw of the dice for a desperate man who is responsible, directly or 
indirectly, for prematurely ending many promising teaching careers, whether it 
be through unmanageable workloads, heavy-handed monitoring and accountability 
measures or outright intimidation and bullying. Frankly, things have never been 
worse, and if Wilshaw is concerned about the long-term effects of a so-called 
brain-drain of UK teachers, he’s got only himself to blame.

Education has become a global institution in recent years, and Wilshaw’s 
successor would do well to be mindful of this when he or she takes over in 
December. International schools are opening in order to meet the rapidly 
growing needs of expat families whose careers are based overseas, yet who want 
their children to have access to a UK-style education. If the British 
government wants the best of its teachers to stick around and deliver this on 
home soil, it needs to provide good reasons for them to do so – and they need 
to be better reasons than flimsy, inconsequential pre-election workload surveys 
and1% pay increases <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-31852192>. Respect 
from Ofsted and the department for education, constructive rather than punitive 
criticism and realistic workload expectations would be a good start. Until that 
happens, the option to leave and work abroad for the UK-trained teacher isn’t 
so much of a brain-drain, as a complete no-brainer.
 