
Should universities take control of schools? The government thinks so
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/nov/30/should-universities-take-control-of-schools-the-government-thinks-so>
In the US, a crowdfunding website, DonorsChoose 
<https://www.donorschoose.org/about>, has helped raise millions of dollars for 
classroom resources, by asking the public to contribute. Could a similar setup 
work in the UK?Nesta, an innovation foundation and registered charity, is 
running a pilot project for the idea, with the aim of bridging the gap between 
schools and the world of tech. Product managerBen Gill spoke to us about the 
non-profit project, and how teachers can stay connected to tech.

Classrooms out of sync with tech

Over the years, we’ve seen shedloads of money going into edtech. There’s loads 
of exciting innovations coming up, but when you look at how tech is used in 
schools, you find huge variation. I’ve seen that from both sides: lots of 
startups are struggling to get market traction, and lots of schools aren’t 
using it.


To understand what’s going on I went to as many schools as I could, talking to 
teachers and headteachers. I found that the two worlds – schools and edtech – 
are almost like diverging universes. Everyone is trying to achieve the same 
thing, with the best intentions in mind: either trying to save teachers’ time, 
or improve learning outcomes. But unfortunately in many cases they’re not 
working together.

Tech-savvy headteachers tend to lead tech-savvy schools. But there can be lots 
of barriers – whether it’s a lack of budget, poor infrastructure, lack of 
support and training, or a lack of confidence. The final thing is teachers’ 
lack of time, which is a big problem. It takes time to learn what technology is 
available and choose what you want. Then it takes time to prepare to use it in 
your lesson.


Tablets out, imagination in: the schools that shun technology
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/dec/02/schools-that-ban-tablets-traditional-education-silicon-valley-london>
From the edtech perspective, it’s difficult because teachers are extremely 
busy and extremely hard to talk to. And even if you do get to talk to them, 
they haven’t got any budget anyway. Also, if teachers want to use technology, 
often there’s not adequate Wi-Fi or there are not devices in the classroom to 
use new apps.


Beating the budget cuts

In times of austerity or budget cuts, the first thing to go are luxury items. 
Sometimes, headteachers have to choose between staff or technology, and 
obviously they prioritise staff. However, that means budgets for technology 
have been decreasing, according toBesa reports 
<http://www.besa.org.uk/insights/ict-education-2016-research/> for the last few 
years. There’s a lack of overall budget provided by the government. But there’s 
also a lack of individual teacher budgets – they usually only have a few 
hundred pounds a year to spend on stuff, and most of it goes on photocopying, 
or things like that. So we decided there’s no point building a normal online 
marketplace for teachers if teachers haven’t got any money.


We decided to take a different angle and pilot an online fundraising platform 
for schools, called Rocket Fund 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/blog/launching-rocket-fund>. The aim is to allow 
teachers the freedom to buy things they think will have an impact in the 
classroom, which they might not be able to get otherwise.


People always ask me if this is supposed to be a replacement for government 
funding. That’s not the objective. The two safeguards we’ve put in to stop that 
is we’ve capped funding at £1,500 per project and it’s supposed to be for 
non-core items. So it’s not for desks and chairs and teachers; it’s for luxury 
items which you might not expect to be part of the core budget anyway. The way 
I see it is it’s an innovation fund, not a replacement fund – it’s not letting 
the government off the hook. It’s a way teachers can experiment with new things 
without risking their core budget.


Empowering teachers

Teachers want to be empowered to do their own thing. They want to be given the 
respect to teach how they want to teach – they know what will work best in 
their class. The exciting thing about this is that it empowers teachers to 
experiment with new things. If teachers find a piece of tech that’s absolutely 
amazing, then maybe it’ll become part of the standard package in the future. 
But this allows them to give it a try first, before we have a situation where 
technology is just dumped on every school in the country without thinking about 
how it’s going to work in practice.


Could computers ever replace teachers?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/feb/24/computers-replace-teachers>
Each school is unique. So it’s about how you use technology in your own 
particular situation. You can’t just dump iPads or Smartboards on schools and 
say: “Hey, this will solve everything”. Because, of course, if you give someone 
a car and they don’t have any driving lessons, they’re going to crash it pretty 
quickly. And within your particular class, one app might have might have more 
impact than another. So it’s important to get away from the one-size-fits-all 
approach.


In a dream world, in a few years time we’ll have a network of teachers who we 
know have bought iPads, or 3D printers or Lego Mindstorms. Then we can connect 
them as a network and find out how it’s going for them. It’s a great way to 
build a community from the ground up, sharing experiences and best practice.


Ben Gill is a product manager at Nesta 
<http://www.nesta.org.uk/users/ben-gill#sthash.wX7AWjWM.dpuf>, heading up the 
Rocket Fund <https://rocket.fund/> project.

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 