
Geoff Barton, head, King Edward school, Suffolk
 Geoff Barton 
We will run our own mock election in school this spring and have candidates 
doing hustings and poster campaigns. It wouldn’t at all surprise me if students 
ask staff how they plan to vote and I would be quite comfortable – in the 
context that the whole school will be talking about what the choices are – for 
teachers to say what choice they might make. It’s up to individual teachers, 
but we don’t have a blanket policy telling staff to keep it secret; doing so 
makes voting sound like a furtive act.

Francis Gilbert, English and media studies teacher, outer London
 Francis Gilbert 


Teachers are nervous about talking politics because you’ve got to be careful 
that you’re not offering propaganda.

The Tories are in a bit of a weak position: most teachers I’ve come across – 
even former Conservative voters – don’t like the Conservatives at the moment. 
That’s possibly obvious in the way that teachers talk about things happening in 
schools, like changes to exams: “It’s the government that forced us to do 
this”; “It’s the government that changed your results and made exams more 
difficult”. That might be an indirect way in which politics can come through. 
That said, I would never say I’m going to vote Labour or I’m going to vote Tory.

Tait Coles, vice-principal, Dixons city academy, Bradford
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821158765%2F18907e57-2984-491d-8ec5-809016396a59-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-1%23img-1&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821158765%2F18907e57-2984-491d-8ec5-809016396a59-680x1020.jpeg>
 Tait Coles 
If students asked me, I would turn the question around and ask them what 
they’d do. Young people spend pretty much their whole lives being controlled 
and indoctrinated about what and how to think by the media. Education is the 
only chance to turn that around and make them aware of how the world works. 
We’re an inner-city school – our students are interested in world and local 
issues and, quite rightly, things that affect them as a working-class kid from 
Bradford, or a Muslim from Bradford. Most feel completely removed from 
Westminster. But they will still be excited about the general election because 
we’ll do something about it – we have mock trials, debating societies, spoken 
word performances on issues like the Gaza crisis or the shootings in Paris. 
We’re trying to give students enough information to think critically.

Emma Ann Hardy, infant school teacher, East Riding of Yorkshire
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821237217%2F1080ecda-0992-4ade-be97-c409fbf1b513-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821237217%2F1080ecda-0992-4ade-be97-c409fbf1b513-680x1020.jpeg>
 Emma Hardy 
I’m very politically active in my local area but I don’t mention my politics 
at school. I don’t think you can – you’re in a position of trust as a teacher 
and are very influential. If parents don’t agree with your politics there might 
be complaints.

It does seem a shame because we want young people to be more politically 
involved – I remember, it was a discussion in history about the NHS that 
sparked my own interest.

For the past two years, I’ve run a debating team for 11-year-olds where we’ve 
talked about issues like fox-hunting and have visited parliament. There is an 
appetite for it. The problem is that if we want teachers to do more things like 
this, something else has to give.

Avais Qureshi, citizenship teacher, Barking Abbey school, London
 Avais Qureshi 
Students ask me how I vote all the time. Our school policy is “no personal 
views”. We don’t want to influence their choice. Teachers can be partial when 
it comes to policy, but you say: “Here are the people who introduced it; if 
they introduced it, they can also get rid of it; how can we make them do that?”

You can’t just go after personalities. And we wouldn’t say that Ukip is a 
racist party, we would say that so-and-so’s comments are classed as racist. In 
school we have a student council, debate clubs and all students do the 
citizenship GCSE short course: it wouldn’t make sense for us to shy away from 
political discussion. But lots of schools do politics at a superficial level, 
approaching only the safe topics. When it comes to controversial issues, I 
don’t think most teachers feel well equipped.

Chris Waller, professional officer, association for citizenship teaching
 Chris Waller 
It’s important for students to understand that it’s not for me [a teacher] to 
tell them who I’m going to vote for because that could be construed as me being 
biased. But I can talk about the perceived strengths and weaknesses of each 
party.

The new citizenship curriculum that Michael Gove introduced in September is 
now quite focused on the role of democracy within Britain. There is an issue 
over how competent teachers are at teaching all the different systems that make 
politics function – for example, the role of the speaker. The number of trained 
citizenship teachers is small.

The subject time varies. In primaries, citizenship is not compulsory, though 
most embrace aspects of it to provide a broad and balanced curriculum.

It is compulsory from age 11 to 16, but it’s entirely up to schools how they 
do this. Some schools have one hour a week, others will just have five or six 
off-timetable days.

Jackie Schneider, music teacher, London
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821696877%2F25460689-3b9a-4d0e-b008-b8accf5af969-680x1020.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Teachers%3A%20will%20you%20tell%20pupils%20how%20you%20plan%20to%20vote%20in%20the%20election%3F%20%7C%20Rebecca%20Ratcliffe&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2015%2Fjan%2F13%2F-sp-multiple-choice-general-election-schools-how-teachers-vote-pupils%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F1%2F9%2F1420821696877%2F25460689-3b9a-4d0e-b008-b8accf5af969-680x1020.jpeg>
 Jackie Schneider 
A Ukip councillor complained to my headteacher after I live-tweeted its public 
meeting. I had gone along, listened and then attempted to persuade the people 
at the meeting that blaming immigrants was not the answer. I told people there 
I was a teacher but didn’t speak on behalf of the school. I was shocked to 
discover that a Ukip councillor then complained about my tweets.

Nothing came of it and I was very grateful to the councillor who was chair of 
the children and young people scrutiny panel, who wrote to the local paper 
defending my right to make political tweets.

While I would never bring my politics into school to influence children, I do 
expect the right to take part in civic life. I worry though that some teachers 
are nervous about speaking out. In my experience, many prefer to remain 
anonymous when discussing politics online.
 