
In a new paper 
<http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JCLI-D-15-0744.1?af=R&>, Carl 
Mears and Frank Wentz at Remote Sensing Systems (RSS) have revised their data 
set estimating the temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere. At his recent 
congressional hearing, Ted Cruz presented the RSS datato incorrectly claim 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/18/ted-cruz-fact-check-which-temperature-data-are-the-best>
 that there’s been no global warming in over 18 years.

Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8BnkI5vqr_0&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8BnkI5vqr_0>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8BnkI5vqr_0&media=>
 Video explaining the satellite temperature record, by Peter Sinclair. 
As I noted at the time 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/18/ted-cruz-fact-check-which-temperature-data-are-the-best>
, RSS had the only data that could remotely support Senator Cruz’s argument. 
Surface and ocean temperatures have warmed, ice has melted, sea levels have 
risen, species have been forced to migrate, spring has begun earlier, and so on.


Even other estimates of the atmospheric temperature, of the same satellite 
data by scientists at the University of Alabama at Huntsville (UAH), and by 
weather balloons, indicate that the atmosphere is warming.Ted Cruz 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ted-cruz> cherry picked RSS because it was 
the lone outlier that seemed to support his preferred argument against the need 
to take action to mitigate the risks posed by human-caused global warming.


That’s no longer the case. In their new paper, Mears and Wentz detail the 
revised RSS method to account for drift in the time of day at which satellites 
measure the same location on Earth (known as “diurnal drift”, discussed by 
Mears at the 0:47 mark in the above video). They applied a method suggested by 
Stephen Po-Chedley and colleagues at the University of Washington in an 
importantpaper covered by John Abraham last year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/mar/25/one-satellite-data-set-is-underestimating-global-warming>
. As a result, the new version of RSS (v4.0) shows about 60% more warming than 
the previous version (v3.3) since the record began in 1979.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81f9436040d3eb10901c17bd70e425c95e09b2d%2F0_0_903_452%2F903.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz's%20favorite%20temperature%20data%20just%20got%20a%20lot%20hotter%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Cruz%27s%20favorite%20temperature%20data%20just%20got%20a%20lot%20hotter%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd81f9436040d3eb10901c17bd70e425c95e09b2d%2F0_0_903_452%2F903.jpg>
 RSS mid-troposphere temperature, v3.3 and v4.0. Illustration: Mears & Wentz 
(2016), Journal of Climate. 
This new adjustment also helps to reconcile the divergence between atmospheric 
temperature estimates from satellites and weather balloons 
<https://tamino.wordpress.com/2015/12/11/ted-cruz-just-plain-wrong/>. Over most 
of the temperature record, the estimates using the two different types of 
instruments have been similar, and the satellite data are calibrated with the 
weather ballon data. However, over the past decade, the weather balloons had 
shown significantly more atmospheric warming than the satellite estimates. RSS 
v4.0 goes a long way toward bringing these measurements into closer agreement.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3201b404ce196ea146b70ebf6f7b1705acc36529%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ted%20Cruz's%20favorite%20temperature%20data%20just%20got%20a%20lot%20hotter%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ted%20Cruz%27s%20favorite%20temperature%20data%20just%20got%20a%20lot%20hotter%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fmar%2F03%2Fted-cruzs-favorite-temperature-data-just-got-a-lot-hotter%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3201b404ce196ea146b70ebf6f7b1705acc36529%2F0_0_677_461%2F677.jpg>
 Mid troposphere temperature estimates and linear trends (2006–2015) from RSS 
v3.3, RSS v4.0, UAH v6.0, and weather balloons (RATPAC). Illustration: Dana 
Nuccitelli 
As Joe Romm noted at Climate Progress 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/03/02/3755715/satellites-hottest-february-global-warming/>
, Roy Spencer and John Christy at UAHspeculated over 4 years ago 
<http://www.drroyspencer.com/2011/07/on-the-divergence-between-the-uah-and-rss-global-temperature-records/>
 that the RSS diurnal drift correction method was introducing a cool bias into 
their record.

my UAH cohort and boss John Christy, who does the detailed matching between 
satellites, is pretty convinced that the RSS data is undergoing spurious 
cooling because RSS is still using the old NOAA-15 satellite which has a 
decaying orbit, to which they are then applying a diurnal cycle drift 
correction based upon a climate model, which does not quite match reality.

This new paper and latest RSS adjustment once again highlight the challenges 
scientists face in converting measurements of atmospheric microwave emissions 
by satellites in orbit into a synthetic temperature estimate. It’s a 
complicated process that requires a complex model with large uncertainties 
involved, and as Carl Mears has noted, it’s certainly unwise to rely 
exclusively on these estimates of one small component of the Earth’s climate to 
evaluate global warming.

Nevertheless, Spencer has just reported that February 2016 was the hottest 
month on record 
<http://www.drroyspencer.com/2016/03/uah-v6-global-temperature-update-for-feb-2016-0-83-deg-c-new-record/>
 in the UAH data set;the same is true of RSS 
<http://data.remss.com/msu/graphics/TMT_v40/time_series/RSS_TS_channel_TMT_Global_Land_And_Sea_v04_0.txt>
, and weather balloons are also registering record hot atmospheric 
temperatures, as the above chart shows.

It’s now clear that Senator Cruz has been hoisted by his own petard. He and 
his hearing witnesses claimed that the satellite data from RSS represent our 
best measurement of global warming. Whilethat’s not true 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/18/ted-cruz-fact-check-which-temperature-data-are-the-best>
, this latest correction to the RSS record shows that global warming continues, 
in the atmosphere as with every other component of the Earth’s climate, at 
record hot levels. Instead of congressional hearings denying the existence of 
global warming, we need hearings to debate the best way to solve the problem.

 