
In some parts of higher education, contact hours have become synonymous with 
quality. Students want more of them, as the annualHepi-HEA student academic 
experience survey 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.hepi.ac.uk%2Fwp-content%2Fuploads%2F2016%2F06%2FStudent-Academic-Experience-Survey-2016.pdf&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=%2B9LC%2FFdewdVJ4zDfFTJ1yhmtTlufw%2B9O8F1w0z7sI3E%3D&reserved=0>
 [pdf] highlights year after year. Universities point to them when showing 
applicants that they offer value for money. And now, the government is 
considering including a measure of contact hours in theTeaching Excellence 
Framework 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.gov.uk%2Fgovernment%2Fuploads%2Fsystem%2Fuploads%2Fattachment_data%2Ffile%2F523546%2Fbis-16-265-success-as-a-knowledge-economy-web.pdf&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=gGxooDHMZrZU7OLmGvBQJBZcIY2B2C2ea%2BglpbgKlec%3D&reserved=0>
 [pdf].

Imagine a Tef that actually measured teaching excellence...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/26/imagine-a-tef-that-actually-measured-teaching-excellence>
But it is not that simple. Nationally, courses 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fviewer.gutools.co.uk%2Feducation%2Fstudents%2Ftables%2F0%2C%2C1574402%2C00.html&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=xcK8AtH33sD0DO3%2BuqD%2Fjzfd0x8tf9wO%2FA1eD6GRukY%3D&reserved=0>
 with some of the most satisfied students have the fewest contact hours 
(philosophy, theology and religious studies). So when measuring how good a 
course is, should we look at contact hours at all? If more is not necessarily 
better, how should universities decide the right amount of contact hours?

Quality or quantity?


There are massive variations in workload across subjects – particularly in the 
mix of contact time and independent study. This is a concern for some students, 
especially those on humanities courses who have only a couple of contact hours 
a week, and compare themselves to friends studying medicine or dentistry.

But it’s difficult to make value judgements on this basis. Not all contact 
hours are the same – class sizes and teaching vary hugely.Research 
<http://www.kcl.ac.uk/study/learningteaching/kli/People/Research/DL/QAAReport.pdf>
 [pdf] funded by the Quality Assurance Agency found that students did not want 
more contact time if it simply meant more large lectures. Whenasked 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.kcl.ac.uk%2Fstudy%2Flearningteaching%2Fkli%2FPeople%2FResearch%2FDL%2FQAAReport.pdf&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=xWCdYGi2N0QKqwuvM3S86wqInWYhGT8rsYtqFpvdctw%3D&reserved=0>
 [pdf] what would help them select a course, students wanted to know if they 
would be taught by well-qualified, trained teaching staff in small settings.

Focusing on measuring contact time runs the risk of obsessing about the number 
of hours, rather than the quality – or the importance of extra-curricular 
activities and work experience.

Beyond the classroom


Recent findings from the HEA UK Engagement Survey 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.heacademy.ac.uk%2Fuk-engagement-survey-2016-student-engagement-and-skills-development%23section-2&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=XjMGHImc2s85vH2eSmDi4xDBpPRUux7g4ZzTvfeEisA%3D&reserved=0>
 (UKES) provide further evidence that simply allocating more classes to 
students might not benefit them.


UKES asked students to self-report their development of academic skills such 
as writing and critical thinking. It also asked them about the extent to which 
they engage with different educationally purposeful activities, such as 
interacting with staff and other students, how challenging their course is, how 
they have spent their time and what they feel they have gained from their 
experience.


Tef: dump the pointless metrics and take a hard look at casualisation
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/nov/08/tef-dump-the-pointless-metrics-and-take-a-hard-look-at-casualisation>
The study indicated that it’s not just the amount of time spent with tutors 
that matters – it’s also the time spent studying individually.

The students who were most successful at developing their academic skills were 
those who had a balance of contact hours, independent study and engagement with 
extra-curricular activities. This supports thefindings of previous graduate 
surveys 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.co.uk%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj%26q%3D%26esrc%3Ds%26source%3Dweb%26cd%3D6%26ved%3D0ahUKEwjawNbii5nQAhWoIsAKHY3wCrkQFgg8MAU%26url%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fhighfliers.org.uk%252Fngcc-2016%252Fdownload.php%253Ffile%253Duk_graduate_careers_survey_2016_report.pdf%26usg%3DAFQjCNFPWbdisFBxisK73IcwBihzenrRsw%26sig2%3DS01MXS0ZIwgyyI1IRb72nw%26cad%3Drja&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=pwenWGhcPG6TPB6CYrCp5eYhTWDgp0cwjkDtQomeBn4%3D&reserved=0>
, which show that students who take part in more work outside of their course 
are more employable. Not only are they more likely to get jobs, they also tend 
to getbetter jobs 
<https://emea01.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.google.co.uk%2Furl%3Fsa%3Dt%26rct%3Dj%26q%3D%26esrc%3Ds%26source%3Dweb%26cd%3D6%26ved%3D0ahUKEwjawNbii5nQAhWoIsAKHY3wCrkQFgg8MAU%26url%3Dhttp%253A%252F%252Fhighfliers.org.uk%252Fngcc-2016%252Fdownload.php%253Ffile%253Duk_graduate_careers_survey_2016_report.pdf%26usg%3DAFQjCNFPWbdisFBxisK73IcwBihzenrRsw%26sig2%3DS01MXS0ZIwgyyI1IRb72nw%26cad%3Drja&data=01%7C01%7Ccamille.kandiko_howson%40kcl.ac.uk%7C3d379441227a42d52a8908d407f57738%7C8370cf1416f34c16b83c724071654356%7C0&sdata=pwenWGhcPG6TPB6CYrCp5eYhTWDgp0cwjkDtQomeBn4%3D&reserved=0>
.


UKES found that beneficial activities include participating in sports and 
societies, doing volunteer work and having caring responsibilities. All of 
these activities help students to develop key skills – and in some surprising 
ways. Students are more likely to develop their academic skills if they are 
doing paid work. Having a part-time job can force students to schedule their 
time and prioritise studying when they can – and keep them from having too many 
late nights out. Meanwhile, lessons learned from caring can help students 
develop key critical thinking and problem-solving skills, and volunteering has 
a positive impact on civic skills but an even larger one on employability.

How to judge quality

 Given the variation in contact hours between disciplines, it’s clear there’s 
no one single measure for quality. Institutions should be able to tailor their 
offering to meet the unique needs of their students, and not fit into a 
one-size-fits-all model.

Will the Teaching Excellence Framework be sexist?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/apr/04/will-the-teaching-excellence-framework-be-sexist>
And, if student applicants have a right to know about contact hours, surely 
they also need to know what activities are on offer to undergraduates and how 
universities support students who choose to take part? Some of this is explored 
in the UKES data but more research is needed.

Hefce is now running a series of pilot projects that will explore different 
ways of measuring student progress and the types of institutional conditions 
that help support student success. The projects are still underway, but already 
they highlight the need for a variety of metrics to be used when judging the 
quality of different subjects and universities.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 