
The government claims that its new Teaching Excellence Framework (Tef) will 
put students at the “heart of the system”. Unfortunately, the metrics being 
used for the Tef tell us little about teaching quality and nothing about how we 
could improve things.

For example, what does a “future employment” metric actually tell us about 
teaching quality? If we look closely at the data, we are most likely to learn 
that a graduate’s chances of landing a decent job are heavily shaped by things 
such as social class, ethnicity, geographical location, institutional 
reputation and subject choice. That would hardly be revelatory.


Imagine a Tef that actually measured teaching excellence...
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/oct/26/imagine-a-tef-that-actually-measured-teaching-excellence>
Casualisation counts

One aspect of university life that has been ignored by the Tef thus far is the 
issue of casualisation. Yet there is now alarge body of research 
<https://www.nea.org/assets/docs/HE/e-Kezar.pdf> in the US, over a 20-year 
period, that shows it has a clear impact on teaching quality.

Insecure working practices now permeate every section of our society. Although 
students probably don’t realise it, most of them are taught at some point, 
perhaps even for majority of their time at university, bypeople on insecure 
casual contracts 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/news/fixed-term-now-the-norm-for-early-career-academics-says-university-and-college-union-ucu>
. Some universities have been accused of trying toape the worst practices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/27/low-paid-workers-sports-direct-university-staff-rights-mike-ashley>
 of the likes of Sport Direct.


 The exploitative use of casualised contracts – including hourly-paid, 
part-time and even zero-hours ones – breeds insecurity and stress, and forces 
people to work long hours for poor pay. Many work for more than one university 
to make ends meet. It cannot be right that the people teaching our students are 
constantly anxious, not knowing from year-to-year, term-to-term, or even 
month-to-month, whether they will have a job or how much they might earn.

Will the Teaching Excellence Framework be a licence for universities to raise 
fees?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/22/teaching-excellence-framework-universities-tuition-fees-tef>
Inevitably, casualisation has an impact on education. US research 
<https://www.nea.org/assets/docs/HE/e-Kezar.pdf> demonstrates that students who 
take large numbers of courses with teachers employed on insecure contracts, or 
who are in institutions with large numbers of non-permanent staff, tend to 
graduate at a lower rate and are more likely to drop out of college.

The Delphi project 
<http://www.uscrossier.org/pullias/research/projects/delphi/>, which was set up 
to look at increased casualisation in the US, has noted a correlation between 
increases in the use of part-time staff and negative effects on student 
learning. It argues that, no matter how good they are as teachers, those 
employed on casual contracts have working conditions that make it impossible 
for them consistently to reproduce the high quality interactions with students 
that can be achieved by those on decent, secure contracts.

Early-career academics who teach at private universities in America have 
recentlywon the right to unionise 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/nov/07/weve-fought-for-decades-us-graduate-teachers-win-workers-rights>
, and collectively bargain for better conditions.

Poor contact

Casualisation is bad for both staff and students: on the one hand it makes it 
more difficult for students to make contact with hard-pressed casual staff 
often paid only by the hour; and on the other it denies talented teachers the 
job security they need to maximise their own academic potential.

English universities to be ranked gold, silver and bronze
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/29/english-universities-ranked-gold-silver-and-bronze>
The research makes much of the quality of interactions between staff and 
students. It suggests that students from non-traditional backgrounds are more 
likely to experience academic success and express satisfaction with their 
academic experience if they have good support from staff.

The UK government should be looking at the findings in the US and, at the very 
least, considering research of its own, to uncover more about the relationship 
between casualisation and teaching quality.

If the government truly cared about teaching quality, it would spend less time 
forging ahead with its controversial higher education bill – complete with a 
Tef built up out of unreliable metrics – and more time looking at the way 
universities treat their insecure staff.

 It could start by asking universities to publish what percentage of 
undergraduate teaching is done by non-permanent staff. Bringing this out into 
the open would transform expectations and genuinely place teachers and students 
at the heart of the system.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 