
A wise government facing the multiple threats of Brexit would strive in every 
way to mitigate its worst effects. The chancellordashes to Wall Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/06/pound-sterling-chancellor-hammond-wall-street-charm-offensive-business-live?page=with:block-57f5f228e4b0e2a2a25af768#block-57f5f228e4b0e2a2a25af768>
 today to try to calm markets as thepound falls again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/06/pound-sterling-chancellor-hammond-wall-street-charm-offensive-business-live>
 and future investment to Britain is in jeopardy: the idea of Philip Hammond on 
a “charm offensive” may be a tad improbable – but at least he’s trying.

Pound under pressure as chancellor Hammond launches Wall Street charm 
offensive – business live
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/oct/06/pound-sterling-chancellor-hammond-wall-street-charm-offensive-business-live>
Not so the prime minister, home secretary and health secretary: in a hole, 
they keep digging.

They are right that immigration must be addressed when every poll and focus 
group showed it was at the heart of the Brexit vote – but what kind of 
immigrants? If there is “good” and “bad” migration,doctors, nurses and care 
workers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/03/jeremy-hunt-promises-to-end-nhs-reliance-on-overseas-doctors-after-brexit>
 would surely top the “good” list. So wouldstudents swelling university coffers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/04/rudd-announces-crackdown-on-overseas-students-and-new-work-visas>
, returning home to influential jobs with a fond connection to Britain, 
spreading our soft power round the world. Yet they have picked on both these 
groups this week in a fit of self-harming madness.

The popular anti-immigrant fears that stirred antagonism towards the EU were 
caused by scenes such as the thousands of peoplestruggling to the EU in boats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/05/refugee-crisis-italy-more-than-10000-rescued-off-coast-sicily>
 or the east Europeans packed into slum housing bygang masters serving 
car-washes and farmers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/may/11/gangsters-on-our-doorstep>.

But why pick on doctors at a time of severe shortage, when some units are 
closing for lack of qualified medics? Everyone welcomes Jeremy Hunt’s 
announcement of 1,500 more medical school places by 2018. When we need more 
doctors, it makes no sense to turn away so many able applicants. Though somehow 
it has slipped Hunt’s memory that his government cut medical training places by 
2% in 2012, and only last yearcut the Health Education England budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/21/george-osborne-considers-axeing-student-nurse-bursaries>
 for training.

The puzzle is why anyone would insult the one third of NHS doctors born abroad 
by suggesting they are only “interim”, as May said. We need both homegrown and 
foreign staff, all we can find, and scour the world for more. Since the Brexit 
vote agencies are struggling to recruit nurses and doctors abroad. As ministers 
refuse to guarantee the right for EU staff to stay, NHS doctors and nurses feel 
insecure and unwelcome – and many may slip away. Ed Smith, chair of NHS 
Improvement, the regulator,writes in the Telegraph 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/10/05/driving-out-foreign-doctors-could-put-patients-at-risk-nhs-watch/>
 warning of the risk to patients if overseas staff are made to feel 
“demoralised and diminished”. Simon Stevens, head of NHS Englandrecently wrote 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/07/18/the-radical-blueprint-the-nhs-needs-to-survive-life-after-brexit/>
: “It should be completely uncontroversial to provide early reassurance to 
international NHS employees about their continued welcome in this country.”

Jeremy Hunt’s claim that we will be ‘self-sufficient' in medical staff is 
nonsense – and he knows it

Hunt’s claim that we will be “self-sufficient” in medical staff is nonsense – 
and he knows it. These new doctors won’t qualify as consultants until 2030, 
while everywhere has ageing populations and the World Health Organisation 
estimates a global shortage of 2 million doctors. The number of people in 
Britain over the age of 85 will double by 2037 – and who is to care for them if 
we chase away all foreigners?

Hunt is right to oblige British-born doctors to pay back with four years’ 
service to theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> – but that’s not 
enough. And it’s only necessary because of all he has done to alienate junior 
doctors instead of wooing them to stay for life. Treasuring them, begging them 
not to depart for easier work in Australia would be economic prudence. Scaring 
away the foreign-born doctors will do untold damage.

The NHS has lost a decade in progress, returning to where it was 10 years ago 
in A&E-waiting and ambulance-response times. Waiting lists for operations are 
at their highest since 2007.

Theresa May consigns Cameron to history in populist conference speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-consigns-cameron-to-history-in-populist-speech>
The social care calamity in local government has helped tip the NHS into 
crisis – a crisis happening right across the UK, where doctors are needed 
everywhere. Over 60% of care workers in London are foreign-born, mainly from 
outside the EU, people May could have banished long before Brexit. But the 
government knows that if it drives out cheap foreign care-labour it will need 
to pay higher rates with better conditions to attract British-born staff. Good 
idea, but will they raise the tax to do it?

Paeans of praise poured from the prime minister in her speech on Wednesday, 
bidding to be the party of the NHS. But she showed no sign of confronting the 
NHS crisis. Instead, it was a go-home message to invaluable NHS and social care 
staff. She looks and sounds like a safe pair of hands – but we may find her 
neither as practical nor as competent as she pretends.
 