
Book early for the best deals, say travel agents; January and February are the 
busiest months for tour operators as families book for the summer. But research 
has found that while you should book ahead for short journeys on such airlines 
asRyanair <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ryanair> or easyJet, it’s 
better to wait until much later for the best deals on long-haul flights.

The best time to book a short-haul flight is at least 70 days (2.5 months) in 
advance of flying, according to online booking agent Tripsta. But if it’s a 
long-haul destination that you’re after – such as New York, Bangkok or Sydney – 
then it is better to hold your nerve and wait until closer to your departure 
date.

The researchers found that for long-haul travel you should book no more than 
47 days in advance, “and if you are brave enough, try leaving it even later”.

BA owner to launch low-cost flights to US from Barcelona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/23/ba-owner-to-launch-low-cost-flights-to-us-from-barcelona>
For example, Guardian Money tested flights to New York departing next 
Saturday, 7 January, returning two weeks later on Saturday 21 January. The 
cheapest deal for a direct flight was £410 on Virgin Atlantic. Booking far in 
advance, for an equally quiet period of travel in late November 2017, the 
cheapest price for a direct flight was £482.

But if you follow the same strategy with Ryanair or easyJet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/easyjet>, you are likely to get your 
fingers burned. Their business model is to offer the cheapest tickets on a 
first-come, first-served basis; as the clock ticks down towards the departure 
date the prices begin to rise. However, note that Ryanair holds sales on some 
routes around two to three months ahead of departure date, so keep an eye out 
for those.

There are many other tips for bagging a bargain on flights. Here are our top 
10:

1. Always book on a Sunday

According to Expedia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/jul/12/rabbit-expedia-advert-stuart-heritage>
, more business travellers make bookings on Fridays, and the airlines and 
hotels price accordingly. By choosing to book on a Sunday (although not 
necessarily travelling on a Sunday) you can save up to 30%.

2. Buy long-haul on Tuesdays

According to website Skyscanner 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/24/skyscanner-sold-to-chinas-ctrip-in-14bn-deal>
: “Quite a few airlines release their last-minute weekend deals on a Tuesday, 
as they tend to start their sales on a Monday evening – as competitors scrabble 
to compete, by Tuesday afternoon you could be bagging a sweet bargain on your 
air fare.”

3. Stay away over a Saturday

By including a Saturday night stay in your flight you can save up to 34% on 
average when travelling within Europe, says Expedia, but this rises to 74% for 
flights within central Europe. “Airlines often try to segmentbusiness versus 
leisure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/may/13/easyjet-business-travel-allocated-seating>
 travellers by filing cheaper fares that require a Saturday night stay,” says 
Expedia.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09263b979af311feb40cbf84cc2ee7abbd3a63f%2F0_106_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa09263b979af311feb40cbf84cc2ee7abbd3a63f%2F0_106_2676_1606%2F2676.jpg>
 Including a Saturday night stay can save you up to 34% on average on your 
flights when travelling within Europe. Photograph: AFP/Getty Images 
4. Try this easyJet trick 


Martin Lewis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/martin-lewis-money-saving-expert-lehman-brexit-homeowners-savers-uk-trade>
 of MoneySavingExpert says there’s a loophole in easyJet’s “Flexi” fare, which 
allows you to get round peak time prices in the summer school holidays. “Book a 
Flexi fare on the same route at a less busy time, when flights are cheaper; 
after 24 hours, provided there’s capacity, you can switch it to the dates you 
originally wanted at no extra charge. It’s not the easiest trick in the book, 
but if it works it could save you hundreds of pounds,” he says.

5. Remove cookies


It may be an urban myth, but regular flyers swear that flight prices increase 
when a particular route is repeatedly searched. You candelete cookies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/blog/2010/aug/07/computer-cookies-booking-online>
 by heading to the internet options button in “tools” on Microsoft Internet 
Explorer, or by heading to “settings” in Google Chrome.

6. Avoid some specific dates 


These are always the first five Fridays of the school summer holidays. Tripsta 
says flights toAlghero in Italy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/travel/2015/aug/02/holiday-guide-sardinias-best-beaches-restaurants-hotels>
, departing this summer on Friday 4 August, were selling for £304, but if the 
traveller switched dates to Wednesday 17 August the price fell to £143.

7. Return on a Friday

A summer trip to Alicante was £325 booked last minute and returning the 
following Sunday. If the traveller could face returning on the Friday, and had 
booked earlier, the price dropped to £110.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdc0979ad1dfd72473009ef410a2aea0d46446e%2F0_404_2555_1533%2F2555.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1bdc0979ad1dfd72473009ef410a2aea0d46446e%2F0_404_2555_1533%2F2555.jpg>
 There are ways to avoid paying more for flights during school holidays.
 Photograph: Luke Macgregor/Reuters 
8. Use different search engines

Skyscanner is great for a quick overview of prices. But be wary of excessive 
card charges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2011/feb/11/which-consumers-card-charges-ryanair-easyjet>
 made by some operators which enable them to offer “cheap” flights but which 
come with a sting in the tail.Kayak 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2013/aug/17/how-find-cheap-hotel-room> 
allows you to filter options based on card fees. Momondo is good for 
inspiration. Expedia is good for flight/hotel combinations. In the US, try 
AirfareWatchDog for alerts on cheap deals. JacksFlightClub claims to hunt down 
pricing errors and email you when they occur.

9. Consider split ticketing


Take the concept of “split ticketing” on the railways and apply it to 
airlines. That’s what Skiplagged.com does after discovering that sometimes a 
flight that connects in the city you want to go to is cheaper than flying 
directly to it. They call it “hidden city flights”, although it only really 
works in the US. Its promoters are currently engaged in a legal battle with 
United Airlines, and it can only work if you have no luggage apart from 
carry-on.

10. Mix and match

It’s always cheaper midweek, on both short and long haul. And always check 
single as well as return ticket prices, and mix and match airlines. There is 
no rule that says because you choose to fly Ryanair to Madrid you can’t fly 
back with easyJet.

Expedia’s new loyalty scheme

Expedia is the first major holiday booking website to launch a loyalty 
programme, similar to air miles.

It will give holidaymakers two “Expedia+” points for every £1 spent on a 
flight-plus-hotel package, or one point for every £5 spent on flights.Points 
can then be used to obtain as much as 3% off the price of further bookings, 
with no ‘blackout’ periods common on other travel reward schemes. A couple 
heading to Ibiza this summer on a £2,450 package including flights, hotels and 
car hire would qualify for £67 off the price of their next trip, or equal to 
2.75% cash back. Expedia also promises free room upgrades and other perks for 
travellers who book at least 15 nights and enter its “gold tier” membership, 
although members of Expedia’s similar scheme in the US have complained that 
upgrades have sometimes failed to materialise.

As with all loyalty schemes, travellers should check the price of flights or 
hotel combinations on a variety of websites before booking, but if Expedia is 
the cheapest there is no harm in joining the rewards programme, which is free. 
Using Expedia+ does not stop you collecting on other schemes such as Nectar or 
using their credit cards to pay for flights and pick up air miles.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94d8a894fe9fa4981fab3fa96f00ed1ee850b8a0%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Ten%20ways%20to%20save%20money%20on%20your%20holiday%20flights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ften-ways-save-money-holiday-flights%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F94d8a894fe9fa4981fab3fa96f00ed1ee850b8a0%2F0_0_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Londoners could find that flying to Dublin is a lot cheaper from Birmingham 
airport. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images 
Flying from a different airport can save a lot of money


Flying home for Christmas and the New Year can be an expensive affair, Shane 
Hickey writes, even if you book well in advance. A few years ago, faced with 
return fares of £400 for two for a trip from London to Dublin, I found an 
unlikely, cheaper alternative: Birmingham airport.

Living in north-east London, flying from Stansted makes the most sense. At 
Christmas, however, prices skyrocket, particularly for the most convenient 
times of day. Travelling to Birmingham airport, meanwhile, takes just an hour 
and 10 minutes from Euston, and the station is located in the terminal building.
Flights <https://www.theguardian.com/travel/flights> cost just over £190 for 
two return when they were booked at the start of October – some 50% cheaper 
than if we had flown from Stansted or Heathrow. The return train fares to the 
airport came in at £38.40, after savings from a Two Together railcard were 
applied.

Planning ahead is key for Christmas and New Year travel on budget airlines – 
return flights for two people to Dublin from London, booking just before 
Christmas, were £696.
 