
Like old soldiers, whenever tenants unlucky enough to live in the UK’s broken 
private rented sector get together, we show our battle scars and compete for 
the worst story. It’s no surprise four out of 10 British homes aren’t up to 
standard,according to Shelter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/16/four-in-10-british-homes-not-up-to-standard-says-shelter>
.

Four in 10 British homes not up to standard, says Shelter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/16/four-in-10-british-homes-not-up-to-standard-says-shelter>
In among violent illegal evictions, sexual harassment and assaults, there’s 
the tenant whose flat, his home, the one he pays rent for, has had a leaky roof 
for six years. The landlord shrugs off the damage caused to his property, 
reasoning that water is absorbed by insulation installed and subsidised by 
government funding. There’s the tenant whose kitchen wall was collapsing and 
dangerous. The landlord was compelled by council inspectors to make it safe, 
but immediately issued a notice to quit, because he was miffed but also because 
he could – a perfectly legal practice often referred to as “revenge evictions”.)

My own worst experiences involve a potentially lethal gas boiler, eventually 
repaired by the landlord’s outraged friend, who called him to scream: “What’s 
wrong with you? Your daughter lives there and this could kill her.” (I lived 
there too, but hey.) Or the slimy sinister “cousins” of one rentier who arrived 
to install a shower bringing wine, suggesting we should “partay”. They left 
rebuffed, but unbeknown to us also donated bare wires encased in damp plaster 
to the household. When a council officer ordered our landlord bluntly with 
industrial language to make it good, we, his endangered tenants, were referred 
to as “bitches”.

It’s the inaction borne of entitlement that frequently causes problems. The 
owner is entitled to profit, and balks at spending minor amounts for repairs 
for their “whining tenants”, even when the home is ankle-deep in water from a 
leak. This can lead to cases such as the tragedy ofThirza Whitall 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/5779475/Young-mother-electrocuted-by-bath-taps.html>
, electrocuted in a bath by lethal faulty wiring.

Cold, wet weather is coming, and many of us know that inefficient heating 
systems need looking at

Thanks to Shelter’s excellent report 
<http://www.shelter.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0011/1287848/living_home_standard_full_report.pdf>
 Living Home Standard, we know that nearly half of rented properties are 
substandard. What this means is they are infested with vermin, leaking, 
insecure in tenure, damp or cold. And tenants feel unable to complain since 
they can be issued with notice to leave on a whim. Most renters have extreme 
tales, but it’s the everyday misery of no security and the possibility of 
no-fault evictions that cause major woe.

What can be done? Well, ideally, fresh laws can be introduced, similar to 
those recently introduced in Scotland 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-34477176> banning 
no-fault evictions, preventing landlords from exacting revenge by turfing 
tenants out whenever they see fit. We need new strictly enforced legislation, 
so that errant rentiers forfeit the property and must pay damages when 
properties fall into such disrepair.

It’s also about education. Smaller non-institutional landlords should receive 
training about their responsibilities, such as the notion that proper 
maintenance cares for their investment, meaning tenants stay longer, thereby 
avoiding agency fees for finding new occupants when residents give up and 
leave. This would prevent anyone from imagining that letting property involves 
sitting back and raking-in enormous stacks of easy money while doing absolutely 
nothing.

It gets us tenants down, you see. Cold, wet weather is coming, and many of us 
know that inefficient heating systems need looking at. This increases our 
energy bills, so we sit huddled on rickety furniture wrapped in a thick layer 
of woollens, blankets, hats and gloves, fingers and noses frozen – because why 
should the landlord indulge our childish demands to have a properly heated home?

A vulnerable woman. A derelict home. Day 20 without running water | Frances 
Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/14/vulnerable-woman-derelict-home-no-running-water>
Sometimes the letting agent is at fault, employing in-house repair teams to 
shock landlords with extortionate plumbing costs, until owners refuse to spend 
any money at all on their investment. It’s also down to a question of renting 
culture, where some owners regard tenants as beneficiaries of their largesse, 
not hard-pushed adults paying to live in a decent home, which should be of an 
acceptable standard.

Another way forward may be for tenants to unite and organise. This is already 
happening nationwide with campaign groupAcorn 
<http://www.acorncommunities.org.uk/our_action_against_tenancy_fees_is_news>, 
and in Scotland withtenants’ union Living Rent <http://www.livingrent.org/>. I 
attended the AGM a few weeks ago, and signs were hopeful. Scottish tenants do 
not pay upfront agency fees and restrictions on rent rises and an end to 
no-fault evictions were included in new legislation.

I hope that within a few years, older tenants will gather at Halloween in 
candlelight (for effect, not because the lights don’t work) to scare young 
people with terrifying stories about the bad old days and what they did in the 
tenant wars: how they fought and won. This situation can’t go on. We need safe, 
warm, secure, long-term housing, not freezing rat-infested hovels. The new 
Shelter living home standard doesn’t demand gold-plated taps flowing with free 
champagne, simply the right to a safe, affordable property we can treat as a 
home. When you remember that homes can also be lethal, it should be obvious 
what needs to be done.
 