
The cyber heist at Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> Bank 
been described by the chief executive of the City regulator as an 
“unprecedented” incident in the UK.

Andrew Bailey, chief executive of the Financial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, told MPs on 
the Treasury select committee that “there are elements of this that look 
unprecedented and it is serious, clearly”.

Tesco Bank stopped all online transactions for 140,000 current account 
customers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-freezes-transactions-online-attack>
 on Monday after it discovered 40,000 customers had been targeted by the online 
attack. Half of the customers had money taken from their accounts, which are 
operated through an app or online. Customers have reported that sums have been 
transferred to Spain and Brazil.

Tesco Bank fraud: key questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-fraud-key-questions-answered-suspicious-transactions-40000-accounts>
The National Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency (NCA) is 
one of a number of organisations scrutinising what has taken place at the 
supermarket chain’s banking arm, which has more than 7 million customers.

A new division of the surveillance agency GCHQ – the National Cyber Security 
Centre – confirmed it was working with the NCA 
<https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/tesco-bank-incident> which has launched a 
criminal inquiry. The NCSC, created only last month as the UK’s authority on 
cybersecurity, said it was “providing direct assistance to the company at their 
request, including on-site assistance”.

“In the case of cyber-related incidents, it can, on certain occasions, take a 
significant period of time to understand the incident given the technical 
complexities involved. So the story will emerge over time. During this period 
it is vital that nothing is said publicly that could interfere with the 
criminal investigation,” the NCSC said.

“Given the investigation thus far and the evidence at hand, the National Cyber 
Security Centre is unaware of any wider threat to the UK banking sector 
connected with this incident.”

Bailey told the MPs that the FCA was in close contact with Tesco and that the 
bank had reassured the regulator that customers whose money had been stolen 
would be reimbursed by the end of Tuesday.

He said it was too early to know the exact cause but said it appeared to be 
related to debit cards and that computer hackers were looking for weaknesses 
and “points of entry” into banks.

“It looks like its [in] on-line banking, clearly appears to be on debit card 
side of online banking as far as we can tell. But it requires further urgent 
analysis ,” said Bailey.

He said he was confident that Tesco knew which customers were affected by the 
incident which began to unfold on Saturday nightwhen the bank began texting 
customers about unusual activity from their accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/06/tesco-bank-blocks-some-customers-cards-suspicious-activity-detected>
.

But Tesco provided no update on the status of its customers on Tuesday after 
suspending online banking transactions for current accounts in the wake of the 
incident.

Bailey indicated that Tesco would not be able turn those facilities back on 
until it was confident it knew the service was safe for customers.

A number of theories have circulated about the cause of the problem, including 
that it was caused by an internal security breach. Conservative MP Chris Philp, 
a member of the Treasury select committee, has raised the idea it could have 
been the work of a foreign power. “I think we can’t rule out the possibility, 
at all, that this is state-sponsored,” he told the BBC earlier this week.

As the crisis was unfolding, Benny Higgins, chief executive of Tesco Bank, had 
said the decision to suspend some banking activities was an attempt to protect 
customers from “online criminal activity”.


Higgins, who has apologised to customers, has described the raid as “a 
systematic, sophisticated attack”.


The NCSC said its role was to provide support to the investigation, work with 
the company concerned to manage the incident, investigate the root causes and 
use any lessons learned to provide future guidance and policy on cyber security.

The Information Commissioner’s Office is also scrutinising the situation. It 
fined telecom company TalkTalk a record £400,000 in October for failing to stop 
the personal data of 157,000 customers being hacked.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
said after the hearing that “the attack on Tesco’s retail accounts is deeply 
troubling. Banks have a long way to go to improve the resilience and security 
of their IT systems”.

Another member of the committee, Steve Baker, said: “the vulnerability of 
Tesco Bank highlights the crucial importance of technical security to the 
financial system.”
 