
Tesco <https://www.theguardian.com/business/tesco> Bank has revealed that the 
“unprecedented” attack on its online accounts at the weekend resulted in the 
loss of £2.5m. The banking arm of the supermarket chain also revised down the 
number of accounts from which money was removed from 20,000 to 9,000 and 
announced that banking services had been restored for all its customers.

Tesco bank issued its update hours after Andrew Bailey, the chief executive of 
theFinancial Conduct Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/financial-conduct-authority>, told MPs 
that the incident was unprecedented in the UK and regarded as serious. Bailey 
told the Treasury select committee that “there are elements of this that look 
unprecedented and it is serious, clearly”.

Benny Higgins, the chief executive of Tesco Bank, apologised to customers. 
“Our first priority throughout this incident has been protecting and looking 
after our customers, and we’d again like to apologise for the worry and 
inconvenience this issue has caused,” he said. “We’ve now refunded all customer 
accounts affected by fraud and lifted the suspension of online debit 
transactions so that customers can use their accounts as normal. We’d also like 
to reassure our customers that none of their personal data has been 
compromised.”

Tesco Bank fraud: key questions answered
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/07/tesco-bank-fraud-key-questions-answered-suspicious-transactions-40000-accounts>
Tesco Bank said it was continuing to work closely with the authorities and 
regulators in their criminal investigation.

The National Crime <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/ukcrime> Agency (NCA) is 
one of a number of organisations scrutinising what has taken place at the 
supermarket chain’s banking arm, which has more than 7 million customers.

The National Cyber Security Centre, the new division of the surveillance 
agency GCHQ created last month, confirmed it was working with the NCA 
<https://www.ncsc.gov.uk/news/tesco-bank-incident>, which has launched a 
criminal inquiry. The NCSC said it was “providing direct assistance to the 
company at their request, including on-site assistance”.

“In the case of cyber-related incidents, it can, on certain occasions, take a 
significant period of time to understand the incident given the technical 
complexities involved. So the story will emerge over time. During this period 
it is vital that nothing is said publicly that could interfere with the 
criminal investigation,” the NCSC said.

“Given the investigation thus far and the evidence at hand, the National Cyber 
Security Centre is unaware of any wider threat to the UK banking sector 
connected with this incident.”

Bailey told MPs that the FCA was in close contact with Tesco and the bank had 
reassured the regulator that the customers whose money had been stolen would be 
reimbursed by the end of Tuesday. He said it was too early to know the exact 
cause, but said it appeared to be related to debit cards and that computer 
hackers were looking for weaknesses and “points of entry” into banks.

“It looks like it’s [in] online banking, clearly appears to be on debit card 
side of online banking as far as we can tell. But it requires further urgent 
analysis ,” said Bailey. He said he was confident that Tesco knew which 
customers were affected by the incident which began to unfold on Saturday night
when the bank began texting customers about unusual activity from their accounts
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/06/tesco-bank-blocks-some-customers-cards-suspicious-activity-detected>
.


A number of theories have circulated about the cause of the problem, including 
that it was caused by an internal security breach. Conservative MP Chris Philp, 
a member of the Treasury select committee, has raised the idea that it could 
have been the work of a foreign power. “I think we can’t rule out the 
possibility, at all, that this is state-sponsored,” he told the BBC earlier 
this week.


As the crisis was unfolding, Higgins had said the decision to suspend some 
banking activities was an attempt to protect customers from “online criminal 
activity”. He described the raid as “a systematic, sophisticated attack”.


The NCSC said its role was to provide support to the investigation, work with 
the company concerned to manage the incident, investigate the root causes, and 
use any lessons learned to provide future guidance and policy on cybersecurity.

The Information Commissioner’s Office is also scrutinising the situation. It 
fined telecom company TalkTalk a record £400,000 in October for failing to stop 
the personal data of 157,000 customers being hacked.

Andrew Tyrie, the Conservative MP who chairs the Treasury select committee, 
said after the hearing that “the attack on Tesco’s retail accounts is deeply 
troubling. Banks have a long way to go to improve the resilience and security 
of their IT systems”. Another member of the committee, Steve Baker, said: “the 
vulnerability of Tesco Bank highlights the crucial importance of technical 
security to the financial system.”
 