
Tesla <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> owners will be able to 
ask the robot that drives their car to break the speed limit, again, following 
a software update pushed out to users over the weekend.

The new software changes the way the autopilot function works on Tesla cars 
equipped with it. The brand covers a suite of advanced safety features, from 
lane assist, which keeps the car in the correct lane when driving on motorways, 
to adaptive cruise control, which allows the car to match speeds with the 
vehicle in front.

In December, a software update was pushed out which limited the speed on roads 
without a central divider: cars could not be set to go faster than the speed 
limit. At the time, Tesla Motors’ chief executive, Elon Musk,said that 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/812441273013452800> there was “no major 
precipitating event” for the change, but that “people in general were going a 
bit too fast on winding roads”.

Now, that update has been reversed, allowing Tesla Motors owners to return to 
breaking the speed limit. The car is still capped at five miles per hour faster 
than the limit on non-divided roads, however.

On highways, the limit is rather higher: autopilot can be set up to 90mph, 
regardless of the actual speed limit on the road.

Tesla owners, many of whom had expressed irritation at the original limiter, 
responded to Musk’s confirmation of the change 
<https://twitter.com/elonmusk/status/819663998878564352?ref_src=twsrc%5Etfw> 
with glee. “Yay! I can keep my car!,” wrote one. “Looks like owner outrage and 
certain well known people tweeting Tesla does in fact get results,”said another 
owner on Reddit 
<https://www.reddit.com/r/teslamotors/comments/5nlgar/new_software_update_25222_rolls_back_hard_speed/dcchimn/>
.

The Guardian asked Tesla whether it approves of owners commanding their 
personal robots to drive them faster than the law permits.

In a statement, the company said: “Autopilot is designed as a hands-on 
experience to give drivers more confidence behind the wheel, increase their 
safety on the road and make motorway driving more enjoyable by reducing the 
driver’s workload.

“Tesla vehicles are constantly evolving in their capabilities and features 
sets. With the current feature set, Tesla Autopilot is classified as Level 2 
automated system. Until full autonomy is reached, the driver is responsible for 
and must remain in control of their car at all times.”
 