
Scientists have raised hopes for a radical new therapy for phobias and 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) with a procedure that can dampen down 
fears linked to painful memories.

The advance holds particular promise for patients because in early tests, 
researchers found they could reduce anxieties triggered by specific memories 
without asking people to think about them consciously.


Phobias: The rationale behind irrational fears | Dean Burnett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/brain-flapping/2013/jun/28/phobias-rationale-irrational-fears>
That could make it more appealing than exposure therapy, which aims to help 
patients overcome their phobias by making them confront their fears in a safe 
environment, for example by encouraging them to handle spiders or snakes in the 
clinic.


The new technique, called fMRI decoded neurofeedback (DecNef), was developed 
by scientists at the ATR ComputationalNeuroscience 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/neuroscience> Lab in Japan. Mitsuo Kawato, 
who worked with researchers in the UK and the US on the latest study, said he 
wanted to find an alternative to exposure therapy, which has a 40% drop-out 
rate among PTSD patients.


“We always thought this was ambitious, but it worked the way we hoped it 
would,” said Ben Seymour, a clinical neuroscientist and member of the team at 
Cambridge University. “We don’t completely erase the fear memory, but it is 
substantially reduced.”


The procedure uses a computer algorithm to analyse a patient’s brain activity 
in real time and pinpoint moments when their fears can be overwritten by giving 
them a reward. In the latest study, the reward was a small amount of money.


Volunteers who took part in the study had their brain activity recorded while 
images of red, green, blue or yellow circles flashed on a screen in front of 
them. After viewing 50 or so images, a computer algorithm analysed the brain 
scans and identified the brain activity linked to each colour image.

 A brain image showing a pattern activity across the brain associated with one 
of the fear-triggering stimuli. Photograph: Mitsuo Kawato/Ben Seymour 
The next part of the study was more painful. The volunteers watched another 
sequence of images flash up, but this time, two colours of circles, for 
example, red and green, were followed by unpleasant, but tolerable electric 
shocks. Brain activity and sensors on the skin showed the participants came to 
fear those images being shown.


Having induced fearful memories in the volunteers, the scientists then tried 
to erase them. This time, the patients rested in the brain scanner and thought 
about whatever they wished. They were not asked to think about the painful 
memories, and none reported doing so.


But even in rest, the brain is active. And from time to time, the electrical 
activity of the brain resembled the patterns linked to green circles or red 
circles, even when the volunteers were not thinking about them. When the 
algorithm spotted this, it flashed up a message telling the participant they 
had earned a monetary reward, to be picked up after the experiment.


“We don’t want them to think about fear when they are in the scanner,” said 
Seymour. “They are not aware what we are detecting in the brain activity.”


Each volunteer had painful memories for both green and red circles, but the 
scientists tried to erase only one of them. This allowed them to judge how well 
the procedure worked. And work it did. After three one-hour sessions, the brain 
scans showed no signs of anxiety when people were shown the images that 
previously made them flinch, and sensors on their skin found their anxiety 
response had halved. Details of the research are published inNature Human 
Behaviour <http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/s41562-016-0006>.


The scientists are now investigating how long the fear is dampened down for. 
“It might be that it’s not long lasting, that the fear memory comes back. We 
don’t think it will, but we want to test that,” Seymour said.


Virtual reality isn't just for gaming - it could transform mental health 
treatment
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/blog/2016/may/05/virtual-reality-isnt-just-for-gaming-it-could-transform-mental-health-treatment>
The Japanese team has already started scanning patients with phobias and PTSD. 
“Hopefully in a few years, we can start systematic DecNef therapy,” Kawato told 
the Guardian.


One avenue the team is exploring amounts to a library of brain activity 
signatures that correspond to the wild and varied fears that humans suffer. 
Armed with that, a patient could arrive at a clinic, declare their phobia, and 
have therapy to retrain their brain so they no longer feel terrified.


Jonathan Lee, a psychologist at the University of Birmingham, said the work 
served as an early proof of concept. “The idea of counter-conditioning to 
reduce fear expression is by no means new, but the potential to achieve it 
outside the realm of consciousness is intriguing and would certainly have 
translational benefits,” he said.


But Lee warned that it may be much harder to treat patients unconsciously if 
they have truly traumatic memories. “I just doubt that this will be possible in 
a clinical situation. First, any attempt to induce the pattern of activity 
without triggering fear and anxiety might be doomed to failure. Or by 
activating the pattern, this might inevitably lead to the production of fear 
and anxiety,” he said.

 