
An international crackdown on human rights abuses in the Thai fishing industry 
has resulted in vessels travelling thousands of miles further into remote and 
lawless waters, where trafficked men continue to be beaten and sold at sea, a 
12-month Greenpeace investigation alleges.

According to the report, published on Thursday, seafood caught by such vessels 
is largely illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) and has entered the supply 
chains of multiple companies producing food for global export, including to the 
UK, in clear violation of international labour, supply and fishing codes.

Slavery and trafficking continue in Thai fishing industry, claim activists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/25/slavery-trafficking-thai-fishing-industry-environmental-justice-foundation>
The allegations are likely to heap further pressure on Thailand’s $6.5bn 
(£5.1bn) seafood export industry –the fourth largest in the world, according to 
the most recent figures <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5555e.pdf> – which has 
suffered significantly over the past few years following allegations of human 
rights, labour and IUU fishing abuses both at sea and on land. Thailand was 
given a “yellow card” warning by the EU last year toclean up or face a ban on 
EU imports 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/21/eu-investigators-to-decide-on-thai-fishing-industry-ban-over-slave-labour>
.

“For some years there’s been a growing awareness of the endemic labour rights 
issues in the Thai seafood industry, which companies have repeatedly brushed 
under the carpet,” said Will McCallum, head of oceans at Greenpeace.

“There can no longer be unsubstantiated assurances of workers’ rights while 
companies continue to profit from turning a blind eye.”

Depleted seafood stocks in the Gulf of Thailand have encouraged Thai vessels 
to explore neighbouring waters off the coasts ofIndonesia and Papua New Guinea, 
often using fake permits and ghost fleets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/feb/18/thailand-failing-tackle-fishing-industry-slavery>
 to avoid inspection by authorities. But a new government policy tosink vessels 
caught fishing illegally in Indonesian waters 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/indonesia-blows-up-23-foreign-fishing-boats-to-send-a-message-1459852007>
 has forced such boats into less policed waters off Papua New Guinea’s southern 
“dog leg” region, Greenpeace claims.

The report alleges that, when authorities also began clamping down on IUU 
fishing in Papua New Guinea, Thai vessels sailed out to the isolated, 
bio-diverse Saya de Malha bank off the eastern coast of mainland Africa, more 
than 7,000km from home ports inThailand 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/thailand>.

Here, on large refrigerated vessels known as “reefers”, Thai captains have 
engaged in a fishing frenzy over the past 18 months. Located north-east of 
Madagascar, Saya de Malha is the world’s largest submerged bank andpart of an 
underwater ridge that connects Mauritius with the Seychelles 
<http://wwf.panda.org/who_we_are/wwf_offices/madagascar/index.cfm?uProjectID=MG0947>
. The shallow tropical marine system – roughly the size of Belgium – is not 
adequately policed by either country, however, allowing human rights and 
fishing abuses to continue at large, the report claims.

Beyond the view of authorities, Thai captains abuse, beat and traffic 
fishermen from boat to boat in the seafood-rich waters, Greenpeace alleges, 
despite the government’slegislative efforts to curb both IUU fishing and human 
rights abuses at sea 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/jun/30/thailand-us-trafficking-in-persons-report-2016-fury>
. The vessels catch a variety of species including snapper, bream, rays, shark, 
mackerel and tuna, which Greenpeace claims are likely to have ended up in 
European, North American and Asia Pacific supermarkets and restaurants in the 
form of surimi, imitation crabmeat and pet food.

Survivors who had been on board these reefers told Greenpeace that daily 
beatings were part and parcel of everyday life, and that many had given up hope 
of ever getting off the boats alive.

“We were kicked, punched and beaten with sticks,” one survivor told 
Greenpeace. “Once, one of the Thai crew was forced to the floor of the deck 
while the captain stepped on his face. About 10 minutes later, the engineer 
beat the man until his face was swollen, and threatened to throw him into the 
sea.”

Another survivor said: “Working on a boat faced with violence and abuse, in 
the middle of the ocean where you couldn’t even see the shore … it seemed like 
there was no future at all.”

With the reefers spending months and sometimes years at sea, and solely 
reliant on trans-shipments every 90 days to receive food supplies, fishermen 
have been exposed to beriberi, a preventable disease caused by vitamin B1 
deficiency that was common in the 19th century. Beriberi was responsible for the
hospitalisation and death of a number of Cambodian and Thai fishermen 
<http://www.bangkokpost.com/archive/lack-of-vitamin-b1-blamed-for-sailors-deaths/826468>
 earlier this year who had been aboard a Saya de Malha reefer for nine months 
continuously.

According to a 2016 Thai government report 
<http://ccpl.mol.go.th/ewt_dl_link.php?nid=86&filename=index>, nearly half of 
the 1,000 fishermen on 50 vessels in Saya de Malha bank were working in 
violation of immigration and labour laws, Greenpeace claims. Interviews with 
fishermen on board tunagillnetters <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gillnetting> 
– which had also been operating in the bank – revealed that the men had been 
trafficked on to the boats after being told they would be employed at an 
on-shore fish processing factory, working eight-hour days with food and 
clothing provided.

Instead, the report claims, the men worked 20-hour days, seven days a week, 
and were told they could only leave the vessels once they had paid back the 
30,000 baht (£660) for which the captains had bought them. Some fishermen had 
been at sea for as long as five years, the report says.

Steve Trent of the Environmental Justice Foundation said the findings 
demonstrated how little Thai vessels had applied basic international labour 
standards.

“Vessels fishing thousands of miles from their home country are inherently 
risky and difficult to control and it is essential that Thailand pays 
particular attention to them,” Trent said.

“They must ensure that vessels have observers, are tracked 24/7 by satellite, 
and are inspected regularly, with attention paid to both fisheries and labour 
standards. To prevent illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing, Thailand 
should only allow vessels to fish in areas where there is a science-based, 
robust fisheries management regime in place.”

The report also alleges that the Royal Thai Navy has failed to adequately 
identify and protect potential trafficking victims, despite an increase in the 
number of inspections in recent years.

In January, Greenpeace directly observed inter-agency inspections of vessels 
returning from Saya de Malha bank. Crew members reported that they had not been 
paid in years, that none of the 57 migrant crew were in possession of correct 
work permits, and that many had paid extortionate recruitment fees, yet Thai 
authorities cleared the vessels to return to port, Greenpeace claims.

More than 70% of all known Thai-owned reefers, claims Greenpeace, have at some 
point operated in areas with “dirty” fishing operations, many of which are 
family business groupings with interests across the entire seafood supply chain 
and, in some cases, even politics.


Despite the Thai government’s public interest in addressing problems in the 
seafood sector, much more needs to be done to reform the industry, as well as 
police activity at sea, said McCallum.

“Greenpeace is in active discussions with the Royal Thai Government about this 
issue,” he said. “However, implementation and monitoring will need to be in 
place over a longer period before we can see the fruits of action.

“One crucial issue which needs to be urgently addressed is the practice of 
trans-shipment at sea. This allows fishing vessels to remain indefinitely out 
in the ocean, where monitoring, control and surveillance are limited to 
non-existent. Greenpeace is urging a moratorium on at-sea trans-shipments for 
the Thai fleet.”
 