
Margaret Thatcher <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/margaretthatcher> was 
sent a warning notice by Westminster council that she risked having a penalty 
imposed for not returning her poll tax registration form for her Downing Street 
flat, newly released Cabinet files show.

Her failure to register for her flagship local government finance policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/31/poll-tax-riots-25-years-ago-political-awakening-carnage-trafalgar-square>
 may have had less to do with any sympathy for the anti-poll tax movement it 
provoked and more to do with the bureaucratic inefficiency of Westminster city 
council. But the files show that there was widespread confusion among 
Conservative ministers over whether they were liable for the new town hall tax 
at their official residences, their constituency homes or their own private 
houses.

The Trafalgar Square poll tax riot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/gnm-archive/gallery/2015/mar/28/poll-tax-riots-revisited-in-pictures>
 marking its introduction on 31 March 1990 included a prolonged attempt by 
demonstrators to get into Downing Street, the official papers reveal. Police 
withstood abuse and missiles for over an hour before officers equipped riot 
gear could be deployed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-warned-failure-register-poll-tax-uk-cabinet-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab75a01e80a6645d9eed72fcc219e9d3156a35f1%2F0_81_1981_1189%2F1981.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thatcher%20was%20warned%20over%20failure%20to%20register%20for%20poll%20tax%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-warned-failure-register-poll-tax-uk-cabinet-files%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thatcher%20was%20warned%20over%20failure%20to%20register%20for%20poll%20tax%2C%20files%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F30%2Fmargaret-thatcher-warned-failure-register-poll-tax-uk-cabinet-files%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab75a01e80a6645d9eed72fcc219e9d3156a35f1%2F0_81_1981_1189%2F1981.jpg>
 Margaret Thatcher. Photograph: PA 
At a confidential meeting three days after the riot the Metropolitan Police 
commissioner, Sir Peter Imbert, told Thatcher that about 40,000 poll tax 
protesters had turned up in Trafalgar Square in line with police expectations.

“What had been completely unexpected was the degree of violence used. Some of 
his officers came close to being murdered,” reported the confidential minutes 
of the meeting. More than 400 officers were injured and 339 arrests were made.

“The prime minister expressed concern that some officers had nearly been 
trapped in a van which the demonstrators attempted to set on fire. The design 
features of these vehicles should be looked at carefully, eg the petrol caps, 
to make it as difficult as possible to set fire to them,” it continued.

“She feared there could be further riots in the near future and hoped, 
therefore, that losses in equipment would rapidly be made good and that any new 
equipment which was identified as necessary would be quickly acquired.”

Thatcher asked Imbert if there was a case to ban future demonstrations from 
Trafalgar Square. He said it was possible to have a peaceful protest of 40,000 
as long as they were well behaved. He would, however, apply for a ban if a 
similar poll tax demonstration was proposed in the near future. While accepting 
Thatcher’s gratitude to the police, Imbert told her his “ultimate ambition” was 
that the force should be called the Royal Metropolitan police.

The ferocity of the attack on the police was caught on camera when a youth 
smashed a stave through the window of an occupied police car. The next day, the 
Downing Street papers show, Westminster council offered a £1,000 reward for 
information leading to his conviction. The council also called on the then 
Labour leader,Neil Kinnock <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/neil-kinnock>, 
to expel two Labour MPs, George Galloway andDave Nellist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2002/nov/01/uk.military>, who supported 
the demonstration and refused to pay the poll tax.

Thatcher’s initial failure to sign up for the poll tax, or the community 
charge as it was officially known, stemmed from a bureaucratic error by 
Westminster council in May 1989 when the register was being drawn up.

DJ Hopkins, the community charge registration officer for Westminster, had 
sent a registration form for the “offices and residencies in Treasury chambers 
and No 10, 11 and 12 Downing Street” asking for details of the occupants.
 Thatcher’s poll tax form. Photograph: Handout 
Thatcher was advised that her Downing Street flat would be treated as her 
primary home but there was also discussion about the status and liability of 
her Dulwich house and of her official country residence,Chequers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/picture/2016/aug/31/martin-rowson-theresa-may-cabinet-meeting-chequers-eu-cartoon>
, as second homes. Eventually the local government minister, John Selwyn 
Gummer, sent out a note to all ministers with official residences on whether 
they would have to pay a standard charge – up to two times the poll tax – on 
their second homes.

But in the meantime, it appears, a community charge registration form 
addressed to “rooms first floor, 10 Downing Street” had gone unanswered and the 
Westminster community charge registration officer sent out his warning letter 
that if it was not completed within 21 days failure to do so may lead to a 
penalty being imposed.

It is presumed that the matter was resolved and Thatcher did pay her poll tax 
liability.

The released papers include four large files detailing repeated attempts to 
take the political sting out of the poll tax. At one point the chief whip 
warned Thatcher that a repeat of a “Mates-style amendment” – referring to a 
wrecking amendment by the Tory MP Michael Mates – “would be difficult to stop 
this time” as marginal Conservative MPs feared for their seats in the face of 
increased bills.

The opposition of longstanding Tory voters is represented in the files by a 
letter from a correspondent from “Dreams of Delight”, Great Snoring, Norfolk, 
who accused Thatcher of being a dictator because they faced the prospect of 
their rates bill doubling under the poll tax.

It would be this revolt in the Tory shires, rather than the Trafalgar Square 
protests, that would seal Thatcher’s fate in theNovember 1990 leadership contest
 <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/1999/oct/04/thatcher.uk1>.
 