
On 23 June the people of Scotland voted decisively to remain in the European 
Union while the people of the United Kingdom as a whole voted to leave. The 
nationalist government’s immediate reaction to the 62% to 38% vote in Scotland 
was to ratchet up the rhetoric about a second independence referendum.The first 
minister Nicola Sturgeon said a second vote was highly likely 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/alex-salmond-second-scottish-independence-referendum-is-certain>
; the SNP launched what it described as anational conversation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/scots-independence-referendum-brexit-nicola-sturgeon>
 about the options; and there was a small shift in the opinion polls in favour 
of independence. Many observers in and out of Scotland assumed a second vote – 
and the break-up of the UK – might follow naturally. Since the summer, however, 
Scottish opinion has drawn back from that first defiant flurry. Themost recent 
poll, 
<http://www.thetimes.co.uk/article/support-for-independence-sinks-0j2bc7jxc> at 
the end of November, found support for independence at its lowest level since 
the 2014 referendum, with 44% of Scots supporting independence and 56% 
opposing. Only 31% of Scots said they wanted the Scottish government to 
campaign for independence in the next two years, with only 60% of yes voters 
from 2014 in favour of an early campaign either. The reality appears to be 
that, while the politics of the Brexit vote might appear at first sight to 
strengthen the case for independence, the economics now seem even more daunting 
than they did in 2014. Ms Sturgeon hasseemed to reflect that caution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/12/the-guardian-view-on-the-snp-conference-dominant-amid-the-dilemmas>
, aware as she is that she cannot afford to follow Alex Salmond and David 
Cameron as a leader who calls a referendum, loses it, and who then has to 
resign.

This is the political context in which Ms Sturgeon launched a plan for Scotland
 <http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2016/12/9234> today to stay within the EU 
single market after Brexit. As ever, the SNP is deliberately promoting demands 
– in this case Scotland’s continued membership of the EU single market even in 
the event of the rest of the UK leaving – that the UK government will find 
difficult to fulfil. As ever, this will position the SNP toreiterate the case 
for independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/nicola-sturgeon-seeks-more-powers-scotland-brexit-plan>
 as the only way through any resulting impasse. But it is clear at the same 
time that the SNP is conscious that Scots are concerned about the economic 
realities, that part of its own support is pro-leave, and that Brexit has not 
yet triggered the kind of revolt that Ms Sturgeon hopes for. The SNP is waiting 
for something to happen. Theresa May may be tempted to call Ms Sturgeon’s bluff 
about all this. She may judge that, when push comes to shove, the SNP 
leadership will prefer to stay in power in Edinburgh rather than risk 
everything on an uncertain second referendum. She may well be right. 
Nevertheless, the right course for the UK government is not to call the 
Scottish government’s bluff but to make two wise judgments. The first is to 
recognise Scotland has a genuine concern about Brexit. That concern is not just 
constitutional, though that exists, but practical. Just as in Northern Ireland, 
a hard Brexit in Scotland would have real-life consequences on issues like 
migration (which the Scottish economy needs), budgets and EU transfers. It 
would be completely wrong to steamroller such concerns aside, least of all 
because English Tory MPs and rightwing London newspapers don’t care about 
Scotland.

The second, just as important, is to recognise that good governance in the UK 
must now mean making compromises with the devolved institutions. Mrs May has 
described the UK as a country in which the four nations “flourish side by side 
as equal partners” and has said she will seriously engage with the devolved 
governments. She needs to turn those words into a permanent reality, partly 
because that is the modern thing for a UK prime minister to do, and partly 
because she needs to keep her word. The 21st century United Kingdom will only 
work if UK leaders recognise that different parts of the country have different 
interests that must be respected. Mrs May said theright words this week 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-12-19/debates/605D7654-DF44-4B82-A2A5-C07448B2FCD6/EuropeanCouncil2016>
 when she was asked in the Commons about the Scottish government’s proposals. 
She said that the priorities of the devolved administrations matter. She said 
she would take Ms Sturgeon’s suggestions seriously. Now she should make good on 
those words. The worst thing the UK government and the Tory party could do with 
the Scottish plans is to trash them. That’s because, in the end, the thing most 
at stake in this part of the Brexit jungle is not Scottish independence but the 
better and less centralised governance of the UK. If that means that Scotland 
exerts effective pressure on the May government to avoid a hard Brexit, then 
fine. If it means the UK asking for a differentiated Brexit outcome that works 
for Scotland, then so be it.
 