
Tomorrow’s official statistics are expected to show that immigration to the 
United Kingdom continues to be far above the government’s often-repeated and 
recently re-adopted target of “tens of thousands”. So far, so familiar. In the 
ever more politicised context of Brexit, however, the figures – andthe 
arguments about how they are compiled 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/briefings/non-european-student-migration-to-the-uk/>
 – are taking on a new and sharper significance. This is only likely to grow as 
the Brexit arguments deepen and become more intense, even though anxiety about 
immigration was just one element in June’s referendum vote. But Theresa May has 
nowstaked her prime ministership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/30/ministers-want-controls-on-skilled-and-unskilled-eu-workers-say-sources>
 on being able to resolve it. She aims to show voters that, once out of the 
European Union, Britain can control its borders with measures and resources 
that will bring down the numbers coming into the country in the long term. 
Others in the Conservative party have differing Brexit priorities, but it is 
hardly an exaggeration to say that in Mrs May’s mind, every aspect of the 
forthcoming negotiation is subordinate to the goal of reduced immigration.

Migration <https://www.theguardian.com/world/migration> numbers are not the 
only weapons available to Mrs May to help her make that case but they are 
undoubtedly one of the most important. This makes two things about her approach 
to the statistics both odd and unsustainable. The first is that the UK’s 
official migration data is so unreliable. The second is that she continues to 
resist calls to remove students from the overall migration numbers.

The net migration figures rely on interviews with departing visitors gathered 
for the International Passenger Survey, a count developed more than 50 years 
ago as a measure of tourism. IPS interviewers do not work overnight, which 
means that long-haul flights to countries that are a source of overseas 
students tend to be underrepresented. While nearly a million travellers a year 
are interviewed, only about 5,000 count as “long-term” migrants – that is, in 
the UK for more than 12 months. Such a small sample introduces a high margin of 
error. The Office for National Statisticsknows there are limits 
<https://www.google.co.uk/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&uact=8&ved=0ahUKEwismYeF_9DQAhUFJ8AKHW7BABMQFggfMAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.ons.gov.uk%2Fons%2Frel%2Fmigration1%2Flong-term-international-migration%2Fstudent-migration---what-do-the-statistics-tell-us-%2Fstudent-migration---what-do-the-statistics-tell-us.pdf&usg=AFQjCNFoEP4R_hMuv574M-6Pr_xpxprLZA&sig2=MPG24H3ScDUPs1unFuayVQ&bvm=bv.139782543,d.d24>
 to the IPS, but it is the only count available.

The case for removing students 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/commentaries/international-students-and-the-net-migration-target-should-students-be-taken-out/>
 from all these numbers is even more stark. International students come here to 
study. That makes them different from migrants in three ways. First, they are 
temporary, returning to their own countries at the end of stays that are, in 
many cases, only of between one and three years. Second, they necessarily pay 
fees for the courses they study, and thus bring economic value to the UK rather 
than being a charge on public funds. Third, public opinion does not think of 
international students as immigrants and therefore does not worry about them in 
the same way as it worries about other migrants.

These would all be good reasons for removing students from the statistics. But 
now the case goes much further. International students are part of the 
lifeblood of British universities, for their intellectual and cultural 
contribution, but also for their fees. Britain’s universities are often rightly 
extolled by ministers, as they were again by Mrs May inher Guildhall speech 
last week 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/economy/taxation/news/80965/full-text-theresa-mays-speech-cbi>
, but their standing depends on their global status. That status is at serious 
risk from proposed migration policy changes.

Any policy to reduce immigration to the tens of thousands inevitably involves 
a large cut in international students. That would be hugely damaging to 
universities and to UK relations with the countries from which the students 
come (around a third of non-EU students come from China, for example). After 
Brexit, those cuts would also involve EU students who for now can study here 
and pay UK levels of fees, for which they are also able to get loans. But, 
after Brexit, who knows?

The chancellor of the exchequer, Philip Hammond 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond>, is currently leading 
efforts within government to exclude foreign students from the migration 
numbers. If only for the sake of Britain’s universities, international students 
from the EU and beyond should indeed be removed from the immigration numbers.
 