
The idea that Donald Trump might become a “normal” American president once he 
moved into the White House was always for the birds. The 2016 contest was an 
abnormal election won by an abnormal politician. It was an abnormal election 
becausehackers linked to the Russian government 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/13/us/politics/russia-hack-election-dnc.html?hp&action=click&pgtype=Homepage&clickSource=story-heading&module=a-lede-package-region&region=top-news&WT.nav=top-news&_r=1>
 worked to help Mr Trump’s cause; because the head of the FBItossed a political 
hand grenade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/28/fbi-reopens-hillary-clinton-emails-investigation>
 into the closing stages of the contest which helped Mr Trump’s cause; and 
because,since a US supreme court ruling 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shelby_County_v._Holder> in 2013, states that 
want to have exploited a power to impose voter ID rules that intentionally keep 
African Americans off the rolls 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/07/north-carolina-s-racist-voter-suppression-is-working.html>
. Oh, and 2.8 million more Americansvoted for Hillary Clinton 
<https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/133Eb4qQmOxNvtesw2hdVns073R68EZx4SfCnP4IGQf8/edit#gid=19>
 than Mr Trump. That’s hardly normal either.

Mr Trump was and remains an abnormal politician because he threatens changes 
that, with almost no exception, are genuinely destructive to American values 
and interests, not least to the interests of many of those white working-class 
voters who voted for him in the hope of change. He has now assembled a 
government team which, again almost without exception, testifies to this 
reality. These appointments confirm that he cannot be regarded as a president 
like any other. Perhaps, in five weeks’ time, when he actually succeedsBarack 
Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> in the Oval Office, he 
will start to do things that suggest otherwise. But that has not happened yet.

The first threat from the new appointments is that it is Team Corporate 
America. Thenew secretary of state, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-quandaries-trump-russia-conflicts-of-interest>
 Rex Tillerson, is one of the biggest oil moguls on the planet, chief executive 
of ExxonMobil, friend of Vladimir Putin and the Middle Eastern petrolocracies. 
Thenew energy secretary, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/14/rick-perry-formally-announced-as-trump-pick-for-energy-secretary>
 Rick Perry, is an oilman and a climate change sceptic. Scott Pruitt,the new 
head of the Environmental Protection Agency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/trump-scott-pruitt-environmental-protection-agency>
, a body he would like to see closed down, holds those prejudices even more 
strongly. This will be a pro-carbon, pro-drilling and anti-climate change 
administration like no other.

It is also political Christmas for the Wall Street bankers. The new Treasury 
secretary, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/30/steven-mnuchin-expected-to-be-named-us-treasury-secretary>
 Steven Mnuchin, is a former Goldman Sachs investment banker whose stated 
priority is to cut corporate taxation by more than half. He will join former 
Goldman banker and Breitbart chiefStephen Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/14/steve-bannon-white-house-racism-fear>
, Mr Trump’s ultra-rightwing chief strategist, and the Goldman president,Gary 
Cohn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/gary-cohn-national-economic-council-goldman-sachs-trump>
, who will become, in effect, the new president’s chief economic adviser. Mr 
Trump may have railed against bankers, and Goldman in particular, during the 
campaign, but he has put them at the heart of his economic thinking.

The third fox in the governmental hen house is the military. Mr Trump said 
during the campaign that he knew “more than the generals” about the threat from 
Islamic State. But the generals will occupy key roles in his administration to 
such a degree that the head of Human Rights Watch has said there will be a 
whiff of “military junta” about it. WithJames Mattis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/01/james-mattis-secretary-of-defense-donald-trump>
 at defence, the temperamental IslamophobeMichael Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/michael-flynn-will-be-a-disaster-as-national-security-adviser>
 as national security adviser,John Kelly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/trump-picks-retired-general-john-kelly-for-homeland-security>
 in charge of the enormous homeland security bureaucracy andMike Pompeo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/jeff-sessions-attorney-general-trump-cabinet>
 as the new CIA director, military men have seized some key jobs. Whether this 
heralds the politicisation of the military or the militarisation of politics 
will be a key question.

Mr Trump’s appointments also point unerringly towards the dismantling of 
federal government programmes in other crucial areas. MakingAndrew Puzder 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/08/andy-puzder-labor-department-hardees-trump-cabinet>
 labor secretary puts an opponent of raising the minimum wage in charge of it.
Betsy DeVos 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/23/betsy-devos-education-secretary-trump-administration>
 at education will be a privatiser running public schools policy.Tom Price 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/28/tom-price-health-human-services-secretary-trump-administration>
 at health and human services is both an arch-critic of Mr Obama’s affordable 
care programme and a privatiser of the Medicare retirement care programme.Ben 
Carson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/ben-carson-housing-secretary-nomination-trump-administration>
 at housing and urban development does not agree with government safety nets. 
Overall, the military will prosper at the expense of the poor. Guns not 
healthcare.

There is nothing normal about any of this; just as there is nothing normal 
about appointing Jeff Sessions, the Alabaman who has spent years in the Senate 
trying to roll back voting rights for African Americans, attorney general; and 
nothing normal about the expected appointment of an anti-choice justice to take 
the vacancy on the supreme court. Inheavily tainted circumstances 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/opinion/the-tainted-election.html>, America 
has elected a president who seems wholly unable to distinguish between private 
interest and public responsibility. As long as Mr Trump does so little to 
respect his own office, it is hard for others to respect him and it as they 
would normally.
 