
If it were easy to design a national funding formula for schools, it would 
have been done years ago. Now the education secretary, Justine Greening, has 
set out a plan in which she bravely tries to strike the right balance between 
fairness and simplicity. She might have had a better chance of success if she 
was not trying to devise a new way of slicing the funding cake while it is also 
shrinking under the weight of rising costs. The pressure schools will be facing 
was underlined by today’s National Audit Office report. It warned that schools 
are facing £3bn of cutsfor which they have not been prepared 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
 by a Department for Education that is still claiming that spending on schools 
is protected. That claim does not acknowledge that, as theInstitute for Fiscal 
Studies 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/research_areas/38/44?year_published[start]=&year_published[end]=&page=1&>
 predicted, rising employment costs and more pupils actually mean a cut of 8%.

Thousands of schools stand to lose out under new funding formula
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/14/england-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary>
The great strength of a national funding formula is that it will replace the 
system where, for example, children inBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> schools get up to £1,300 more per 
pupil than children in neighbouring Solihull, leaving Solihull struggling to 
recruit and retain staff. It will also make it clear where spending by local 
councils on schools in areas with a similar level of deprivation, on IFS 
figures, varies (by as much as £3,000 per pupil); and where some children have 
nearly £70,000 spent on them over their school lifetime, while others have less 
than £50,000. Once the formula is in place, the reasons for such big variations 
will at least be transparent. The proposal now out for consultation retains 
some existing payments, such as the pupil premium, and allowances for children 
on free school meals, or with English as a second language. It introduces new 
ones – including an allowance for schools with a high level of pupil churn, 
mainly in London, and one for rural schools in sparsely populated areas – that 
will be welcomed. So will the plan for a more responsive funding formula that 
will ease one of the big consequences of rapid population change – overcrowded 
schools and oversize classes.

There will be winners: nearly 11,000 schools will get more money. But almost 
as many will lose some. And all schools are facing inflation likely to be 
higher than allowed for in their budgets, as well as the cost of paying the 
national living wage, and are struggling to recruit and keep teachers. By the 
next general election, the claim that schools budgets are protected in real 
terms is not going to be matched by the reality. That is likely to make the 
government’s enthusiasm for yet more experimentation with school structures – 
including expanding the number of grammar school places – look even more like 
an indulgence. The DfE is opaque about the amount set aside for its reform 
programme, although there is £50m a year for selective places, available from 
the new school year. In addition, the government has pledged that another 500 
free schools will be opened in the course of this parliament, funded from the 
£23bn budget for new places and school maintenance.

Transparency in funding is long overdue. It won’t just allow parents to see 
what’s fair. For years it has been broadly accepted that what matters is not 
how much is spent, but how. Now that theory can be tested. It could end up 
proving the findings from anew US study 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/12/nyregion/it-turns-out-spending-more-probably-does-improve-education.html?_r=0>
 – that it is possible, if enough is spent in areas of deprivation, to bring 
the results of poor children into line with those of the rich.
 