
Is Derbyshire in the north of England or the Midlands? The question is as old 
as the redrawing of the map of England following the Norman conquest. But it is 
no longer such a parochial or academic question as it may seem. Derbyshire’s 
dilemmas now illuminate what we mean by local democracy and local government in 
England more generally. That’s because the promotion of English city regions 
and the money being directed towards the northern powerhouse by the Treasury in 
London are making a nonsense of historic local identities as well as of 
England’s long but increasingly derelict traditions oflocally rooted democratic 
municipalism 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v38/n24/tom-crewe/the-strange-death-of-municipal-england>.

Just before Christmas, the high court backed an objection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/22/sheffield-city-regions-bid-to-absorb-chesterfield-faces-legal-setback>
 by Derbyshire county council against efforts by Chesterfield, which is in the 
north of the county, to attach itself to the emerging city region of Sheffield, 
which comprises Sheffield, Barnsley, Rotherham and Doncaster, which are all 
historically part of the various iterations of Yorkshire, its ridings and its 
more modern subdivisions.

Medieval county boundaries are one thing, economic geography another | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/medieval-county-boundaries-are-one-thing-economic-geography-another>
The court did this after Derbyshire complained 
<https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/community/chesterfield-looks-to-join-up-with-sheffield/default.asp>
 that if Chesterfield were permitted to redefine itself as part of Sheffield, 
it would raise the question of whether the county of Derbyshire could be said 
to exist at all without its second largest town. The county’s case was 
reinforced by the fact that Chesterfield district has no actual border with 
Sheffield, from which it is separated by part of the North East Derbyshire 
district. If Chesterfield were to join Sheffield, it would become an enclave 
(or, from Sheffield’s viewpoint, an exclave) within its former county. It would 
be theNagorno-Karabakh 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/10/azerbaijan-shells-nagorno-karabakh>
 of the east Midlands, leaving the map of Derbyshire resembling nothing so much 
as aBarbara Hepworth sculpture 
<http://www.tate.org.uk/visit/tate-st-ives/barbara-hepworth-museum-and-sculpture-garden>
.

From a financial rather than an identity perspective, Chesterfield’s move 
makes a certain sort of sense. Faced with continuing financial pressures to 
cut, sell off or simply abandon swaths of local government services that have 
existed for generations, English local authorities inevitably clutch at any 
cash straws they can. The city regions are one of the few straws on offer. They 
are due to receive £30m in new funding a year and to acquire new freedoms to 
shape local transport, planning and economic policy.

It is hardly surprising that Chesterfield’s defection was hatched and promoted 
at the council level, since councillors and council officers are in the 
frontline of struggling with these austerity-driven realities every day. While 
the councils did their deal, Chesterfield and Derbyshire opinion was barely 
considered, the high court ruled, so it must now be properly consulted and 
taken into account before any decision is taken.An online poll 
<https://www.derbyshire.gov.uk/community/chesterfield-looks-to-join-up-with-sheffield/view-the-results/default.asp>
 organised by the county council in August, five months after Chesterfield 
decided to join Sheffield, found 92% of respondents opposed to the move.

Sheffield region’s bid to absorb Chesterfield faces legal setback after ruling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/22/sheffield-city-regions-bid-to-absorb-chesterfield-faces-legal-setback>
That is almost certainly because, for all its proximity to Sheffield, there 
has never been any serious tradition ofChesterfield 
<http://www.chesterfieldforum.net/threads/chesterfield-a-northern-town-or-a-midlands-town.2267/>
 regarding itself as part of Greater Sheffield, or of Sheffield seeing 
Chesterfield as part of South Yorkshire. Chesterfield is today what it has 
always been, an important town in north-east Derbyshire, famous for the twisted 
spire of its St Mary’s church, and for having had Tony Benn as its MP in the 
later period of his parliamentary career. Its possible marriage to the 
Sheffield city region is overwhelmingly rooted in perceived economic advantage 
rather than in history or public sentiment. The high court has therefore pitted 
economic survival against identity and democracy.

The Chesterfield-Sheffield question is of far more than local interest. Local 
identity matters everywhere. It is tenacious. It runs deeper than the economic 
or administrative convenience of a bureaucrat’s pen. County identities are 
medieval in origin but they lurk on in many modern consciousnesses. Ministers 
mess with them at their peril.

The argument about Derbyshire has only arisen because English local government 
is in such a desperate state. Austerity in the 2010s is completing the 
centralisation of local powers begun in the 1980s.Communities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/communities> like Chesterfield are reduced 
to scrabbling for a share of the Treasury’s parachute drop of cash to the city 
regions. Ministers may talk of a new era of municipal greatness, but it is a 
hollow sham as long as local authorities lack effective income-raising powers. 
Unless and until English devolution is reconceived as regions made up from 
existing counties, cities and boroughs, these arguments will continue, pitting 
community identity and democracy against economic inequalities and distortions 
enforced from Whitehall.
 