
In the city where Adam Smith developed the free-market theories that inspired 
Thatcherism nearly 300 years later, a young Labour politician is pursuing an 
economic vision that takes a drastically different approach to “the wealth of 
nations”. Councillor Matt Kerr, an anti-poverty specialist onGlasgow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> city council, has been exploring how 
people become enslaved by poverty – and how they can escape it.

A meeting in Glasgow last month with Guy Standing, the radical economist who 
founded theBasic Income Earth Network <http://basicincome.org/>, inspired Kerr 
to seek cross-party support to pilot a “universal basic income” in parts of 
Fife and Glasgow. He acknowledges that these are very early days and that there 
are many obstacles ahead, but the move makes him the most senior incumbent 
politician in Britain to contemplate a radical scheme that only a few years ago 
was considered beyond the political pale.

So why is Kerr sticking his neck out?

“Look, it might be that at the end of this whole exercise we find that it’s 
just not workable, but I’d rather give it a go in good faith. At the moment, 
defending a system that is only slightly better than the one the government is 
trying to implement is simply not good enough. It’s not giving anyone any hope.”

The universal basic income concept is so simple you are tempted to ask why it 
has never been seriously looked at before. It offers something for everyone 
across the political spectrum. It works on the premise that individuals are 
guaranteed a minimum regular payment unconditionally. Kerr, who worked as a 
postman for 14 years, acknowledges that much academic research and fieldwork 
must be done to calibrate payments appropriate to the needs of people.

Related: Should we scrap benefits and pay everyone £100 a week? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/13/should-we-scrap-benefits-and-pay-everyone-100-a-week-whether-they-work-or-not>

“We, as a party, need to be ambitious for people and I think this can be a 
part of that. Nye Bevan is a great hero of mine, but I can’t imagine if he were 
around today that he would have created the benefits system the way it now 
looks. It’s time to ask if this has worked. This has been a 70-year experiment. 
It worked at the time when we had high levels of employment. But we don’t have 
that now. And although I’ll always strive for full employment, the reality is 
that as technology improves and increases, that’s going to be harder to achieve.

“This is a big challenge to the left. In these circumstances you can’t just 
write people off and nor can you have the current system that is hugely 
difficult to navigate and completely enslaves people to the state.”

Already, the Finnish government, as well as provinces in Canada and some Dutch 
cities, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/26/dutch-city-utrecht-basic-income-uk-greens>
 are looking at pilot schemes. Glasgow, however, would seem to offer an ideal 
petri dish for experimentation. The infamous “Glasgow effect” sees adult males 
in the city’s most deprived areas die significantly younger than those from 
other working-class UK cities with similar patterns of deprivation and health 
inequalities. Here a person can lose 20 years of life expectancy in a six-mile 
corridor from the east end of the city to its arboreal west end.
 Easterhouse is one of the most disadvantaged areas of Glasgow. Photograph: 
Murdo MacLeod for the Guardian 
“The universal basic income is about the relationship between state and 
individual,” says Kerr. “I’ve always believed that socialism is about giving 
people freedom from fear, but the right have distorted the word to suit their 
agenda.

“If you’re free from worrying about having a roof over your head and feeding 
your children, you can be free to take some risks and manage your own life. You 
can have the ability to take part in your community and volunteer without the 
risk of sanctions. At its core is a message from the state to the individual, 
saying ‘we actually give a damn about you and we’ll treat you with respect’.”

Kerr is scathing about another Scot, Iain Duncan Smith, and his universal 
credit scheme. Almost 15 years ago, the former Tory minister for work and 
pensionsfamously toured Easterhouse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/08/duncan-smith-poverty-benefit-sanctions-easterhouse>
, a sprawling and disadvantaged community in the north-east of Glasgow. “People 
who guided him round at the time genuinely thought that he got it, that he 
began to understand the deep-rooted patterns of inequality that underpinned the 
lives of many people living there.

“But his system of universal credit showed he didn’t get it. It was doomed to 
failure because they made one basic error: they moved people off receiving 
their benefits weekly or fortnightly to once every four weeks. Thus people 
began to fall into the clutches of loan sharks or predatory credit card firms 
when the cash ran out well before the end of four weeks.”

Discussions around the universal basic income also highlight competing 
political and moral philosophies.

On the one hand, there is the view that our benefits scheme is one that we and 
the generations before us all paid into. We are entitled to any benefits we may 
require throughout our lives because they have already been paid for. The view 
favoured by the right, however, is that the postwar welfare state has, in 
places, created a damaging dependency culture among generations of the 
unemployed: the state therefore has a duty to incentivise people to get off 
benefits.

For Kerr, though, there is also a challenge for the left. “We’re sleepwalking 
here,” he says. “We like to tell ourselves that we are a nice, centre-left 
society that values our public services, yet we consistently reject parties who 
seek to increase taxes to pay for them. There needs to be a conversation about 
that.

“The universal basic income gives people a degree of certainty and proper 
security. Few people now can expect to go through their entire working lives in 
the same job. People change jobs much more frequently and this leaves gaps and 
we don’t deal with the gaps properly. It takes weeks to register and to become 
eligible for payments and weeks for them to come through. By that time, they 
have become consumed in a spiral of debt from which they rarely emerge.”

Within weeks a team of academics and economists will begin to address the task 
of making pilot schemes for Glasgow and Fife viable. In the interim, Kerr and 
Jamie Cooke, head of RSAScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, 
which has led research on the subject across the UK, will seek support across a 
wide spectrum. “We’ve had encouragement from the SNP and also from some senior 
officers within the DWP.

“Tories like Professor Adam Tomkins, the MSP, can also see its possibilities. 
A person who has the security of a minimum basic income might dare to dream of 
setting up their own business and becoming an entrepreneur.”

Perhaps Adam Smith, the great champion of the free market, would have approved 
after all.
 