
Amid the fetid air and noxious smoke of the London mayoral contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/london-mayoral-election-2016> it has been 
easy to lose sight of what has been happening, but today is a day for clarity.
Sadiq Khan, the son of a Pakistani bus driver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/11/sadiq-khan-labour-london-mayor-candidate-selects-bus-drivers-son-to-take-on-millionaire-old-etionian>
, has been elected mayor of London. The first person from an ethnic minority to 
hold the post. A Muslim propelled to power by the capital when the status and 
legitimacy of British Muslims is being questioned as never before.

Sometimes London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, with its noise, 
crammed streets and packed trains, invokes madness, but at times like this, one 
can love it to distraction.

Local elections 2016: our writers on the night’s winners and losers | The panel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/06/local-elections-2016-winners-losers-labour-conservatives-snp>
For this could have been very different. Khan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/sadiq-khan>, who always looked the more 
credible of the main candidates, began his campaign early. It was a very 
different kind of mayoral campaign from those we had seen before, because 
neither of the two main candidates could boast the star power of a Boris 
Johnson or a Ken Livingstone. The Labour candidate focused early on homes and 
rents and jobs and the overheated costs of transport, and that, allied to his 
energetic criss-crossing of the capital, saw him build up a solid lead in the 
polls.

Zac Goldsmith <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/zac-goldsmith>, his 
languid Tory rival, could not make an impact sufficient to change the course of 
events. His policy prospectus did little to excite, still less his demeanour. 
Those who observed him at close quarters wondered why he took the job. He 
seemed awkward, distracted and when required to meet real people, he appeared 
to die a thousand deaths.

And so, with defeat the most likely impending prospect, Goldsmith – presumably 
at the behest of his appointed handlers, deployed to his side by the 
controversial Conservative strategist Lynton Crosby –went rogue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/05/sadiq-khan-victim-new-politics-zac-goldsmith-london-mayoral-election>
. The decision to focus the final phase of his campaign on the theme of Khan as 
a security risk and a terrorist sympathiser was disreputable, and deployed to 
defend it,Goldsmith seemed to realise that more than most 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/30/battle-london-mayor-dirtiest-fight-zac-goldsmith-sadiq-khan>
. But it was an act of desperation.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London's%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sadiq%20Khan%3A%20London%27s%20new%20mayor%20-%20video%20profile&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fmay%2F07%2Fsadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile&media=>
Sadiq Khan: London’s new mayor - video profile 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/may/07/sadiq-khan-londons-new-mayor-video-profile>
It was, as we have seen from Crosby before in London elections, the doughnut 
strategy. It was never likely to move the dial in inner London, even with the 
enthusiastic support of the Evening Standard, which took up the Khan as 
terrorist sympathiser line with enthusiasm.

But it might have bolstered Conservative support in the less ethnically 
diverse suburbs. It was that cynical: a headlong plunge by the Conservatives 
into scare politics and the very sort of divisive, racially based politics the 
party would claim it abhors. The Tory inquest into this election has begun with
fierce criticisms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/06/zac-goldsmith-attacked-by-senior-tory-over-tactics-in-london-mayor-election>
 from the London assembly member Andrew Boff, the party’s London assembly 
leader, and Roger Evans, a former deputy mayor, and as that reckoning 
progresses, senior figures will have to explain how a party that espouses 
cohesion deliberately sought to set white people against minorities and Sikhs 
and Hindus against a Muslim standing for public office. It will have to 
rationalise why, in pursuit of a mayoral seat and to stave off municipal 
humiliation, a great political party – the “one-nation” party – jettisoned its 
moral compass.

The great thing about today is not just that the job has been claimed by the 
candidate who seemed best equipped and best motivated to do it, but that 
Londoners in sufficient number refused to be swayed by a weak, undeserving 
candidate, an absurdly partisan press and a strategically corrosive campaign. 
There is a message for Khan in all this. Londoners have endorsed him despite 
all the provocations that might have led them to do otherwise. The mayoralty is 
a pedestal from which a good and active mayor can view all that needs strategic 
attention. It is also abully pulpit <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bully_pulpit>
. People don’t want another four years of theindolent leadership provided by 
Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/01/boris-johnson-mayor-never-was-london-vote>
. They will look to the mayor they have chosen. Khan must deliver for them.

But the greater message should go to the Tories. Their campaign exceeded the 
parameters. It was unacceptable and, ultimately, it was unsuccessful. Goldsmith 
began the campaign with the reputation of a principled political iconoclast. He 
ends it as the hustler for whom principles appear optional. The Tories began 
their campaign as a party seeking to modernise in the face of ethnic and 
demographic realities. They end it as a party apparently willing to slit its 
own throat for temporary advantage.

They have at least four years – the span of a Khan mayoralty – to reflect and 
perhaps repent.
 