
No one can accuse Chris Patten, Hong Kong’s last colonial governor, of not 
being prepared to scrap with China to defend liberal values in the territory.
The Conservative peer 
<https://www.parliament.uk/biographies/lords/lord-patten-of-barnes/1136> and 
chancellor of the University of Oxford took the view – rightly – two decades 
ago that Hong Kong’s prosperity was underpinned by a free and plural society.He 
pushed for more representative institutions, albeit far too late in Britain’s 
century-and-a-half tenure in charge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/jun/30/comment.china>. In doing 
so he earned the enmity of Beijing. Its media organs churned out ever more 
elaborate descriptions of the governor. A “serpent” and a“wrongdoer who would 
be condemned for a thousand generations” 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/chinese/trad/hi/newsid_1910000/newsid_1910800/1910806.stm>
 are among the kinder epithets hurled by mainland propagandists. His elected 
council was dissolved upon Hong Kong’s handover to the people’s republic in 
1997.

So it is strange now, perhaps, to find Beijing and Lord Patten in agreement 
over the antics of two pro-independence Hong Kong legislators. Yau Wai-ching, 
25, and Sixtus “Baggio” Leung, 30, hadpledged allegiance to the “Hong Kong 
nation” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/15/we-didnt-do-anything-wrong-banned-hong-kong-politician-yau-wai-ching-oath-taking-protest>
 and unfurled a banner declaring “Hong Kong is not China” during a swearing-in 
ceremony earlier this year. In conflating the push for greater democracy with 
the argument for independence, activists are, in Lord Patten’s words,
“dishonest, dishonourable and reckless” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/25/chris-patten-hits-out-at-hong-kong-democracy-activists>
. Words that might not go amiss in the editorials of Beijing’s mouthpiece 
Global Times which mocked “the Hong Kong independence farce”.

Full-blown secession from the mainland is a pipe dream. China’s communist 
leaders have zero tolerance for independence movements in restive Tibet and 
Xinjiang, home to minorities that resent Beijing’s rule. These regions suffer 
fromperiodic “strike hard” campaigns to crush dissent 
<http://www.rfa.org/english/news/uyghur/strike-hard-01092014172927.html>. 
Beijing is unlikely to let a Chinese-majority showcase city slip away. Yetcalls 
for an independent Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/26/liberate-hong-kong-calls-independence-china-elections-loom>
 are made from anger rather than reason. Independence sentiments were roused in 
theaftermath of 2014’s pro-democracy Umbrella Revolution 
<http://www.newyorker.com/news/news-desk/thugs-mainland-china-hong-kong-protests>
. The mess is of Beijing’s own making. Two years ago, Hong Kong was ranked 
number one for crony capitalism by the Economist.Falling salaries co-existed 
with soaring property prices and made the city state one of the most unequal 
places in the developed world. This economic anxiety was coupled with an 
assertion of a Hong Kong identity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/07/hong-kong-protests-fade-take-stock-beijing-china>
. When Beijing rejected demands for open elections for Hong Kong’s next chief 
executive it energised protesters. The Occupy-style movement ended up with 
police firing tear gas on peaceful protesters.

Since then Beijing’s interference in local affairs has been heavy-handed. 
Liberal academics have been cowed and there are calls for “patriotic education” 
in Hong Kong 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/mar/17/hong-kong-academics-china-pro-democracy>
. Booksellers have been spirited away.Pro-democracy activists harrassed 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-37558908>. What was being hollowed 
out was Beijing’s “one country, two systems” policy, meant to guarantee Hong 
Kong’s way of life. By the summer crowds gathered for Hong Kong’sfirst ever 
pro-independence rally 
<http://time.com/4440708/hong-kong-independence-china-localist/>. A poll found 
one in six of the city’s residents favoured secession 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-hongkong-china-survey-idUSKCN1050GT>. 
Instead of dealing with a political problem, China has sought confrontation and 
control –threatening new national security laws that outlaw treason 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-07/china-s-red-line-on-hong-kong-signals-increased-tensions-ahead>
. When Beijing took over, Hong Kong was one-fifth of China’s economy. Now it is 
one-fiftieth. The problem is that, without dialogue and compromise, the 
situation is likely to get worse before it gets better.
 