
Thanks in no small part to its close links to our neighbours in the EU and a 
longstanding reputation as a welcoming destination overseas scientists, Britain 
has consolidated its position as one of the most productive centres for 
research in the world – a necessary foundation on which to build a thriving 
knowledge economy.

But “Brexit means Brexit”, which means that those links and that reputation 
are now under threat.

Although one of Theresa May’s first acts as Prime Minister was to assure the 
research community 
<http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-seek-influence-on-brexit-ministry-1.20358>
 that the government remained committed to “ensuring a positive outcome for UK 
science”, since then there have been few encouraging signs. Thetrail of Theresa 
May’s speech today 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/theresa-may-to-confirm-uk-exit-from-eu-single-market-speech>
 indicates that taking back control over immigration is more important to her 
than retaining membership of the Single Market or Customs Union, a move that 
will cut UK research out of EU funding mechanisms. The chancellor, Philip 
Hammond, hashinted darkly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/philip-hammond-suggests-uk-outside-single-market-could-become-tax-haven>
 about turning Britain into a corporate tax haven to fight off European 
competition. And in the past week police have recorded the anti-immigration 
rhetoric of home secretary Amber Rudd’s Conservative Party conference speech 
last Octoberas a “hate incident” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/12/amber-rudd-speech-on-foreign-workers-recorded-as-hate-incident>
.

EU citizens in UK could face 'deliberate hostility' policy after Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/eu-citizens-in-uk-could-face-deliberate-hostility-policy-after-brexit>
Closing ourselves off from the uniquely sophisticated ecosystem of 
multilateral collaboration and scientific exchange that has been built over 
decades by the EU – with Britain at the forefront of that process – will exact 
a high price. Even the pro-leave Scientists for Britain campaigned on the basis 
that the UK would retain unfettered access to EU research structures. This 
claim may have been based on a disastrous – and possibly disingenuous – reading 
of how the EU works, but it is a testament to the fact that all points of the 
political spectrum recognise the high value of its research network.

Perhaps the government’s hardening stance is just a negotiating position, but 
the confusion emanating from May’s wayward Brexit ministers and her repeated 
insistence on not providing a running commentary means that uncertainty 
abounds. And into that uncertainty, whatever our preferences for the endpoint 
of the Brexit negotiations, we have all poured our hopes and fears.

As the triggering of Article 50 approaches, one thing that has been hard to 
find is proper dialogue about the shape of the outcome. Here, scientists have a 
vital role to play, and not just in informing key aspects of the debate from 
their ground-level perspectives of the likely impact on UK research. As 
generators and users of evidence and, yes, unashamedly as experts in the 
domains of knowledge and technology, we can be exemplars of the required 
standard of discourse.

There was huge dismay in the research community at the outcome of the 
referendum vote – and for many the well of bitter frustration still overflows – 
but the fissures revealed across British society also prompted much 
soul-searching. Why was the support for the EU among researchers and 
universities seen merely as the self-interest of an insulated elite?

The reasons behind many leave voters’ sense of disconnection from political 
and economic currents are many and complex, but the research community has a 
part to play in building bridges to a brighter future – for all of us. That’s a 
long-term project. For now, in the public discussions that need to take place 
around Brexit, we have to make plain the risks to our national research base 
and, crucially, make the case that it is in everyone’s interest for them to be 
mitigated. AsColin Macilwain observed in Nature last week 
<http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-should-not-resign-themselves-to-brexit-1.21237>
, voicing the concerns of many in the scientific community: ‘Make no mistake, 
the end of free movement and a bumpy exit from EU research programmes will blow 
holes in the culture of British academic science that devalued pound notes 
cannot fill.’

But it’s not just about money – even if replacement funds are found, they will 
not automatically replace the intricate networks of collaboration and exchange.
Macilwain continued 
<http://www.nature.com/news/scientists-should-not-resign-themselves-to-brexit-1.21237>
: ‘the mood in science departments is universally grim. It isn’t just EU-born 
students, postdocs and staff who are unsettled: countless spouses and offspring 
feel dejected and unwanted in the United Kingdom, too.’ I have seen this 
myself. So many of the EU nationals among my university colleagues have been 
saddened by the change in atmosphere in the UK before and after the referendum. 
We cannot afford to lose their talent or their friendship – they hugely enrich 
our research endeavours and our society. But asurvey published just last week 
<http://www.nature.com/news/brexit-vote-drives-uk-academics-to-think-about-leaving-1.21259>
 revealed that many will vote with their feet and leave our shores. Over a 
third of British scientists say are now more likely to do likewise.

Seven months after the referendum, no-one has clear sight of the hardness or 
hue of the Brexit that will emerge from the forthcoming negotiations. There is 
no road map, though theeight-point plan detailed by Scientists for EU last week 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/355/6320/31.full> is a constructive 
starting point on a number of key issues including funding, immigration, 
collaboration, regulation and business investment.

The best we can do for now is to talk and the time for doing that is already 
overdue. If you are a scientist or a supporter of science,you can get involved 
too <http://scienceisvital.org.uk/eu-campaign/>. Whatever happens in the coming 
months and years, it is important that we maintain close and productive 
research links with the EU. Science is Vital is campaigning to ensure that 
people can make their voices heard and help shape that future.Write to your MP 
<http://scienceisvital.org.uk/eu-campaign/> and share your experience of UK 
science and your hopes for its future. Stand up robustly for science by being 
informed, but also respectful of perspectives that have led people to vote 
leave. Better yet, invite your MP to the lobby of parliament in two weeks’ time 
<http://scienceisvital.org.uk/eu-campaign/> – on Tuesday 31st January – and 
tell them in person. But prepare for that meeting to be a two-way conversation.

@Stephen_Curry <https://twitter.com/Stephen_Curry> is a professor of 
structural biology at Imperial College. He is a member of the boards ofScience 
is Vital <http://scienceisvital.org.uk/> and the Campaign for Science and 
Engineering <http://www.sciencecampaign.org.uk/>.
 