
You learn early on that you’re not going to make everything all right. Lots of 
kids just have very tough lives, whether one of their parents has a drink or 
drug problem, their dad’s just died, or they are seeing a lot of fighting going 
on. Sometimes social services do something about it. Mostly, they don’t because 
they simply can’t.

A lack of therapeutic intervention by social services is quite common in 
austerity Britain, and it was one of the big surprises when I started my 
career, working on the frontline of child mental health in schools. Indeed my 
local social services describe themselves as an “emergency service”, and 
increasingly seem to manage levels of risk, rather than help situations or 
people improve. In many parts of the country, Camhs – child and adolescent 
mental health services – is similarly stretched.

When I did my training, I thought we would be taught how the human mind works 
– and how to fix it. I imagined we would be given aHaynes care maintenance 
manual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2015/oct/25/colouring-in-classic-car-books-motoring-haynes>
, if you like. I was 35: probably too young, definitely too naive. I’m 50 now, 
and understand less than ever about the complexities of emotions and thoughts 
that are inevitably ensnared in the kids I work with, and that’s probably not 
so bad. After all, the last thing kids want is to be told what is good for them.

Social care careers: an interactive guide
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/ng-interactive/2014/aug/26/social-care-careers-an-interactive-guide>
Take one eight-year-old boy I worked with. The police had to step over needles 
and a stash of guns to find him cowering under a bed. He was taken into care 
and moved to a new school miles away, where I met him. But the social worker 
hadn’t really explained to him why he’d had to leave his dad. As a result he 
was deeply confused, and very untrusting.

He would dive under the table as soon as our counselling sessions came to an 
end and growl like a dog, refusing to move. Reflecting on this with my 
supervisor, we wondered if it was where he felt safe, and in control. All 
behaviour is communication, as the saying goes. The last thing he wanted was to 
be dragged off somewhere new again by strangers. So we acted out the story of a 
hurt, distrustful puppy being placed with a new owner using puppets, and 
discussed how unsafe that dog must feel. It took a lot of time for the boy to 
feel more understood but he’s doing better now.

Social services’ “thresholds” – the level of need at which they deem it 
necessary to intervene – are absurdly high at the moment. But that frustration 
never goes away. A colleague worked with a child who was seeing a lot of 
domestic violence at home, and helped her to plan a strategy for keeping 
herself safe and calling the police when things were kicking off. An hour later 
she got an irate phone call from a social worker telling her to stop 
interfering and to not place too much responsibility on the kid. That’s as far 
as the new “joined-up thinking” gets.

My daughter is in year 3, and we’ve been on several camping trips around the 
UK this summer. Only one of the 20 kids I work with each week has had more than 
a single day trip during that time. I had a comfortable and happy childhood, 
and it has been a real eye-opener seeing how hard so many families have it. I 
guess it’s all about perspective, isn’t it? If more people in the UK could 
visit the country’s deprived estates and really get to grips with how life is 
there, maybe there would be a greater sense of compassion for struggling 
parents and families.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsecret-life-therapist-deprived-struggling-parents-families%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc17f8ccb7acd3869e0a9108ff7d3a641de8e402%2F0_47_1443_866%2F1443.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20child%20therapist%3A%20you%20have%20to%20accept%20you%20can%E2%80%99t%20fix%20everything%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsecret-life-therapist-deprived-struggling-parents-families%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20child%20therapist%3A%20you%20have%20to%20accept%20you%20can%E2%80%99t%20fix%20everything%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F03%2Fsecret-life-therapist-deprived-struggling-parents-families%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffc17f8ccb7acd3869e0a9108ff7d3a641de8e402%2F0_47_1443_866%2F1443.jpg>
 ‘Quite often you need a light touch, even a bit of humour, to get things 
moving.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Someone I know recently posted a picture of two dogs she’d adopted from 
Romania on Facebook. “How English is that,” I thought. Forget the refugee 
children – let’s look after the animals. Because, let’s face it, children with 
deep emotional needs can be trickier to love than pets. Yet in forgotten 
corners of the UK, like the estates where I work, it is only the love and toil 
of the teachers and teaching assistants that is keeping the lights on for many 
kids right now.

There are lovely things about working in primary schools: the community ethos, 
the values, the constant thinking about others, and the working-together ideal 
that teachers embody and hope the children will embrace. It’s hard to square 
the Brexit vote with that, and unfortunately it seems to have unleashed some 
attitudes at home that have filtered through to the children. I’ve heard of 
several racist remarks in schools since term started and have been asked to 
work with a Polish family who have faced hostility at the school gates.

There is a focus on one-to-one therapy, but in practice, this isn’t always the 
most effective route. I’ve had far better results working with the parents or 
carers and children together. I’m not the most confident of people, and some of 
the hardest moments are being with kids and their carers when they’re at the 
end of their tether, or talking about the really difficult stuff. Quite often 
you need a light touch, even a bit of humour, to get things moving. If a kid 
draws a picture of tanks blowing up his parents, well, it’s a starting point.

The secret life of a call centre worker: a degree of compassion never hurts | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/13/secret-life-call-centre-worker>
The pay is similar to teaching, but contracts are generally short term as 
funding is always shaky. Yet despite the difficulties, it’s an undeniable 
privilege to work with children: their imagination, their energy … it’s just 
wonderful.

Us adults with our job titles and qualifications might think we know best, but 
kids often heal themselves through their friendships. It’s a big ask of any kid 
to open up to a stranger who she only sees once a week for 45 minutes.Children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/children> with similar life experiences 
tend to gravitate towards each other. Sometimes just saying, “hey, you know 
Aidan in year 5 has been through the same stuff as you – he got adopted last 
year,” is enough of a pebble to drop for two kids to get talking and things to 
make more sense for them.

Children who constantly get into trouble tend to develop low self-esteem, no 
matter how hard they seem on the outside. They get to be known as “the bad 
kids”, and they soon see themselves that way too. This doesn’t leave much fuel 
in their tanks when it comes to wanting to change. The Australian therapist
Michael White 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/28/us/28white.html?_r=4&scp=1&sq=Michael%20White&st=cse&oref=slogin&oref=slogin&oref=slogin>
 coined a beautiful phrase: “The person isn’t the problem, the problem is the 
problem.” I once worked with a child withADHD 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder>. 
He called his hyperactivity his “monkey” and we attempted to work out what the 
monkey needed so the rest of him could focus during class time. I love this 
kind of approach – it’s playful, fun and works.

• Are you a bailiff, an inventor or a pilot? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 