
Ivan Golubev was a hyperactive child until his school in the Donbass region of 
easternUkraine <https://www.theguardian.com/world/ukraine> was attacked by 
gunfire. The trauma left him unable to to speak.

 A few months later he was on holiday in Odessa and his mother, Anna, decided 
to try dolphin therapy. “By the end of the first session he started talking 
again, and I just couldn’t stop crying,” she says, as her son splashes round in 
the pool as part of his follow-up treatment.

 The therapy is one of the many dolphin-related attractions in the Black Sea 
port city, marketed at children with learning difficulties, pregnant women and 
more recently soldiers injured 
<http://www.ohchr.org/EN/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20329> in the 
conflict in eastern Ukraine.

Staff at the Nemo centre <http://odessa.therapynemo.com/en/prices/>, who 
include five psychologists, says there is1,000-year old evidence 
<http://therapynemo.com/en/scientific-work/private-kind-animtherapy/> that 
animals can help aid mental and physical rehabilitation, but some clinical 
experts dispute the benefits while others question whether it is ethical to use 
wild animals in this way.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e5899f76249a78a93f6a799815cdcdde2a28a4%2F0_82_2439_1463%2F2439.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F09e5899f76249a78a93f6a799815cdcdde2a28a4%2F0_82_2439_1463%2F2439.jpg>
 Soldiers testing the dolphin therapy programme. Photograph: Nemo Centre 
As well as resulting in about 10,000 deaths 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/20/ukraine-peace-process-leaders-agree-roadmap-to-revive-talks>
, the war between pro-Russia separatists and the Ukrainian army has left many 
thousands more with post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), a conditionnot 
widely recognised in Ukraine <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35028142>.

 In September a group of soldiers diagnosed with PTSD came to Odessa to test 
whether sea mammals could help their rehabilitation.

It’s not a “magic stick” but it can contribute to recovery, claims dolphin 
trainer and counsellor Yuri Mishkurov, who worked with the servicemen. And 
while he can’t say how many of the 15 veterans who took part in the programme 
made a full recovery, he claims that “it’s an effective experience because 
after the therapy they feel positive emotions”.

 “It doesn’t matter whether you are an adult or a child – if you spend time in 
the pool with this big and friendly animal you will feel better,” adds Bogdan 
Popovski, who has run the therapy programme for 10 years.

From cats and dogs aiding palliative care to horses helping children with 
attention deficit 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/animals-and-us/201411/does-animal-assisted-therapy-really-work>
 disorders, there are animal-assisted therapies on offer around the world. 
However, some clinical experts argue that there is not enough evidence to show 
the programmes actually help people with psychological illnesses.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F207cfdd92c7d8393f20a9128464327c36221b7a6%2F0_643_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F207cfdd92c7d8393f20a9128464327c36221b7a6%2F0_643_4288_2573%2F4288.jpg>
 Dolphin therapy. Photograph: Nemo 
Writing in Psychology Today Hal Herzog 
<https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/animals-and-us/201110/does-dolphin-therapy-work>
, who has studied animal and human interaction for 20 years, says claims about 
dolphin-based therapies remain the most over-hyped of the lot. He concludes 
that “placebo effects, wishful thinking, and simply having a new experience … 
are more plausible explanations for the supposed improvements”.

 Mishkurov, who has worked at Nemo for four years, says that the most positive 
impact he had witnessed is on children such as Ivan who start talking again, or 
become more comfortable socialising. But there has never been any qualitative 
research on the 1,000 or so children that visit the centre every year.

Ukraine, Russia and Spain are the only European countries to still keep 
dolphins or whales in captivity, according toanimal rights NGO Born Free 
<http://www.bornfree.org.uk/campaigns/zoo-check/captive-whales-dolphins/global/>
, which warns that “direct contact between the public and captive cetaceans 
places both parties at significant risk of disease and injury”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eac2d214d4f6cd05a4e1db903f8b7c13675a5b2%2F0_1132_3554_2132%2F3554.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20dolphins%20used%20to%20treat%20PTSD%20in%20Ukrainian%20soldiers&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Fthe-dolphins-used-to-treat-ptsd-in-ukrainian-soldiers%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8eac2d214d4f6cd05a4e1db903f8b7c13675a5b2%2F0_1132_3554_2132%2F3554.jpg>
 Rights campaigners say that using animals for therapy puts them at risk. 
Photograph: Nemo 
Staff at the Nemo centre admits Ukraine has had problems in the past with 
animal welfare, but say they now comply with rigorous checks and that the 
dolphins they work with were either rescued after being injured by ships or 
were born in captivity.


The therapy dolphins work an average of four 30-minute sessions a day but this 
can stretch to as many as nine in busy times.
 