
The nation was both shocked and relieved on Sunday when The Archers domestic 
violence storyline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/the-guardian-view-on-domestic-abuse-truth-fiction-and-the-archers>
 reached a dramatic climax. Having attempted to walk out on her husband Rob, 
Helen cracked, stabbing the man who has been systematically eroding her sense 
of self for over two years.

The psychological coercion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/28/domestic-violence-law-coercive-control-abuse-partners-courts>
 Helen experienced is a particular type of manipulation known as “gaslighting”, 
after the 1944 filmGaslight 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/dec/15/gaslight-thorold-dickinson-classic-dvd>
. In the film, Charles Boyer’s Gregory Anton sets out to convince Ingrid 
Bergman’s Paula that she has gone mad. One of his many tactics is to secretly 
dim the gaslights in their home and tell Bergman she is insane when she 
comments that the lights are flickering. As a result, gaslighting is now used 
to describe a particular type of mental abuse that makes the victim doubt her – 
and it is often a her – own sanity, memory and perception.

Setting up bizarre events and then denying them is one tactic, but so is the 
kind of behavioural and thought control Rob exerts over Helen, from controlling 
her money to forcing her to eat a sticky toffee pudding after his wife, who is 
bulimic, has just thrown up her meal.

I wish I had faith that the psychiatric system would have spotted why [The 
Archers'] Helen was so distressed

Most victims of domestic abuse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/domestic-violence>, narcissistic 
relationships or abusive childhoods see gaslighting as often as damaging as 
physical abuse. Gaslighting is so dangerous because it skewers the individual’s 
capacity to explain and realise what is wrong. It occurs in romantic 
relationships, like Rob and Helen’s marriage, but also in friendships, 
families, the military and at work. Gaslighting tends to start gradually, and 
can often appear ridiculous and everyday at first, for example being accused of 
overreacting because you are premenstrual.

However, as the lever is pressed more and more firmly, victims start to 
question themselves, trying to argue their way back to reality. This capacity 
to doubt – a healthy sign in comparison to the certitude of the sadist – is 
then pathologised by the perpetrator who often uses psychiatric discourse to 
tell the individual they are too emotional and disturbed, too irrational.

Attempts to keep a grip on reality are mocked and blocked, as the perpetrator 
works to cut the victim off from friends and a community that can provide a 
reality check, as in Helen’s case. The victim may know something is wrong, that 
reality is slipping away, but the undivided attention becomes more and more 
addictive, and is often fuelled by problematic experiences of childhood 
relationships.

The battle against sexual violence is being lost – look at the number of young 
victims | Joanna Bourke
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/15/rape-victims-children-sexual-violence-government-statistics>
As gaslighting makes people feel mad, and as labelling someone as insane is a 
classic form of abuse, people often turn to their GP. When Helen did this a few 
weeks ago, she was offered antidepressants and a talking therapy calledCBT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2003/feb/09/healthandwellbeing>. Her 
surface complaints of feeling low, angry and erratic were taken at face value. 
She was not able to articulate her actual experiences, an excellent 
representation of the gaslighting experience where victims are coerced into 
believing that if they could just be less emotional, have more positive 
thoughts and be less troublesome, all would be well. These dubious goals being 
force-fed to Helen by Rob coincide with the therapy world’s preoccupations at 
this moment in history, with often devastating results.

I wish it were possible to have faith that the psychiatric system would have 
spotted why Helen was so distressed. However, not only aredomestic violence 
charities closing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/aug/03/domestic-violence-refuge-crisis-women-closure-safe-houses>
, but also most victims of gaslighting don’t present at specialist services 
because they have been trained to believe they, not the relationship, are the 
problem. Like Helen, they present at GP surgeries, or viaservices 
<http://www.iapt.nhs.uk/about-iapt/> where they will most likely receive a 
telephone assessment. With emphasis on placing people in diagnostic boxes as 
soon as possible, and huge managerial pressures to move on to the next person, 
surface complaints are often taken too literally in order to complete an 
assessment.

What is missing for many is a detailed understanding of how language and the 
toxic environments we experience can colonise our minds, and drive us into 
mental illness as Helen’s relationship with Rob did. Many listeners of The 
Archers would argue that Helen is not ill, but drowning in toxic environmental 
quicksand. Those of us who are lucky enough to spend our days listening to 
psychiatric patients’ stories often think similarly. But the time and space 
needed to allow a real story to emerge – always a brave act of untangling 
latent from manifest meaning – is increasingly under attack in the NHS.

The Guardian view on domestic abuse: truth, fiction and The Archers | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/04/the-guardian-view-on-domestic-abuse-truth-fiction-and-the-archers>
The failure to understand gaslighting is not just dangerous to victims of 
adult domestic abuse, but to many psychiatric populations. A classic example is 
voice-hearing. Voice-hearing can be a way of trying to ward off an oppressor’s 
voice from completely taking over one’s subjectivity – a way to try to insert a 
minimal space between addresser and addressee, an attempted solution. But 
voice-hearing is often ticked off simply as an obvious symptom of 
schizophrenia. In this case, psychiatry can inadvertently work in the interests 
of the initial manipulator; this diagnosis would reinforce the classic taunt of 
“no one will believe you”. Sadly, mental health practitioners do not always see 
beyond surface communications that may look like someone is ill, to see how 
violent backgrounds can create mental illness.

While Archers fans are to be lauded for empathising with Helen’s plight, and 
donating to specialist domestic abuse agencies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/mar/31/fans-of-the-archers-raise-more-than-80000-for-domestic-abuse-charity>
, deaths – both fictional and real –will continue to occur 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/15/rape-victims-children-sexual-violence-government-statistics>
 unless mental health practitioners listen in detail to the backstory behind 
each and every psychiatric presentation. Radio 4 listeners will attest that 
this has been a painful process. But it is an essential one if we are to stop 
psychiatric discourse being used as a gaslighting technique to discredit the 
lived experiences of those too readily seen as mentally ill.

• The freephone 24-hour national domestic violence helpline, run in 
partnership betweenWomen’s Aid <https://www.womensaid.org.uk/> and Refuge 
<http://www.refuge.org.uk/>, can be reached on 0808 2000 247.
 