
The territory is marked out in red and blue on two maps by statistician Nate 
Silver 
<http://fivethirtyeight.com/features/election-update-women-are-defeating-donald-trump/>
. One map of the US showing what would happen if only women voted, the other if 
only “dudes” did. The lady vote would have Hillary Clinton ahead in typically 
safe Republican states such as Alaska, Kansas, Indiana, Missouri, Montana, 
South Dakota, Arizona, Georgia, South Carolina and Texas. She would get 458 
electoral votes, compared with Donald Trump’s 80.

The dude-only map, though, shows that Trump could win every swing state with 
Clinton just about clinging on to the west coast, parts of the north-east, 
Illinois and New Mexico. Trump would get 350 electoral votes to Clinton’s 188.

Thankfully, this is not a dude-only election. It is not even a Democrat v 
Republican election. It is an insurgency by a man (and a movement) who, in 
promising to reinstate America’s supposedly lost greatness, will destroy the 
GOP establishment. They deserve it. The sudden abhorrence at Trump’s 
description of sexual assault as banter is ludicrous. Have they ignored 
everything he said on women, Mexicans, Muslims and black people? The cowardice 
of the Republican party meant they would not challenge him for fear of damaging 
their own prospects. They could not care less if the collateral damage is to 
poor women or black communities.

For Trump has been a long time coming: he is the embodiment of the backlash 
against feminism that many of us recognised in the early 90s.

We need to understand how culture and gender intersect with the economy. Votes 
for Trump might not be deliberately made in the name of a gender war, but that 
is exactly the battle being fought.Feminism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/feminism> is seen as both triumphant and 
passé. Both views deem it as unnecessary. This backlash has been drip fed into 
popular culture.

Its radicalism was stripped away in the mid-90s by the whole Sex and the City 
vibe. We could have sex and shoes, if we were white and rich. Lads could be 
sexist pigs again. Porn became ubiquitous and post-feminists embraced it.Women 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/women> no longer needed feminism, 
because they needed men for babies and to open jars. For this they had to be 
appealing before they were 30 and their eggs shrivelled up. Dating became a 
desperate game and men preferred women who were free. Just not too free. Men 
wrote books about how to get women into bed that were akin to rape manuals. But 
worse was to come: men started embracing their manhood, rejecting “cultural 
Marxism” or political correctness. By the mid-to-late 2000s, this pushback 
against the gains of feminism was in full flow.

This was implicitly tied to recession. This is something that the likes of 
Trump and Nigel Farage understand. The right always does. The left, with its 
eye on class struggle, continues to miss how things play out in terms of 
gender. The misogyny of a Trump, or his pet tic Farage, does not exist in an 
economic vacuum.

The net worth of the bottom 60% of US households is about 14% lower than it 
was 30 years ago <http://www.vox.com/2015/1/28/7929939/net-worth-decline>. The 
life expectancy gap between rich and poor in the US is growing 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/04/11/upshot/for-the-poor-geography-is-life-and-death.html?_r=0>
. The number of single-parent families has risen rapidly. Michelle Alexander, 
a law professor, says there aremore black men in prison than there were slaves 
in 1850 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2011/10/12/michelle-alexander-more-black-men-in-prison-slaves-1850_n_1007368.html>
.

So the US and its men are in pain. So much so that a quarter of white 
blue-collar workers are unemployed. 
<http://money.cnn.com/2016/05/04/news/economy/america-left-behind-white-men/> 
Many are on prescription painkillers, opiates such as OxyContin. Where there is 
pain, there is anger. And anger kicks downwards. On to women.

This sense of abandonment felt by blue-collar workers feeds the backlash. 
Britain is a very different country, but the same sense of neglect is there in 
former industrial areas.

I remember interviewing miners who “retired undefeated”, as they said, and 
would not take the new jobs on offer to them. Their women folk did. This 
inflexibility, combined with real inequality, feeds exactly into a backlash 
against women and “immigrants”. The fragility of the masculine identity 
produces this hopeless nostalgia for defined gender roles. Look around. Have 
women – of every ethnicity – ever had to look so uniform? Long straight hair, 
pouty lips, big breasts? That’s just the surface; the substance remains lack of 
equal pay, sexual violence, attacks on abortion rights, and online abuse. As 
Susan Faludiwrote way back in 1991 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Backlash:_The_Undeclared_War_Against_American_Women>
 the backlash is not coherent, it is more of a countercurrent, an undertow. But 
it will drag us down

In yoking economic insecurity to the culture war, Trump and his cohorts 
threaten liberal certainty. His voters may know that his misogyny is a small 
price to pay for the change he offers; it may, indeed, be a bonus. The running 
down of the welfare state, after all, has been a war on women. The war on drugs 
has been a war on women with more and more women in prison. The overt coupling 
of patriarchy with race privilege and a militarised police force is visible 
enough proof to make Trump’s assertion that the American Dream is over feel 
true.

So how come women are rejecting his vision and men are not? What is in it for 
them? “When power is scarce, a little of it is tempting,” wrote Margaret Atwood 
inThe Handmaid’s Tale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/jan/20/handmaids-tale-margaret-atwood>. 
A little power. Trump cannot win without women. The fact he thinks that he can 
reveals his heart of darkness. It still beats strong.
 