
I’d wanted to be a physicist <https://www.theguardian.com/science/physics> 
ever since I was a kid. Of course, back then I had no real idea what exactly a 
physicist did. What I did know from books was that the sun was very big, but 
that there were many stars in our galaxy so much bigger; that all the wildly 
different things in our world were made from just a few varieties of 
inconceivably tiny atoms, but that those were made of tinier things still; that 
time did not just go back further than the building of the pyramids, but 
further than the birth of my species, my star, my galaxy. To a mildly obsessive 
youngster, it seemed that learning about these things would be a very fine 
thing indeed.

100 years on, is this Einstein’s greatest gift to human understanding? | Paul 
Davies
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/07/einstein-universe-gravitational-waves-theory-relativity>
Physicists come to the field in all kinds of different ways, but some version 
of this wonderment is shared by all of us. It is what compels us to go through 
a decade of formal university education. The original research you do during 
your PhD prepares you, to some extent, for what’s expected in the next three to 
10 years as a postdoctoral researcher at various institutions. These 
appointments are for a few years at a time, don’t pay a lot, and are 
exceedingly hard to get. You have to prove your capacity as an independent 
researcher, basically putting work ahead of everything else. I am a postdoc, 
and I’m trying to keep my eye on the prize, which only a tiny minority attain: 
a tenure-track position as a professor. Only once you land one of those do you 
have a good shot at actually doing this physics thing for the rest of your 
career.

As a high-energy theorist, I try to think about the most fundamental laws of 
nature that we could understand. This involves phenomena smaller than an atomic 
nucleus, which can be experimentally probed by smashing protons or electrons 
together in huge facilities such as theLarge Hadron Collider 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/large-hadron-collider> in Switzerland. 
Since the universe started out much smaller than this, our theories also touch 
upon the study ofthe big bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/shortcuts/2015/mar/24/the-big-bang-are-we-in-a-pics-or-it-didnt-happen-type-situation>
, traces of which can be discerned using powerful telescopes. Some of the most 
exciting work has to do with theories or physical scenarios that will be out of 
experimental reach for a long time, maybe for ever.

The quest for a theory of everything – Science Weekly podcast
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2016/oct/11/the-quest-for-a-theory-of-everything-science-weekly-podcast>
In practical terms, there are parts of my job that are roughly in line with my 
childhood expectations. We think about theories that have been proposed to 
describe some aspect of the subatomic world, such asdark matter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/life-and-physics/2016/oct/02/dark-matter-did-we-just-hear-the-most-exciting-phrase-in-science>
 or theHiggs boson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/04/higgs-boson-discovery-giant-leap>
, and occasionally come up with new ones. We calculate their predictions, 
hoping they can be tested soon. This is usually in collaborations of two to 
five people.

The actual work is done partially on pen and paper, especially to formally 
understand a mathematical model or physical mechanism. For detailed 
computations, we often write programs and run them on laptops or 
supercomputers. There are lots of meetings and Skype calls with collaborators 
to feel our way forward, and once we figure out something worthwhile, we write 
a paper together, usually a few per year per person, but this varies 
significantly.

Other parts of the job have turned out to be a bit more surprising. It’s 
unbelievably social: we’re all about getting together and chatting in front of 
a blackboard, around an espresso machine, or during a strenuous hike, where 
many new ideas are born. This is one of the unexpected pleasures of being a 
theorist, but it also comes with a gruelling amount of travel to give seminars 
and attend conferences. Dozens of work trips per year are not unusual and wear 
you down. Since we spend a lot of time presenting our research to one another, 
a degree of oratory skill and charisma can play no small role in one’s success. 
Some see this as a burden; others, including me, enjoy the chance to put on a 
good show.

It’s a very rich professional experience, but there are significant downsides, 
and if this wasn’t your dream job, you might absolutely hate it. The work is 
entirely open-ended and self-motivated. This is a delicious freedom most of us 
couldn’t do without, but also a source of insecurity we never stop struggling 
with (look up“imposter syndrome” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome>). The working hours are long 
and sometimes lonely. Having to move to a new position every few years until 
you hope to land a faculty job is not exactly a recipe for stability, and it’s 
asking a lot from your partner or spouse. I’m lucky that my partner puts up 
with all this, but it doesn’t always work out. The large majority leave 
academia at one stage or another, usually when they can’t find another job 
(budgets are shrinking) or the personal cost becomes too high. They typically 
end up reinventing themselves in finance, analytics or software-related 
industries. Unlike a chemist or even other kinds of physicists, a high-energy 
theorist moving into the private sector usually has no choice but to leave 
their passion behind.

Good luck, physicists, with those tricky 'meaning of life' questions | Giles 
Fraser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/24/physicists-questions-scientists-theologians-big-bang-discovery>
All of this takes its toll. The decade or so spent in low-paying jobs and 
moving from place to place, the importance of academic pedigree and personal 
recommendations for getting ahead, and the ultimately very low chance of 
landing a permanent position, all contribute to a deplorable lack of women and 
ethnic minorities in the field. This is apart from the usual overt or covert 
biases that make it difficult to break into the old boys’ club. I sincerely 
hope that we can overcome these institutional barriers and make it more 
welcoming to everyone, because I couldn’t be happier doing what I do, and 
everyone with the talent and passion deserves a fair shot at doing the same 
thing. This field and its rarefied pool of individuals rapidly disabuses you of 
any ill-conceived notion that the intellectual gifts that propelled you through 
school and university are anything of real significance. It’s a humbling 
perspective for anyone who fancies themselves a bit of a smarty-pants.

At its best, the job allows us to experience moments of sublime joy: every now 
and then, you feel like you are uncovering nuggets of universal, objective 
truth about the cosmos. These moments of transcendence are predicated by months 
and years of confusion, obsession, mistakes and incremental work. Even if a 
particular discovery or insight isn’t your own, being able to understand it and 
grasp its significance inspires awe. Almost all of us are atheists, but we 
worship at the altar of nature.

I know our work is important in its own right, but like most of us, I 
selfishly do what I do because I can’t imagine doing anything else. Given all 
of its flaws, it is incredible that society recognises the value of basic 
research, and lends its support. We serve at its pleasure and owe it our 
gratitude.

• Are you a civil servant, an opera singer or a chef? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 