
As the Scottish National party’s spokesman pointed out in Wednesday’s Commons 
debate on Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-debate-plan-labour-pmqs-call-for-government-to-publish-its-brexit-plan-politics-live>
, it is nearly six months now since the EU referendum. By contrast, there are 
less than four months to go before Theresa May has pledged to invoke article 50 
of the Lisbon treaty to begin the UK’s European withdrawal negotiations. It is 
extraordinary that so much time has passed without any real clarity about the 
government’s general aims in those negotiations. Beyond the inanity that Brexit 
now means a red, white and blue Brexit – a soundbite that must have been 
dreamed up to discourage Tory defections in Thursday’sSleaford and North 
Hykeham byelection 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/sleaford-and-north-hykeham-voters-express-impatience-over-brexit-byelection-theresa-may-eu>
 – we know almost as little about Brexit aims today as we did on 24 June. 
Wednesday’sCommons vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-debate-plan-labour-pmqs-call-for-government-to-publish-its-brexit-plan-politics-live>
 just papered over the cracks on both sides of the house.

It is almost as extraordinary that relatively little time now remains in which 
to remedy that uncertainty. There are few signs, even now, that the government 
is close to knowing its own collective mind. As Kenneth Clarke put it in 
Wednesday’s debate, even Brexiter ministers are not agreed with one another. 
There have been occasional hints – the welcome pledge to Nissan, the declared 
readiness to pay the EU for market access and, more recently, Brexit secretary 
David Davis’s agreement that the UK could continue within the EU justice and 
security framework. But there is nothing that adds up to a remotely coherent 
statement of intent commensurate with the seriousness of the issues. Britain is 
advancing towards Brexit in a fog, like the luckless Russians marching towards 
Napoleon at Austerlitz. On Wednesday, however, some fog began to lift.

On the west side of Parliament Square in London, the UK supreme court 
continued to hear the government’s appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/article-50-supreme-court-hearing-brexit-full-act-parliament>
 against the high court’s ruling that it could not invoke article 50 by using 
prerogative powers. Meanwhile, on the east side of the square, MPs finally 
called on the government to publish its EU withdrawal plans before article 50 
is triggered. At last, the great issue of the UK’s future relations with Europe 
was finally being discussed where it matters most of all, in our elected 
parliament and in our highest court of law. And in the Commons some progress 
was made, though not enough. It was a parliamentary daywhen a deal was struck 
that allowed both sides to claim victory 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm201617/cmagenda/OP161207.pdf>. The 
Conservatives believe they have scored a success by ensuring Labour accepted 
that article 50 must be triggered by 31 March 2017. Labour claimed a victory 
because the Tories did not oppose Labour’s call for a published plan. Of the 
two,Labour has the better case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/labour-showed-its-teeth-over-brexit-but-its-room-for-manoeuvre-is-small>
 for celebration. The Conservatives know that Jeremy Corbyn and many of his 
backbenchers in leave-supporting seats are not going to oppose triggering 
article 50, even if someLabour rebels, voting with their conscience, propose 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/tory-backbenchers-demand-brexit-plans-theresa-may-government-article-50-anna-soubry>
 to join the Liberal Democrats and the SNP in doing so.The Tories, by contrast, 
have been forced to make a significant retreat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/agreement-to-produce-brexit-plan-is-no-concession-says-david-davis>
. They conceded on publishing a plan before the article 50 decision because 
they could not win the vote any other way. The prime minister may have been 
physically in the Gulf states, trying to drum up trade from repressive oil 
kingdoms. But her mind was focused on Westminster and Sleaford, where she could 
not afford defeats. Mrs May blinked.

Yesterday’s outcome, while much better than nothing, is not ideal and may not 
be deliverable in the way Labour expects. It all depends on what the published 
plan looks like and how soon it is produced. Labour’s Sir Keir Starmer set out a
good list of minimum requirements 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/commons/2016-12-07/debates/CA09D9B2-9634-41C8-8979-8B9CD82DBB8F/TheGovernmentSPlanForBrexit>
 for inclusion in the published plan – clear statements about the single 
market, the customs union and transitional issues, and sufficient information 
to allow MPs, the Office for Budgetary Responsibility and the devolved 
governments to make their judgments. But he did not press for, and did not get 
from Mr Davis, a commitment to a government white paper in January. And Labour 
has lost something by accepting the 31 March deadline, when autumn 2017 would 
have been better. The big political problem is that the government will wriggle 
in every way to get itself off the hook. That’s because, quite simply, it is 
not in Mrs May’s domestic political interest to be precise. Mr Davis has 
liberal instincts on transparency but if he, or she, provided the kind of 
information that Labour has asked for, it could have split the Tory party. A 
hard Brexit option will not be acceptable to the Tory left, while a soft Brexit 
option will not be acceptable to the right. Wednesday was a skirmish. But the 
battles, and the casualties, will come in the new year.
 