
Poland, the pivotal power in post-communist central Europe, is in danger of 
being reduced by itsrecently elected ruling party 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/25/poland-lurches-to-right-with-election-of-law-and-justice-party>
 to an illiberal democracy. Basic pillars of its still youthful liberal 
democracy, such as theconstitutional court 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/23/poland-constitutional-crisis-lech-walesa-law-justice-pis>
,public service broadcasters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/poland-president-signs-bill-putting-state-media-under-government-control>
 and a professional civil service, are suddenly under threat. The voices of all 
allied democracies, in Europe and across the Atlantic, must be raised to 
express their concern about a turn with grave implications for the whole 
democratic west.

Polish president signs bill putting state media under government control
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jan/07/poland-president-signs-bill-putting-state-media-under-government-control>
And this needs to happen soon. For the political blitzkrieg of the past two 
months suggests that the strategy of the Law and Justice party (known by its 
Polish acronym as PiS), and specifically of its one true leader,Jarosław 
Kaczyński 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/26/jarosaw-kaczynski-one-more-thorn-in-europe-eastern-side>
, is to do the dirty work of transforming the political system rapidly, even 
brutally, and then to show a kinder, softer, more pragmatic face. He has the 
parliamentary majority to do this (although not the two thirds needed to change 
the constitution), still considerable popular support – and, shockingly, the 
president of the country is behaving like his glove puppet.

For at least 20 years Kaczyński has dreamed of what he sees as completing the 
anti-communist revolution of 1989 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Poland_(1945%E2%80%9389)>, but he 
also knows, recalling his experience in power from 2005 to 2007, that the 
window of opportunity may not long be open. So he says to himself, like 
Macbeth, “If it were done … then ’twere well it were done quickly.”

Since what I have just written will be seen as partisan, unfair criticism by 
many who voted for Kaczyński’s party in last autumn’s election, let me state 
equally clearly what I am not saying. I am not criticising a party with a clear 
parliamentary majority for pushing through its proclaimed conservative, 
Catholic, Eurosceptic policies, cleverly combined with an almost leftwing set 
of economic and welfare promises. I may not like those policies, but that’s 
democracy. I have been for nearly 40 years now a friend ofPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland>, not just of one milieu, let alone 
of any particular party. Among my most moving memories is the vast crowd in 
front of the historic monastery of Częstochowa greeting Pope John Paul II in 
1983, and singing the old patriotic hymn Return to Us, O Lord, a Free 
Fatherland.

PiS represents a whole conservative, religious side of Polish society and a 
solid third of the Polish electorate. Skilfully picking up other votes, 
benefiting from disillusionment with the centrist Civic Platform and pathetic 
chaos on the Polish left, it won a resounding victory in a free and fair 
election – like David Cameron’s Conservatives in Britain. So it’s not the 
policies, the politics or even the ideology that requires all friends of Poland 
to sound the alarm; it’s the winning team attempting unilaterally to change the 
rules of the whole democratic game.

A comparison with Tory-ruled Britain is interesting because PiS politicians 
claim to be implementing something like British-style parliamentary 
sovereignty. A British Conservative politician once described Britain’s 
political system as “elective dictatorship” because of the extraordinary power 
concentrated in the hands of any prime minister with a substantial and 
disciplined parliamentary majority. Yet although Britain does not have a 
written constitution, like the US and Germany, it does have powerful checks and 
balances: an impeccably neutral head of state; fiercely independent courts that 
do not hesitate to find against government ministers; the BBC; a professional 
civil service; security services that (these days, so far as I know) don’t do 
the bidding of one politician against other politicians; a robust culture of 
civil political debate … Need I go on?

In Poland, by contrast, the president, Andrzej Duda 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/28/poland-law-curb-power-top-court-end-democracy-andrzej-duda>
, is executing his political master’s strategy. Duda holds a doctorate in law, 
but his own doctoral supervisor says he has already violated the constitution 
three times. New legislation and judicial appointments will effectively neuter 
the constitutional court (formally constitutional tribunal); a new media law 
subordinates public service broadcasting directly to government; political 
appointees will be allowed at the highest level of the civil service, and so 
on. For a rough British comparison, imagine Nigel Farage in place of the Queen 
(King Nigel I?), Daily Mail editor-in-chief Paul Dacre appointed by the ruling 
party to direct the BBC, and Mail columnist Richard Littlejohn becoming the top 
official at the Foreign Office.

The good news is that Polish society is already mobilising in defence of 
liberal democracy. As early as last November, an opinion poll found 55% of 
respondents saying democracy is threatened in Poland. The EU has also responded 
more sharply than it did to similar (and worse) changes in Viktor Orbán’s 
Hungary. Tellingly, Kaczyński and Orbán met privately for five hours this week, 
coordinating their positions.

Next week, the day after Poland’s constitutional court meets to consider the 
constitutionality of its own emasculation, the European commission will discuss 
whether the attack on that court and the new media law justify invoking a new 
EU mechanism to defend the rule of law in member states. German media have 
given particular prominence to this dangerous turn in Poland – the European 
commissioner responsible for media also happens to be German, as isMartin Schulz
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/dec/08/european-union-in-danger-president-parliament-martin-schulz>
, the outspoken president of the European parliament.

But if we leave it to Brussels and the Germans, it is all too easy for 
Kaczyńskiites to claim that Brussels is giving orders to Poland just as 
Moscow used to, and to play on still latent anti-German feeling. So we need 
traditional friends of Poland to speak up as well: its historic ally France, 
for instance (Poland is the only country I know to make positive reference to 
Napoleon in its national anthem); Spain, another major, traditionally Catholic 
country, which has made the transition from dictatorship to democracy; Italy; 
Canada. Not least, we should hear from the US, especially as Poland prepares to 
host an important Nato summit this summer and wants Nato forces permanently 
based in the country.

And what about Britain? Realistically, Cameron is the politician least likely 
to criticise Kaczyński at the moment, because he desperately needs a deal over 
in-work benefits for (mainly Polish) migrants in the UK, so as to win his 
referendum on Britain’s EU membership. But it’s worth putting Cameron on the 
spot, if only to hear his weasel words in reply. So will a British MP please 
challenge him about Poland in parliament at the next prime minister’s questions?
 