
Facial recognition <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facial-recognition> 
software is most commonly known as a tool to help police identify a suspected 
criminal by using machine learning algorithms to analyze his or her face 
against a database of thousands or millions of other faces. The larger the 
database, with a greater variety of facial features, the smarter and more 
successful the software becomes – effectively learning from its mistakes to 
improve its accuracy.

The government wants more offshore fish farms, but no one is biting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/sep/25/offshore-fish-farms-imported-seafood-aquaculture>
Now, this type of artificial intelligence is starting to be used in fighting a 
specific but pervasive type of crime – illegal fishing. Rather than picking out 
faces, the software tracks the movement of fishing boats to root out illegal 
behavior. And soon, using a twist on facial recognition, it may be able to 
recognize when a boat’s haul includes endangered and protected fish.

The latest effort to use artificial intelligence to fight illegal fishing is 
coming from Virginia-based The Nature Conservancy (TNC), which launched a 
contest on Kaggle 
<https://www.kaggle.com/c/the-nature-conservancy-fisheries-monitoring> – a 
crowdsourcing site based in San Francisco that uses competitions to advance 
data science –earlier this week. TNC hopes the winning team will write software 
to identify specific species of fish. The program will run on cameras, called 
electronic monitors, which are installed on fishing boats and used for 
documenting the catch. The software will put a marker at each point in the 
video when a protected fish is hauled in. Inspectors, who currently spend up to 
six hours manually reviewing a single 10-hour fishing day, will then be able to 
go directly to those moments and check a fishing crew’s subsequent actions to 
determine whether they handled the bycatch legally – by making best efforts to 
return it to the sea unharmed.

TNC expects this approach could cut review time by up to 40% and increase the 
monitoring on a boat. Despite rules that call for government-approved auditors 
to be stationed on 5% of commercial fishing boats in the Western and Central 
Pacific, in practice the auditors are foundonly around 2% of 
<https://www.wcpfc.int/system/files/WCPFC-2016-ERandEMWG2-IP02%20Report%20on%20Solomon%20Is%20longline%20monitoring%20project.pdf>
 the fishing boats, including tuna long liners. As a result, fishermen 
sometimes keep protected fish that they hook – including sharks that are killed 
for their lucrative fins.

In the Pacific’s $7bn tuna fishery, illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) 
fishing not only harms fragile fish stocks, it takes an economic toll of up to 
$1.5bn 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/collections/2013/11/international-policy-the-western-and-central-pacific-fisheries-commission-2013-meeting>
. The impact shows up many ways, including lost income for fishermen in the 
legal marketplace and harm to the tourist economy that sells snorkelers and 
divers the opportunity to witness protected species in the wild.


Worldwide, cost estimates related to IUU reach $23bn annually 
<http://www.pewtrusts.org/en/research-and-analysis/fact-sheets/2013/08/27/faq-illegal-unreported-and-unregulated-fishing>
, and the take represents up to 20% of all seafood. Using technology to track 
and prevent illegal fishing presents an opportunity for technology companies as 
the fishing industry seeks ways to comply with the growing demand for 
transparency from governments and consumers.

“If using facial recognition software to track fish were easy, we’d already be 
using it,” says Matthew Merrifield, TNC’s chief technology officer. Whereas 
images from security cameras installed inside banks or other buildings are 
consistent and predictable, “the data from (electronic monitoring) cameras on 
boats is dirty, because the ships are always moving and the light keeps 
changing”.

Because of the “dirty” data, it will not be easy to write a facial recognition 
software that can accurately spot protected species when the variable 
conditions on the high seas could lead to blurry images on the video.

Given those challenges, it’s too early to know how large this market will 
grow, or how quickly. While the use of artificial intelligence to reduce 
illegal catch is relatively new, the Kaggle contest isn’t the first time it is 
being applied to the fishing industry.

San Francisco-based startup Pelagic Data Systems (PDS) has developed 
technology that illuminates the activity of some of the4.6m 
<http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5555e.pdf> small-scale commercial fishing boats that 
ply coastal waters around the world. Using data from a UN’sFood and Agriculture 
Organization report <http://www.fao.org/3/a-i5555e.pdf>, PDS estimates that 
roughly 95% of those boats don’t have the types of communications and tracking 
radios that larger boats are required to have, partly because the boats are too 
small or lack the power source to run the radios.

PDS installs a solar powered radio with an integrated GPS receiver and 
cellular modem on boats. The company collects the location data and analyzes it 
to create a map to show where the boat traveled and deduce its activities, such 
as where it stopped to set out nets or other gear and where and for how long it 
hauled in a catch. This data is vital because it shows whether the boat fished 
inside or outside marine protected areas. The device doesn’t have an on/off 
switch, a design to prevent a fishing crew from tampering with data collection.

The software also generates heat maps to indicate where the heaviest fishing 
activities are taking place within a coastal region. By pairing that data with 
the movements of the boats, PDS can also estimate the quantity and even the 
size of the fish pulled from those waters, says Dave Solomon, CEO of PDS.

The company sells its technology to governments, nonprofits, academic 
researchers and companies in the fishing industry, and expects the number of 
boats installed with its device to reach 1,000 in regions such as West Africa, 
North America and Mexico by the end of the year, Solomon says. Some of his 
customers install the devices in the boats of their suppliers for another 
reason: to win over customers by demonstrating transparency in fishing 
practices.

Another effort to use data to fight illegal fishing comes from the nonprofit 
SkyTruth, which tracks the movement of large ships by mining data broadcast by 
ships and collected by satellites. Its technology is used by Global Fishing 
Watch <http://globalfishingwatch.org/>, which is backed by Google, Oceana and 
the Leonardo DiCaprio Foundation. SkyTruth’s data helped the island nation 
Kirbati to bust illegal fishing operations.

But Kaggle has a habit of taking on unusual technical challenges. Earlier this 
year, it launched a contest with State Farm to develop machine learning 
software, to be embedded in dashboard cameras, to classify a driver’s behavior 
<https://www.kaggle.com/c/state-farm-distracted-driver-detection>, such as 
being distracted by a smartphone when behind the wheel.

Kaggle, with a membership of 650,000 data scientists, hasn’t tackled an 
environmental problem before. But its CEO, Anthony Goldbloom, thinks the TNC 
contest could represent the start of environmental competitions on its site 
because scientists from government agencies and academic institutions are 
collecting a growing amount of field data using cameras and sensors.

TNC contest attracted 44 teams within the first day. Each team has five months 
to submit its software.

While the contest presents an appealing opportunity to do something good for 
the environment, it doesn’t promise a big payoff. That will make it difficult 
for software developers and data scientists to raise venture capital to fund 
their efforts.

“Silicon Valley only invests in places with big money [potential],” says 
Andrew Bosworth, vice president of ads and business platform for Facebook and a 
board member of land conservation group Peninsula Open Space Trust 
<https://openspacetrust.org/staff/>. “Plus, everyone underestimates 
[environmental] challenges. Going to the moon is easier than tracking fishing. 
It really is. So these are big challenges without financial incentives to solve 
them.”

Oysters are making a comeback in the polluted waters around New York City
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/17/oysters-new-york-aquaculture-hudson-east-river>
But, he adds, Silicon Valley does provide important undergirding for using 
technology to solve environmental problems. Bosworth argues that the 
advancement in core technologies behind things like multiplayer gaming software 
and smartphone apps has propelled the rise of machine learning and artificial 
intelligence and lowered the development costs over time.

The winning team of the contest will earn a prize of $150,000. Then, as part 
of its campaign to reduce bycatch and illegal fishing in the region, TNC will 
work with the governments of Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, Solomon 
Islands and Marshall Islands to install the software, for free, on the 
electronic monitors of selected fishing boats.

If the software proves effective in reducing the labor costs and improving the 
accuracy of identifying protected species, then it could become a standard 
feature in electronic monitors. TNC will own the intellectual property of the 
winning software and make it free to the equipment makers, which include 
Satlink and Archipelago. The software could become even more widely used if 
large retailers such as Walmart begin to require electronic monitors on their 
vendor’s fleets.

But it is still early days for policing the fishing industry. For Melissa 
Garren, chief scientific officer of PDS, that means the market potential is 
huge. “We should be treating the oceans more like we treat airspace,” she says. 
“If we had this lack of visibility in the skies, it would be nuts.”

 * This article was amended on 21 November to show that the data used by 
Global Fishing Watch is collected by satellites, not both satellites and 
cellular technology.  