
People assume that oncology is all doom, gloom and death. To be honest it can 
be, but thankfully not all of the time, or else nobody could cope with doing it.

Cancer <https://www.theguardian.com/society/cancer> can be a disease of 
dreadful retrospectives – that lump that was looked at but not biopsied; that 
mole that was judged to be OK. These patients and their families are 
justifiably angry. Others have refused to see what was plainly staring them in 
the face.

For most of our patients the actual diagnosis of cancer has been given to them 
in another ward, and when they come to us they are pleased there are still 
options that can prolong their lives even if we cannot cure their illness. 
Surgery is usually restricted to relieving obstructions or draining fluids that 
cause discomfort. What is most commonly used ischemotherapy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jun/03/how-to-get-through-chemotherapy-decca-aitkenhead-cancer-treatment>
 in different forms, and radiation. The treatment that is chosen is the result 
of many tests and a lot of accumulated experience. Oncology is very much a team 
effort, with everybody working together.

We could prevent millions of cancer deaths with knowledge we already have | 
David Hunter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/prevent-millions-of-cancer-deaths-with-knowledge-already-have>
Most people have little idea about the kind of discomfort that chemotherapy 
entails. Vomiting, endless nausea and a totally washed-out feeling associated 
with a really bad stomach bug is usually experienced during most 
chemotherapies. Depending on the type, it can also knock your immune system 
badly leading to life-threatening infections if you are unlucky. If there is 
hope for recovery at the end of treatment, it is easy to support the decision 
to go through with it. But it might only be possible to prolong life for a few 
months and if that entails such sickness and other side-effects the choice of 
what is the right thing to do is not so clear.

A big part of life on the oncology ward is pain relief. Sometimes people are 
admitted almost howling in pain. They have stayed at home, without much more 
than paracetamol, and at some point it becomes too much for both them and their 
family to handle. To be able to help them get control of their pain and regain 
their dignity is a very satisfying part of the job. People are worried about 
opioids and dependency, but what we usually see is that people take too little 
and too seldom.

Talking to patients and their relatives when there is bad news is definitely 
the worst part of the job

Alternative therapies come and go: last year’s noni juice 
<http://www.livescience.com/4219-noni-nonsense-miracle-juice-scam-bottle.html> 
is replaced by this year’s crystal water. Usually these therapies are expensive 
and harmless, but sometimes people make choices that make you wonder. There was 
one patient on the ward who surrounded herself in crystals and was advised not 
to take painkillers as apparently they would be harmful for her. Naturally, as 
the disease progressed she was in agony, but she did not want to show she had 
no faith in the crystals her family spent huge sums of money to purchase. Her 
last few weeks were hell for both herself, the staff and those close to her.

I really despair whenever people come in to the ward and say: “I’ve done some 
research on this and this and this medication seems to be the best.” They have 
no idea of the amount of effort and hours involved in keeping up with what is 
the most cutting edge and promising treatment. People would not dream of 
showing YouTube videos to the garage when they take their car in for repairs, 
but have no qualms about presenting their doctor with articles printed off the 
internet. It can take a very long time to try to explain that something that 
worked on one person and two sets of mice might not help their loved one. It 
would be good if people could trust the people who have devoted their lives to 
knowing what might work best.

What it's like to survive cancer, by those who have done it | Guardian readers 
and Sarah Marsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/03/what-its-like-to-survive-cancer-by-those-who-have-been-given-the-all-clear>
At the end of life we lose our sense of hunger and thirst, and this usually 
sends visiting relatives into a total frenzy. They see the patient getting 
thinner and thinner, and believe they are starving to death. To try to explain 
that it is the cancer that is eating away at them and force feeding is not 
helpful can be very hard. This is especially trying when relatives have not 
been part of the process but come in at a late stage. Sometimes I believe that 
all of the stubbornness from childhood returns as they brazenly declare what 
mother would and would not like to do. It does not matter if all natural 
functions have shut down, as long as there is a bag of saline they feel that 
something is being done.

Despite all the negative aspects of the job, some people come in at death’s 
door and walk out with the possibility of living to 100. The advances in 
treatments have given more years to many, but to some there is possibility of 
life where there would be no hope just a few years ago. This is what creates 
optimism on the ward, the balance that is necessary to keep on working here.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsecret-life-oncologist-cancer-painful-intimate-life-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe154a8965ca30d4412ef308dbb989b1bf0805031%2F0_163_3630_2178%2F3630.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20an%20oncologist%3A%20witnessing%20the%20most%20painful%20and%20intimate%20moments%20of%20life%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsecret-life-oncologist-cancer-painful-intimate-life-treatments%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20an%20oncologist%3A%20witnessing%20the%20most%20painful%20and%20intimate%20moments%20of%20life%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F14%2Fsecret-life-oncologist-cancer-painful-intimate-life-treatments%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe154a8965ca30d4412ef308dbb989b1bf0805031%2F0_163_3630_2178%2F3630.jpg>
 ‘The best part of the job is when things go well and the treatment is 
working.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Sometime miracles happen. I remember one guy who came in, full of cancer and 
withmetastasis <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metastasis> everywhere, and we 
assumed he’d be dead in a week or two. Then one of the doctors started 
wondering about the pattern in which the diseases had spread. It did not seem 
to fit entirely with the diagnosis given, and he ordered a second opinion of 
the histology. The pathology department were asked to reconsider, and they 
changed the diagnosis to a testicular cancer. The patient’s chemotherapy was 
changed, and in four weeks he was a healthy man again. It gives me faith, that 
the lab workers were not so stubborn that they let their pride stop them from 
rethinking given the input from an experienced clinician.

How do people die from cancer? You asked Google – here’s the answer | Ranjana 
Srivastava
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/17/how-do-people-die-from-cancer-google>
I try not to take the job home with me, but sometimes it can be hard not to. 
Especially at times when we have had many deaths, and the local paper is filled 
with notices naming people I spoke to only recently. Talking to patients and 
their relatives when there is bad news is definitely the worst part of the job. 
You cannot comfort people like you would a friend, and it can be really hard to 
know what to say.

That said, talking about death has become more acceptable over the years, and 
I think it helps to put what everybody is feeling into words. Some patients 
share their worries about the actual process of dying: nobody wants to be in 
unbearable pain. We try to reassure people that usually things are quiet and 
peaceful, and that we’ll do everything possible to relieve any discomfort.

The best part of the job is when things go well and the treatment is working. 
To see a tumour shrink away, and disappear, then meet a patient five years 
later who is healthy, and getting on with their life is a wonderful feeling. We 
follow people through some of the most painful and intimate moments of their 
lives. The losses casts a shadow on our days, but the wins give the entire ward 
a sense of pride and joy.

• Are you a prison warden, a decorator or a librarian? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 