
Here’s a shocking fact for those of you who (like me) shivered on freezing 
platforms when their train was cancelled or delayed over the so-called festive 
period. The train operating companies can actually make a nice little profit 
out of your distress, so they have almost no incentive to improve the service.

As you get ready to fork out £5,000-plus for an annual season ticket on a 
40-mile journey into work on atrain built 30 years ago 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/28/uk-railway-trains-more-than-20-years-old-on-average-analysis-shows>
, which arrives at your destination on time approximately every solar eclipse, 
consider this: train operators receive a “schedule 8 
<http://www.networkrail.co.uk/payments-for-disruption-on-the-railway/>” payment 
from Network Rail when something goes wrong with the infrastructure, such as a 
points failure. It is designed to compensate them for the impact of poor 
performance on their revenue. It is estimated that last year train operators 
picked up £107m from Network Rail for delays. But how much was paid out to the 
customers who were the victims of these problems? Just £26m. It means the train 
operating companies profited by some £81m because something went wrong.

Plans to allow rail users to claim compensation for 15-minute delays
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/13/rail-users-train-passengers-claim-compensation-15-minute-delays-repay>
Even the long-running industrial action on the Southern network is barely 
touching profits at GTR, the operating company that runs the routes. Its unique 
contract, put in place to cover the period while London Bridge station is 
rebuilt, means fares are currently paid directly to the government. The 
taxpayer will foot the bill for the estimated £28m in lost revenue and millions 
more in Delay Repay compensation. Meanwhile the government pays GTR £1bn a year 
to run the service.

Southern’s Delay Repay scheme has been improved, but is still far from 
adequate. As of this month rail users delayed 15 minutes or more can obtain 25% 
of the single fare back, rising to 50% if the delay is 30 minutes or longer. 
But the money only goes to those who apply – the majority don’t. Less than 0.5% 
of GTR’s turnover is paid out in compensation; across the industry only one 
third of eligible passengers obtain a payout.

The simple solution is re-nationalisation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/sep/20/jeremy-corbyn-rail-nationalisation-policy-labour-conference>
. Even diehard opponents of state ownership must feel shamed by the shambles 
our train network has become – as evidenced by the personal stories we 
highlight in today’s Money. But re-nationalisation will not in itself 
incentivise the rail operator to run trains on time and with enough seats 
(although it would go some way to help).

The Tory MP for the deep-blue Conservative commuting territory of East 
Worthing and Shoreham,Tim Loughton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/23/why-abuse-mp-tim-loughton>, 
has come up with a plan he hopes will give the private train companies a kick 
up the backside, and has won support from other MPs, such as Caroline Lucas, 
the Green MP for Brighton Pavilion, whose constituents know a thing or two 
about train delays.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftrain-companies-pocket-millions-delays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83a1f76d91fa369138f5a91ab928839b6291ea3%2F518_670_1696_2118%2F1696.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20train%20companies%20pocket%20millions%20in%20compensation%20for%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftrain-companies-pocket-millions-delays%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20train%20companies%20pocket%20millions%20in%20compensation%20for%20delays&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Fdec%2F31%2Ftrain-companies-pocket-millions-delays%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe83a1f76d91fa369138f5a91ab928839b6291ea3%2F518_670_1696_2118%2F1696.jpg>
 Tim Loughton, MP for East Worthing and Shoreham. Photograph: Rex/Shutterstock 
Loughton wants the train companies to be forced to pay a penalty fine every 
time a train is late, is cancelled, or overruns a station. The money would go 
into a central pot, entirely independent of the train company, from which 
passengers should be able to claim very easily. If passengers don’t claim 
compensation (sometimes it can be just a few quid) then the remaining money 
would be used to offset fares.

He is also proposing a new rail ombudsman with the power to award compensation 
more directly linked to the realistic loss suffered by passengers. When you are 
turfed off a train far short of your destination the cost of getting home is 
far more than the repayment of the single fare.Transport 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> Focus, the body for consumers, has 
no power to impose binding decisions against train operators. As Loughton says: 
“The current problem is that the passenger can like it or lump it. The 
complaints procedure largely relies on the goodwill of the train operating 
company beyond the minimum obligations.”

Unfortunately Loughton’s bill 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/Commons/2016-12-20/debates/E835E520-A495-4794-AF8C-1157AF512F82/RailOmbudsman#contribution-6147FB55-D5C6-4EC6-A48F-E74C4A5BDE73>
 was introduced under the 10-minute rule and without official government 
support will go nowhere. That said, prime minister Theresa May hails from 
Eastbourne, which suffers a craptacular rail service. So there’s hope yet.

p.collinson@theguardian.com
 