
The fifth Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) report is due out 
on September 27th, and is expected to reaffirm with growing confidence that 
humans are driving global warming and climate change. In anticipation of the 
widespread news coverage of this esteemed report, climate contrarians appear to 
be in damage control mode, trying to build up skeptical spin in media climate 
stories. Just in the past week we've seen:

 * The David Rose Mail on Sunday piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/09/climate-change-arctic-sea-ice-delusions>
 that treated scientific evidence in much the way bakers treat pretzel dough. 
 * Dr. John Christy interviewed by the Daily Mail 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2419557/Climate-change-models-accurate-study-finds-widely-overestimated-global-warming.html>
; 
 * Christy's colleague Dr. Roy Spencer in The Christian Post 
<http://www.christianpost.com/news/climate-change-rebuttal-evangelical-scientists-correct-one-error-make-others-of-their-own-104158/>
; 
 * Andrew Montford in Rupert Murdoch's The Australian 
<http://www.theaustralian.com.au/opinion/consensus-on-changing-climate-just-pr-campaign/story-e6frg6zo-1226718828707>
; 
 * Matt Ridley in Rupert Murdoch's Wall Street Journal 
<http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324549004579067532485712464.html>
; and 
 * Bjorn Lomborg in The Washington Post 
<http://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/bjorn-lomborg-dont-blame-climate-change-for-extreme-weather/2013/09/13/4b770d48-117e-11e3-bdf6-e4fc677d94a1_story.html>
. 
Interestingly, these pieces spanned nearly the full spectrum of the 5 stages 
of global warming denial.

Stage 1: Deny the Problem Exists

Often when people are first faced with an inconvenient problem, the immediate 
reaction involves denying its existence. For a long time climate contrarians 
denied that the planet was warming. Usually this involves disputing the 
accuracy of the surface temperature record, given that the data clearly indicate
rapid warming <http://data.giss.nasa.gov/gistemp/graphs_v3/Fig.A2.gif>. 

In the 1990s, Christy and Spencer created a data set of lower atmosphere 
temperatures using measurements from satellite instruments. These initially 
seemed to indicate that the atmosphere was not warming, leading Christy, 
Spencer, and their fellow contrarians to declare that the problem didn't exist. 
Unfortunately, it turned out that their data set containedseveral biases that 
added an artificial cooling trend 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/uah-misrepresentation-anniversary-part1.html>, 
and once those were corrected, it was revealed that the lower atmosphere was 
warming at a rate consistent with surface temperature measurements.

Most climate contrarians have come to accept that the planet has warmed 
significantly. Unfortunately many have regressed back into Stage 1 denial 
through the newmyth that global warming magically stopped 15 years ago 
<http://skepticalscience.com/global-cooling-january-2007-to-january-2008-intermediate.htm>
 (most recentlyexemplified by David Rose in the Mail on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/sep/09/climate-change-arctic-sea-ice-delusions>
).The error in that argument 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/jun/24/global-warming-pause-button>
 involves ignoring about 98 percent of the warming of the planet, most of which 
goes into heating the oceans. When we account for all of the data, global 
warming actually appears to be accelerating.
 Global heat accumulation data, from Nuccitelli et al. (2012) 
David Rose also doubled-down on his Arctic sea ice decline denial 
<http://archive.is/MUONE> this weekend, suggesting melts in the 1920s were just 
as large as today's. Sorry David,the data debunk your denial again 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/Arctic-sea-ice-loss-1940s.htm>.
 Average July through September Arctic sea ice extent 1870–2008 from the 
University of Illinois (Walsh & Chapman 2001 updated to 2008) and observational 
data from NSIDC for 2009–2012. 
Stage 2: Deny We're the Cause

Once people move beyond denying that the problem exists, they often move to 
the next stage, denying that we're responsible. John Christy and Roy Spencer 
took this approach by disputing the accuracy of global climate models in The 
Daily Mail and The Christian Post, respectively. Spencer was quite explicit 
about this:

...we deny "that most [current climate change] is human-caused, and that it is 
a threat to future generations that must be addressed by the global community."

Christy and Spencer made their case by comparing the outputs of 73 climate 
models to satellite temperature measurements, and showing that the models 
seemed to predict more warming than has been observed. But the comparison was 
not of surface temperatures, or of the lowermost layer of the atmosphere, or 
even any measurement global average temperatures. They specifically looked at 
measurements of the temperature of the middle troposphere (TMT) in the tropics.

There's certainly nothing wrong with examining this particular subset of 
temperature data, but it's a bit of an odd choice on the face of it. The real 
problem lies in the fact that satellite measurements of TMT are highly 
uncertain. In fact, estimates of the TMT trend by different scientific groups
vary wildly 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/uah-misrepresentation-anniversary-part1.html>, 
despite using the same raw satellite data.

Another problem is that the stratosphere (the layer of the atmosphere above 
the troposphere) is cooling –an expected consequence of the increased 
greenhouse effect <http://www.skepticalscience.com/its-not-us-advanced.htm>. 
But some of the cooling stratosphere bleeds into the TMT data, leading to 
another cool bias. While there is a discrepancy between model simulations and 
measurements of tropical troposphere temperatures, it's not clear how much (if 
any) is due to the models being wrong, and how much is due to errors in the 
measurements. Asa U.S. Climate Change Science Program report 
<http://www.climatescience.gov/Library/sap/sap1-1/finalreport/sap1-1-final-execsum.pdf>
 co-authored by John Christy concluded,

"This difference between models and observations may arise from errors that 
are common to all models, from errors in the observational data sets, or from a 
combination of these factors. The second explanation is favored, but the issue 
is still open."

However, in mainstream media interviews and editorials, Christy and Spencer 
always fail to mention the possibility that the problem could lie more in the 
measurements than the models, which frankly is intellectually dishonest. 
Additionally,climate models have done very well 
<http://skepticalscience.com/comparing-global-temperature-predictions.html> in 
projecting long-term global surface temperature changes.

Stage 2b: Consensus Denial

In Murdoch's The Australian, Andrew Montford took a different approach to deny 
that we're the cause of the problem, attacking the expert consensus on 
human-caused global warming. Specifically he attacked theCook et al. (2013) 
<http://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/8/2/024024/article> study finding 97 
percent consensus on this question in the peer-reviewed scientific literature 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/16/climate-change-scienceofclimatechange?guni=Article:in%20body%20link>
.

In order to deny the consensus, Montford employed the Climategate strategy 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/Climategate-CRU-emails-hacked-advanced.htm>, 
using material stolen during ahacking of the private Skeptical Science 
discussion forum 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/Skeptical-Science-hacked-private-user-details-publicly-posted-online.html>
. He then pulled quotes out of context to claim the study was "a public 
relations exercise," because we discussed how to effectively communicate our 
consensus results. In reality, the comments Montford used to support this 
argument were made after we hadpreliminary results reviewing nearly 14,000 
peer-reviewed abstracts 
<http://desmogblog.com/2012/11/15/why-climate-deniers-have-no-credibility-science-one-pie-chart>
 that found only 24 rejecting the human-caused global warming consensus.

Montford's article demonstrates the inherent dangers in quoting illegally 
obtained private correspondence. First, there is the obvious ethical issue of 
republishing private correspondence obtained through an illegal act. Second, 
using isolated quotes extracted from private conversations runs the risk of 
taking comments out of context and misrepresenting the facts.

In any case, we have set up a public ratings system so that anybody can read 
and rate the scientific abstracts. If you don't believethe vast body of evidence
 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/global-warming-scientific-consensus-intermediate.htm>
 of an expert consensus on human-caused global warming,test it for yourself 
<http://skepticalscience.com/tcp.php?t=rate_papers>. Moreover, the scientist 
ratings 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/Consensus-Project-self-rating-data-now-available.html>
 of their own papers – independent of our abstract ratings – also resulted in a 
97 percent consensus.

Stage 3: Deny It's a Problem

Once they've progressed through the first two stages and admitted global 
warming is happening and human-caused, contrarians generally move on to Stage 
3, denying it's a problem. Lomborg and Ridley did their bestTony the Tiger 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_the_Tiger> impressions in The Washington 
Post and Murdoch's Wall Street Journal, respectively, arguing that global 
warming is 'Grrrrreat!' (or at least nothing to worry about).

I've previously discussed why this argument is a complete risk management 
failure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/23/matt-ridley-climate-change-scepticism-risk>
. When faced with a potentially catastrophic outcome for something as important 
as the global climate, it's a no-brainer to take action to make sure we avoid 
that possible outcome. Moreover,Lomborg's and Ridley's arguments are based on 
cherry picking data 
<http://skepticalscience.com/ridley-murdoch-lomborg-greenwash-global-warming.html>
. For example, Lomborg talks about how droughts have not worsened in the United 
States, according to the IPCC, but fails to mention that theIPCC predicts that 
US droughts will intensify 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/pielke-jr-mcintyre-assist-christy-extreme-weather-obfuscation.html>
 over the next century.

In his editorial, Ridley takes a rosy view about the impact of climate change 
on crop yields that isnot supported by the scientific research 
<http://www.climatesciencewatch.org/2013/09/14/in-wsj-ridley-presents-debunked-climate-claims/>
. He argues that climate impacts won't be bad in a middle-of-the-road emissions 
scenario, butas Climate Progress reports 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2013/09/15/2621431/matt-ridley-wall-street-journal-climate/>
, the scientist on whose work Ridley based this argument previously explained,

"In his article, Mr. Ridley is just plain wrong about future global warming."

Moreover, by painting an unjustifiably rosy picture and thus misleading the 
public, he's helping to ensure that we'll blow past that middling greenhouse 
gas emissions scenario (which requires significant emissions reductions 
efforts) and commit ourselves to much worse climate change consequences.

Stage 4: Deny We can Solve It

In his editorial, Roy Spencer bounced between the second and fourth stages of 
global warming denial, also claiming that solving the problem is too expensive 
and will hurt the poor.In reality the opposite is true 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/co2-limits-economy.htm>. 

Spencer specifically attacked renewable energy like wind power as being too 
expensive. In reality,wind power is already cheaper than coal 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/johnson-hope-2012.html>, even without 
considering the added climate damage costs from coal carbon emissions. When 
including those very real costs,solar power is also already cheaper than coal 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/co2-limits-economy-advanced.htm>. Additionally,
the poorest countries are generally the most vulnerable to climate change 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/graphics.php?g=15>. Listening to Spencer and 
continuing to cause rapid climate change is what will really hurt the poor.

Stage 5: It's too Late

Stage 5 global warming denial involves arguing that it's too late to solve the 
problem, so we shouldn't bother trying (though few climate contrarians have 
reached this level). Unfortunately this stage can be self-fulfilling. If we 
wait too long to address the problem, we may end up committing ourselves to 
catastrophic climate change.

The good news is that we still have time to avoid a catastrophic outcome. The 
more emissions reductions we can achieve, the less the impacts of climate 
change will be. The challenge lies in achieving those greenhouse gas emissions 
reductions when Rupert Murdoch's media empire and other news outlets are 
spreading climate misinformation and denial.
 