
I joined the armed forces <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/military> when I was 
19 years old. I had moved to the UK after a difficult childhood in Jamaica, and 
I wanted to do something different to everyone else. None of my friends were 
doing anything like active service, so it seemed like a good option for me. 
During my time in the army, I served with theRoyal Logistics Corps 
<http://www.army.mod.uk/logistic/23443.aspx> and was based at Colchester for 
three years, and RAF Odiham for two. I also spent time inAfghanistan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/afghanistan>.

Why are millennials so anxious? | Rose Bretécher, Ronnie Joice and Rhiannon 
Lucy Cosslett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/15/millennials-anxiety-generation-y-housing-careers>
For the most part, my time in the army was enjoyable. I felt like I was part 
of a family and have happy memories of my time on tour with my comrades. But I 
did see things that left metraumatised 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/01/ptsd-special-forces-post-traumatic-stress-disorder>
. As a result, I developed a very short temper and found that I didn’t have 
patience for anything. I left the forces because I was sick of the lifestyle 
and because my temper was becoming a problem. There isn’t any room in the army 
for that kind of attitude.

When I first got back home, everything was fine. I had a solid support network 
consisting of family, friends and my girlfriend. I felt that I had people to 
turn to if I needed them. I didn’t struggle to find work, but it was never a 
solid, stable income.

I soon began to experience mental health issues 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/mental-health>, which I later found out 
were a result of my experiences in Afghanistan. Without any treatment, I turned 
toalcohol <https://www.theguardian.com/society/alcohol> as a coping mechanism 
and started drinking heavily. I still had a short temper, and was having 
extreme mood swings that made me behave aggressively. This all contributed to 
the breakdown of my relationship with my girlfriend, who had just given birth 
to our daughter. I moved out of her home and was sleeping on my uncle’s sofa. I 
had to keep relying on the support of friends and family; I couldn’t sort 
anything stable out for myself.

Shortly after my daughter was born, I realised I needed to change. My dad 
wasn’t around when I was growing up, and I didn’t want my daughter to have the 
same experience. I wanted to be there for her and provide for her so that she 
would have a solid father figure. My daughter was the first reason I had to 
have stability in my life for a long time. I wanted to get better for her.

Anxious, depressed, scared? Close down the browser and face your fears | 
Joshua Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/08/anxious-depressed-panic-attacks-close-browser-internet-distraction>
I kept hold of my determination to change my life, and made a conscious effort 
to reduce my drinking, so that I could keep seeing my daughter even if I wasn’t 
living with her. But at the same time I was finding it extremely difficult to 
find a steady place to live. I needed a safe place where my daughter could come 
to stay, but the short-term contracts I was working didn’t provide enough money 
to rent privately.

At work one day, I saw a banner promoting the services of a charity called 
Stoll <http://www.stoll.org.uk/>. The advert said they provided housing support 
for vulnerable ex-servicemen and women, running a number of programmes to help 
veterans find stable accommodation, and supporting them as they rebuilt their 
lives. I immediately got in touch with them and they came through for me.

A support worker got in touch, and helped me to apply for accommodation 
through a number of supported social housing schemes. I was also referred to the
veterans’ assessment clinic <http://londonveterans.nhs.uk/> so that I could 
seek treatment for my alcohol problems. I was offered a one-bedroom property 
through Stoll’sVeterans’ Nomination Scheme 
<http://www.stoll.org.uk/i-need-help/i-need-a-home/a-home-elsewhere-in-the-uk/veterans-nomination-scheme/>
, so that I could finally afford to rent a place for myself. The staff were so 
helpful throughout the whole process, and they worked with other charities to 
raise money to help furnish my flat. The best part is that my new home is just 
five minutes’ away from my daughter’s nursery, and I have her to stay with me a 
few days a week.

The help that I was given has allowed me the sense of security and stability 
that I was lacking after the army. For the first time in a long time, I feel 
safe. Now, I can finish a day at work without worrying about where to stay that 
night – I can finally say I’m going home.
 