
“Fertig” announced the lighting on the glass walls of Hamburg’s astonishing 
new concert hall 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/01/hamburg-elphie-concert-hall-elbphilharmonie-finished>
 when the keys were finally handed over. Done, ready, finished, six years late 
and, at €789m, 10 times over budget, the Elbphilharmonie – one of Europe’s 
biggest ever regeneration-through-cultural-renewal projects – formally opened 
today.

It has overcome some seemingly insuperable obstacles. One of Hamburg’s most 
famous sons, the late chancellor Helmut Schmidt, once said the project reminded 
him of Kaiser Wilhelm II’s desire to make “as big an impression as possible”. It
nearly broke its Swiss architects, Herzog and De Meuron 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/nov/04/hamburg-elbphilhamonie-herzog-de-meuron-a-cathedral-for-our-time>
; its developer’s initial ambition to underwrite the costs with apartments and 
a hotel turned out to be an unrealistic dream. But now, after disputes, 
lawsuits and a row over its €291.97 toilet brushes, Hamburg has a dazzling new 
concert hall and, reflecting the city’s large refugee population, a programme 
that includes a celebration of Syrian culture.

In Britain, Germany <https://www.theguardian.com/world/germany> is often 
admired as the home of fiscal discipline and public modesty. The 
Elbphilharmonie illustrates two other enviable qualities: a passion for music, 
and a competitive relationship between its largest cities, Berlin, Munich and 
Hamburg, that triggers huge cultural investments. The concert hall was part of 
a bid to broaden the appeal of a port city that was fighting to modernise its 
down-at-heel, faintly sleazy reputation without abandoning its working-class 
past; originally it was going to build a museum celebrating the Beatles’ stay 
instead.

London garden bridge project's future is in doubt, say trustees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/london-garden-bridge-project-future-doubt-trustees>
In Britain earlier this week, London’s current ambitious semi-public building 
project, a garden bridge, stuttered over another hurdle when itproduced its 
annual accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/london-garden-bridge-project-future-doubt-trustees>
. Delayed for five months, they came with a warning from Lord Mervyn Davies, 
the former Labour minister who chairs the Garden Bridge Trust, that the project 
still has challenges to resolve before construction, already 18 months behind 
schedule, can get under way. He said in the accounts that a series of delays 
meant the final cost could “substantially exceed” the most recent “external 
estimate” of £185m.

The project was launched with the enthusiastic endorsement of George Osborne 
and £30m of public money (with another £30m to come from the mayor of London) 
extracted from an otherwise straitened 2013 autumn statement. The Department 
for Transport’s assessment that there was a “significant risk” it represented 
poor value for money was ignored. Later, the department’s accounting officer, 
the official with technical responsibility for the proper use of public money, 
was sufficiently dubious to trigger the convention where the minister is 
expressly requested to sign it off. Now the department has agreed to provide an 
indefinite guarantee of cancellation costs; according to the National Audit 
Office it may lose up to £22.5m if the bridge does not go ahead. Alternatively, 
if the bridge is built, it may end up footing the bill for its maintenance.

London needs more river crossings. But it is hard to understand the demand for 
a garden bridge that is open only to pedestrians (not cyclists), closed 
sometimes for private parties, and obstructs some of the great city views. It 
is a project of uncertain value over-associated with the chumocracy: the actor 
Joanna Lumley was the first and most ardent advocate of the plan and its 
architect, Thomas Heatherwick, andshe brought in her old family friend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2015/may/24/joanna-lumley-role-boris-johnson-thames-garden-bridge-london-thomas-heatherwick>
 the then London mayor, Boris Johnson. Mr Johnson’s successor, Sadiq Khan, is 
reluctant to lose money already spent and is officially set to give the 
go-ahead to a project that might one day enhance his mayoralty. Hardest of all 
to justify is public spending in Britain’s richest city on projects that are a 
good deal more glamorous than functional.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-culture-and-devolution-the-hamburg-model%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe39411c8371e3d1c1a5a6e79ea651a9540520e47%2F288_521_2861_1717%2F2861.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20culture%20and%20devolution%3A%20the%20Hamburg%20model%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-culture-and-devolution-the-hamburg-model%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20view%20on%20culture%20and%20devolution%3A%20the%20Hamburg%20model%20%7C%20Editorial&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fthe-guardian-view-on-culture-and-devolution-the-hamburg-model%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe39411c8371e3d1c1a5a6e79ea651a9540520e47%2F288_521_2861_1717%2F2861.jpg>
 We Are Hull, an installation by Zolst Balogh, projected on to the city’s 
Maritime Museum, 1 January 2017. Photograph: Danny Lawson/PA 
Across the North Sea from Hamburg sits Hull, a port rather more down on its 
luck than its one-time Hanseatic trading partner. Hull is the UK’scity of 
culture this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/08/hull-city-of-culture-2017-art-review-observer>
, and it has embarked on a festival of arts and culture that it hopes will 
sustain a turnaround in its long-term fortunes. From a range of sources, public 
and private, it hasraised just over £32m 
<http://www.hulldailymail.co.uk/32-million-to-be-spent-on-city-of-culture-2017-in-hull/story-29720210-detail/story.html>
. How tellingly the figure chimes with the Treasury’s largesse to the garden 
bridge.

• This article was amended on 12 January 2017. An earlier version referred to 
the garden bridge as “the £366m project”, perhaps confusing its length, 366 
metres, with its cost.
 