
In the 10 years I have spent working as a photographer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/photography> for men’s lifestyle 
magazines <https://www.theguardian.com/media/magazines>, I have often felt like 
a traitor, trading in bums and boobs: images that perpetuate an unproductive 
and even dangerous archetype of what makes women desirable. But with the recent 
decline in commercial print publishing,particularly of lads’ mags 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/nov/17/fhm-zoo-magazines-suspend-publication>
, it has become imperative to evolve in order to stay relevant.

The secret life of an archaeologist: soil in your sandwiches and sexism on 
sites | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/25/secret-life-archaeologist-soil-sandwiches-sexism-sites>
Recently, crossing over into women’s lifestyle publishing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/28/things-i-wish-womens-magazines-would-publish>
 (where the boobs and bums may be more petite, skin plentiful and the 
interviews are often even more cringeworthy), I have realised the grass is not 
any greener on the other side. A lingerie shoot in a female publication only 
really varies from one aimed at a male audience by its inclusion of styling 
credits, and a lower model BMI.

In fact this is perhaps an even more toxic cultural wasteland, with its severe 
retouching standards and consumerist ideals. Are the professionally empowered 
and educated inadvertently conspiring behind the scenes to keep the others daft 
and naive? How did we end up this way?

To say that I am torn between the ethical issues and doing the ultimate dream 
job – flexibility included – would be an understatement. For the majority of 
the work, which is in retouching, I keep my own hours. The work can be done 
from a home studio in my pyjamas – that’s how centrefolds are “made”.

Retouching is brutal work. The process routinely involves liquefying body 
contours, grafting skin, augmenting and trimming body silhouettes, 
transplanting hair, shaving noses and fixing bad makeup. We know about the real 
state of models’ cellulite and hair-removal habits. If a nipple shows through 
sheer fabric (or the model is cold) in a shoot for non-nude publications, we 
recreate lace fabrics, shadows and hair over the area to ensure that they pass 
editorial standards. In the case of a nude publication, papillae and ducts 
within the nipple itself must be removed in order to create a Barbie-smooth 
look. European titles tend to be more forgiving in both respects, but the 
butchery I have had to commit for American and Australian magazines has been 
unforgivable.

Aside from tolerating a few challenging personalities throughout the years, 
such as the neurotic makeup artist who hijacked a shoot or the difficult art 
director who decided all the furniture had to be retouched out of images, 
working as a photographer has been nothing but a pleasure. The technical 
challenges are exciting and rewarding, deadlines are bearable and the ability 
to say, “Hey, Mum, I just got a shoot in …” is gratifying. Although the glamour 
of any profession lies in the public’s thankfully uninformed perception, 
working with beautiful people is hardly a terrible way to spend one’s day.

In fact, the main perk is the people. Models themselves are often vastly 
intelligent and interesting to speak with behind the scenes. We know exactly 
what product we are making, and we do it so well that the consumer genuinely 
believes it is real.

Once, during a casting, I was going through a model’s professional website, 
which included interview clips of her exclaiming – with no hint of irony, and 
well placed pauses – that she had never read a book in full. I dreaded the 
shoot for weeks, until we were involved directly in an email exchange, in which 
she was attentive and very articulate. On set, she was probably the most 
professional person I have ever worked with, and I do not say that lightly.

The secret life of a trainee brain surgeon: it’s all about the drilling | 
Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/18/secret-life-brain-surgeon-drilling>
The industry feeds with one hand, on an individual level, and then takes away 
with the other, from the masses, by means of unhealthy cultural programming and 
behavioural normalisation.

It has been interesting to see how social media has changed the way people 
view images. Mainstream reporting of important commercial events, such as aKim 
Kardashian nude shoot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/20/why-is-kim-kardashian-famous>
, now generate interest not from the lads’ mag crowd, but also from a very 
vocal audience of vastly heterosexual females, who now more than ever are able 
to look up to or deconstruct these ideals.

But as content is increasingly available online, its value is reduced. This 
new generation of free-content producers is quite literally putting us out of 
business – and at the same time it lacks the legal protections and controlled 
distribution afforded to professional models and photographers.

Fellow dinosaurs from the print world still do not quite know what to make of 
this and how to work with it. Many of us have found ourselves fleeing to other 
vocations in search of a stable pay cheque to make rent day, a mere 10 years 
after the glory days of print, when one double-page spread would cover a 
photographer’s basic financial needs for a month.

I am currently stuck in a strangely privileged place – disillusioned and 
bitter, yet enjoying being one of the survivors. I manage to keep production 
costs down and have dramatically increased my work output to cope and adapt.

Delivery mechanisms for images are changing. In the early 2000s it was film v 
digital, in the 2010s pirate v purchased, and in 2016 pro v amateur. As Playboy 
publishes images of Instagram girls, it’s all still the same … but yet so very 
different.

• Are you a lawyer, a lorry driver, a PR? We want to hear your candid accounts 
of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your story 
anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 