
Theresa May has the admirable intention of restoring confidence in government 
by paying careful attention to the discontents of the 52% who voted Brexit. She 
recognises that many who voted leave did so from a sense that Westminster had 
yielded control of important policies, most notably immigration, to Brussels. 
That is partly the consequence of setting a target for net migration that was 
unachievable. Mrs May spent six years trying to make it work against internal 
opposition from the Lib Dems, and sometimes from George Osborne’s Treasury. It 
wasMr Osborne who vetoed a manifesto pledge 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/uknews/immigration/11329609/George-Osborne-sees-off-Theresa-Mays-controversial-plan-to-deport-foreign-graduates.html>
 to prevent international students staying on after they had finished their 
studies. But international students stayed in Mrs May’s sights, one of the few 
points of traction in the government’s efforts to bring net migration down 
below 100,000.

Now her successor at the Home Office, Amber Rudd, in a speech that was 
startlingly hardline 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/10/full-text-amber-rudds-conference-speech/>
, is planning a new attack on the numbers ofstudents coming to Britain to study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2016/oct/04/conservative-conference-theresa-mays-morning-broadcast-interviews-politics-live>
. Ms Rudd wants to impose different tests for applicants to different 
universities and colleges. The net effect is likely to be a cut in the numbers 
taking shorter courses or attending the post-1992 universities that offer more 
accessible degree subjects, and a blow to their viability, since international 
students account for 30% of university revenue. This is a bad policy. It 
imposes new bureaucratic burdens on all universities, and might seriously 
undermine newer ones that serve an important local role. It will be hard to 
enforce. Worse, it is basedon flaky and contested evidence 
<http://www.ippr.org/publications/destination-education> about how many 
students stay after they have completed their course of study: last year, just 
11,100 people who previously held study visaswere granted extensions to remain 
in the UK 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/briefings/non-european-student-migration-to-the-uk/>
 in a category other than study. But the government relies on the International 
Passenger Survey, which suggests as many as 100,000 international students 
might stay on. With such a dubious evidence base, it seems unlikely that these 
latest moves will dent the net migration figures – while further souring an 
atmosphere where anti-migrant attacks already appear legitimised by the Brexit 
campaign. A sceptical public will have yet more evidence that migration is a 
problem the politicians cannot solve.

Mrs May’s Home Office legacy is the Immigration Act 2016, a piece of 
legislation expressly intended to create “a hostile environment for illegal 
migration 
<https://www.jcwi.org.uk/blog/2016/05/23/what%E2%80%99s-next-hostile-environment-immigration-act-2016-and-queen%E2%80%99s-speech>
”. Ms Rudd is on to it, announcing that the measures criminalising landlords 
who let property to illegal migrants and introducing compulsory immigration 
status checks on all taxi drivers will be in force by the end of the year. She 
made one positive announcement: a new “controlling migration” fund, at £140m 
nearly three times bigger than Jeremy Corbyn’s proposal last week. But along 
with supporting hard-pressed public services, the fund will be used to help 
councils stamp down on wrongly claimed housing benefit and rough sleeping.

Of the great humanitarian crisis engulfing millions of refugees, or the slow 
progress on uniting unaccompanied children with their British-based families, 
Ms Rudd said not a word. And every time a minister announces a crackdown on 
illegal migration, they add to the impression of an ill-defined, uncontrolled 
threat. Ms Rudd was a banker. She should know the value of robust evidence and 
reliable statistics. That is the only basis for policy.
 