
We are delighted to announce the distinguished members of our Public Leaders 
Network 2017 editorial advisory board.

Ten leaders have been selected to provide expert insight over the next year on 
the editorial board, chaired by network editor Jane Dudman.

Each year, we ask for nominations from network members and once again you 
nominated a wide cross-section of public leaders. They provide a rich mix of 
talent and leadership skills, from all parts of public service, including 
central and local government, health, social care, housing and the voluntary 
sector. We are delighted they are able to give up some of their valuable time 
in what will doubtless be another tumultuous and challenging year for all 
public services.


Here are the members of this year’s board:

Michael Beaven, digital director, Methods Digital and former transformation 
programme director, Government Digital Service
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522ce9f0c7e2222f1cd8f6a9acc5c8af5ed67ce5%2F0_232_3003_3000%2F3003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F522ce9f0c7e2222f1cd8f6a9acc5c8af5ed67ce5%2F0_232_3003_3000%2F3003.jpg>
 Michael Beaven. 
Digital transformation has now matured and is a core part of the agenda for 
central and local government. As one of the founding members of the original 
Government Digital Service mission, Michael Beaven is uniquely qualified to 
understand the challenges and options facing public sector workers with 
expertise in public sector commitment and industry best practice.

Beaven led the ground-breaking exemplar programme, transforming 25 high-volume 
public services in 400 days, across eight Whitehall departments and 12 large 
agencies.

Since leaving the civil service, Beaven has worked for UK digital 
transformation SME Methods Digital. He advises local authorities, departments 
and agencies.

Niall Bolger, chief executive, London borough of Sutton
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e5bad60fec70204512dc8efbdbc26d29440ad9%2F0_175_2357_2357%2F2357.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30e5bad60fec70204512dc8efbdbc26d29440ad9%2F0_175_2357_2357%2F2357.jpg>
 Niall Bolger. 
Niall Bolger, as a comparatively young chief executive, has quietly achieved a 
transformation at the London borough of Sutton, in close consensus with elected 
members to modernise and achieve efficiencies.

Most recently, he has spearheaded an initiative to bring a world-class cancer 
research and treatment facility to London in conjunction with the Institute of 
Cancer Research and the Royal Marsden Hospital, which will generate 9,000 new 
jobs. He has also led the council into new potential revenue-generating areas 
through the establishment of Sutton Opportunity and its subsidiary companies 
and has successfully brokered the reconfiguration of shared services with the 
Royal Borough of Kingston.

Bolger’s personal leadership style is to build consensus and empower and 
support his team. He is also incisive and perceptive with regard to the impact 
of implementation of government policy on local government and the wider public 
sector.

Dwayne Branch, head of Business Investments, London borough of Newham
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d504343a7eff7f95aca8531ee9cbf0a601300a8%2F348_0_2403_2403%2F2403.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2d504343a7eff7f95aca8531ee9cbf0a601300a8%2F348_0_2403_2403%2F2403.jpg>
 Dwayne Branch. 
Dwayne Branch is joining the London borough of Newham from a consultancy role, 
bringing with him a commercial outlook to local public service provision.
In his post at PwC, Branch has worked with local councils, NHS trusts, CCGs 
and universities but also with variety of business from banks to small owner 
managed businesses.
He is an experienced restructuring professional bringing private sector 
knowledge to the public sector. In his new role at Newham, from 1 February 
2017, he will head up business investments to deliver additional income which 
will help protect services.

Kate Carr, director of partnerships, engagement and communications, Office of 
the Future Generations Commissioner
 Kate Carr. 
Kate Carr works for the Future Generations Commissioner for Wales, Sophie 
Howe, who began her role in 2016 to oversee new legislation, the Wellbeing of 
Future Generations Act. The Act is pioneering legislation focused on making 
Wales a more sustainable and responsible nation and commended by the United 
Nations as an example for other countries.

Aisling Duffy, chief executive, Certitude

Aisling Duffy is the chief executive of Certitude, a not-for-profit 
organisation providing support to people in London with mental health needs and 
learning disabilities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8426665a595c1ecbda6d565cbe121b4acbc4e2e%2F0_578_3597_3597%2F3597.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd8426665a595c1ecbda6d565cbe121b4acbc4e2e%2F0_578_3597_3597%2F3597.jpg>
 Aisling Duffy. 
Duffy led the organisation through a successful merger in 2010 and has 
achieved significant growth by providing concrete evidence of the ability of 
the third sector to transform services and its impact on wider system design.

Duffy chairs the Integrated Personalised Support Alliance in Lambeth 
<http://www.lambethccg.nhs.uk/about-us/Lammy-Awards-2016/Pages/Integrated-Personalised-Support-Alliance.aspx>
 – leading a partnership including the local authority, South London and 
Maudsley NHS Trust, Lambeth CCG and other third-sector providers to transform 
rehabilitative mental health support. She is committed to strengthening the 
development of the social care workforce and has sector-wide influence, sitting 
on the boards of both the Voluntary Disability Organisations Group and the 
National Development Team for Inclusion (NDTi).

Peter Fleming, leader, Sevenoaks district council and deputy chair, Local 
Government Association
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b94760237ce728d27cf4bfb0143d370b2a822e4%2F227_0_914_914%2F914.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5b94760237ce728d27cf4bfb0143d370b2a822e4%2F227_0_914_914%2F914.jpg>
 Peter Fleming. 
Councillor Peter Fleming has held various roles at the Local Government 
Association, including chairing its Improvement and Innovation Board. As deputy 
chair, he has considerable passion for and knowledge of the sector.
As leader of Sevenoaks district council, Fleming has been influential in 
Sevenoaks becoming the first council to achieve financial self-sufficiency, 
with a demonstrable track record of making significant savings, working in 
partnerships and delivering innovations. Sevenoaks won thefinance award 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-winners-and-runners-up>
 and was also crowned theoverall winner of the 2016 Guardian Public Service 
Awards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society-professionals/2016/nov/30/guardian-public-service-awards-2016-overall-winner-sevenoaks-district-council>
.

Fleming is at the forefront of delivering the new role for district councils 
in a time of devolved budgets and powers and has a true and practical 
understanding of its place in the public sector and the way local authorities 
work together, work with the blue light services, with charities and the 
voluntary sector and with town and parish councils.

Karen Holmes, chief executive and registrar, Architects Registration Board
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6db19bb7726c8d3201fdf7fdfa294b30a279cd1%2F936_0_3127_3127%2F3127.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd6db19bb7726c8d3201fdf7fdfa294b30a279cd1%2F936_0_3127_3127%2F3127.jpg>
 Karen Holmes. 
Karen Holmes is a leader in regulation. She has been chief executive and 
registrar since July 2015 of the Architects Registration Board (ARB), the 
regulatory body that regulates the architectural profession in the UK and that 
also prescribes architectural courses across the UK.
Holmes first joined the ARB as head of registration in 1999 and was deputy 
registrar from 2006–14 before becoming interim chief executive. She is highly 
regarded by her other regulatory colleagues and by the Department for 
Communities and Local Government, to which she is accountable.


Holmes is steering her organisation through changes in regulation and 
relationships with Europe.

Hayley Lewis, founder, Halo Psychology
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee6423276066e501b37441328a88f1dc0c2cb07%2F0_254_4016_3805%2F4016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1ee6423276066e501b37441328a88f1dc0c2cb07%2F0_254_4016_3805%2F4016.jpg>
 Hayley Lewis. 
Hayley Lewis is an organisational psychologist dedicated to improving the 
effectiveness of public sector organisations and has used her background to 
cleverly transform various services in local government. She is an expert 
communicator and is a genuine thought leader in methods for making public 
services user-centred.

Described as “talented and affable”, Lewis has previously worked with the 
Local Government Association, and for Croydon council and the BBC.

Steve McGuirk, chair, Warrington NHS Foundation Trust
 Steve McGuirk. 
Steve McGuirk, now chair of Warrington NHS Foundation Trust, was formerly 
county fire officer and chief executive at Greater Manchester Fire and Rescue 
Service. In this role he was also a member of the wider public sector 
leadership team for Greater Manchester.

McGuirk has a very wide breadth of experience in public service and a strong 
track record in reforming both his own organisation and contributing to wider 
public service reform.

Matt Stevenson-Dodd, chief executive, Street League
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66200879aa48c802a3b6227cae29f9886a10227c%2F0_130_1828_1828%2F1828.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%202017%20Public%20Leaders%20editorial%20advisory%20board&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpublic-leaders-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthe-2017-public-leaders-editorial-advisory-board%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66200879aa48c802a3b6227cae29f9886a10227c%2F0_130_1828_1828%2F1828.jpg>
 Matt Stevenson-Dodd. 
Matt Stevenson-Dodd has been the chief executive of Street League, the UK’s 
leading sport for employment charity, for six years, successfully navigating 
the charity through a changing sector landscape to achieve 30%–40% growth in 
social impact every year for the past three years.

Street League helps unemployed 16- to 24-year-olds move into work using the 
power of sport. As well as leading the charity, Stevenson-Dodd is passionate 
about achieving broader sector-wide change and has been leading a new campaign 
for transparency in social impact reporting called #callforclarity.

He has published editorial and social media content for the past 10 years, and 
has twice been recognised as one of the top chief executives to follow on 
social media, due to his innovative approach to sharing Street League’s 
progress towards ending youth unemployment and his own views on sector matters.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.

 