
So Barack Obama expels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/29/barack-obama-sanctions-russia-election-hack>
 35 Russian diplomats because Moscow apparently hacked the American election 
campaign. Big deal. The gesture is, as Moscow replies, “the death throes of 
political corpses”. In another bout of this archaic ritual, Russiathreatened to 
close Moscow’s Anglo-American school and expel a batch of Americans from Moscow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
 – thoughVladimir Putin eventually said he would not stoop to such 
‘irresponsible diplomacy’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/30/russia-plans-immediate-counter-measures-us-diplomats>
. The next thing we know, Britain will ban Russians from Harrods. It is like 
reacting to Pearl Harbor by not eating sushi.

We're living through the first world cyberwar – but just haven’t called it 
that | Martin Belam
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/first-world-cyberwar-historians>
The essence of cyberwarfare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/30/first-world-cyberwar-historians>
 is precisely that it needs no diplomats. They are little more than 
bureaucratic flotsam. Just as defence policy is passing to bombardiers sitting 
thousands of miles from the action, so foreign policy is moving from cocktail 
parties and embassies to hackers sitting in their own attics.

Washington’s FBI and Homeland Security report into Russian 
government-sponsored interference in the recent US election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/29/fbi-dhs-russian-hacking-report>
 is unanswerable. Russian hacking has been widespread and multifarious, as 
during theOlympic doping scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/dec/27/russian-officials-admit-athletes-doping-olympics>
. Why Moscow felt it worth the risk of meddling in a presidential election is 
puzzling. Did Putin really think he could fix the outcome? The reason was 
probably hackers’ hubris: “We did it because we could.” Rather than tell 
barefaced lies, Moscow should perhaps boast – and warn the world – of its 
new-found proficiency.

American policy towards Russia since 2000 has been a catastrophe. It misjudged 
Moscow’s visceral response to cold war defeat. It failed to learn from its 
disastrous adventure in Afghanistan. It recklessly pushed Nato and the EU into 
easternEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, where Russian 
sensitivities have always been strong. Finally America allowed itself to be 
humiliated by Russia in Syria.

America (with western Europe) has encouraged Moscow’s worst inclinations

Back in 2009, Obama promised to “reset” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jul/07/barack-obama-russia-moscow-speech>
 relations with Moscow. In this too he failed. The US has taunted, provoked and
sanctioned 
<https://www.treasury.gov/resource-center/sanctions/Programs/Pages/ukraine.aspx>
 Russia to absolutely no advantage. It has merely forestalled the role that 
trade and contact should play in opening up Russian society to outside 
influence. It has diminished opposition to Putin and driven Russia back to 
autocracy. America (with western Europe) has encouraged Moscow’s worst 
inclinations, and made Europe more dangerous as a result.

That said, Putin has made his friend, and comrade in mendacity, Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, look a fool just when he 
might use his favour. A president-elect can hardly trust Moscow’s word before 
the entire Washington security apparatus. Trump would be wise to move on, 
perhaps proposing a new international treaty regime to police inter-state 
hacking and curb the threat of cyberwar.

Except, what is the point? As Edward Snowden and WikiLeaks have showed, an 
electronic secret is a contradiction in terms, whether personal or 
governmental. There can be no such thing. Perhaps we shall need those diplomats 
after all.
 