
On the beach in Kent this summer, my teenager went off to the gift shop. It is 
a treasure trove of tat. Whoopee cushions and shell ornaments, lucky dips, 
inflatable dolphins, toy swords and fairy figurines. She came back all 
agitated. “They are selling Jim Crow dolls in there!” I didn’t know what she 
meant. Then she showed me a picture. They were golliwogs, part of my childhood, 
but not hers. She didn’t know the word and had never seen one. This is not down 
to that insane concept “political correctness gone mad”. This is down to 
progress, where we tend to avoid giving children racist toys.

She and my friend went back to the shop to have a word. The shopkeeper said: 
“People love them, especially black people.” My daughter, still outraged, wrote 
to the local mayor who replied that “ethnic dolls” were not illegal and she 
could approach Trading Standards if there was a problem.

Well, there is a problem all right because golliwogs have been making a 
comeback in the past few years, not just in this small seaside town, but all 
over the country. Fifteen years ago, when I first started visiting the Kent 
coast and would go to craft fairs, there were always knitted golliwogs. The old 
ladies made them, along with those crinolined dolls that cover toilet rolls, 
and lacy vacuum-cleaner covers. These women were in their 80s, from another 
era. It seemed pointless to have a conversation about racism with them as I 
simply assumed the golliwogs would die when they did. I was completely wrong. 
These things are now for sale all over the coast and in cities. They are brand 
new, often made in China. There is a thriving business online for “collectors”.

Enid Blyton shop’s ‘racist’ golliwog ad banned
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/enid-blyton-shop-golliwog-ad-asa>
Every so often, some golliwog controversy comes to the fore. Some intrepid 
freedom-fighter insists on his or her right to sell golliwogs (“It’s just a 
doll!”). Anyone who takes offence at this is some loony-left zealot. It is 
especially good if the person who wants to sell golliwogs or dress up as one is 
themselves black or of mixed race. Rightwing papers excel in whittling out 
these oddballs. The latest is Viv Endecott,a woman who has decorated the 
windows of her Enid Blyton gift shop in Corfe Castle, Dorset, with tea towels 
featuring a golliwog 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2016/09/21/enid-blyton-giftshop-has-golliwog-advert-promoting-english-freed/>
. An advert for this shophas been banned by the Advertising Standards Authority 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/sep/21/enid-blyton-shop-golliwog-ad-asa>
. A spokeswoman for the store said the golliwog did not represent “a negative 
racial stereotype” but was, in fact, a “heroic and aspirational role model”. I 
have never met anyone who aspired to be a racist soft toy. Perhaps it’s just me.

It is telling that those who are nostalgic for the time when everyone proudly 
displayed their golliwogs refuse to accept the history of these figures. 
Created byFlorence Kate Upton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/feb/05/golliwog-history-florence-kate-upton>
 in 1895, the golliwog grew out of caricatures of minstrelsy: big white teeth, 
frizzy hair, all one skin colour, large lips. Female characters are usually in 
servant costume.

There is little ambiguity about these dolls; their literary presence spells it 
out. Blyton, in a Noddy story, has a naughty golliwog steal Noddy’s car. In her 
bookThree Little Golliwogs 
<http://listverse.com/wp-content/uploads/2007/12/413px-the-three-golliwogs.jpg> 
(currently trading on eBay with the description “Banned, so bid fast!”), the 
characters Golly, Woggee and Nigger sing their favourite song, Ten Little 
Nigger Boys, which celebrates the death of 10 black children. In a 1975 edition 
of Agatha Christie’s 1939 mystery Ten Little Niggers, alynched golliwog 
appeared on the cover 
<http://paradise-mysteries.blogspot.co.uk/2011/04/review-ten-little-niggers-agatha.html>
.

These harmless toys for white children fully dehumanise black people to such 
an extent that someone such as Carol Thatcher would, in 2009, refer toa black 
tennis player as a golliwog 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/feb/03/bbc-drops-carol-thatcher>. It 
wasn’t till that year that Hamley’s banned them. By 2011, Bill Etherbridge, a 
prospective Tory councillor,was thrown out of the party after posing with 
golliwogs on Facebook 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-1368713/Tory-husband-wife-posed-golliwogs-Facebook-forced-leave-conservatives.html>
. He promptly joined Ukip andrecently stood in the leadership contest 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/26/ukip-leadership-candidate-calls-for-bbc-to-be-privatised>
. He said he was merely trying to stimulate “healthy debate”. Right. He has 
also written a book celebrating golliwogs calledBritain: A Post-Political 
Correctness Society 
<https://images-eu.ssl-images-amazon.com/images/I/513Ge-4HS3L._SY291_BO1,204,203,200_QL40_.jpg>
.

This is exactly how these wretched things ended up back in the shops. Two 
things have been going on: the ongoing lie that political correctness 
(basically, manners) has gone so mad that an open display of racism brands 
itself somehow as an exercise of freedom. Such people always hark back to a 
time of “innocence”. That innocence is now called white privilege.

The other is the lie that we live in a “post-racist” society. This is a view 
that is often expressed in Australia, where golliwogs are extremely popular. 
Yet if you go to any of the Australian websites selling them, you will see the 
vendors go with the word “gollies”, leaving out the obviously offensive bit. 
The tea towel of doom that caused the latest fuss in Dorset is a bizarre mind 
map. A golliwog holding a pint stands above the slogan “English freedom”. 
Around it are phrases such as victimhood, safe space, freedom of speech, 
internet trolls, sharia law. You know – the kind of stuff you want on a tea 
towel.

You see, this ubiquitous reclamation of the golliwog is neither fun nor 
nostalgic. It is less an ironic nod to our racist past than a stark reminder of 
our racist present.
 