
At the turn of the year, after the giving, receiving and splurging are over, 
eyes turn wearily to outstanding bills, upcoming liabilities and the settling 
of accounts. This year, thanks to Brexit, no shortage of final demands and 
eye-watering bills will be appearing in the nation’s letterbox – and denial 
will not be an option.

In addition to the £18bn or so that the UK is thought to owe in outstanding EU 
spending commitments and pensions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/brexit-britain-cost-divorce-bill-questions-answered-uk>
, there will also be demands marked in the deepest red that can be traced back 
to our imperial past, and which have been ignored for far too long.

Related: The history of British slave ownership has been buried: now its scale 
can be revealed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/12/british-history-slavery-buried-scale-revealed>

Some 235 years ago last month, 133 African slaves bound for Jamaican sugar 
plantationswere deliberately drowned 
<http://www.blackpast.org/gah/zong-massacre-1781> in the Caribbean by British 
sailors aboard the slave ship Zong. Chained together at the ankle and weighed 
down with metal balls, they were cast into the deep so that the ship’s owners 
could claim compensation for “cargo” lost at sea.

Two weeks ago this event, known as the Zong massacre, was symbolically chosen 
<http://www.jamaicaobserver.com/news/Govt-will-pursue-reparations-for-slavery----Grange>
 by the Jamaican government to reassert its claim that the UK should formally 
apologise and make financial reparations for running a slave colony on the 
island for two centuries.

Jamaica’s culture minister, Olivia Grange, used the anniversary of this 
heinous act to rededicate her government to pursuing reparations, saying: “We 
will continue to see through campaigns and initiatives being undertaken by the 
National Council on Reparations [and will take] strategic steps towards 
honouring our foreparents.”

Eighteen months ago, I was photographing the slave auction site Farquharson 
Wharf in Black River, Jamaica, where the Zong’s survivors passed from being 
cargo to human livestock for an average of £35 each. For those Scots – and 
there are many of us – who have been unaware of our own nation’s culpability in 
this ghastly business, the revelation that Farquharson Wharf was a 
Scottish-owned business, and that many of the souls who passed though its doors 
would go on to toil in the numerousScots-owned sugar plantations 
<http://www.blackhistorymonth.org.uk/article/section/history-of-slavery/scotland-and-slavery/>
 in the surrounding countryside, should give pause for shame and reflection.

In Jamaica, where Scottish surnames and place names abound 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/opinion/13839601.Jamaica__the_country_with_more_Campbells_per_head_of_population_than_Scotland/>
, a sense of shame for past misdeeds goes only so far. What the island and its 
similarly impoverished neighbours require is debt relief and access to finance 
to develop their productive capacities and enhance opportunities for education, 
enabling them to escape a reliance on fickle tourism.

In its campaign for reparations from the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/26/caribbean-countries-slavery-compensation-claim>
 and other ex slave-trading nations such as Spain and Portugal, the region’s 
economic bloc, Caricom, isdemanding that 
<http://www.caricom.org/reparations-for-native-genocide-and-slavery> we 
recognise that our society’s enrichment has been at the direct expense of its 
members’ advancement – and that we are obliged to make amends.
 ‘What Jamaica and its similarly impoverished neighbours require is debt 
relief and access to finance to develop their productive capacities.’ 
Photograph: Stephen McLaren 
A recognition that each of us alive in Britain today has benefited financially 
from the era when our country shipped humans from one continent to another and 
forced them to work for free became apparent to me while photographing many 
Scottish country estates, schools and landscapes with Jamaican connections. 
Thanks to research by Scottish historians, we are now learning that not only 
did many sugar magnates of the Caribbean return to buy big houses and become 
lairds of the manor – but they also invested surplus wealth in many nascent 
enterprises of the industrial and agricultural revolutions, turbo-charging 
sectors such as canal-building, mining and textile production. It happened all 
over Britain; our collective sweet tooth and today’s economic comforts are 
directly connected to the empire’s rapacious exploitation of the West Indies 
sugar trade.

The Caribbean’s patience at our reluctance to deal with these outstanding 
debts is understandably running out. In 2015 it was duly noted thatDavid 
Cameron’s visit to Jamaica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/30/slavery-reparations-call-overshadows-david-camerons-visit-to-jamaica>
 passed with a refusal to engage with the idea of reparations, never mind a 
formal apology. Indeed, the takeaway from that visit was his urging of 
Jamaicans to “move on”, while offering to fund and build a new prison.

When you consider that in 1948, all Jamaicans, and 800 million fellow citizens 
of the British empire, were entitled to migrate to Britain, and nowadays just 
obtaining a tourist visa to visit is a stretch, it shouldn’t surprise us that 
the reparations issue is now being pursued more forcefully. With Caricom 
engaginga British law firm 
<https://www.leighday.co.uk/News/2013/July-2013/UK-law-firm-advises-Caribbean-reparations-committe>
 that previously won£20m compensation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/uk-compensate-kenya-mau-mau-torture>
 for Kenyans tortured by British troops during the 1950s, there is no doubt it 
is serious about prosecuting these claims.

No one relishes paying bills, and the notion that developing countries want to 
put us on the hook for vast sums in reparations is just the issue to set off a 
chorus of, “It’s a messy business, long time ago, you wouldn’t understand, 
sleeping dogs and all that.” In this worldview, it’s always Britain coughing up 
for the rest of the world’s problems, putting the sixth richest nation on Earth 
at risk of being impoverished by damn foreigners.

Related: Should Britain pay reparations for slavery? | The panel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/30/should-britain-government-reparations-slavery>

History teaches us, however, that compensation for imagined national 
liabilities is always available if one is of the “right sort”.The bank bailouts 
of 2008 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/reality-check-with-polly-curtis/2011/sep/12/reality-check-banking-bailout>
 may be the most recent example, but it is the1835 compensation for British 
slave-owners 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/britains-colonial-shame-slave-owners-given-huge-payouts-after-abolition-8508358.html>
 post-emancipation that is the most enlightening here. As slavery was 
abolished, the British government decided that each slave owner (and there were 
tens of thousands up and down the country) was entitled to a sum that, when 
combined, totalled around £2bn in today’s money – a quarter of the government’s 
annual budget.

How can we compensate those who leeched off the unpaid labour of African 
slaves yet remain hostile to the legitimate claims of their ancestors?

As a Glaswegian whose city flourished massively as a result of transatlantic 
slavery, I urge Scotland’s leaders to engage with the UK government in a series 
of negotiations with the Caribbean nations in order that we can begin to settle 
these blood-soaked debts. The poor of Glasgow, and likewise of Bristol and 
Liverpool, cannot be expected to personally contribute, as that would be a 
travesty of reparative justice; but collectively we must explore what we have 
to do to put this right.

If, while dragging its feet on this issue, Scotland should take flight from 
Brexit andbecome independent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/14/independent-scotland-financial-future-westminster-holyrood-government>
, then it is beholden on us to make a formal apology to the people of the 
Caribbean impacted by the slave trade, hope that it is accepted, and then work 
out how we can contribute to their economic advancement. As the Scottish purse 
is currently being expected to contribute around £1.5bn annually for the next 
30 years for new Trident submarines, I would suggest that a portion of this 
insane amount of money should instead be earmarked for more humane ends in the 
islands from which we took so much.
 