
Recent political campaigns have shown beyond reasonable doubt that dry 
statistical claims that things are getting better don’t work when the public 
suspects that they are not. So the claim that the percentage of schools ranked 
good or outstanding has increased in the past five years is unlikely to be 
reassuring to anyone who frets about the condition of education in England. 
Technically, though, that is true. For primary schools, the rise is from 68% to 
89%; for secondary schools it is from 66% to 78%. One person keener than most 
to advertise those numbers isSir Michael Wilshaw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/profile/michael-wilshaw>, since they reflect his 
four-year tenure as chief inspector of schools.He is standing down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/sir-michael-wilshaw-ofsteds-dirty-harry-bids-farewell-to-a-colourful-career>
 at the end of the year.

It is easy to find fault with the inspection regime, to challenge the criteria 
on which judgments are made, to criticise the way data is collected, to lament 
the imprecision of verdicts expressed in crude categories and league tables. 
But it is also easy to forget that an imperfect system for upholding standards 
and giving parents a tool to monitor progress came into being because 
previously there was no system at all that allowed parents to judge how their 
child’s school was doing.

No one doubts Sir Michael’s commitment to that process, even if his approach 
has ruffled feathers <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35775458> along the 
way. He earned suspicion from unions for supporting reforms that began under 
New Labour and were accelerated by Michael Gove, and for comments on 
underperformance that left teachers feeling berated and demoralised. 
His reputation as a transformative school leader was founded in large part on 
his headship of the Mossbourne academy in east London. It has routinely been 
held up as a model for the academies programme, carrying more weight in that 
debate than any one institution can reasonably bear.

Ofsted chief slams Theresa May’s ‘obsession’ with grammar schools
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/ofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession>
But Sir Michael was not a compliant apparatchik of the Govian regime. 
Relations with the former secretary of state soured over budget issues and the 
Ofsted chief’s reluctance to share the ideological frenzy in Mr Gove’s 
entourage that treated the emancipation of schools from local authority control 
as an end in itself. Unlike most of his ministerial patrons, Sir Michael has 
retained an attachment to the unfashionable principle of public sector reform 
that what matters is what works. On that basis he has given short shrift to 
what he describes as Theresa May’s“obsession” with grammar schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/ofsted-chief-slams-grammar-school-obession>
, saying the policy would be “socially divisive” and harmful to standards 
overall.

A chief inspector would hardly be doing his job properly if he avoided 
controversy and Sir Michael has not been shy of politically charged 
intervention, nor of using a broad brush to depict a complex challenge. True to 
form, he used a final round of public appearances to stir debate. Speaking 
ahead of publication ofthe final Ofsted annual report 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/573554/Ofsted_annual_report_education_and_skills_201516_print-ready.pdf>
 of his four-year term, he cited the role played by regional disparities in 
education in the majority vote against European Union membership. In this 
analysis, failure to improve schools in parts of the north of England and the 
Midlands contributed to a sense of alienation and neglect by southern elites, 
feeding a “malaise” thatunderpinned support for Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/01/ofsted-chief-michael-wilshaw-links-divide-in-education-to-malaise-behind-brexit-vote>
.

It was a typical Wilshawism – a bold generalisation, testing the boundary 
between non-partisan analysis, as is expected of an official with statutory 
obligation to stay at arm’s length from government, and the kind of 
provocative, headline-generating remark more characteristic of a politician. 
Forthrightness is a permissible perk of valediction and Sir Michael is as well 
qualified as anyone to opine on educational inequality. Where drivers of Brexit 
are concerned, his view feels intuitively correct, although the case is 
unproven.

A less dramatic but no less important valedictory observation was made in an 
interview earlier in the week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/oct/15/sir-michael-wilshaw-politicians-inevitably-come-up-against-people-like-me-chief-inspector-schools>
, when Sir Michael was asked about the pace of constant upheaval in school 
structures and the curriculum at the education department during his time at 
Ofsted: “I have learned this not just as chief inspector but also as 
a headteacher: that change sometimes has to be slow and incremental.”

In a peripatetic political culture, that can be a hard lesson for politicians 
to heed. Sir Michael’s many critics might be reluctant to take it from a man 
more often associated with restless impatience for action. It is nonetheless 
consistent with a creditable ethos atOfsted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/ofsted>, albeit one that is irregularly 
upheld: a preference for evidence over ideology. That impulse is too rare in 
the politics of education.
 