
Michael Dean spends his day sitting in the corner of a box room. He has Down’s 
syndrome <https://www.theguardian.com/society/downs-syndrome>, a sensory and 
hearing disorder, and severe learning disabilities – and since 2012, he has 
lived in a small care home in the south of England. Dean’s mother, Julia Evans, 
describes it as “intolerable” for him: instead of giving him the specialist 
therapy he needs, she says the staff largely leave him at a desk next to a 
boiler room and kitchen. Torture for someone who’s extremely sensitive to noise.

If austerity is over, why can’t Britain afford proper social care? | John 
Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/02/austerity-over-britain-afford-social-care>
Michael, who is in his 20s, can’t speak, but communicates his distress the 
only way he knows how: by screaming and hitting himself in the face. “Once he 
had a big black eye,” says Evans.

She wants her son to move back to her bungalow with a team of carers, paid for 
out of a personal budget – an agreed amount of money allocated by the local 
authority to allow a person to have greater choice and control over the care 
and support they receive.

Evans doesn’t want her or her son’s real identity revealed because for the 
last three years she has been battling with Dean’s council for the allocation 
of a personal budget. After three formal assessments, stretched over 18 months, 
he has now been offered a personal budget of 21 hours a week of care. Compared 
to his current package, this is a cut of 90 hours per week, which the family is 
contesting.

When the 2014 Care Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-care-network/2015/apr/28/-care-act-2014-quick-guide>
 gave anyone receiving council-funded social care in England the legal right to 
a personal budget it was heralded as a major step towards choice and 
personalised care. But it has become another casualty of the widersocial care 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/tory-mps-press-philip-hammond-over-nhs-and-social-care>
 that has engulfed old and disabled people, like Dean, living in residential 
care or who need help to still manage in their own homes, while councils’ care 
budgets since 2011 have beencut by 30% 
<http://www.patients4nhs.org.uk/government-cuts/>, leaving a £5bn funding gap. 
As a result, the reality of personal budgets is often one of cuts to funding, 
inadequate support and reduced choice.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpersonal-budget-disabled-funding-cuts-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8cb4f59ffa516dc5825a09a2f7e437c0a2c3866%2F53_279_4772_2865%2F4772.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20right%20to%20choose%20your%20own%20care%20is%20the%20latest%20casualty%20of%20council%20cuts%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpersonal-budget-disabled-funding-cuts-social-care%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20right%20to%20choose%20your%20own%20care%20is%20the%20latest%20casualty%20of%20council%20cuts%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Fdec%2F07%2Fpersonal-budget-disabled-funding-cuts-social-care%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa8cb4f59ffa516dc5825a09a2f7e437c0a2c3866%2F53_279_4772_2865%2F4772.jpg>
 ‘Personal budgets have become another casualty of the wider social care crisis 
that has engulfed old people living in residential care.’ Photograph: 
Photofusion/REX/Shutterstock 
According to a recent survey of disabled people by the charity In Control 
<http://www.in-control.org.uk/news/in-control-news/report-on-the-independent-living-survey-2016.aspx/>
 on behalf ofthe Independent Living Strategy Group 
<http://www.disabilityrightsuk.org/news/2016/may/independent-living-strategy-group-survey-2016>
, a third of respondents said they had less choice and control over the support 
they received. Half reported that councils were restricting the use of their 
how their budgets were spent to “personal care” – meaning help with such things 
as washing and dressing, rather than help to leave the house.

Sue Bott, deputy chief executive of Disability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/disability> Rights UK and long-term 
independent living campaigner, says the concept of personal budgets has “become 
corrupted”. She adds: “Councils have almost penalised people for wanting 
control by passing over the minimum amount they can get away with.” John 
Waters, a director at In Control, says “personal budgets as an idea were 
transformative. But this government has put a massive shock in the social care 
system by slashing funding. On the one hand, there’s talk of increased choice 
and flexibility. But on the other, it’s ‘do that but with less money’.”

The reality of personal budgets is often one of cuts to funding, inadequate 
support and reduced choice

Although cuts are a key issue, it isn’t purely funding that’s a problem. Roger 
and Gill Pratt from Warwickshire, both 72, began usingdirect payments 
<http://www.in-control.org.uk/support/support-for-individuals,-family-members-carers/frequently-asked-questions/what-are-the-key-differences-between-personal-budgets-and-direct-payments.aspx>
 – a type of personal budget where disabled people or family can directly 
organise care themselves – for their daughter Joanne in 2014, when the care in 
her supported living bungalow became, in Gill’s words, “miserable”. The use of 
unreliable agency staff meant that Joanne, 52, who has cerebral palsy, as well 
as eyesight and hearing problems, severe learning disabilities and mobility 
problems, often had no one to care for her – “She had to come back to our house 
as an emergency eight times,” Roger explains – and taking over the funding to 
hire a team of personal assistants themselves appeared to be the best option.

But they soon found there was “no support from the local authority” to do it. 
Instead, they were left to wade through recruitment, tackle funding errors, and 
negotiate complex employment practices alone. One carer took the family to a 
tribunal (they were fined £800 for a violation of employment law). With no one 
to help them organise staff, Joanne is currently short one assistant (she needs 
four) and has to return to her parents three times a week.

It makes for an exhausting retirement and it’s taking its toll. “All the local 
authority does to support you is give you a list of agencies,” Gill says. 
“You’re left to sink or swim.” And they’re not alone.More than half (51%) of 
respondents 
<http://www.in-control.org.uk/news/in-control-news/report-on-the-independent-living-survey-2016.aspx/>
 to the In Control survey who received direct payments said the information 
they got to manage the process was poor or very poor.

In the West Midlands, Carol Stevenson describes direct payments as “the worst 
thing I’ve ever done ... we’re hanging on by our fingernails,” she says.

Since 2012, Stevenson (not her real name as she too is in negotiations with 
her council) has used direct payments to enable her son, “Alexander” – who is 
registered blind and severely autistic – to live in his own bungalow with the 
help of seven rotating carers. She says it was “running like clockwork” – his 
care partly funded by the now axedIndependent Living Fund (ILF) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jul/13/disabled-people-call-return-independent-living-fund>
 and partly by the council – until March. Then, the council reassessed 
Alexander’s care package and six months later, announced a plan to almost halve 
his funding.

Care cuts have left one million disabled people stranded. They deserve a life, 
too | Frances Ryan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/02/care-cuts-disabled-people-deserve-life>
Eighteen months since the closure of the ILF in England and the transfer of 
its once ring-fenced budget to councils, this is an emerging problem: 41% of 
former ILF recipients told In Control’s survey that the amount of their support 
had decreased or decreased a lot (councils have no legal duty to spend 
transferred money on previous recipients).

Stevenson no longer even has direct access to her son’s personal budget – her 
council diverted the money to a third party agency. She is now considering a 
judicial review to appeal the cut and she is on anti-depressants and sleeping 
tablets to deal with the stress.

The Department of Health points out that it has allocated an extra £3.5bn for 
social care by 2020. Despite huge demands from an ageing population, a DoH 
spokeswoman says as a result it expects councils to provide “personalised care 
to ensure people have more choice, control and flexibility”, and “there should 
be no reason for failing to introduce local personal budgets where appropriate”.

Warwickshire county council says it has contracts with two organisations that 
provide free support to people who are using its personal budgets to employ 
personal assistants. “We actively encourage anyone who chooses to receive a 
direct payment to seek advice and support from these organisations,” says a 
council spokesman.

Meanwhile, Julia Evans is waiting for her son’s fourth council assessment. “It 
shouldn’t be this hard,” she says. “Getting this far has been like pulling 
teeth.”

 