
In the 1840s, the Rochdale Pioneers  
<https://www.theguardian.com/social-enterprise-network/gallery/2014/jan/29/the-history-of-the-british-co-operative-movement-timeline>
set up their own shops to provide honest food at fair prices at a time when 
people had little money and bread was often bulked out with chalk, milk diluted 
with water and tea had ingredients not related in any way to tea leaves. Today, 
standards are much improved. The supermarket, the invention of the 1960s, 
provides huge choice at relatively cheap prices for consumers who are 
increasingly pushed for time and money.

Now, four companies – Sainsbury’s, Tesco, Asda and Morrisons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/morrisons> – dominate 75% of the market, 
although the German discounters Aldi and Lidl, offering far fewer products, 
competitive prices and stripped-down shops, are rising fast. While the price at 
the checkout is attractive, it fails to factor in the hidden cost to our 
health, the environment, to animal welfare, farming and the countryside. 
Furthermore, certain aspects of government policy, such as the intensive 
production of wheat, are exhausting the soil.

Children need to know more about what honest food is, and why it matters

The four have enormous power. They can dictate the size of an apple grown 
6,000 miles away. A change in the price they are prepared to pay can make or 
break farmers.A thousand dairy farms have closed in three years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/aug/06/dairy-farmers-call-for-supermarkets-boycott-as-milk-price-falls>
, beaten by the supermarket price of milk. The demand for “seasonal” produce 
all year round has had an impact onBritain’s self-sufficiency 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/aug/07/britain-food-self-sufficiency-decline-imports-nfu>
. It has declined over 30 years from 78% to 60% – and the population is 
predicted to rise to 75m in 20 years.

The good news is that consumers have clout – if they choose to wield it. 
Learning how to use it should begin at school. Children, as campaigners such as
Jamie Oliver <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/oliver> have long 
argued, need to know more about what honest food is and why it matters. 
Labelling has to be tougher. “Permanently housed” on beef products tells us the 
cows have been kept indoors for their lifetime. We need tougher monitoring and 
policing of animal welfare, food fraud and the treatment of farmers and 
suppliers by supermarkets.

We need a healthier food chain, offering greater transparency and credible 
claims of “local” and “farm-fresh”. Monitoring has been weakened by austerity 
and prosecutions are rare. Thehorsemeat scandal  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/16/horsemeat-burgers-supermarkets>
three years ago failed to shake up the system. It shouldn’t require another 
before we begin to see real change that can begin with us, the customer.
 