
It was this newspaper’s revelations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2009/jul/08/murdoch-papers-phone-hacking> of 
phone hacking by parts of the tabloid press that led in 2011 toLord Justice 
Leveson’s inquiry 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20140122145147/http:/www.levesoninquiry.org.uk/>
 into the “culture, practices and ethics” of an industry. The judge heard 
striking testimony from victims of media mistreatment, many of whom had awful 
tales of prolonged harassment and gross invasions of privacy. The airing of 
illegal practices carried out by the press over years led to very public 
criminal trials.Individuals went to jail 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jul/04/andy-coulson-jailed-phone-hacking>
. This seems the right way to do things: journalists expose wrongdoing; the 
agitation it produces is submitted to; and existing criminal and civil law 
processes kicked in to administer justice. There was a twist. Leveson clearly 
thought that parts of the press were out of control, and unresisted pressure 
built up for collective punishment.

What we have ended up with is a form of press regulation – enabled by a 
medieval piece of constitutional nonsense, the royal charter – consisting of 
small carrots and big sticks. Newspapers can sign up to a state-approved 
regulator. The only one endorsed so far is Impress, which is hardly independent 
given it isfunded by Max Mosley, a wealthy victim of press intrusion into his 
sex life 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/oct/25/impress-press-regulator-newspaper-publishers-max-moseley>
. Impress has distinctly unimpressed, failing to attract any significant 
national or local news outlets.The sanction has been smuggled into section 40 
of the Crime and Courts Act 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2017/jan/10/section-40-david-camerons-ticking-time-bomb-under-the-press>
. Those that refuse to join a system of regulation would be subjected to a form 
of unnatural justice: non-cooperative newspapers face paying the legal costs of 
both sides even in cases they win. This would have a deeply chilling effect on 
investigative journalism and help make the wealthy and powerful unaccountable. 
Editors would be forced to think long and hard before confronting anyone with 
deep pockets, never mind taking on dozens of millionaires who were outed by 
this newspaper when it published thehidden offshore tax affairs of the 
super-rich in the Panama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers>. In cases involving 
national security, where deep source protection sits at the heart of a story, 
the result would be not just a colder climate but a freezing one.

A free press is a constitutional necessity, not an ornamental timepiece. There 
is no other option but to repeal section 40. The Guardian believes that the 
independence of the press is best served by self- not state- regulation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/guardian-and-ft-join-call-for-repeal-of-section-40-media-law>
. Most others agree. Ipso, an “unapproved” regulator, remains a creature of 
much of Fleet Street. Impress and Ipso should be allowed to continue to 
administer their own forms of self-regulation. The Guardian, along with the 
Financial Times, has decided to pursue its own model of oversight, accountable 
to readers and the public. Peers in the upper house who threaten to reintroduce 
section 40 by the back door,in effect threatening the government with what 
Oliver Letwin described as “trench warfare” 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c322da38-d41d-11e6-9341-7393bb2e1b51>, are simply 
wrong. There is an issue of inequality of justice in this information age. The 
law must apply to the mighty and the meek in the same way. Politicians should 
think what weapons ordinary people, down on their luck, can call on to fight 
their corner. Reformed access to the civil justice system would help.

How to contact the Guardian securely
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/help/2016/sep/19/how-to-contact-the-guardian-securely>
What is missing here is an appreciation of the present. Investigations into 
past behaviour ignore what the media industry is today. Facebook is by far the 
most pervasive network for news. Google dwarfs others in terms of media 
distribution. Sparky websites and blogs vie with traditional newsprint for 
readers and advertising revenue. Yet there is silence on the means to regulate 
them. Just as bizarre, given the fact theBBC is being taken to court by Sir 
Cliff Richard 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/sir-cliff-richard-starts-legal-action-against-bbc-and-south-yorkshire-police>
, is that the broadcaster is excluded from the purview of the proposed laws. 
Left unopposed, we will get an unequal system of media law that targets a 
specific type of news organisation, not a specific form of poor conduct. Such 
malpractice will no doubt feature in the outcome of the43-month-long 
independent review into the unsolved murder of the private investigator Daniel 
Morgan <https://www.danielmorganpanel.independent.gov.uk/>, which involves the 
police and the media.

A fitting coda to Leveson would be not another inquiry, but a referral of the 
proposed merger of 21st Century Fox with Sky to Ofcom 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/16/petition-ofcom-rupert-murdoch-sky-bid-fox-karen-bradley>
. Consolidating media power in the hands of the many accused of wilful 
blindness to the practices that went on at News International is highly 
questionable. A press that is free to investigate and criticise is essential 
for good governance. Newspapers often take advantage of their freedom. But 
Thomas Jefferson, one of America’s founding fathers, perhaps put it best: “Our 
liberty cannot be guarded but by the freedom of the press, nor that be limited 
without danger of losing it.”
 