
Ever since the Met Office was derided for predicting a barbecue summer, 
long-range weather forecasting for the season ahead has been avoided. The most 
that is attempted is 30 days, and thecurrent forecast 
<http://www.metoffice.gov.uk/public/weather/long-range-forecast/> contains so 
many ifs, buts and possibilities that almost any weather might occur in 
November and no one could complain.

That does not mean that predicting the weather for the coming season is not 
the ambition of every meteorologist and scientist, especially as climate change 
makes extreme weather both more likely and economically important.

In Britain the track of depressions across the country that turn into winter 
storms and bring the threat of flooding are of increasing concern. The warmer 
atmosphere out in the Atlantic means more water in the clouds has to be 
deposited as rain.

After El Nino, what next
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/oct/23/el-nino-la-nina-drought-flood-weatherwatch>
The second threat, extreme cold, is posed by changes in the Arctic. According 
to thelatest research 
<http://www.sheffield.ac.uk/news/nr/climate-change-cold-winters-uk-us-weather-study-1.657530>
, the jet stream, that is responsible for pushing the depressions towards us 
across the Atlantic, is developing a wavy habit. This has led to the current 
dry spell as long lasting high-pressure systems block the path of the lows that 
would normally bring autumn rain.

If the weather pattern persists, or returns in the winter, the weather will 
turn cold and could remain bleak for days and possibly weeks. Researchers say 
this has already happened in the past in the UK, and brought the winters that 
the Eastern United States has suffered recently with record snowfalls. And it 
may soon happen again.

On the other hand, as the Met Office would be careful to say, it might just 
rain a lot.
 