
Trump’s victory is one of the biggest calamities to befall the west and the 
effect is that every racist, woman-hater, homophobe and rightwing authoritarian 
feels vindicated. This rightwing populism can no longer be dismissed as a blip. 
Indeed, without an urgent change in strategy, the left – perhaps all 
progressive opinion – will be marginalised to the point of irrelevance. Our 
crisis is existential.

Mourn the election outcome now. Then stand up and protect American values | 
Claire Messud
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/09/american-values-election-fight>
Multiple factors explain this calamity. First: racism. The legacy of slavery 
means racism is written into the DNA of US society. The determined efforts by 
African Americans to claim their civil rights has been met with a vicious 
backlash. The exit polls suggest that Trump won a landslide among both male and 
female white non-graduates:only white women with degrees produced a majority 
for Hillary Clinton 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html>
.

Second: misogyny. Trump – who brags of sexually assaulting his victims – ran a 
campaign defined by hatred of women. Clinton was self-evidently an 
establishment candidate, but a male candidate of the establishment would have 
been treated differently. Some American men feel emasculated by two factors: 
the demise of skilled secure jobs that gave them a sense of pride and status, 
and the rise of women’s and LGBT movements, which some men feel undermine their 
rightful dominance.

But there is a factor that cannot be ignored. Centrism, the ideology of 
self-styled moderates, is in a state of collapse. In the 1990s, the third way 
project championed by Bill Clinton and Tony Blair could claim political 
dominance in much of the US and Europe. It has shrivelled in the face of 
challenges from theresurgent populist right 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/13/birth-of-populism-donald-trump>
 and new movements of the left.

Younger citizens feel aggrieved at being condemned to a life less affluent 
than that of their parents; older working-class voters feel economically and 
socially dislocated. Whether it be thedramatic surge of the leftist Podemos in 
Spain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/03/spain-halt-europes-slide-populist-right-podemos>
, the popularity of the far-right Front National in France, or Brexit – it’s 
all interlinked. The aftermath of financial crisis left centrism with ever 
fewer answers, and yet its advocates continue to attack the political 
hopelessness and failures of their leftwing opponents. Lashing out is easier 
than addressing their own lack of clear vision or strategy at a time of crisis.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protesters%20in%20US%20cities%20take%20to%20the%20streets%20saying%20Donald%20Trump%20is%20not%20their%20president%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protesters%20in%20US%20cities%20take%20to%20the%20streets%20saying%20Donald%20Trump%20is%20not%20their%20president%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fprotesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video&media=>
Protesters in US cities take to the streets saying Donald Trump is not their 
president 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/10/protesters-new-york-chicago-washington-cities-streets-saying-donald-trump-is-not-their-president-video>
Whenever the economic insecurities that fuelled Trumpism are mentioned, 
several objections are raised. It’s an explanation, some say, that fails to 
account for the large majority of working-class Americans from minority 
backgrounds who vote Democrat. Then there is the issue of culpability. Many 
insist that working-class Republican voters must take responsibility for 
electing a racist, misogynist candidate. True, some will be racists and 
misogynists beyond redemption but others have the potential to be peeled away 
if the lure is attractive enough.

Early evidence suggests depressed Democratic turnout, indicative of a lack of 
enthusiasm for Clinton’s campaign. But Trump appears to have done best among 
middle-income Americans, and narrowly beat Clinton among the affluent. But the 
biggest shift to Trump – a 16-point swing–came from those earning less than 
$30,000 a year 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/11/08/us/politics/election-exit-polls.html>
, even though he still lags behind Clinton among this group. Last time they 
voted for the country’s first black president. This time they shifted to a 
candidate backed by avowed racists, and ensured he won.

Centrism has failed these and many other voters. Clinton was not handpicked by 
the Democratic party’s elite: she defeated an unexpectedly successful challenge 
by self-described socialist Bernie Sanders, partly because of his failure to 
inspire African Americans. But her political machine did make it virtually 
impossible for other candidates – say,Elizabeth Warren 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/25/elizabeth-warren-us-president-workers-rights-wall-street>
 – to stand.

At a time of anti-establishment sentiment sweeping the west, a dynastic 
establishment candidate – close to Wall Street, close to foreign despots, the 
backer of calamitous foreign wars – was a disastrous choice.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Centrists have an easy retort. OK, smug radical, if we’re not the answer, 
let’s hear you list the flourishing leftwing governments, describe how the left 
bridges its divide? And, of course, they have a point. The style and culture of 
the radical left is often shaped by university-educated young people (a group 
that includes me). They are a growing and diverse group; often they hail from 
modest backgrounds. But their priorities, their rhetoric and their outlook is 
often radically different to older working-class voters in small town England, 
France or the US. Both groups are critical to building a victorious electoral 
coalition, and yet they are, indeed, divided.

That must change. Unless the left is rooted in working-class communities – 
from the diverse boroughs of London to the ex-mill towns of the north, unless 
it speaks a language that resonates with those it once saw as its natural 
constituency, shorn of contempt for working-class values or priorities, then it 
has no political future. In Britain, Theresa May understands where history is 
heading, hence her clumsy, partisan, attempt to pit a supposedly unpatriotic 
liberal elite against a working-class for whom patriotism is a priority.

Be calm: Trump is not the worst and won’t go unchallenged | Simon Jenkins
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-will-not-go-unchallenged>
In his seminal book, Don’t Think of an Elephant!, the US political linguist 
George Lakoff said voters were motivated above all else by “moral identity and 
values”, even if that meant voting against economic self-interest. 
Progressives, by contrast, believed that yelling the facts would somehow bring 
people round.

But human beings are emotional creatures. We want emotionally compelling 
stories. Clinton’s pitch was that of someone applying to be a bank’s chief 
executive. She was paraded as the most experienced presidential candidate in 
history, but that hardly mattered. She was beaten by Obama, then a junior 
senator; bested again by a political novice.

So what next for the left? It clearly cannot compromise in the fight against 
racism, misogyny and homophobia but it must urgently work out how to do that in 
a way that connects with the unreached. The working class is increasingly 
diverse and the left must have a message that resonates with all 
constituencies. It cannot allow the populist right to portray it as a hater of 
working-class values.

We need to project an emotionally compelling vision. Because now we know that 
stating the facts and hoping for the best will not blunt the right or build a 
progressive alliance. There is a common thread, but centrists and radicals have 
failed to find it. We must redouble our efforts. From the US, we see what 
tragedy occurs in a vacuum.
 