
The Guardian <https://www.theguardian.com/media/theguardian> has been named 
website of the year at the Press Awards, while Guardian Weekend was given the 
prize for supplement of the year.

Three of the newspaper’s journalists were also honoured at the ceremony in 
London on Tuesday night and an Observer writer was highly commended.

The Guardian’s health editor Sarah Boseley was named the science and health 
journalist of the year for her reporting on theEbola crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/17/ebola-race-find-cure>, the 
scourge of endometriosis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/28/endometriosis-hidden-suffering-millions-women>
 and concerns over the handling of acampaign dealing with the menopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/nov/07/scientists-fear-pr-campaign-underplays-hrt-cancer-risks>
.

Press Awards for 2015 – video highlights
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/22/press-awards-for-2015-live-coverage>
The critic of the year was the Guardian’s Marina O’Loughlin, who was 
recognised for her restaurant reviews ofAndrew Edmunds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/oct/09/andrew-edmunds-london-w1-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
,Sexy Fish 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/dec/26/sexy-fish-london-restaurant-review-marina-o-loughlin>
 andInver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/may/15/inver-strathlachlan-restaurant-review-marina-oloughlin>
. The Observer’s Jay Rayner was highly commended in the category.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fc568bb312f23478180b271074893386f9857c2%2F100_397_1926_1155%2F1926.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20named%20website%20of%20the%20year%20at%20Press%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20named%20website%20of%20the%20year%20at%20Press%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5fc568bb312f23478180b271074893386f9857c2%2F100_397_1926_1155%2F1926.jpg>
 Team Guardian celebrates the award won by Sarah Boseley (standing). 
Photograph: Nick Carter/MagStar Ltd/Press Awards UK 
Tom Jenkins was named the winner in the sports photographer of the year 
category for his images of the former Chelsea managerJosé Mourinho 
<http://pressawards.org.uk/modules/entries/images/entries-30150815-02275-l.jpg>
, which appeared in the Observer, of the tennis playerRafael Nadal 
<http://pressawards.org.uk/modules/entries/images/entries-30150815-01847-l.jpg>
, and of Japanese players tackling a South African opponent during the Asian 
nation’s shock 32-34 win at last year’s Rugby World Cup.

The newspaper’s migration correspondent Patrick Kingsley and its sports desk 
were highly commended in the foreign reporter and sports team of the year 
categories, respectively.

The Guardian’s online reporting as the Paris terror attacks unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2015/nov/13/shootings-reported-in-eastern-paris-live>
, as well as coverage of theeffects of climate change on the Mekong river 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/2015/nov/26/the-mekong-river-stories-from-the-heart-of-the-climate-crisis-interactive>
 were among the pieces recognised.

The supplement of the year award went to the Guardian Weekend magazine for its 
cover pieces onCate Blanchett 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2015/nov/07/cate-blanchett-carol-film-interview>
, theRugby World Cup 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/ng-interactive/2015/aug/29/rugby-world-cup-player-photographs-interactive-gallery>
 and themeeting of the minds of JK Rowling and Lauren Laverne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/nov/28/conversation-lauren-laverne-jk-rowling-interview>
.

The Press Awards are among the most prestigious prizes in British journalism.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25a0cfaa59b3151d651e6511a2e12e16ce672b1%2F0_87_3650_2190%2F3650.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Guardian%20named%20website%20of%20the%20year%20at%20Press%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Guardian%20named%20website%20of%20the%20year%20at%20Press%20Awards&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fculture%2F2016%2Fmar%2F22%2Fthe-guardian-named-website-of-the-year-at-press-awards%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe25a0cfaa59b3151d651e6511a2e12e16ce672b1%2F0_87_3650_2190%2F3650.jpg>
 The shot of Japanese rugby players tackling a South African opponent that 
helped Tom Jenkins win the sports photographer of the year award. 
The Mail on Sunday (MoS) was the most successful outlet on Tuesday night, 
winning seven awards, including the prizes for newspaper, scoop and news team 
of the year.

The news reporter of the year prize went to MoS journalist David Rose, while 
MailSport – representing both the Mail on Sunday and the Daily Mail – won the 
sports team of the year award.

The Daily Mail was also given the Cudlipp award for popular journalism for its 
charity cold-calling campaign.

Another notable winner on the night was Ian Birrell, who collected two awards: 
one in the foreign reporter category for his work for the MoS; and the other in 
the columnist in the popular press category for his writing for various outlets.

Amie Ferris-Rotman won the Georgina Henry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/georgina-henry> women in journalism prize, 
named after the Guardian journalist who died in 2014.

“[The awards] are the answer to the critics who seek to silence our 
newspapers,” said Bob Satchwell, the chair of the judges. “This is the best of 
UK newspaper journalism, which is the best in the world.”
 