
This is a glorious time of year for confectionary lovers, and in a few days 
time I’ll embark on my annual mission to hoover up boxed chocolates with 
customary enthusiasm.
 My mission includes house visits, so although I would favour Fairtrade 
artisanal chocolate brands with top notch ethical sourcing, I can’t always 
choose.

The good news is that there is evidence the big chocolate brands are wising up 
with regard to their supply chain. Ethical labels are now widely used on 
Christmas chocolates in Germany, the UK, the Netherlands and Sweden.

It’s true that current standards are still dismally low; West African cocoa 
production in particular is intrinsically linked with modern day slavery. But 
this scramble to include “ethical” symbols shows that many chocolate makers 
have finally realised they must invest in a sustainable supply chain for their 
key commodity – cocoa.

Big Chocolate <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/chocolate> (the 
corporations that control the market) has invested in sustainable production 
programmes. For example Lindt & Sprüngli sources 100% of its West African cocoa 
bean supply from Ghana and runs a major sustainable farming programme. Ferrero 
states that by 2020, 100% of its cocoa and sugar cane will be certified as 
sustainable.

But research also shows that in countries such as China, where the festive 
chocolate box count is now huge, sustainability isn’t under scrutiny and many 
brands don’t make ethical efforts. This extends to packaging. A chocolate box 
destined for Germany will be packaged in recyclable materials, but for China is 
packaged in rigid plastic. This is what we call an ethical pick and mix.

Brands should be aware that as chocolate watchers (and eaters), we appreciate 
your efforts so far, but know you could do better.

The big picture: iAnimal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde91640dcd881350f643124dc3b3ddfc373fad97%2F0_960_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20Christmas%20chocolates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20Christmas%20chocolates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fde91640dcd881350f643124dc3b3ddfc373fad97%2F0_960_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 A world of pain: factory farmed chickens. Photograph: Animal Equality 
Animal Equality, the animal advocacy organisation, wants you to get the big 
picture with iAnimal (ianimal.uk <http://ianimal.uk/>), a 360-degree virtual 
reality experience of the lifecycle of factory-farmed animals from birth to 
death featuring footage from 13 investigators in six countries, including the 
UK. The experience is narrated by actor Amanda Abbington, who broke down in 
tears when she watched the footage for the first time.

Well dressed: embroidered linens and bags
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7db7307e9288014ee2cb634e6e45ac06019e2867%2F187_891_3511_4389%2F3511.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20Christmas%20chocolates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20eco%20guide%20to%20Christmas%20chocolates&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fthe-eco-guide-to-christmas-chocolates%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7db7307e9288014ee2cb634e6e45ac06019e2867%2F187_891_3511_4389%2F3511.jpg>
 Stitched up: many embroiderers are exploited. 
Embroidery and embellishment is overlooked in fashion – except in the rarified 
echelons of haute couture – so embroiderers can be among the most exploited. 
Most consumers assume embroidered products are added cheaply by machine. So 
it’s cheering to see this skill used as an opportunity.

SEP Jordan, a luxury, sustainable accessories brand, has created an embroidery 
business employing women artisans in refugee camps to embroider linen shawls, 
keffiyeh scarfs and clutch bags (stocked in the UK by clerkenwell-london.com).

Palestinian refugees in Jordan are subject to restrictions on employment and 
free schooling, and it’s worse for women. Now, thanks to this initiative, these 
woman can earn using the traditional cross-stitch techniques passed down from 
one to generation to the next.

Email Lucy at lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk <mailto:lucy.siegle@observer.co.uk> 
or follow her on Twitter@lucysiegle 
<https://twitter.com/lucysiegle?ref_src=twsrc%5Egoogle%7Ctwcamp%5Eserp%7Ctwgr%5Eauthor>
 