
Banging on about Brexit five months after the referendum may be boring to 
Brexiters who have wrapped themselves in the red, white and blue flag of the 
“people’s will”. But it is such a threat to universities it can’t just be 
tidied away into a box labelled “summer madness”. The threat comes in three 
parts. The first can be managed, although with difficulty; the other two are 
more deadly.

First, the threat to the UK’s participation in European research programmes and
student exchange schemes such as Erasmus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/13/government-urged-to-protect-eu-student-exchange-scheme>
. The government has given a semi-solid guarantee that research programmes will 
be protected, up to 2020 at any rate. The future of exchange schemes will 
depend on the willingness of the UK to contribute to the cost – and the 
enthusiasm for paying for a student mobility programme so intimately identified 
with the rejected “European project” may be limited.

Closely related is the future of staff and (non-Erasmus) students from other 
parts of the EU. Both are crucial. Teachers, and especially researchers, from 
the EU play a key role in maintaining the UK’s envious position in global 
league tables, about which we love to brag. Other European students fill 
deficits in domestic demand, typically in science and engineering.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Oxford%20vice%20chancellor%20worried%20about%20post-Brexit%20funding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Oxford%20vice%20chancellor%20worried%20about%20post-Brexit%20funding%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Foxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio&media=>
Oxford vice chancellor worried about post-Brexit funding – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/sep/22/oxford-university-vice-chancellor-research-funding-brexit-audio>
It is difficult to see even a Brexit government kicking out established staff 
from the rest of Europe, or placing significant obstacles in their way. But 
other EU students are a different matter. They are likely to have to pay 
international student fees. But, because England already charges its own 
students the highest fees in the world in public universities, the gap between 
home (and currently EU) student fees and those paid by international students 
is much less than in the past – about £4,000 rather than more than £10,000.

The second threat is much deadlier. The UK is now established as a nasty 
country in the world’s imagination. No amount of flummery from the foreign 
secretary about“openness” 
<https://twitter.com/BorisJohnson/status/786617722989846528> can cover that up. 
Nor can rather more honest claims by universities that they are open to all, 
Europe and the wider world, as evidenced by theremain votes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 in the referendum in university cities.

Universities will pay a high price now our future has been voted down | Peter 
Scott
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/27/universities-high-price-eu-exit-scientific-capability>
It is difficult to imagine why talented scholars and scientists, and students 
for that matter, should want to make their careers or study in a country unable 
toadmit a handful of refugee children without a tabloid firestorm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/19/rightwing-tabloids-pour-scorn-appearance-child-refugees>
 demanding dental checks. Even before the referendum our inability to evoke a 
moral response to global distress worthy of our history wasdeeply shaming 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/world/politics/the-government-s-shameful-response-to-the-refugee-crisis-in-four-charts-a6814391.html>
. To Orwell, England was like a family with the wrong members in control – and 
so it increasingly seems since the Brexit vote.

The image and ethos of a country matter even if, as we must hope by relying on 
our sense of fair play, the direst consequences are avoided. German 
universities, probably the world’s best before 1914, took at least three 
generations to recover their eminence and excellence after the world wars, the 
Nazis and the Holocaust. In a milder example, during the George W Bush neo-con 
era US universities lost out to rivals, including the UK.

The third threat relates to “taking back control”, one of the Brexit mantras. 
The EU has never been good at “control”, as theveto of the EU-Canada deal by 
the Walloon parliament in Belgium 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/oct/21/eu-canada-ceta-trade-deal-meltdown-canadian-minister-walks-out>
 has demonstrated. Instead, it has a political culture characterised by 
compromise and consensus. The language of Europe is littered with “-ities”: 
mutuality, solidarity, subsidiarity … Power is diffused, for historical and 
cultural reasons we all understand.

But this EU culture has always been at odds with that elective dictatorship, 
the UK constitution. Fundamental principles, entrenched rights, legal scrutiny 
of political decisions, these had never been the English way (they may see 
things differently in Scotland); instead we rely on precedent and convention. 
These have protected the independence of the BBC, the courts – and the 
universities.

The danger is that Brexit will further empower the strong state of which the 
prime minister is an admirer. There is no better example than thehigher 
education and research bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/07/universities-higher-education-bill-award-degrees>
 currently before parliament. Safeguards are being swept aside and conventions 
ignored, as the secretary of state accumulates unprecedented powers over 
universities.

There will no longer be even the semblance of a buffer body between 
universities and the state when theHigher Education Funding Council 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/nov/30/hefce-buffer-ministers-universities-higher-education-funding-council-for-england>
 is replaced by the Office for Students. The dual-support system, which 
distinguishes between core research funding and research council grants, cannot 
long survive when both come from the same source, UK Research and Innovation 
(headed by a civil servant not a scientist). Universities can be stripped of 
their degree-awarding powers by ministerial fiat. A frightening demonstration 
of who, post-referendum, is “taking back control”.
 