
The Kremlin has dismissed the stories about Donald Trump’s alleged dealings 
with Russia as “pulp fiction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/11/kremlin-ridicules-claims-collected-material-donald-trump>
”. Even a superficial glance at the dossier on his relationship with Moscow 
supposedly compiled by aformer M16 counter-intelligence officer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
 and published by BuzzFeed reveals a confusion that raises questions about its 
credibility at the very least.

Trump dossier: intelligence sources vouch for credibility of report's author
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/intelligence-sources-vouch-credibility-donald-trump-russia-dossier-author>
For example, the FSB unit named as responsible for gathering material on 
Hillary Clinton – Department K – has nothing to do with eavesdropping or cyber 
investigations. It was, however, much in the Russian news recently because it 
was tasked with “supervising” the banking and financing system and its officers 
were involved in a major scandal that ended with an Interior Ministry official 
jumping out of a window during interrogation. There is another Department K in 
the Interior Ministry and it is this that is in charge of cyber investigations. 
The dossier names Igor Diveikin, a senior official in the political department 
of Putin’s office, as tasked to deal with the US election. He was indeed in 
charge of elections, but inRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia>, 
not the US. Last October, a month before the US elections, he was moved to the 
apparatus of the state Duma.

Beyond the factual detail, there are problems too with the document’s 
analysis: as in a classic conspiracy, Putin’s decisions in 2016 to fire 
prominent officials, including the all-powerfulSergei Ivanov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/18/vladimir-putin-purge-kremlin-russia-elections>
, a head of the presidential administration, are explained via the ups and 
downs of Russia’s interference in the American election.

But Putin had plenty of other reasons to start selective repressive acts 
against his elites – 2016 was also a year of theDuma elections 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/19/russia-stays-loyal-kremlin-election-record-low-turnout>
 and there is palpable anxiety in Moscow about the presidential elections in 
2018. There are big questions too about the sources: high-placed Kremlin 
officials seem a little too keen to talk to a former British spy, and feed him 
damaging information about the most sensitive Kremlin operation in the 21st 
century – right in the middle of the operation.

Though many of the report’s elements appear hastily compiled, overall it 
reflects accurately the way decision-making in the Kremlin looks to close 
observers. There’s been much focus on the shakier elements but what is 
plausible about this episode? The leaked document paints a picture of groups of 
hackers all over the world hired to attack western targets. And that sounds 
about right. I have been covering the Russian secret services since 1999 and 
have spent the last five years researching Russian cyber activities. 
Outsourcing sensitive offensive operations is the Kremlin’s way to lower risk 
and create deniable responsibility. It was used in Crimea, Ukraine and Syria 
with Russian “volunteers” and private military companies, while in cyberspace 
it has been the Kremlin tactic since the mid-2000s.

The dossier suggests that Putin personally supervised the operation, with the 
Foreign Ministry playing only a minor role. This is exactly what has been 
observed since the annexation of Crimea – that the Foreign Ministry is no 
longer in charge of defining policy for Ukraine or Syria, so decision-making is 
likely to be more capricious. It also fits with the assessment of many experts 
that thehack of the US Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 was prompted by thePanama Papers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/series/panama-papers> exposé, which was seen 
in the Kremlin as a personal attack on Putin.

Media and intelligence agencies attacked by Trump over Russia claims
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-media-cnn-buzzfeed-intelligence-agencies>
Finally, the dossier states that the Kremlin extensively borrowed its methods 
for dealing with Trump from the KGB playbook. For instance, it claims the 
Russian secret services were eager to collect dirt on Trump during his trips 
to Russia to explore whether a recruitment was feasible. The evidence is 
questionable, but the idea looks entirely plausible – after all, the KGB even 
had a special terminology for this kind of operation: it was calledrazvedka s 
territorii or “gathering intelligence from the territory”, meaning recruiting 
foreigners once they come to Russia. For that purpose every regional department 
of the KGB had a “first section” tasked to deal with foreigners once they get 
to the “territory” of the region, and Putin himself spent a few years in this 
section in St Petersburg.

The goal, the dossier states, was to create kompromat on Trump. And kompromat, 
meaning compromising material, as a tactic to smear one’s opponents in the 
media, came into use in Russia in the late 1990s. It was a mix of intercepted 
phone calls and analytical profiles prepared by the oligarchs’ shadowy security 
agencies and government security services. In the 2000s and 2010s,kompromat was 
redirected against Russian opposition leaders, as well as western diplomats. 
Videos withkompromat were aired on state television and posted on the websites 
of pro-Kremlin media outlets.

Unverifiable sensational details aside, the Trump dossier is a good reflection 
of how things are run in the Kremlin – the mess at the level of decision-making 
and increasingly the outsourcing of operations, combined with methods borrowed 
from the KGB and the secret services of the lawless 1990s. That is not the 
picture projected by the Kremlin externally – namely, that the Russian 
government is an effective bureaucracy, strategic in foreign policy planning 
and ruthless in execution. And that, whatever the truth of Putin’s connections 
with Trump, makes it all pretty scary.
 