
Normandy

Markets
Across France, Normandy is esteemed for its abundance of quality produce and 
rich gastronomic history. Dozens of traditional markets showcase the best of 
these, with further specialist markets dedicated to fish, organic produce and 
local crafts. Whatever the day of the week, wherever you happen to be, you’ll 
never be far from one.

Perhaps the most picturesque of these is to be found in the medieval “halles” 
in Dives-sur-Mer on a Monday. You can wander around the 14th-century 
half-timbered building, which is packed to bursting with stalls, and chat to 
dozens of local producers. Sundays in Trouville-sur-Mer are equally popular 
with locals and visitors looking for top-notch fresh bread, cheeses, meat and 
charcuterie – local farmers lay out their vegetables and homemade preserves, 
vinegar and pickles, too.


In the surrounds of glamorous Deauville, regular gourmet food markets take 
place at Place du Marché (Tuesday, Friday, Saturday) and the abundant high-end 
restaurants and Parisian-style cafes are ripe for celeb-spotting during 
Deauville’s American film festival in September. Ifpoisson is your passion, 
Trouville, the adjacent 17th-century port town, boasts a daily market on the 
quay with numerous terrace cafes and grills for feasting on seafood.


Rouen and the Seine valley are renowned for the quality of their markets. For 
cheeses, fish and seafood, and local specialities such as pressed duck, check 
out Clos Saint-Marc (Saturday), Vieux-Marché (Sun-Fri and brocante or flea 
market on Saturday) and les Emmurées (Tuesday, Saturday) and the 250-stall 
Sotteville-les-Rouen (Thursday, Sunday).


Regional specialities and where to sample them
Dairy herds were introduced to Normandy by the Vikings and the region has long 
produced world-class cheeses for the Paris market. You can buy camembert, 
Livarot, Pont-l’Evêque and Neufchâtel in shops and supermarkets, but to try 
small-batch artisan cheeses, head for the markets and specialist fromageries – 
notably in the Pays d’Auge and smaller Le Pays de Bray regions. At Isigny sur 
Mer, west of Caen, you can also enjoy a tour and tasting atSainte Mére 
<http://www.isigny-ste-mere.com/> cheese factory.

As you’d expect, the coastal towns and villages are awash with fabulous fish 
and seafood. Inland, look out for exceptional beef and veal, and the duck – 
canard de Rouen – appears on lots of menus.


If you’ve a sweet tooth, don’t visit the region without trying a traditional 
tarte Normande, a rich shortcrust pastry tart filled with creamy egg custard 
and almonds, and topped with slices of caramelised apple.


Restaurants
Smart, family-friendly eateries serving simple, seasonal produce are plentiful 
in Normandy. For fresh “surf and turf” with a sensational sea view,Hôtel des 
Isles <http://www.hoteldesisles.com/en/> in Barneville-Carteret, just south of 
Cherbourg, offers a land and sea starter buffet with seafood platters, grilled 
or plancha-seared fish and traditional stewed meats for main.

If you’re after a traditional experience inland, try Brasserie Paul 
<http://brasserie-paul.com/english/> in Rouen where fresh regional specialities 
such as rabbit pâté, Normandy snails, local farm chicken and fine cheeses are 
on the menu.


Rouen also offers stylish two-Michelin-starred dining at Gill 
<http://www.gill.fr/fr/> – pigeon is a speciality – or the more affordable but 
still sleekly decorated sister restaurant,Gill Côté Bistro 
<http://www.gill-cote-bistro.fr/>.


Drinking
Calvados (apple brandies) and cider are the region’s two signature drinks. 
Three controlledappellations produce the former, one of which is Pays d’Auge, 
where copper alembic pot stills are used. On the 25-mile (40km) cider route 
east of Caen, you can visit more than 20 establishments producing one or both 
of these, as well as pommeau – made by mixing apple juice with brandy. Many of 
the distilleries and cidermakers occupy picture-postcard houses set amid apple 
orchards and lush pastures.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9bbbe1eb57a612f1ec182862e853eb0869954ed%2F0_570_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20food%20and%20where%20to%20find%20it%20in%20Normandy%20and%20Brittany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20food%20and%20where%20to%20find%20it%20in%20Normandy%20and%20Brittany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb9bbbe1eb57a612f1ec182862e853eb0869954ed%2F0_570_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 Calvados is one of the region’s trademark drinks. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo
Brittany

Markets
From the bustling Sunday market at Carnac to Vannes’s fish market (four days a 
week, as well as a traditional market on Wednesdays) to the astonishing 20 
neighbourhood markets that are spread around Rennes, Brittany is a region 
brimming with food and produce, crafts and culture. Whether you’re looking for 
crisp apples and freshly picked strawberries or more gastro items such as rare 
poultry and artisanal butters, you’ll find them on a stall – Breton chefs do 
their shopping here … and they know a thing or two.

At charming Pontivy, by the river Blavet and the Nantes-to-Brest canal, you 
can drop in at the Monday market before exploring the medieval castle and the 
maze of winding streets. The town also has a thriving antiques trade and there 
are regular flea markets.


Quaint Bécherel, between Saint-Malo and Rennes, has a buzzing Saturday food 
and household goods market and is also one of France’s best-loved book towns. 
There are more than a dozen bookshops, a book market on the first Sunday of the 
month and a lively schedule of literary events, including afête du livre (book 
fair) every Easter.


In the summer months, you can find night markets in Carnac and Quiberon, and 
enjoy classic Breton musical entertainment withbombarde (woodwind) players 
while you browse.


Regional specialities and where to sample them
If you’re self-catering in Brittany you’re in luck. With 1,740 miles of 
coastline, you can pick up some of the best fish and shellfish in Europe. 
Brittany is the powerhouse of France’s oyster trade, providing one-third of the 
nation’s yield – Cancale is its capital. Look out, too, for delicious mussels, 
scallops, clams, lobster, and langoustines, as well as more exotic items such 
as organic abalones.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5bc950b376ee0cc1b6ed9cc185efdbfbef446e%2F0_168_5128_3076%2F5128.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20best%20food%20and%20where%20to%20find%20it%20in%20Normandy%20and%20Brittany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20best%20food%20and%20where%20to%20find%20it%20in%20Normandy%20and%20Brittany&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbrittany-ferries-summer-holidays%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fthe-best-food-and-where-to-find-it-in-normandy-and-brittany%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9c5bc950b376ee0cc1b6ed9cc185efdbfbef446e%2F0_168_5128_3076%2F5128.jpg>
 Saucissons: a Breton speciality. Photograph: Mike Warren/Getty Images/Canopy 
Breton producers are very proud of their pork – saucissons of all kinds 
abound, while audouille – a sausage made from smoked chitterling – has its 
semi-official capital in Guéméné-sur-Scorff. Across the region, look out for 
local onions and organic honey.


If you’re big on pastry, kouign amann – which translates as “butter cake” – is 
a Breton speciality. Created in 1860 in the town of Douarnenez, this gooey, 
layered confection is sold by weight in traditional patisseries; the very 
definition of “naughty but nice”.


Restaurants
If ever you’re in need of a tasty snack between meals, a regional comfort food 
is the crepe, both the sweet kind and savoury galettes. They are served in 
restaurants and occasionally on the street. At theCreperie Ti Saozon 
<https://tisaozon.com/>, in Roscoff, chef Estelle Combot prepares sublime 
crepes with fish, as well as dessert crepes that get even the locals queuing 
around brunchtime.

Seafood restaurants dot the coast. La Côte 
<http://www.restaurant-la-cote.com/index.php/fr/>, close to Carnac’s famous 
menhirs, occupies a large, old house in a delightful setting, with a terrace 
overlooking a carp-filled pond. Try the squid with pig’s trotters or the 
lobster.


L’Amphytrion <http://www.amphitryon-abadie.com/> in Lorient has two Michelin 
stars and a chic ambience. Acclaimed chef Jean-Paul Abadie creates fine art 
with spider crab, mackerel, sea urchins and local fish such as red mullet.


Drinking
Cider is the “wine” of Brittany. Cornouaille was the first French cider to be 
recognised with anappellation controlee label. Look out for the 10 AOC 
cider-makers and six non-AOC producers listed on theCIDREF website 
<http://www.cidref.fr/les-cidreries>. Le Sistrot <http://lesistrot.com/> in 
Quimper stocks a wide range of craft and farm ciders.

There’s also a long tradition of beer brewing in the region. Brasserie Lancelot
 <http://brasserie-lancelot.bzh/> was founded in 1990 and occupies the site of 
a gold mine in Roc-Saint-André, Morbihan. Seven unpasteurised beers are made 
here, each one named after a figure from Breton history.


For more foodie ideas visit the Brittany Ferries blog 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/blog?category=food-and-drink> 


Book now and save up to 20% 
<http://www.brittany-ferries.co.uk/holidays/2017-sale?utm_source=guardian&utm_campaign=0117&utm_content=ebo>
 on Brittany Ferries sail & stay holidays, even during school holidays. Choose 
from family friendly resorts, cottages or hotel breaks in France and Spain.
 