
1 World Health Organisation declares a public emergency of international 
concern over Zika

 1 February

In global health, 2016 will be remembered as the year a little known virus 
made a major impact. It felt strangely familiar, but this time it wasn’t Ebola 
making headlines around the world, it was Zika – a mosquito-borne virus being 
linked to a huge spike in the number of babies in Brazil born with brain 
defects. When the World Health Organisation declared that the cluster of 
microcephaly cases and other neurological disorders werea public health 
emergency of international concern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/01/zika-virus-world-health-organisation-declares-global-health-emergency>
, it was a rallying cry for the international community to respond. The 
announcement triggered investment in mosquito control efforts and vital funding 
for research into the virus and its devastating health consequences. This 
allowed for the scale-up of initial efforts already under way by institutions 
including the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine.

For me, this response also showed that the international community had learned 
important lessons from the Ebola crisis, and was determined to act more rapidly 
before the situation spiralled out of control. As 2016 draws to a close, our 
knowledge of the virus has increased and potential vaccines are in the pipeline.

But Zika transmission by mosquitoes has now been reported in 75 countries and 
we are still a long way from fully understanding and controlling this virus.
Professor Peter Piot <http://www.lshtm.ac.uk/aboutus/people/piot.peter>, 
director of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=SpaceX%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20successfully%20lands%20on%20ocean%20platform%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=SpaceX%20Falcon%209%20rocket%20successfully%20lands%20on%20ocean%20platform%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fapr%2F09%2Fspacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video&media=>
SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket successfully lands on ocean platform 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/apr/09/spacex-falcon-9-rocket-successfully-lands-on-ocean-platform-video>
2 SpaceX demonstrates a big step towards fully reusable space craft

8 April

It was an incredible achievement for SpaceX. The first stage rocket of one of 
its Falcon 9 launchers, having successfully lofted cargo to the International
Space <https://www.theguardian.com/science/space> Station, managed to turn 
itself around, bleed off the enormous kinetic energy it had acquired while its 
main engines were burning, fly back down to Earth and land vertically – with 
balletic precision – on a rather tiny looking robotic barge floating somewhere 
in the Atlantic.

There are many reasons to love this moment. For the sheer audacity of it; for 
the uncontrollable roar of celebration that erupted in the control room at the 
moment of touchdown; for the promise that it might prove a game changer in the 
world of space exploration; for the fact that they named the drone ship on 
which the landing happened Of Course I Still Love You after a sentient AI 
spacecraft that featured in one of the late great Iain M Banks’s sci-fi novels. 
But most of all because Arthur C Clarke once said that any sufficiently 
advanced technology would be indistinguishable from magic and on 8 Aprilthe 
successful touchdown of Flight 23’s first stage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/apr/08/spacex-rocket-test-elon-musk-international-space-station>
 looked a lot to me like magic.


Kevin Fong <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/kevin-fong>, clinical lead at 
the Centre for Altitude Space and Extreme Environment Medicine
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbde2a96ca8f8bc7a52b069b32df90d0381f46386%2F0_131_3854_2313%2F3854.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbde2a96ca8f8bc7a52b069b32df90d0381f46386%2F0_131_3854_2313%2F3854.jpg>
 The solar power plant at Moura, Portugal, produces 45 MW of electricity each 
year, powering 30,000 homes. Photograph: Universal Images Group/Getty Images 
3 Portugal is entirely powered by renewable energy for four days

7-11 May

The high point for me this year from an engineering perspective was the 
announcement by Portugal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/may/18/portugal-runs-for-four-days-straight-on-renewable-energy-alone>
 that the entire country’s electric usage had been provided by renewables for 
four consecutive days in early May. Moving away from fossil fuels to renewable 
energy is surely the most important engineering and scientific challenge of our 
age. The shift to coal in the 19th century and then to oil in the 20th century 
gave us the modern world of cheap energy, plentiful food, consumer goods and 
sunny holidays. If we want to prevent climate change while allowing our 
children to have these things too, then we must wean ourselves off fossil 
fuels. It seems unthinkable, it seems impossible, but impossible is what 
engineering does best. Portugal’s achievement gives governments and energy 
companies a tangible example of how it can and does work, and why they should 
be investing in solar, wind, wave and other renewable technologies now.
Mark Miodownik <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/mark-miodownik>, professor 
of materials and society, UCL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1c64de7b91a27acd256eacc7fef02fe1f74267%2F0_354_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6f1c64de7b91a27acd256eacc7fef02fe1f74267%2F0_354_3264_1958%2F3264.jpg>
 Helium-filled balloons stuck against a ceiling. Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
4 New reserves of helium discovered 

28 June 

It might seem odd to get excited by a new supply of the second most abundant 
element in the universe. But in June this year, a collaboration between 
universities and industry announced that it haddiscovered a huge reserve of 
helium gas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/jun/28/huge-helium-gas-tanzania-east-africa-averts-medical-shortage>
 in Tanzania, using a new exploration technique. Helium is a very small 
unreactive atom, which makes it spectacularly useful for cooling magnets (in 
MRI scanners, for example) and as an inert atmosphere for manufacturing 
semiconductor chips. It’s an essential tool for our modern world. But that tiny 
size means that it’s easily lost from the atmosphere, and we are reliant on 
finding trapped pockets of it buried deep underground. The known reserves are 
limited, and this discovery is huge news. It means that as amazing new ideas 
come along and our society pushes to make use of them, we won’t be limited by 
lack of this tiny workhorse.
Helen Czerski, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/oct/23/helen-czerski-physics-everyday-lives-quantum-weirdness-storm-in-a-teacup-interview>
 research fellow in the department of mechanical engineering at UCL
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Discovery%20of%20Earth-like%20exoplanet%20Proxima%20b%20close%20to%20our%20solar%20system%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F24%2Fdiscovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report&media=>
Discovery of Earth-like exoplanet Proxima b close to our solar system – video 
report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/video/2016/aug/24/discovery-of-earth-like-exoplanet-proxima-b-video-report>
5 Confirmation of the discovery of a nearby habitable planet

24 August

We’ve discovered in recent years that many stars – perhaps even most of them – 
are orbited by retinues of planets, like the sun is. The night sky has become 
hugely more interesting.

We’re specially interested in possible “twins” of our Earth – planets the same 
size as ours, on orbits with temperatures such that water neither boils nor 
stays frozen – the so-called “habitable zone” . It’s estimated that our Milky 
Way galaxy contains billions of such planets.

This year there’s been further excitement. It’s been realised that even more 
planets may be orbiting very small faint stars. The nearest star, Proxima 
Centauri,has a planet orbiting it not much bigger than Earth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/aug/24/earth-like-planet-found-orbiting-our-suns-nearest-star-raises-hopes-for-life-proxima-b>
. Its “year” is only 11 days. But it’s in the habitable zone because Proxima 
Centauri is a red dwarf star about 100 times fainter than the sun. And there’s 
hot news that a similar star, 40 light years away,may have three planets 
<https://www.nasa.gov/feature/promising-worlds-found-around-nearby-ultra-cool-dwarf-star>
 in its habitable zone.

These planets are “habitable” – but that of course doesn’t mean they are 
inhabited. We eagerly await telescopes that can analyse the faint light from 
these planets, seeking evidence for a biosphere. And these discoveries are 
stimulating searches for advanced (even intelligent) life – though this remains 
a long shot.
Martin Rees, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/29/the-anthropocene-epoch-could-inaugurate-even-more-marvellous-eras-of-evolution>
 astronomer royal
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa2d64b74227f79c69e39fa95ccba3d988579aa%2F476_512_4220_2534%2F4220.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8fa2d64b74227f79c69e39fa95ccba3d988579aa%2F476_512_4220_2534%2F4220.jpg>
 A hydrothermal vent on the East Pacific Rise, seen as the root of life. 
Photograph: Dr Ken McDonald/Getty Images/Science Photo Library RM 
6 Our last universal common ancestor gets a makeover

25 July

The Tree of Life was redefined in April 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/nmicrobiol201648>, now looking like a jagged 
explosion, its central node representing a thing we call Luca – the last 
universal common ancestor. Our presence in this grand view of life is not 
significant enough to warrant a label, as almost every bough of this tree is a 
type of bacteria. Amazingly, many of these cells are yet undiscovered, but 
known only by our finding their DNA, and it being different from all others.

Luca is not the origin of life, but the thing from which all life is derived. 
Luca alsogot a makeover in July 
<http://www.nature.com/articles/nmicrobiol2016116> with a dazzling new portrait 
by Düsseldorf-based biochemist Bill Martin. By tracking back DNA in branches of 
other single-celled creatures, he drew up a list of 355 genes that tell us how 
Luca made its living – deep in the metal-rich gassy hydrothermal vents of an 
ancient ocean floor, the root of life on Earth.
Adam Rutherford <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/adamrutherford>, 
geneticist and presenter of Radio 4’s Inside Science
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4590e4c446b2cc73596930e1e9d4751902eb28f6%2F3_12_957_574%2F957.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4590e4c446b2cc73596930e1e9d4751902eb28f6%2F3_12_957_574%2F957.jpg>
 Henry G Molaison, aka HM, was the subject of decades of research by Suzanne 
Corkin. Photograph: NYT 
7 The legacy of a celebrated neuroscientist is contested

9 August

In 1953, Patient HM had experimental brain surgery that left him with striking 
amnesia. Decades of subsequentresearch with HM by neuropsychologist Suzanne 
Corkin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2013/may/05/henry-molaison-amnesiac-corkin-book-feature>
 made a major contribution to our understanding of memory.

Corkin died this year but shortly after, journalist Luke Dittrich published a 
book claiming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/aug/25/patient-hm-by-luke-dittrich-review>
 Corkin buried inconvenient findings, shredded files, and acted unethically in 
gaining HM’s consent. Subsequently,200 neuroscientists wrote to the New York 
Times to protest at a “biased and unfair attack” 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/mit-challenges-the-new-york-times-over-book-on-famous-brain-patient/>
. Corkin’s institution, MIT, stated nothing was shredded, and claims of 
“burying findings” turned out to be indistinguishable from a typical scientific 
spat.

But Dittrich then released audio of Corkin 
<https://medium.com/@lukedittrich/questions-answers-about-patient-h-m-ae4ddd33ed9c#.odf56bxhq>
 saying she had shredded files and the ethical issues remain unresolved. In 
many ways, this has been a standard debate about a scientist’s legacy but, so 
soon after Corkin’s death, passions have run too high for a cool consideration. 
Undoubtedly, it will come in time.
Vaughan Bell <https://www.theguardian.com/profile/vaughan-bell>, clinical 
senior lecturer, Faculty of Brain Sciences, UCL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffcb136117c013b40ace6039c8801d5898808ded%2F0_12_2121_1273%2F2121.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fffcb136117c013b40ace6039c8801d5898808ded%2F0_12_2121_1273%2F2121.jpg>
 A Greenland shark in Lancaster Sound, Nunavut, Northwest Territories, Canada.
 Photograph: Paul Nicklen/National Geographic Creative/Getty Images 
8 Greenland sharks live for a very long time

11 August 

On our increasingly human-dominated planet we can still learn much from the 
lives of other species. The discovery this year that theGreenland shark lives 
for 400 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/11/400-year-old-greenland-shark-is-the-oldest-vertebrate-animal>
, making it the longest-living vertebrate, puts our hectic lives into 
perspective. Perhaps we could pick up some tricks from the frigate birds that 
were found to sleep for only about 40 minutes a day while on their 10-day 
nonstop flights across oceans. But all this is put into a stark perspective by 
the latest readout from theWWF Living Planet Report. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
 This records that over just the past 40 years, a timescale that represents the 
kindergarten years of a Greenland shark, the number of wild vertebrates on 
Earth has been reduced by 58%, surely putting the future of many of these 
species into question.
Georgina Mace, professor of biodiversity and ecosystems, UCL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab49eff94703842f69e0f2be005df3906c9872a9%2F129_0_2139_1284%2F2139.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fab49eff94703842f69e0f2be005df3906c9872a9%2F129_0_2139_1284%2F2139.jpg>
 The sun sets behind a smoking chimney in Wismar, Germany. Photograph: Daniel 
Reinhardt/EPA 
9 CO2 in the Earth’s atmosphere passes 400 parts per million

28 September

In climate science, we work in 30-year averages, so 30 years is one data 
point. Four data points ago, in 1896, atmospheric CO2 concentrations were 295 
parts per million (ppm). Svante Arrhenius made the first global warming 
predictions, looking forward to a gentle heating of his chilly homeland Sweden. 
Two data points ago, in 1957, Charles Keeling began measuring CO2 
concentrations and discovered a rapid rise, by 20ppm. In 2016, CO2 levels had 
risen a further 85ppm over the same time period andwere officially announced as 
400ppm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/28/the-world-passes-400ppm-carbon-dioxide-threshold-permanently>
: the highest in 3m years. Back then, in the Pliocene era, the world was warmer 
and sea levels were much higher. We don’t know how fast the planet changed, but 
we know we don’t want to risk seeing it again in future. One data point from 
now, in 2046, we’re on track to have burned more than a trillion tonnes of 
carbon and to have reached last year’s Paris agreement target: 1.5C-2C warming. 
What future do we want to see after that?

Tamsin Edwards, lecturer in environmental sciences, Open University
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F776f269deb89ab97b986b6fd5e8dbaaeb7414813%2F0_282_5100_3062%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F776f269deb89ab97b986b6fd5e8dbaaeb7414813%2F0_282_5100_3062%2F5100.jpg>
 Negative emotions in marriage can have surprising effects on health 
Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
10 A bad marriage can lead to an early death

1 October

Next time you’re on the verge of picking a fight with your partner, pause and 
consider thefindings of a study <https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/27213730> 
published in October. This research involves a large longitudinal study of 
emotion in interactions within married couples. They get couples into the lab 
and looking at their stress levels while they have “difficult” conversations, 
finding that couples that deal with stress with positive emotions like laughter 
become less stressed, and tend to stay together for longer. This year they 
looked at the use of negative strategies such as anger or stonewalling 
responses to conflict, and found that these predicted health-related changes 
over time in specific ways. The use of anger predicted cardiovascular problems, 
and “stonewalling” musculoskeletal problems such as bad backs. These 
relationships were found even after lifestyle factors were controlled for, and 
were more pronounced in men. Most strikingly, these physical effects were not 
there at the start of the study, but developed over 20 years. This is an 
extraordinary demonstration of the health effects of negative emotions.
Sophie Scott <https://www.ted.com/talks/sophie_scott_why_we_laugh>, professor 
of cognitive neuroscience, UCL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1a5890a6bc23b19663a3aa660d828522173b9df%2F0_208_4968_2981%2F4968.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff1a5890a6bc23b19663a3aa660d828522173b9df%2F0_208_4968_2981%2F4968.jpg>
 Ice floats near the coast of West Antarctica viewed from a Nasa plane on 
October 27, 2016. Photograph: Mario Tama/Getty Images 
11 Arctic and Antarctic sea ice volumes both fall to an all-time low

17 November

This year saw the arrival of the long-awaited El Niño, the periodic shift in 
warm water across the Pacific that brings torrential rain to Central and Latin 
America and drought to parts of Asia and Africa. Planetary temperatures spiked, 
putting an end to talk of a “pause”. Yet summer melting of Arctic ice broke no 
records. But in October, unprecedented weather patterns drove icy winds across 
Siberia, pushing Arctic temperatures up to 20C above normal and parts of the 
Arctic Ocean failed to refreeze; in the Antarctic,sea ice thawed faster than 
usual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
. For me the bombshell came from aDutch blogger in late November 
<https://sites.google.com/site/arctischepinguin/home/sea-ice-extent-area/grf/nsidc_global_area_byyear_b.png>
: a plot of the Arctic plus Antarctic showed sea ice this autumn to be tracking
4m km2 (the size of western Europe) below the normal average 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/06/arctic-antarctic-ice-melt-november-record>
. This is a7-sigma event <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fat-tailed_distribution>
 – with a chance of about one in a hundred billion of being random. The ice 
doesn’t lie. If we don’t take this seriously now, our children will ask us why.
Andrea Sella 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/audio/2013/may/27/science-weekly-podcast-rare-earth-metals>
, professor of materials and inorganic chemistry, UCL
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c9112902137d5d24212435b21fa5b26c7bd9edc%2F0_164_5130_3080%2F5130.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2012%20key%20science%20moments%20of%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fscience%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2F12-most-important-science-moments-2016-space-sharks-zika-virus-proxima-b%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3c9112902137d5d24212435b21fa5b26c7bd9edc%2F0_164_5130_3080%2F5130.jpg>
 Increasing the speed at which leaves adapt to shade could raise crop yields by 
15% Photograph: Pat Canova/Alamy Stock Photo 
12 Scientists modify photosynthesis to boost crop yield

18 November

Producing enough food for a growing population in the face of extreme weather 
associated with climate change without using environmentally damaging methods 
is a trickier balancing act than the Brexit negotiations! But last month 
scientists at Illinois University made a breakthrough that could herald a 
second green revolution for world agriculture – theyimproved the efficiency of 
photosynthesis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2016/nov/17/plants-genetically-modified-to-boost-photosynthesis-produce-greater-yields-study-shows>
, the process by which plants turn sunlight into the biomass that is the source 
of all our food. The team used mathematical models to show that increasing the 
speed at which leaves adapt to shade could potentially raise crop yields. They 
turned this theory into reality by boosting the expression of the genes 
responsible and crucially showed this worked in agricultural fields, with a 15% 
increase in productivity.

The work, published in Science 
<http://science.sciencemag.org/content/354/6314/857>, is the culmination of 
decades of effort to understand the 140 processes underpinning photosynthesis. 
It demonstrates the value of long-term interdisciplinary collaboration and 
offers proof of concept for a new approach to environmentally sustainable 
increases in crop productivity, something that could improve the lives of 
millions. So it’s my pick for science moment of the year, if not the decade.
Prof Sue Hartley, director, York Environmental Sustainability Institute, 
University of York
 