
Life would be much the poorer without a national biography, a collection of 
the lives of people who have “left their mark onan aspect of national life 
<http://global.oup.com/oxforddnb/info/print/intro/intro2/>, worldwide”. The 
public spirited endeavour of the Oxford University Press that first revised and 
now regularly updates the Victorian concept of a Dictionary of National 
Biography can only be cheered. But its very value makesthe question of who is 
included 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/12/margaret-thatcher-eclipses-churchill-in-dictionary-of-national-biography>
 so important. The dictionary is an edited collection, a portrait not a mirror, 
a dictionary not Wikipedia. It is the product of choice, not random 
coincidence. It is an educated judgment: a description in life stories of who 
we are. In a way no single biography could be, its breadth and range makes it a 
public measure of national values.

Naturally, this judgment is very different now from when Leslie Stephen first 
started inviting eminent Victorians to submitlists of great men 
<http://global.oup.com/oxforddnb/info/#biographies> for inclusion in the early 
1880s, though even then the idea of including thebiographies of 1,400 
hymn-writers <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v03/n22/david-cannadine/british-worthies> 
was considered excessive. The updates, originally every decade, reveal a gentle 
drift away from the church, great landowners and generals as sculptors of the 
nation’s values, towards other pillars of public life, the permanent government 
of Whitehall mandarins, Nobel prize winners and the occasional film star.

In the digital era, the pace has accelerated and so has the breadth of vision. 
The first 63-volume dictionary, completed in 1900 at the expense of a single 
backer, was a compendium of 30,000 lives compiled by only 650 writers and 
editors. When it was overhauled and digitised,a vast undertaking completed in 
2004 <http://www.lrb.co.uk/v27/n02/stefan-collini/our-island-story>, there were 
10,000 contributors, all experts in their field.

The editors’ opinion not only of who counts but who still counts, and how 
much, shifts too. The entries on Queen Victoria and Churchill are shrinking. 
The painful, slow business of confronting the grimmer aspects of our island 
story, so often avoided, is under way in these pages. Last October, the process 
of updating not the newly dead but the newly significant led tothe inclusion of 
some prominent slave owners 
<https://global.oup.com/oxforddnb/info/freeodnb/shelves/sept2016/> and some of 
their opponents in the abolitionist movement – and also Britain’s first black 
mayor,Dr Allan Glaisyer Minns 
<http://www.norfolkblackhistorymonth.org.uk/history/local/minns.html>, who in 
1904 was elected by the people of Thetford in Norfolk.

This week, the latest batch of the elect, the biographies of people of 
significance who died in 2013, were released. That was the year that Margaret 
Thatcher died, and her contemporary pre-eminence is reflected in a 30,000 word 
biography, longer than anyone’s except Shakespeare and Elizabeth I (possibly 
because all publications value an American audience). She is one of just 59 
women, 25% of the total. In its defence, the editors argue that most of the new 
entrants were born between the wars, in the 1920s and 1930s. As David 
Cannadine, who is now editor-in-chief of the DNoB,once noted 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v03/n22/david-cannadine/british-worthies>, often the 
secret to inclusion is to work harder and live longer than your rivals. All the 
same it is striking that a mere 2% of the 235 new names – just five people – 
are non-white. They do include thecommunity rights activist and publisher 
<http://www.oxforddnb.com/public/dnb/108028.html> Jessica Huntley, and the 
Trinidadian airman and judge Ulric Cross 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2017/jan/12/biography-dictionary-bame-new-entrants>
; but curiously there is space too for Ronnie Biggs, the great train robber, 
and the businessman and politician Boris Berezovsky, whoappeared to have killed 
himself 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/mar/27/boris-berezovsky-inquest-open-verdict-death>
 in his Berkshire home but who some believe was murdered for his outspoken 
opposition to Vladimir Putin.

Lists are probably the quickest way to provoke an argument, and arguing over 
who has shaped national life is part of the business of establishing what it 
should like. Biggs and Berzovsky may look questionable; but neither looks 
anywhere near as questionable as a single man left out. There is noNelson 
Mandela <https://www.theguardian.com/world/nelsonmandela>. No matter that he 
was not a Briton, nor ever lived here. For millions of white Britons, he 
redefined what it meant to be black; he reshaped attitudes to apartheid; and 
the story of the life he lived is a vivid influence on the unfinished business 
of how Britons think about the history of empire.
 