
Almost four weeks have passed since Britain voted to leave the EU, and those 
who wanted to remain in it are having trouble accepting the result. They feel 
bereft. They feel that they were defeated by underhand means. They feel that 
those who voted for Brexit were uneducated and didn’t really understand what 
they were doing.

There is a nasty undercurrent of disdain, bordering on contempt, to all this 
angst. Many of those on the losing side of the referendum debate appear to 
actively want the economy to slide into recession in order to teach the 52% a 
lesson.

Let’s be clear. The economy is fragile. It was slowing down even before the 
referendum date was fixed and it is ill-prepared for the shock of Brexit. The 
UK hasa budget deficit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/21/brexit-uncertainty-hits-plans-to-cut-budget-deficit>
 of 4% of GDP, abalance of payments deficit  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/30/uk-current-account-deficit-deepens-brexit-fears>
of 7% of GDP and the worst recent productivity record of any G7 country bar 
Italy. The idea that George Osborne “fixed the roof while the sun was shining” 
is fatuous.

What’s more, it is easy to sketch out the reasons why things are going to be 
difficult. Traditionally, investment is the swing factor in any economic cycle. 
When businesses are upbeat about the future, they spend more on new kit, 
boosting national output. When they are cautious, as they are certain to be 
now, they mothball spending plans and GDP weakens.

The UK-EU battle over free movement and terms of trade | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/18/the-uk-eu-battle-over-free-movement-and-terms-of-trade>
Consumer spending will also be hit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/12/consumer-spending-slows-recession-eu-referendum-retail-sales-bad-weather>
 by the squeeze on spending power caused by the higher inflation that will 
result from theimpact of the falling pound 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/06/brexit-pound-plunges-to-30-year-lows-as-eu-fears-bite-into-global-markets-again>
 on the cost of imports. The flipside is that exports become cheaper, which 
will help boost output, albeit not by much, unless global demand recovers from 
its current depressed level.

A slowdown, therefore, seems inevitable. The extent and duration of that 
slowdown will depend on the actions taken by theBank of England 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/bankofenglandgovernor> and the Treasury, 
and how long it takes the government to sketch out what a Brexit Britain is 
going to look like.

None of this is a surprise. The notion that the economy would struggle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/29/bank-of-england-clamps-down-buy-to-let-lending>
 after a leave vote was strongly argued during the referendum campaign, but did 
not carry the day. Hence the view that those who voted for Brexit didn’t 
understand what was at stake.


Yet the evidence suggests that many of those who voted to leave knew that 
there would be a short-term hit to the economy, but decided that they were 
willing to take the risk. They weighed up the pros and cons – as did US 
investment banks, the CBI and universities – but came up with a different 
answer.

A speech given last week 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2016/916.aspx> by 
Andy Haldane, the chief economist at the Bank, helps explain why so many people 
were unmoved by George Osborne’s argument that the UK would bevoting for a DIY 
recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/may/22/brexit-would-cause-diy-recession-says-george-osborne>
 if the country opted for Brexit. On a visit to Nottingham, Haldane said he was 
struck by the fact that for many people, the recession that followed the 
financial crisis of 2008 had never ended. When he talked about economic 
recovery, he was stopped in his tracks by a “forest of furrowed brows”. The 
message was simple: there had been no recovery. As Haldane went on to explain, 
this was not a case of false consciousness. The economic facts are plain: the 
economy issimply not delivering 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/divided-britain-brexit-money-class-inequality-westminster>
 for millions of people.

Earnings are 7% above where they were when the recession ended in 2009, but 
still 5% below the peak once rising prices are taken into account. This is the 
longest period of flat or falling real wages since the mid 19th century.

UK national wealth, measured by the value of assets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2014/nov/20/britain-net-worth-rises> such 
as property and pensions, has increased by an impressive sounding £3tn since 
2009, but the gains have been skewed towards those who owned their own homes or 
had sizeable pension pots.

Only in two UK regions of the UK, London and the south-east, is GDP per head 
higher than it was before the recession. Everywhere else, it is lower – 
strikingly so in some parts of the country.


The argument deployed by the remain side, that the only real risk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/18/imf-says-brexit-would-trigger-uk-recession-eu-referendum>
 to Britain’s economic renaissance was a vote to leave the EU, worked in the 
more affluent parts of Britain, where the recovery was tangible, but fell on 
deaf ears elsewhere.

During the campaign, Osborne put out figures showing that households in the UK 
would be£4,300 a year worse off  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/18/eu-referendum-reality-check-uk-households-worse-off-brexit>
on average by 2030 in the event of Brexit, because the economy would be six 
percentage points smaller. This had zero impact. In part, that might be because 
voters were rightly dubious about the Treasury’s ability to make such long-term 
economic forecasts. But it seems that even those who did think that the economy 
might be a bit smaller by 2030 took the view that the additional six percentage 
points of GDP would accrue to rich people living inside the M25 and not to 
them. All the evidence suggests that this was a perfectly logical assumption.

In essence, the referendum divided Britain between those who were doing well 
out of the status quo and those who weren’t. The latter group wanted change and 
appear to be willing to risk a recession to get it.

And change there has certainly been. Osborne has been fired 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/theresa-mays-decisive-reshuffle-draws-line-under-cameron-era>
, his ludicrous idea of apost-Brexit “punishment” budget  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/14/osborne-predicts-30bn-hole-in-public-finance-if-uk-votes-to-leave-eu>
has been scrapped, and the idea ofbalancing the budget 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/01/george-osborne-scraps-2020-budget-surplus-plan>
 by the end of the parliament rightly abandoned. The Treasury has been told to 
putgrowth before deficit reduction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/15/bank-of-england-chief-economist-calls-for-big-post-brexit-stimulus>
, a change of tack that is long overdue, and will have to work with a business 
department that has thecrafting of an industrial strategy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/14/industrial-strategy-welcomed-as-part-of-governments-new-business-policy>
 as part of its remit. A stimulus package will be announced by the Bank next 
month.

Brexit has also forced the rest of the EU to have a rethink, with a debate 
under way between those who think that the response should be a drive for 
closer integration and a more powerful group, which believes that the dream of 
political union is dead in the water. As in the UK, budgetary rules will be 
loosened, and not before time.

None of this should disguise the enormity of the challenges ahead. But 
Britain’s economy is dysfunctional and needs to be fixed. The same applies to 
the eurozone, only more so. Brexit provides an opportunity to try alternatives 
to failed policies. There is no guarantee that this opportunity will be seized. 
However, when the remainers talk of themselves as a persecuted minority and 
embrace the idea of recession with such relish, they should be aware of how 
they might sound to the people that Haldane spoke to in Nottingham: pampered, 
vindictive and unable to accept that they lost.

 