
The National Audit Office (NAO) has laid bare the extent of the recruitment 
and retention crisis in teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/10/teachers-are-leaving-as-government-falls-short-on-recruitment-nao-finds>
. The number of teachers leaving the profession has increased by 11% over three 
years and ministers have failed to hit their recruitment target for four 
consecutive years (despite a £700m annual bill for their efforts).

The NAO report, Training New Teachers 
<https://www.nao.org.uk/report/training-new-teachers/>, revealed some stark 
realities about the impact of the crisis. For example, more secondary school 
classes are now being taught by teachers without a relevant post-A-level 
qualification in their subject – particularly in physics.

But what else is happening on the frontline as a result of the shortage? We 
took to our community to find out. All views, offered by teachers across the 
country, are anonymous:

Fact or fiction? The reasons teachers choose the job – and quit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2015/oct/23/fact-or-fiction-the-reasons-teachers-choose-the-job-and-quit>
The quality of some teachers is now questionable

“With fewer teachers in certain subjects, some teachers have had to move over 
to a different department or straddle more than one. This can be a good thing 
if you have a brilliant teacher who can pick up a topic quickly but, more often 
than not, a teacher is being asked to slide into a different teaching area and 
offered no support.

“Maths is my subject and I know a great deal of maths teachers without a 
degree. I am not saying this is the worst thing, but not having an A-level in 
maths is certainly a problem for most of them. Those teachers tend to be the 
ones trotting out the same error-filled lessons and are understandably scared 
and insecure when confronted with their own lack of expertise.”

If I got promoted I’d have to take a pay cut

“One school was looking for a second of department in maths and the only way 
they could recruit was by offering additional responsibility pay of around 
£10,000. Effectively, these second in departments are being offered more money 
and have less responsibility than a department leader. This means I am now in a 
position where I cannot afford to take a head of department job because my 
responsibility payment is so good that even though this would mean a promotion 
I’d have to take a pay cut.”

Unqualified cover supervisors are being called in


“I am a qualified maths teacher and since 1999 have operated an agency placing 
teachers in schools. The greatest issue is that schools use unqualified staff 
(cover supervisors) as teachers. A teacher is invoiced at £160 and a cover 
supervisor at £120.”

Teachers are promoted but have to do their old jobs too

“We now have a situation where it’s so hard to find a good head of department 
in certain subjects that if you promote someone to an assistant headship, for 
example, you have to ask them to continue doing their old job too. So someone 
might be a head of department and an assistant head and teach a 90% timetable. 
This is driving people out as it puts them under so much pressure.”

There’s no time to support new and struggling teachers

“A shortage of teachers means that those higher up in the profession don’t 
have time to help less-qualified teachers. Students as well as the teachers are 
being let down because of it. When there’s an observation or a department is 
being inspected, your heart sinks because you know certain teachers aren’t 
going to be perceived as good enough. This is especially the case when you have 
a supply or agency teacher in as they tend to get even less support.

“Inconsistency is therefore a big issue. In certain subjects that are harder 
to recruit for, you might have 10-15 staff members of varying standards and 
levels of training and support. It’s probably true that none of them get enough 
support. I have waited more than six months to get feedback from a lesson 
observation by an assistant headteacher – by the time I got it, it was worse 
than useless.”

Five alternative careers for teachers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/jan/10/five-alternative-careers-for-teachers>
Classes are getting bigger, putting some students at risk

“When I started teaching in my special school I had six students. Now I hear 
about teachers who have 10 to 12 students in their class. That change hasn’t 
happened over a long period of time; it’s happened in just a few years. Many 
students benefit from one-to-one attention that teachers, now forced to divide 
their attention more, are not able to give. There can be serious consequences; 
I had a child in my class who needed emergency medication for epilepsy if they 
had a seizure. That is an enormously stressful situation for a teacher to be in 
– if you reduce the number of staff and make classes bigger, that makes this 
situation even more dangerous.”

Follow us on Twitter via @GuardianTeach <https://twitter.com/GuardianTeach>. 
Join theGuardian Teacher Network 
<https://profile.theguardian.com/agree/GTNF?returnUrl=https://teachers.theguardian.com/Registration.aspx>
 for lesson resources, comment andjob opportunities 
<http://jobs.theguardian.com/jobs/schools/#browsing?INTCMP=edi_546>, direct to 
your inbox.
 