
A lot has been written about startups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/startups>. It usually involves devoted 
employees working long hours to deliver explosive growth via ping-pong tables 
while the head of fun publishes another piece of thought-leadership about 
inspirational, values-led culture. Some startups are like that, but the amount 
of coverage they receive is inversely proportional to their number. There is 
another type of startup – rudderless, pointless and stuffed with clueless 
children – about which we’ve heard little.

Over the past five years I’ve worked at two companies, both startups when I 
joined. One still is, the other has been bought by a multinational giant and 
just about coughs out a profit. While they could hardly be more different, both 
were fertile ground for all the qualities listed above – and more.

One of the first problems experienced by fast-growing startups is the need to 
hire quickly. Ordinary companies have human resources departments with policies 
and protocols. Startups often have no need for an HR person because they don’t 
have enough employees to warrant one. So you end up with people hiring their 
mates without interviews; staff knowing that their friends are going to be made 
redundant before their friends know; and line managers having to conduct 
performance reviews of the person they’re going out with.

Presenteeism is rising fast – and only bosses can stop it | Peter Cheese
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/19/hillary-clinton-working-presenteeism>
Startups that become successful are also beset by the Peter principle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2014/jan/16/paula-principle-part-time-holding-women-back>
 – the idea that people are promoted to the level of their incompetence. 
High-growth startups don’t need brilliant employees; they just need employees 
who don’t screw up. They are like the governments ofrentier states 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rentier_state> – in the short term at least, the 
money is guaranteed. Just don’t accidentally have sex with someone you manage, 
or invade another country, and you’ll be fine.

The clueless people in this stratum are then rapidly promoted by the founders 
because they see them as the loyal veterans who were “there when we had no 
office, you guys, remember? Eh! Am I right! Super cool.”

I was one of them. In three years I went from an entry-level position to head 
of department, managing a team of more than 40 people and spending the entire 
time trying to look as though I knew what I was doing, with a varying degree of 
success. It’s not that those of us in management were incapable, but any 
capabilities we had were a happy coincidence rather than justification for our 
positions.

This particular company outgrew its startup label and the adults soon arrived, 
only to stumble upon the most almighty mess: hundreds of terrible decisions, 
many of them irreversible, made by people who thinkEbitda 
<http://www.investopedia.com/terms/e/ebitda.asp> is a grime artist. It turns 
out that adults sometimes have children so they tend not to join startups until 
they perceive the risks to have lessened. Unless they are the ones who start 
them, in which case they invariably start yacht shopping and quotingElon Musk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jun/02/elon-musk-tesla-space-x-paypal-hyperloop-simulation>
.

That leads us to the second big problem of startups, which is the people who 
start them. A startup without leadership is just a group of people. You might 
as well be standing at a bus stop. The founder or founders have to understand 
the product or service, have a vision for where the company is heading, and a 
strategy to get it there. I’m still not sure how it is possible to start a 
company and receive millions of dollars in funding without any of those things, 
but I am here to tell you that it is.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsecret-life-startup-employee-rudderless-founded-by-capricious-narcissists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e310b231cd48047dd1659a8e8f628d6a21d321%2F238_458_3238_1943%2F3238.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20startup%20employee%3A%20%20it%E2%80%99s%20like%20being%20a%20firefighter%20led%20by%20an%20arsonist%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsecret-life-startup-employee-rudderless-founded-by-capricious-narcissists%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20startup%20employee%3A%20%20it%E2%80%99s%20like%20being%20a%20firefighter%20led%20by%20an%20arsonist%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F26%2Fsecret-life-startup-employee-rudderless-founded-by-capricious-narcissists%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F19e310b231cd48047dd1659a8e8f628d6a21d321%2F238_458_3238_1943%2F3238.jpg>
 ‘Hunched over a computer, the boss in question would assault the keyboard as 
though his intended target was the desk beneath it.’ Photograph: PhotoAlto / 
Alamy/Alamy 
In a normal company, the personality of the boss is usually diluted by the 
fact that the question of how to successfully run the business was answered a 
long time ago. I’m sure you’ve worked with your fair share of infuriating 
people, but they are rarely running the whole show – and if they are, the show 
rarely consists of 15 people and no audience.

It’s very unlikely that the chief executive of an established company would 
see an advert on the way to work and immediately decide to use it as the basis 
for an entirely new go-to-market strategy, work on which must begin the second 
they arrive at the office. In a startup, all it takes for that to happen on a 
regular basis is for the person in charge to be a capricious narcissist with 
terriblerecency bias <http://performance-appraisals.org/faq/biasrecency.htm>: 
which, as luck would have it, our chief executive was.

A startup founder’s personality problems can manifest themselves in a variety 
of ways: pathological lying to interviewees and customers about the product; 
wildly contradictory decision-making; and the voicing of a million ridiculous 
ideas, every single one of which demands a response. (And because all the ideas 
are generally so hysterically unworkable, pointless or illegal – or all three – 
the response tends to be no, which of course means that you are the problem. 
Again.)

The secret life of a professional poker player: I’m on the fringes of society 
| Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/16/secret-life-poker-player>
Unable to prioritise, it didn’t really matter what one particular startup boss 
I worked for was doing as long as he was doing something. Hunched over a 
computer, the boss in question would assault the keyboard as though his 
intended target was the desk beneath it. Read out of context you would be 
forgiven for thinking his emails had been written by somebody well into their 
third decade of being kept behind a false wall.

Doing battle with a mind untethered from reality required superhuman patience 
and resilience. All of us became the de facto quality control department for 
his unfiltered thoughts. You either had to say no creatively, so that it 
sounded like yes, or no directly, which made you the problem, the blocker and 
merely the latest in a long line of obstructions to his grand vision. In 
reality we were a team of firefighters led by an arsonist.

This isn’t to say startups can’t be fun places to work, or do great things for 
economies and societies – of course they can. But they operate completely at 
the mercy of their founders and first few employees. If you’re incredibly 
lucky, those people will be some of the lesser-spotted pioneering visionaries 
you’ve heard so much about. In the meantime, watch out for the more commonplace 
fiends foaming at the prospect of you joining their whimsical dance into 
oblivion.

• Are you a nanny, a publicist or a landlord? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 