
In the final nine days of the presidential campaign, Hillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> and Donald Trump made a 
combined total of 50 stops in 14 states. What do these stops tell us about the 
race?

Typically, last-minute campaign decisions are based on internal campaign 
polling not available to the public. Such polling explains why Al Gore 
campaigned at 2am in Florida on election day in 2000,as confusing as that move 
was <https://twitter.com/stuartpstevens/status/795685460953677826> for the 
opposition at the time.

final stops <https://interactive.guim.co.uk/embed/2016/11/campaign-stops-map/> 
The late moves of the 2016 campaign may be trickier to decode, in part because 
of the drunken-ninja style of the Donald Trump campaign, whichreportedly 
<https://twitter.com/maggieNYT/status/795722142159605760> ceased conducting its 
own polling last week or even two weeks ago.

It’s not clear what explains Trump’s visit, in the final week of the election, 
to Minnesota, which has been a solidly Democratic state since the Great 
Depression. Trump may see something there no one else does. The visit may have 
been a mistake. Conspiracy theorists have even noted that the Trump campaign 
chairman loathes the Republican congressional leadership, the theory being that 
sending Trump to Minnesota may have been a play to disrupt two delicate House 
races there.


The Clinton campaign, which during the primary season at one point was 
spending more on polling 
<http://www.msnbc.com/msnbc/clinton-spending-more-polling-six-gop-candidates-combined>
 than the top six Republican candidates combined, does not dabble in such 
freelancing. Most of her visits are where one might expect them to be, in 
obvious swing states: Florida, North Carolina, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Nevada. 
Clinton also made one trip to Arizona, where some polls have suggested that she 
has a shot at toppling Trump.

Clinton and Trump make climactic final pitches on eve of historic election day
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/hillary-clinton-donald-trump-election-day-final-voting-push>
The action in Michigan, visited twice by Clinton and four times by Trump, may 
be most interesting. The Great Lakes state emerged as an object of interest 
relatively late in the race, with both campaigns having dispensed with other, 
more central fights, and with the Trump campaign sensing opportunity with the 
state’s white blue-collar voters. The Clinton campaign hopes the state’s 
Democratic voting record since 1988 will be good for 16 electoral votes on 
Tuesday night.

Two final observations. 

One: Trump made almost two more stops per day, on average, than Clinton did. 
That’s either working harder – or being less focused. Clinton also was able to 
take advantage of high-profile surrogates – such as the president, first lady, 
vice-president, and her husband – to pop up in key states for her, while Trump 
is the only major star, political or otherwise, in his universe.

Two: in only two states did Clinton make more stops than Trump in the final 
week, Arizona and Ohio. For whatever reason, she may have sensed a need to work 
harder in those states, while stillseeing opportunity in those states 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/02/hillary-visits-arizona-in-unprecedented-show-of-bravado-for-democratic-nominee>
, perhaps in contrast to some extent with Iowa, where Clinton let Senator 
Bernie Sanders do the work of campaigning.
 