
He is the charismatic Silicon Valley entrepreneur who believes his many 
companies - including the electric car manufacturerTesla 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/tesla> Motors, solar power firm Solar 
City, and SpaceX, which makes reusable space rockets – can help resist man-made 
climate change.

South African-born Elon Musk <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/elon-musk>
 is a billionaire green evangelist, a bete noire of the fossil fuels industry 
who talks about colonising Mars and believes it may be possible that we’re 
living in a computer simulation.

But having been feted by the Obama administration, he now faces an 
extraordinary barrage of attacks from rightwing thinktanks, lobbyists, websites 
and commentators. The character of the assault says much about which way the 
political wind is blowing in Washington – something that will have consequences 
that stretch far beyond the US.

One of Musk’s most trenchant critics has been the journalist Shepard Stewart, 
who writes for a clutch of conservative online news sites. In several articles 
in September, not long after a SpaceX rocket exploded, Stewart attacked Musk 
for receiving billions in government subsidies “to make rockets that 
immediately self destruct” and branded him “a national disgrace”. As Musk 
fought back on Twitter, it became apparent that Stewart was an invention. Even 
his photo byline had been doctored from a LinkedIn profile of a tech 
entrepreneur. “Definitely a fake,” Gavin Wax, editor-in-chief of the Liberty 
Conservative, 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-22/elon-musk-vs-the-trolls>one 
of the websites that published Stewart, admitted to Bloomberg.

The revelation triggered several theories: that Stewart was created by 
speculators shorting shares in Musk’s companies, or that he was invented by 
rival rocket companies keen to bring SpaceX down to earth. But Musk may be 
reassured to learn that Stewart’s attacks on him weren’t that personal. Rather, 
they appear to be part of a wider agenda against big government, the 
environmental lobby and liberals in general – an agenda reinvigorated by the 
prospect of a Donald Trump presidency. In recent months, Stewart has twice 
attacked Oregon’s former governor, John Kitzhaber, a supporter of ObamaCare and 
solar energy who was forced to resign from office, saying his appearance at a 
healthcare conference was like “having Bernie Madoff heading an upcoming 
conference on retirement savings”.

He has also taken aim at Louisiana senator Bill Cassidy for introducing an act 
that compels online contact lens sellers to seek approval from optometrists 
before selling their products. And he has lambasted the Obama administration 
for “banning payday loans despite the fact that there is an overwhelming need 
and positive reception for them”.

Stewart’s protean efforts have been erased from the internet. But the online 
attacks on Musk continue. A website, stopelonfromfailingagain.com, regularly 
publishes <https://stopelonfromfailingagain.com> negative stories about him. 
The site is similar to another anti-Musk site,whoiselonmusk.com 
<http://whoiselonmusk.com>, created by an organisation called The Center for 
Business and Responsible Government (CBRG), which describes itself as a 
“non-partisan organisation dedicated to highlighting cronyism and its effect on 
American taxpayers and policy” and seems not to exist anywhere but cyberspace. 
Both sites were set up around the same time this summer and are registered to a 
domain-name allocation company in Arizona.

Whoiselonmusk carries stories from the Daily Signal, the news arm of the 
Heritage Foundation, a powerful rightwing thinktank whose mission statement is 
to promote “free enterprise” and “limited government”. It also republishes 
items from the Washington Examiner and the Daily Caller – online titles that 
have both published articles by Stewart.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874365faf1a0722f4ec57ac4844df0841674209b%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20trolling%20of%20Elon%20Musk%3A%20how%20US%20conservatives%20are%20attacking%20green%20tech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20trolling%20of%20Elon%20Musk%3A%20how%20US%20conservatives%20are%20attacking%20green%20tech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F874365faf1a0722f4ec57ac4844df0841674209b%2F0_0_3500_2101%2F3500.jpg>
 David Koch of Koch Industries: one of his executives is now the head of a 
pro-petroleum lobbying group. Photograph: Carlo Allegri/Reuters 
Closer inspection of stopelonfromfailingagain.com reveals that it was 
established by Citizens for the Republic, a political action committee (Pac) 
set up in the 70s by Ronald Reagan. Dormant for years, CFTR resurfaced in 2008 
under Craig Shirley, a biographer of Reagan, whose lobbying firm, Shirley & 
Banister, claims to have played a key role helpingthe “Tea Party Patriots in 
its rise to prominence as the premiere grassroots group in the country 
<http://www.sbpublicaffairs.com/work/tea-party-patriots-2/>”.

Announcing its campaign against Musk, CFTR’s’ executive director, Diana 
Banister, the other half of Shirley & Banister, said they would mobilise 
“public opinion, advertising, grassroots advocacy, testimony and legislation” 
in their attack on federal solar subsidies, of which Musk has been a major 
beneficiary. But how and why did CFTR spring back to life? Reports at the time 
suggested it was revived due to widespread dissatisfaction with the direction 
of the Republican party. One stated: “The revitalized Citizens for the Republic 
<http://www.thecarpetbaggerreport.com/archives/13125.html> has already secured 
$17m in solid financial commitments, according to an official involved in 
raising money for the organisation.” Whether CFTR really secured this sort of 
money cannot be verified. But documents filed with the US Internal Revenue 
Service reveal that two linked organisations – the Wellspring Committee and the 
Annual Fund – donated the best part of $1m between 2010 and 2011 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/outside-spending/political-nonprofits/receipts?id=320234718>
.

Few people in the UK will have heard of these two organisations, but they are 
part of a powerful conservative political network whose influence has global 
consequences. An investigation by theCenter for Responsive Politics 
<http://www.opensecrets.org/news/2015/03/the-jcn-story-building-a-secretive-gop-judicial-machine/>
 found that Wellspring was one of many organisations that in the past was used 
as a “dark money conduit” by the billionaire industrialist Koch brothers, David 
and Charles, to channel money to their favoured causes, which have included 
climate change denial scientists, Tea Party activists and a host of other 
rightwing groups, including the Heritage Foundation. While Wellspring has 
reportedly distanced itself from the Kochs, it continues to draw donations from 
the brothers’ network of like-minded supporters.

One of the Kochs’ latest campaigns emerged in February when it was announced 
that James Mahoney, a vice-president at Koch Industries, had teamed up with a 
former lobbyist for American Fuel and Petrochemical Manufacturers to launch a 
group promoting petroleum. The group is spending$10m a year talking up petrol 
while attacking government subsidies for 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/entry/koch-electric-vehicles_us_56c4d63ce4b0b40245c8cbf6>
electric vehicles, according to sources who spoke to the Huffington Post.

The announcement followed a pledge made last December by the Koch brothers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/koch-brothers> that they and their 
supporters intended to spend nearly $900m this year helping favoured 
conservative candidates get elected to Congress, the presidency, and state 
legislatures. This was double what they spent in the last election cycle and 
almost as much as was expended by the two presidential campaigns.

Koch Industries did not respond to requests for comment. The Observer 
attempted to talk to Craig Shirley about CFTR’s relationship with the 
Wellspring Committee and its campaign against Musk. A spokesman for Shirley & 
Banister declined to comment on specific questions but said: “TheObserver may 
not be familiar with our laws, and therefore we feel a duty to inform you that 
conservative philosophy is perfectly legal in the United States. While our 
hearts go out to the liberal groups who may be ‘upset’, Citizens for the 
Republic will continue to fight back against cronyism and corruption at all 
levels of government. If liberals can’t understand that, then that is further 
proof they have learned nothing from this election.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ce5959aec4ab69f4e29739f5a63196b0ab501b%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20trolling%20of%20Elon%20Musk%3A%20how%20US%20conservatives%20are%20attacking%20green%20tech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20trolling%20of%20Elon%20Musk%3A%20how%20US%20conservatives%20are%20attacking%20green%20tech&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftechnology%2F2016%2Fdec%2F04%2Felon-musk-trolling-us-conservatives-green-tech%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe6ce5959aec4ab69f4e29739f5a63196b0ab501b%2F0_0_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 A Tesla Model S saloon recharging. Photograph: Samuel Gibbs for the Guardian 
Ironically, given the money they spent, the Kochs’ preferred presidential 
candidate – Scott Walker, the Republican governor of Wisconsin and a darling of 
many in the Tea Party movement – crashed and burned. Walker’s links to the 
Kochs may actually have hindered his chances, as they gave plenty of ammunition 
to his rivals. Hillary Clinton joked that Walker received “his marching orders 
from the Koch brothers and just goes down the list”. Trump derided Republicans 
who took Koch money as “puppets”.

Walker’s failure to secure the nomination was a blow for Shirley & Banister, 
whichran the communications operation for his super-Pac, The Unintimidated Pac 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2015/04/23/exclusive-reagan-biographer-firm-signs-on-for-communications-strategy-for-scott-walker-super-pac/>
, positioning their candidate as an opponent of the Washington elite 
“unintimidated by powerful political forces”.

And yet, despite the ostensible setback, Christmas has come early for the 
Kochs. The incoming vice-president, Mike Pence, has acknowledged the support of 
David Koch. Myron Ebell, the chair of the Koch-backed Cooler Heads Coalition, 
which questions “global warming alarmism”, will lead Trump’s transition team 
for the Environmental Protection Agency. Another Trump appointment to that 
team, David Schnare, is a former member of the Heartland Institute, which 
denies the scientific evidence for man-made climate change and is a member of 
the American Legislative Exchange Council (Alec), another organisation funded 
by the Kochs.

Meanwhile Thomas Pyle, of the Koch-backed American Energy Alliance, is off to 
the energy department, while Doug Domenech of the Texas Public Policy 
Foundation, which has received millions in Koch funds, is joining the 
Department of the Interior.

As the campaigning website kochvsclean.com put it:  
<http://www.kochvsclean.com/koch-brothers-controlling-trump-appointees/>Are The 
Koch Brothers Controlling Trump Through Appointees?

If the answer is yes, then Musk and other evangelists for the green economy 
will soon have a lot more to worry about than fake news. It’s the real news 
they should fear now.
 