
The ceasefire in Syria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/the-guardian-view-on-syria-the-ceasefire-and-the-aid-convoy-attack-a-new-low>
 may not have been formally pronounced dead, but hopes to resurrect it are fast 
dwindling. After anaid convoy was destroyed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
 near Aleppo, fighting again intensified and theUS and Russia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/20/un-aid-convoy-attack-syria-us-russia>
 exchanged accusations in the UN. But in reality US diplomacy had collapsed 
before these latest events.

The Guardian view on Syria, the ceasefire and the aid convoy attack: a new low 
| Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/20/the-guardian-view-on-syria-the-ceasefire-and-the-aid-convoy-attack-a-new-low>
Last week, just hours after western coalition airstrikes mistakenly targeted 
Syrian government forces, killing more than 60 people, the US ambassador to the 
UN, Samantha Power, made an extraordinary statement that served to highlight 
the contradictions at the heart of the Obama administration.

Power lambasted Russia’s “uniquely cynical and hypocritical stunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/18/us-accuses-russia-of-grandstanding-over-deadly-syria-air-strikes>
” for having convened an emergency UN security council meeting over the bombing 
of Syrian troops. She lashed out at how Russia had, over the past five years, 
consistently propped up the Assad regime and protected it from any consequences 
of its murderous policies. At length, she described Bashar al-Assad’s strategy 
of “death by a thousand paper cuts”: starvation sieges; the “horrifying, 
predictable regularity” of strikes on civilian targets; the “routine” use of 
chemical weapons; and “torture chambers” holding “tens of thousands of people”. 
Why, she asked, had Russia never once called an urgent security council meeting 
over such horrors?

There have long been two takes on Syria. One is the geopolitical realism line, 
whichBarack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> has chosen 
to follow largely because it fits with his reluctance to get involved in 
another war. The line is that US or western security interests are not at stake 
in an intractable, far-flung civil war that can more easily be contained than 
solved. The other is the moral imperative line that Power has repeatedly 
advocated within the administration. It refers to the doctrine of 
“responsibility to protect”, according to which a state’s sovereignty can be 
violated when a regime slaughters its own citizens.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fsyria-aftermath-of-airstrike-on-un-aid-convoy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Aftermath%20of%20airstrike%20on%20Syrian%20aid%20convoy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fsyria-aftermath-of-airstrike-on-un-aid-convoy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Aftermath%20of%20airstrike%20on%20Syrian%20aid%20convoy%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F20%2Fsyria-aftermath-of-airstrike-on-un-aid-convoy-video&media=>
Aftermath of airstrike on Syrian aid convoy – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/sep/20/syria-aftermath-of-airstrike-on-un-aid-convoy-video>
Power published a book in 2002, A Problem from Hell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2003/jun/29/highereducation.news>, 
describing how US governments had historically failed to prevent genocides and 
mass atrocities – the book reportedly drew Obama’s attention to her when he was 
a senator.

The differences between Power and Obama were apparent in her stinging UN 
statement. By contrast, Obama said little onSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> in his UN speech this week.

In his 2009 Nobel prize speech 
<https://www.whitehouse.gov/the-press-office/remarks-president-acceptance-nobel-peace-prize>
, Obama said that inaction in the face of mass slaughter “tears at our 
conscience and can lead to most costly intervention later”. As Syria turned 
into hell on earth, the president repeatedly made the case that any 
intervention would be either futile or dangerous.

In tune with the American public’s aversion to military involvement after the 
disastrous Bush years, his policies have ranged from attempts to negotiate 
Assad’s physical departure from Syria (a plan dubbed theYemeni scenario 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/30/syria-horror-western-inaction-obama-priority>
 in 2012) to creating a “hub” in Turkey where rebels would be armed and trained 
(but without anti-tank or anti-aircraft weaponry), and – once Russia’s military 
intervention was launched in 2015 – more intense diplomacy with Moscow.

Results have been scant. What seems to have been missing from the US calculus, 
and what Power’s comments have perhaps unwillingly underscored, is that so many 
signs point to a crude reality: that Assad and his backer,Vladimir Putin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>, aren’t just indifferent to 
crimes against humanity but believe they serve their purpose.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fsyria-obama-us-president-putin-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee2d8843b67ca4e8620d3c3aae3deb42e5c68a50%2F0_125_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20devastation%20of%20Syria%20will%20be%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fsyria-obama-us-president-putin-russia%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20devastation%20of%20Syria%20will%20be%20Obama%E2%80%99s%20legacy%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fsyria-obama-us-president-putin-russia%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fee2d8843b67ca4e8620d3c3aae3deb42e5c68a50%2F0_125_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 US ambassador Samantha Powers with secretary of state John Kerry at the 
security council at the UN in New York on 21 September. Photograph: UPI / 
Barcroft Images 
Assad warned back in 2011 that he would spread chaos throughout Syria and 
beyond if calls for him to step down weren’t retracted. Putin has constructed 
his whole domestic political narrative around the notion that, however much he 
may be criticised by the west, he has restored Russia’s strength. Nor is Putin 
much bothered by the crimes of the Assad regime – his own army carried out 
similar massacres inChechnya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/23/putins-closest-ally-and-his-biggest-liability>
.

It’s possible Power’s statement was aimed at western public opinion rather 
than at the autocrats who, time and again, have demonstrated their capacity to 
order or tolerate untold levels of violence against civilians.

As his presidency comes to a close, the fact is that Obama has little to 
show the world on Syria. With an estimated half a million deaths, the Middle 
East in flames and European allies destabilised by the impact of refugee flows, 
he will pass on a festering crisis to his successor.

Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> was always going to be a 
stumbling block, not least because Putin long ago identified Obama’s reluctance 
to do more – such as arming the rebels decisively, upholding his 
self-proclaimed “red line” or setting up a no-fly zone (before Russian 
intervention made that impossible). There is a long list of missed 
opportunities that might have forced Assad to the negotiating table.

Syria conflict: overnight airstrikes on rebel-held Aleppo kill dozens
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/overnight-airstrikes-rebel-held-aleppo-kill-syrians>
Earlier this year the Atlantic magazine  quoted Obama 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2016/03/obama-doctrine-quotes-foreign-policy/424281/>
 saying of Putin: “The notion that somehow Russia is in a stronger position now 
than before he had to deploy military forces to Syria is to fundamentally 
misunderstand the nature of power in foreign affairs.” Yet today Putin does 
appear stronger, if only because the US finds itself scrambling to salvage the 
ceasefire deal without any leverage. Trying to blame and shame Russia over the 
UN convoy bombing is unlikely to achieve much on its own.

A key problem with the ceasefire deal was the plan to set up a US-Russia 
“joint implementation centre” to coordinate strikes against Islamic State. This 
was meant as an incentive, as Putin had long sought to be accepted as a 
coalition partner alongside the United States. But if implemented, such a 
coalition could make the US complicit in Russian airstrikes, which have been 
designed to strengthen Assad. The US would endorse a Russian intervention 
premised on the notion that there are only two actors in Syria: Assad and the 
jihadis.

Yet as Power pointed out, “the Syrian government, which bills itself as a 
fighter against terrorists, allows Isis to grow and grow and grow … Assad’s 
antics – his tactics, his strategy – have been a gift to terrorists in Syria 
and well beyond”.

By siding with Russia, the US would risk offering another gift to terrorists. 
Of course, American policymakers were well aware of this, which is why they 
set preconditions: a partial freezing of the civil war, and safe passage for 
humanitarian aid deliveries to Aleppo, the armed opposition’s last stronghold. 
But appealing to Putin’s sense of decency to get Assad to curtail his bombing 
was always going to be a gamble. Why would Putin seek to please the US once he 
had become an equal player alongside the sole global power?

UN seeks to resume aid convoys to Syria after airstrikes on Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/sep/22/overnight-airstrikes-rebel-held-aleppo-kill-syrians>
Obama has been in a hurry to reach a breakthrough on Syria these past few 
months, because he’s leaving office. Putin certainly isn’t. Nor is he 
constrained by domestic public opinion to do the right thing, or even try to.

The Obama administration is hanging on to the last shreds of its ceasefire 
plan – for lack of an alternative, though its critics would do well to 
avoid schadenfreude. With Isis-connected terrorism spreading in many parts of 
the world and illiberalism growing inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> on the back of the refugee 
crisis, Syria has become a security threat well beyond the Middle East. Against 
that backdrop, geopolitical realism and moral imperatives look less like 
opposites.

Assad is capitalising on the balance of forces Russia has helped create. This 
in turn – as Power has said – will fuel Isis, whose twisted claim is to be the 
champion of Sunni Muslims. This means more problems lie ahead for the west, and 
more suffering for the Syrians.

Meanwhile, Putin is celebrated by populists around the world for having 
outmanoeuvred the US by pulling himself up to the ranks of a leader whose 
cooperation is almost begged for. Russia may be in recession, and its economy 
the size of Australia’s, but in Syria it has been given a free hand. Whatever 
one may think of American power and its limits, and however one may choose to 
gauge Syria’s importance to narrowly defined US national security interests, 
history will remember that this all happened under Obama’s watch.

A former adviser to Bill Clinton once reflected on how the US had failed to 
prevent massacres in Bosnia: he said that by 1995, “the issue had become a 
cancer on our foreign policy and on his administration’s leadership”. For this 
reason, Clinton in the end ordered targeted strikes on Serbian forces, which 
forced Slobodan Milošević to the negotiating table. Power, who covered that 
crisis as a journalist, eloquently told the story in her book.

No doubt Syria is a complex, multifaceted war, on a different scale to Bosnia. 
But the lesson that should still be drawn is that war diplomacy can only 
succeed if leverage is decisively built up, not just hoped for. If talking to 
Russia is the only gateway to a peace process in Syria, more than simple 
persuasion must be brought to bear on it.
 