
At 1.23am on 26 April 1986, reactor no 4 of the Chernobyl nuclear plant blew up
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2011/apr/26/inside-chernobyl-control-room>
, spewing immense amounts of radioactive material into the air. A major event 
of the 20th century had occurred. TheChernobyl explosion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/04/-sp-the-long-shadow-of-chernobyl>
, 30 years ago this month, arguably played akey role in the demise of the 
Soviet Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/04/-sp-the-long-shadow-of-chernobyl>
 – if only because it crushed whatever credibility remained of a system of 
authority whose claims included the safe mastery of technology.

For those countries most affected, the road to stable democracy has not been 
easy; for some it’s not even guaranteed. The territories worst hit by the 
disaster were Ukraine and Belarus. Today we tend to watch the political turmoil 
in Ukraine, including this week’s appointment of anew prime minister 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/apr/14/ukraine-volodymyr-groysman-new-prime-minister>
, as solely the result of recent crises – but that can be short-sighted.

The long shadow of Chernobyl
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/jul/04/-sp-the-long-shadow-of-chernobyl>
Belarus rarely makes headlines – except perhaps when sanctions against the 
regime of President Alexander Lukashenko 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/15/eu-lifts-most-sanctions-against-belarus-despite-human-rights-concerns>
 are discussed. But understanding these countries’ travails requires going 
further back in time.

The then Soviet president, Mikhail Gorbachev, had launched his policy of 
glasnost 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/01/glasnost-perestroika-mikhail-gorbachev-soviet-writers-1988>
, or openness, not long before the Chernobyl disaster – which then acted as a 
catalyst for change because of the lies it exposed. It was the final straw 
after a long list of atrocities suffered by nations that had endured the worst 
of Europe’s 20th-century bloodbaths. It is estimated, for example, that Belarus 
lost a third of its population in the second world war. Recovering from the 
cumulative effect of these ordeals was never going to be simple.

Indeed, many of the consequences of Chernobyl are yet to be explored. Three 
decades on, how does one even begin to describe what it is like to live with an 
invisible radioactive enemy? How does one convey what it was like to experience 
an event of that magnitude, when the skies darkened and the apocalypse seemed 
to be unfolding?

I travelled to the Chernobyl region in the 1990s, to try to fathom that 
legacy. And one thing that’s impossible to dismiss is the enduring political 
trauma that came out of the Chernobyl accident and everything that led to it.

Just like the radioactive caesium that seeped into the earth and continues to 
toxify the whole region, the Soviet legacy is hard to get rid of and may never 
disappear. And just as the Soviet authorities rushed to conceal the scale of 
the accident, we tend to underestimate the task the people of Ukraine andBelarus
 <https://www.theguardian.com/world/belarus> confront when trying to dismantle 
the structures of Sovietism.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchernobyl-30-years-nuclear-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb51fc044a27f4d2c514682aee899151b238459%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20political%20fallout%20of%20Chernobyl%20is%20still%20toxic%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchernobyl-30-years-nuclear-soviet-union%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20political%20fallout%20of%20Chernobyl%20is%20still%20toxic%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fapr%2F16%2Fchernobyl-30-years-nuclear-soviet-union%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcb51fc044a27f4d2c514682aee899151b238459%2F0_134_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The Euromaidan protests in Kiev: Russia reacted by launching a war. 
Photograph: Brendan Hoffman/Getty Images 
This should matter to all Europeans, because these two states are at the heart 
of the continent, and the current tensions with Russia. What fate awaits their 
democratic aspirations will say much about whereEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> is heading in the years to come.

The leading Belarusian opposition figure Andrei Sannikov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/oct/28/-sp-ukraine-russia-europe-andrei-sannikov>
, now in exile, has just published agripping memoir of his life and his 
imprisonment <http://www.eastviewpress.com/Books/MyStory.aspx> under the 
dictatorship of Lukashenko, president since 1994. “Few people know that 70% of 
the radioactive fallout of the 1986 explosion landed on the territory of 
Belarus,” Sannikov points out. We forget how on that April morning, and in the 
following days, the wind never stopped blowing north from Chernobyl.

Svetlana Alexievich 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2015/oct/08/everything-you-need-to-know-about-svetlana-alexievich-winner-of-the-nobel-prize-in-literature>
, the 2015 Nobel literature prize winner whose work is all but banned in her 
native Belarus, has eloquently written about the psychological devastation left 
by Chernobyl. She quotes a survivor who says: “Back then everyone was saying, 
‘We’re going to die, we’re going to die. By the year 2000, there won’t be any 
Belarusians left.’” In Alexievich’s words, Chernobyl, while an “accident in the 
sense that no one intentionally set it off, was also the deliberate product of 
a culture of cronyism, laziness and deep-seated indifference toward the general 
population”.

Belarus election: opposition leaders beaten as Lukashenko declares victory
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/20/presidential-candidate-dragged-from-hospital>
It is this cronyism and indifference that persist in many post-Soviet 
societies. Of course, Ukraine and Belarus have had different trajectories: 
Ukraine is today a democracy, albeit one with a war in its eastern regions; 
Belarus is an autocracy, in which any form of dissent is crushed. But as 
Sannikov reminds us, it would be a mistake to think Belarus is condemned to 
never-ending dictatorship. Itscivil society 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2016/feb/15/are-you-affected-by-crackdowns-on-civil-society-in-your-country>
 may be smaller than Ukraine’s, but its activists have repeatedly attempted 
democratic uprisings, and will probably continue to do so.

The difference is that the last Belarusian street revolt, in December 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/dec/20/presidential-candidate-dragged-from-hospital>
, was violently and thoroughly repressed by Lukashenko’s police; Sannikov, a 
former presidential candidate, was later sentenced to five years in a labour 
camp. This obviously contrasts with the success of Ukraine’s 2013-14Maidan 
democratic revolution 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2014/apr/08/architects-revolt-kiev-maidan-square-ukraine-insurrection>
, which led to apresident’s overthrow 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2014/feb/24/ukraine-president-viktor-yanukovych-palace-video>
 – and to which Russia reacted bylaunching a war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/feb/21/ukraine-debaltseve-rebels-maidan-one-year-anniversary>
.

For most of us in the west, Chernobyl is remembered as a technological 
nightmare, the stuff of horror movies. For the people who lived in the region, 
it set the stage not just for horrendous physical consequences, but also for 
monumental political changes whose success can still not be assured. Realism 
dictates that democratic-minded Ukrainians and Belarusians should get all the 
European support they deserve.

In his book, Sannikov recalls how dissidents such as Natalya Gorbanevskaya 
reacted cautiously to the fall of the USSR. “It was as if they knew that the 
totalitarian virus let loose on the peoples of the former Soviet bloc was not 
destroyed.” Just as the toxic substances released by Chernobyl’s reactor were 
never destroyed.
 