
Tricked out in Halloween orange and black, a harlequin moves awkwardly through 
a micro woodland of moss on the concrete as if it were wandering through an 
alien world, which in some respects it is.This is Harmonia axyridis succinea 
<http://www.arkive.org/harlequin-ladybird/harmonia-axyridis/>, a beetle that 
began its global travels somewhere in eastern Asia between Kazakhstan and Japan.

Because its larva has an insatiable appetite for aphids 
<https://greenmethods.com/aphids/> and other small insects it was taken to 
America in the 1980s for the biological control of crop pests. It was so 
successful that it has been transported into European agriculture, too. To show 
its appreciation the beetle, called the Halloween ladybug in the US and the 
harlequin ladybird in Europe, has had a population explosion.

This is such a common story of what happens when commerce controls nature for 
its own ends that it comes as no surprise that a creature pressed into 
servitude causes fear on liberation. It arrived here in 2004 and in 10 years 
spread throughout an area that took grey squirrels a century to colonise.

Harlequin ladybirds declared UK's fastest invading species
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/may/20/harlequin-ladybirds-declared-uks-fastest-invading-species>
Described as a “voracious invader” with a frightening appetite for other 
ladybirds and the eggs of butterflies and moths, the harlequin causes 
understandable alarm, given the threat it poses to Britain’s beleaguered 
wildlife. By the time the harlequin arrived here it was far too late to do 
anything about it.

The harlequin moniker may be more apt than being just a reference to the 
beetle’s patterned colours 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/works-of-art/1974.356.525/>. As a stock 
character of Italiancommedia dell’arte 
<http://www.metmuseum.org/toah/hd/comm/hd_comm.htm> the Harlequin is an agile 
trickster, witty and sophisticated, unlike the brutish Clown. However, the 
essential spirit of that character emerged from the devils and demons of 
medieval passion plays and, much later, through the Harlequinade, is a 
forerunner to the pantomime, arriving in Britain in the 17th century.

This clever little devil, shiny as a pip, bright as a Jack o’Lantern 
<http://www.history.com/topics/halloween/jack-olantern-history>, has become 
detached from theHarlequinade 
<http://www.vam.ac.uk/content/articles/e/early-pantomime/> of several hundred 
ladybird kin gathering to find a safe wintering place. With a kind of pheromone 
group-speak the harlequins swarm, causing consternation and undermining the 
cherished place of ladybirds in public affection – a classic Halloween plot.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 