
What it’s about is not what it’s about. The referendum is a proxy question. 
Underlying it is the fundamental political question, one that is seldom asked 
precisely because it cuts to the heart: how do we best keep money out of 
politics?

This transatlantic trade deal is a full-frontal assault on democracy | George 
Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
Without sufficient public scrutiny, all political systems degenerate into the 
service of wealth. All end up controlled by the few with the cash, not the many 
with the votes. The primary democratic task is to break the nexus of money and 
power. So the question we face next week is this: “In which political unit can 
money best be resisted?” We are not embarrassed by choice. This is a contest of 
plutocracies.

The European Union is a festering cesspool of undue influence and opaque 
lobbying. Prompted at first bythe tobacco industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/11/tobacco-eu-delay>, the 
European commission is slowly dismantling, through what it calls its“better 
regulation agenda” 
<http://corporateeurope.org/power-lobbies/2016/06/better-regulation-corporate-friendly-deregulation-disguise>
, many of the hard-won laws that protect our health, working conditions and 
wildlife. Once they are torn down, corporate power will be locked in place 
through theTTIP – the transatlantic trade and investment partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/nov/04/us-trade-deal-full-frontal-assault-on-democracy>
 – it is negotiating with the United States.

TTIP has two main strands. One is regulatory cooperation, which means 
standardising the laws on either side of the Atlantic – almost certainly 
downwards. The other is investor-state dispute settlement:allowing companies to 
sue governments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/02/transatlantic-free-trade-deal-regulation-by-lawyers-eu-us>
 through an offshore tribunal if a law threatens their profits. Democracy means 
being able to change those aspects of governance we do not like. TTIP, if it 
goes ahead, will ensure that this is not an option.

And if TTIP fails? Well, there are other means. The Comprehensive Economic and 
Trade Agreement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/ttip-trade-deal-agreements-ceta-eu-canada>
 between Europe and Canada, imposing much the same package, quietly transacted, 
now remains only to be ratified. The proposedTrade in Services Agreement 
<https://newrepublic.com/article/121967/whats-really-going-trade-services-agreement>
 – between North America, the European Union and 19 other nations – is a 
turbocharged version that has been negotiated behind closed doors for the past 
three years.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuropean-union-eu-britain-sovereignty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc4e1252f57d5749077bb552f71c28f6322b18fb%2F0_148_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20European%20Union%20is%20the%20worst%20choice%20%E2%80%93%20apart%20from%20the%20alternative%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuropean-union-eu-britain-sovereignty%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20European%20Union%20is%20the%20worst%20choice%20%E2%80%93%20apart%20from%20the%20alternative%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F15%2Feuropean-union-eu-britain-sovereignty%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc4e1252f57d5749077bb552f71c28f6322b18fb%2F0_148_4096_2458%2F4096.jpg>
 ‘Hillary Clinton is embedded in corporate power and corporate dollars.’ 
Photograph: Michael Reynolds/EPA 
The trade secrets directive 
<http://ec.europa.eu/growth/industry/intellectual-property/trade-secrets/index_en.htm>
, approved by the Council of the European Union last month, threatens to treat 
as commercial property any information that a corporation hopes to keep out of 
the public domain. Whistleblowers and campaigners trying to expose corporate 
malfeasance – tax evasion, falsifying emissions tests, polluting rivers – could 
be subject, depending on how it is interpreted by the courts, to massive fines 
and compensation claims. If the EU sometimes looks like a matchmaker for wealth 
and power, that’s because it is.

By comparison with the British system, however, this noxious sewer is a 
crystal spring. Every stream of corporate effluent with which the EU poisons 
political life has a more malodorous counterpart in the UK. The new 
Deregulation Act,a meta-law of astonishing scope 
<http://www.lowimpact.org/how-ttip-fits-perfectly-with-the-deregulation-act-which-can-overrule-all-other-laws-if-they-affect-growth-or-corporate-interests/>
, scarcely known and scarcely debated, insists that all regulators must now 
“have regard to the desirability of promoting economic growth”. Rare wildlife, 
wheelchair ramps, speed limits, children’s lungs: all must establish their 
contribution to GDP. What else, after all, are they for? 

The City’s stranglehold makes Britain look like an oh-so-civilised mafia state 
| George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/08/britain-civilised-mafia-state>
Britain has become a power base for a legalised financial mafia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/08/britain-civilised-mafia-state>
 that strips the assets of healthy companies, turns the nation’s housing into a 
roulette table,launders money for drug cartels and terrorists 
<https://www.hsgac.senate.gov/subcommittees/investigations/media/hsbc-exposed-us-finacial-system-to-money-laundering-drug-terrorist-financing-risks>
, then stashes its gainsbeyond the reach of police and tax inspectors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/apr/03/what-you-need-to-know-about-the-panama-papers>
. Through privatisation, outsourcing and the private finance initiative, the 
public sector has been repurposed as a get-rich-quick scheme for friends in the 
City, licensed to erect tollbooths in front of essential services. The media, 
largely owned by members of the same class, directs our attention elsewhere, 
blaming immigrants for the ills it has inflicted.

It was British lobbying that sank Europe’s soil framework directive 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
 and thefinancial transactions tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/may/06/george-osborne-eu-financial-transaction-tax-legal-challenge>
. Without a mandate from either parliament or people, theBritish trade minister 
wrote secretly to the European commission 
<https://www.opendemocracy.net/ournhs/jurgen-maier/trade-ministers-beg-brussels-to-remove-more-national-sovereignty>
 insisting that investor-state dispute settlement should remain in the TTIP. 
Wherever barriers to the power of money are being kicked over, there you will 
find David Cameron’s bootprint.

Since the first states were established, they have sought power by making 
alliances. The splendid autonomy we are told a Britain out of Europe would 
enjoy is an illusion: we would swap one transnational system for another. The 
demand to leave Europe in the name of independence has long been accompanied by 
a desire to surrender our sovereignty to the United States. If judged by their 
own standards, the Brexit campaigners who foresee a stronger alliance with the 
US are traitors, ceding the national interest to a foreign hegemon.

Sixteen years ago, the Conservative party published a draft manifesto in which 
it proposed thatwe should join the North American Free Trade Agreement 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2000/09/07/vote-conservative-for-a-federal-superstate/> 
(Nafta). This remains a plausible outcome of leaving the EU: it is hard to 
imagine the business class permitting the UK to stand outside a formal trading 
bloc. What this means is swapping a treaty over which we have had some 
influence for one in which we have had none.

How do we know that TTIP would tear down public protections? Because the same 
clauses in Naftahave already started doing so across Canada, the US and Mexico 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/01/06/3736750/transcanada-sues-using-nafta/>
. A closer alliance with the US means surrendering to a system that has been 
signed, sealed and delivered to the power of money. A Congress bound and gagged 
with dollars; a police and military machine pressed into the service of 
plutocracy; a media that scarcely bothers to disguise its own corruption. The 
political power of money there is naked, unashamed – even proud.

I suspect that Donald Trump, or at least Trumpery of some kind, represents the 
future of US politics, especially if the Democrats fail to connect with people 
who are catastrophically alienated from the system. Exciting as it will be to 
have a woman in the White House,Hillary Clinton is embedded in corporate power 
and corporate dollars 
<http://www.thenation.com/article/the-problem-with-hillary-clinton-isnt-just-her-corporate-cash-its-her-corporate-worldview/>
.

We do not release ourselves from the power of money by leaving the EU. We just 
exchange one version for another: another that is even worse 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/10/eu-in-health-wildife-european-union>
. This is not an inspiring position from which to vote remain. But it is a 
coherent one.

• A fully referenced version of this article can be found at www.monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 