
In the past few weeks Israel has been in the headlines for all the wrong 
reasons. There have beenpunch-ups with the outgoing Obama administration 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-israel-palestinians-kerry-netanyahu-idUSKBN14H1KB>
, which, consistent with decades-old policy on settlements,chose to abstain 
from a landmark UN vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/23/us-abstention-allows-un-to-demand-end-to-israeli-settlements>
 rather than exercise its veto to block it. There were reportedlythreats of war 
to nations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/netanyahu-told-new-zealand-backing-un-vote-would-be-declaration-of-war>
 that voted for the resolution. A case of an Israeli soldier who was sentenced 
for shooting a severely wounded Palestinian attacker saw what Israeli 
newspapers describe as“hooligans” descend to intimidate judges and the army 
<http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.763031>. While the mob spat and 
shouted, Israeli politicians sought to inflame rather than cool tempers. 
Finally in Britain this week the Israeli ambassador had to apologise to foreign 
office minister Sir Alan Duncan after an embassy officialwas caught on camera 
in an undercover sting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/07/israeli-diplomat-shai-masot-caught-on-camera-plotting-to-take-down-uk-mps>
 plotting to “take down” MPs – including Sir Alan – regarded as outspoken 
supporters of a Palestinian state.

There is no more serious a charge for a foreign embassy than its staff 
meddling in British government affairs. A British minister writing anonymously, 
to protect himself from abuse and character assassination, in the Mail on 
Sunday claimed that Britain’s politicians had submitted to lobbying,“taken 
donors’ money, and allowed Israeli influence-peddling to shape policy and even 
determine the fate of ministers” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4098970/Ambassador-issues-grovelling-apology-Israel-plot-Tory-minister-Diplomat-caught-video-conspiring-smear-UK-minister-end-contract-Israeli-embassy.html>
. Only the week beforeTheresa May scolded US secretary of state John Kerry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
 for calling out the current government in Israel for what it is: “the most 
rightwing in Israel history, with an agenda driven by the most extreme 
elements”. It was either a bone-headed intervention by the prime minister – 
given thatBritain helped broker the UN vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/uks-key-role-in-brokering-un-resolution-on-israeli-settlements-confirmed>
 – ora craven attempt to ingratiate herself after being snubbed by the Israeli 
government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/26/netanyahu-snubs-may-over-un-settlements-vote-israeli-media-says>
. Neither looks good for Mrs May. An investigation into influence-peddling into 
this most sensitive of foreign policy areas is needed to get a sense of whether 
parliament or government is being corrupted. The foreign office has declared 
the matter closed, but it should not end there. Crispin Blunt, chair of the 
foreign affairs select committee, was elected with a remit to look at the 
lobbying by both Palestinians and Israelis and the effect on British policy in 
the Middle East. The terms of his committee’s inquiry should be wide enough to 
look at whether pernicious influence was wielded by either side.

What has changed is that while Barack Obama stuck to the script of US foreign 
policy in the region,his successor, Donald Trump, says he won’t 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/in-speech-to-aipac-donald-trump-affirms-support-for-israel-1458605471?mg=id-wsj%E2%80%9D>
. Mr Trump has nominated as ambassador to Israel David Friedman,a donor to the 
settlement movement <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.759738>, who 
is if anything to the right of Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu. The 
family of Mr Trump’s son-in-law and Middle East adviser Jared Kushnerhas 
donated to illegal settlements 
<http://www.jta.org/2017/01/03/news-opinion/politics/in-congress-a-new-battle-emerges-2-states-or-not-2-states#.WGwx-X533yw.twitter>
. This will suit Mr Netanyahu. He heads a coalition of rightwing radicals 
accused of seeing democracy as being synonymous with unchecked majority rule. 
This political messaging has changed Israeli society: ina poll last year 
<http://www.timesofisrael.com/plurality-of-jewish-israelis-want-to-expel-arabs-study-shows/>
 four-fifths said Jews in Israel should be given preferential treatment. Half 
thought Arabs should be expelled.

This accelerating rightward trend leads to a situation where the occupation in 
the West Bank becomes seen as permanent, and further annexations envisaged 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/worldviews/wp/2017/01/02/qa-with-israeli-minister-with-trump-coming-in-its-time-to-annex-much-of-the-west-bank/?utm_term=.06b8ddd830b0>
. Israel would find it difficult to be a Jewish and democratic state if 
Palestinians did not have their own nation.Foreign ministers meeting this 
weekend 
<http://www.al-monitor.com/pulse/originals/2017/01/israel-palestinians-france-sweden-paris-initiative.html>
 to discuss the peace process should remind Mr Netanyahu of where he is 
heading. Mr Trump’s endorsement of Jerusalem as Israel’s capital by moving the 
US embassy there –a US congressional law not implemented by previous presidents 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jerusalem_Embassy_Act> – would be a disaster for 
peace. Mr Netanyahu,in the spotlight for graft allegations 
<https://www.yahoo.com/news/netanyahu-questioned-second-time-graft-probe-reports-153329613.html>
, portrays himself as a strongman. But he has been a weak prime minister who 
rulesthrough acquiring multiple offices of state 
<https://knesset.gov.il/govt/eng/GovtByNumber_eng.asp>. Meanwhile the rhetoric 
of reaction goes unchecked, which is a road to ruin.

• This article was amended on 12 January 2017. An earlier version referred to 
Tel Aviv where the Israeli government was meant.
 