
The UK Investigatory Powers Bill 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/snoopers-charter-bill-becomes-law-extending-uk-state-surveillance>
 has passed into law. This bill legalises a variety of tools for intercepting 
and hacking by security services and was waved through without complaint by 
both houses. Academics should be concerned – and engage in some serious 
discussion about the (mis-)use of technological advances.

'Snooper's charter' bill becomes law, extending UK state surveillance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/29/snoopers-charter-bill-becomes-law-extending-uk-state-surveillance>
Digital surveillance poses a real threat to academic freedom. Not only is our 
engagement with research participants no longer guaranteed to be secure, but 
the internet we access is increasingly censored. This impacts researchers 
engaging with vulnerable subjects, whether they’re former prisoners or animal 
rights activists. Our communication and data could be used against them.

The bill is just one way in which the digital environment is changing for 
academics. Blocking and filtering of content on university networks has become 
standard and embedded in internet-specific measures such as those set out in the
 Prevent strategy 
<https://qmail.qub.ac.uk/owa/redir.aspx?C=WCYSMGwHZOeLHqmC53b38WB7hFAeaqUUZBf9ZjTdKkMtdHoV3xnUCA..&URL=https%3a%2f%2fviewer.gutools.co.uk%2fuk-news%2fprevent-strategy>
. This particularly affects security and terrorism scholars, whose research can 
be restricted or flagged up as suspicious. There is also a growing worry among 
ethic committees – made worse by theBoston College tape lawsuit 
<https://qmail.qub.ac.uk/owa/redir.aspx?C=BkRAAvOm5Mczy1UJKE-o3gNUDM581CT5QJmyLaCDcDstdHoV3xnUCA..&URL=https%3a%2f%2fviewer.gutools.co.uk%2fuk-news%2f2016%2fapr%2f25%2fboston-college-ordered-by-us-court-to-hand-over-ira-tapes>
 – about whether to allow studies that touch the edges of the law. Alongside 
these changes, profiling technologies for monitoring students’ behaviour and 
performance are now flourishing.

As someone working on the sensitive research topic of hacking 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=t1j8UZzl6M8> and politically motivated hacking 
– so-calledhacktivism <http://nms.sagepub.com/content/18/8/1599> – these issues 
matter to me. Both phenomena are relevant to discussions on technical security, 
which has made me think more carefully about the safeguarding of my research 
data, and also our understanding of what constitutes security and insecurity 
online.

‘Nothing to hide’

My frustration about the rapid deterioration of privacy and unimpaired 
academic inquiry has been fed by the lack of critical engagement from fellow 
staff and students.

The most fundamental question of digital security remains absent ​in ​from our 
lecture halls and daily practices

“I have nothing to hide” is a common response when I raise the topic with 
colleagues. And while I genuinely admire the certainty with which people 
believe themselves to be inculpable, I do think that academics underestimate 
the importance of thinking about these questions – if not for themselves, then 
at least for their participants.

Let’s reflect: we are teaching students about research ethics and methods. We 
require researchers to protect participants’ privacy and confidentiality. We 
have to pass institutional review boards, comply with good practice standards, 
and appoint data protection officers. Yet, in my experience, the most 
fundamental question of digital security remains absent from our lecture halls 
and daily practices.

I have seen research projects on vulnerable subjects pass ethics boards 
because someone claimed that they would lock transcripts or store them on 
password-protected computers. I have seen researchers going to conflict regions 
without proper clarity on how to save and transport their digital data. I have 
been to lectures that advise on moral dilemmas and methodological approaches 
but fail to outline how to effectively safeguard information. None of this 
protects researchers and participants if devices are stolen or forcefully taken 
from them.


While I acknowledge that these concerns might not affect and apply to all 
researchers equally, there is a risk of academics collecting data with potential
unintended consequences 
<https://www.timeshighereducation.com/features/place-hacker-bradley-garrett-research-at-the-edge-of-the-law/2013717.article>
 such as the confiscation of research material and its use in court cases.

Everyone’s talking about the Tef, but no one is listening to students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/nov/25/everyones-talking-about-the-tef-but-no-one-is-listening-to-students>
A changing landscape

Raising awareness of the need for digital security is one way to tackle the 
challenges of surveillance and censorship. The use of encryption and other 
tools such asThe Onion Router <https://www.torproject.org/> or virtual private 
networks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/askjack/2016/nov/24/how-can-i-protect-myself-from-government-snoopers>
 is key. Although their usage requires some basic technical familiarity, they 
make communication with vulnerable participants more secure and can protect 
data from unauthorised access or interference.

It is also important to keep up to date with the changing landscape of these 
tools through, for example, theCryptoParty <https://www.cryptoparty.in/> 
movement, which runs autonomous global meetings introducing the public to 
cryptographic techniques. These meetings can be attended free of charge and 
without any prior knowledge or skills.

Academics <https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/academics> 
must be more critical in the application of digital technologies; academia 
needs a public debate about the level of protection that scholars and 
participants can expect. We need to be outspoken about the increase of 
surveillance and censorship practices. Scientific advancement relies on 
scholars’ ability to conduct unobstructed inquiry.

Most importantly, institutions need to prepare staff and students for these 
challenges, and give them not only an ethical and methodological toolkit but 
also the ability to anticipate the effects of information being restricted, 
participants exposed, or intellectual property being stolen.

The UK Investigatory Powers Bill could be a wake-up call for the academic 
community. Hopefully we will respond.

Leonie Tanczer is one of the authors of Censorship and Surveillance in the 
Digital Age: The Technological Challenges for Academics 
<http://jogss.oxfordjournals.org/content/jogss/1/4/346.full.pdf>

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 