
What is salient is not important. What is important is not salient. The media 
turns us away from the issues that will determine the course of our lives, and 
towards topics of brain-melting irrelevance.

This year's wildfires are bad. Climate change will make future ones worse | 
Anthony LeRoy Westerling
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/26/wildfires-climate-change-future-worse>
This, on current trends, will be the hottest year ever measured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/21/2016-worlds-hottest-year-on-record-un-wmo>
. The previous record was set in 2015; the one before in 2014.Fifteen of the 16 
warmest years have occurred in the 21st century 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/17/shattered-records-climate-change-emergency-today-scientists-warn>
. Each of thepast 14 months has beaten the global monthly temperature record 
<http://www.noaa.gov/june-marks-14-consecutive-months-record-heat-globe>. But 
you can still hear people repeating the old claim, first proposed by fossil 
fuel lobbyists, that global warming stopped in 1998.

Arctic sea ice covered a smaller area last winter than in any winter since 
records began 
<http://nsidc.org/news/newsroom/arctic-sets-yet-another-record-low-maximum-extent>
. In Siberia,an anthrax outbreak  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/anthrax-outbreak-climate-change-arctic-circle-russia>
is raging through the human and reindeer populations because infected corpses 
locked in permafrost since the last epidemic in 1941 have thawed. India has 
been hammered by cycles of drought and flood, as withering heat parches the 
soil and torches glaciers in the Himalayas. Southern and eastern Africa have 
been pitched into humanitarian emergencies by drought. Wildfires storm across 
America; coral reefs around the world are bleaching and dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/21/coral-bleaching-event-now-biggest-in-history-and-about-to-get-worse>
.

Throughout the media, these tragedies are reported as impacts of El Niño: a 
natural weather oscillation caused by blocks of warm water forming in the 
Pacific. But the figures show that it accounts for only one-fifth of the global 
temperature rise. The El Niño phase has now passed, but still the records fall.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc396dc2f58e7652e2a8e1cc453812b3320ffba21%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20climate%20crisis%20is%20already%20here%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20one%E2%80%99s%20telling%20us%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20climate%20crisis%20is%20already%20here%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20one%E2%80%99s%20telling%20us%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc396dc2f58e7652e2a8e1cc453812b3320ffba21%2F0_133_4000_2400%2F4000.jpg>
 People wait to fill water containers during a drought in Latur, India, April 
2016. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Eight months ago in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/dec/12/paris-climate-deal-200-nations-sign-finish-fossil-fuel-era>
, 177 nations promised to try to ensure the world’s average temperature did not 
rise by more than 1.5C above the pre-industrial level. Already it has climbed 
by 1.3C – faster and further than almost anyone predicted. In one respect, the 
scientists were wrong. They told us to expect a climate crisis in the second 
half of this century. But it’s already here.

If you blinked you would have missed the reports, but perhaps the most 
striking aspect of theDemocratic platform 
<https://www.demconvention.com/platform/> (the party’s manifesto) approved in 
Philadelphia last week was its position on climate change. Hillary Clinton’s 
campaign now promises a national and global mobilisation “on a scale not seen 
since World War II 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2016/07/22/3801094/democratic-platform-climate-wwii-mobilization/>
”. She will seek to renegotiate trade deals to protect the living world, to 
stop oil drilling in the Arctic and Atlantic, and to ensure the US is “running 
entirely on clean energy by mid-century”.

Though boasting of his wealth and power, Trump poses as the friend of the 
common citizen and enemy of corporate capital

There are some crashing contradictions in the platform. To judge by one 
bizarre paragraph, the Democrats believe they can solve climate change by 
expanding roads and airports. It boasts about record sales in the car industry 
and promises to cut “red tape”, which is the term used by corporate lobbyists 
for the public protections they hate. But where it is good it is very good, 
reflecting the influence of Bernie Sanders and the nominees he proposed to the 
drafting committee.

Donald Trump, on the other hand – well, what did you expect? Climate change is 
a “con-job” and a “hoax” 
<http://thinkprogress.org/climate/2015/06/16/3670229/president-trump-climate/> 
that was “created by and for the Chinese in order to make US manufacturing 
non-competitive 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en>”. His 
manifesto <https://www.gop.com/the-2016-republican-party-platform/>reads like a 
love letter to the coal industry. Coal, it says, “is an abundant, clean, 
affordable, reliable domestic energy resource”. He will defend the industry by 
rejecting the Paris agreement, stopping funds for the UN’s climate change work, 
ditching President Obama’s clean power plan and forbidding the Environmental 
Protection Agency from regulating carbon dioxide.

What’s most alarming about the platform is that Trump didn’t write it: the 
deranged and contradictory bluster of the Republican party leadership is a 
collective effort. But at least it clears something up. Though boasting of his 
great wealth and power, he poses as the friend of the common citizen and the 
enemy of corporate capital. On every significant issue in the manifesto, 
corporate capital wins. To read it is to discover how the land lies and where 
the lies land.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2de8e6cc71ae1231871fb064a2a68a0810181d1%2F0_149_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20climate%20crisis%20is%20already%20here%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20one%E2%80%99s%20telling%20us%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20climate%20crisis%20is%20already%20here%20%E2%80%93%20but%20no%20one%E2%80%99s%20telling%20us%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F03%2Fclimate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd2de8e6cc71ae1231871fb064a2a68a0810181d1%2F0_149_5100_3060%2F5100.jpg>
 ‘Trump’s manifesto reads like a love letter to the coal industry.’ A 
coal-fired power station near Page, Arizona. Photograph: Alamy 
Incidentally, Trump’s executives don’t share his belief that climate change is 
a hoax. His golf resort in Ireland is seeking permission to build a wall – not 
to keep out Mexicans, but to defend his business from rising sea levels, 
erosion and storm surgescaused, the application says, by global warming 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/05/donald-trump-climate-change-golf-course-223436>
. If you can buy your way out of trouble, who cares about the other 7 billion?

It’s not that the media failed to mention what the two platforms said about 
humanity’s existential crisis. But the coverage was, for the most part, 
relegated to footnotes, while the evanescent trivia of the conventions led the 
bulletins and filled the front pages. There are many levels of bias in the 
media, but the most important is the bias against relevance.

In Britain, the media largely failed to hold David Cameron to account for his 
extravagant green promises and shocking record as prime minister. His 
successor, Theresa May, has made some terrible appointments, but the new 
climate change minister, Nick Hurd, an adult among her pet buffoons, is an 
interesting choice as he seems to understand the subject. The basic problem, 
however, is that the political costs of failure are so low.

To pretend that newspapers and television channels are neutral arbiters of 
such matters is to ignore their place at the corrupt heart of the 
establishment. At the US conventions, to give one small example,the Washington 
Post, the Atlantic and Politico were paid by the American Petroleum Institute 
to host a series of discussions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/28/oil-gas-industry-democratic-convention-activists>
, at whichclimate science deniers were represented 
<https://theintercept.com/2016/07/22/oil-lobby-paid-washington-post-and-atlantic-to-host-climate-change-deniers-at-rnc/>
. The pen might be mightier than the sword, but the purse is mightier than the 
pen.

Why should we trust multinational corporations to tell us the truth about 
multinational corporations? And if they cannot properly inform us about the 
power in which they are embedded, how can they properly inform us about 
anything?

If humanity fails to prevent climate breakdown, the industry that bears the 
greatest responsibility is not transport, farming, gas, oil or even coal. All 
of them can behave as they do, shunting us towards systemic collapse, only with 
a social licence to operate. The problem begins with the industry that, 
wittingly or otherwise, grants them this licence: the one for which I work.

• A fully referenced version of this article can be found at monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>. Twitter: @georgemonbiot 
<https://twitter.com/GeorgeMonbiot>
 