
Brewing isn’t the kind of job you get into by accident. People often ask me 
how I became a brewer and the honest answer is simply that I just likebeer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer>.

Sexist beer ads: why it's time for a cold, hard rethink
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/14/sexist-beer-ads-fosters> 
I studied law at university but grew increasingly unhappy with the idea of a 
legal career and I was desperate to do something more creative that wouldn’t 
tie me to a desk. Then all of a sudden I became obsessed with craft beer after 
trying Flying Dog’sRaging Bitch IPA 
<http://flyingdogbrewery.com/?beers=raging-bitch>. The sheer explosion of 
flavour made me decide that I wanted to make beer for a living.

My family were supportive about me leaving my degree behind and retraining to 
go down this new path. Both my parents worked for the NHS and were unhappy in 
their jobs, so they were glad to see me try something I felt really 
passionately about.

When I was job-hunting, a large craft brewery was advertising an entry-level 
position, and after a few test shifts I got the job. With a 24/7 operation and 
ever-changing work pattern, the first few months were very tough, and I ended 
up bedridden with bronchitis after three weeks. But I was determined to 
succeed, and quitting wasn’t an option.

The company was growing quickly and it didn’t take long to move from basic 
duties to actually making my own beer. This took a huge amount of practice, as 
good beer requires a great deal of precision, care and attention. Mostly, 
however, I had to clear out themash tun <http://brewwiki.com/index.php/Mash_Tun>
, which involves digging two tonnes of hot, wet malt from a confined space. 
It’s like mining for porridge in an underground sauna.

After about a year I got the chance to put my own recipe into production, and 
this is still my favourite part of the job. To be able to combine flavours and 
judge beer involves intense palate training. This is achieved through drinking 
many different styles as well as undertaking courses to recognise specific 
flavours. You can’t simply say a beer is bad because you don’t like it: you 
need to recognise what is wrong and understand the chemistry. For me this has 
taken years to grasp, and I’m still learning every day. Just as a chef knows 
what flavours and textures will work together, a good brewer can create a beer 
with many layers and nuances. I’ve certainly made more than a few terrible test 
batches.

Despite trendy breweries and media interest in their owners, the idea that 
brewing is glamorous is wrong. On any given day I can move several tonnes of 
malted barley multiple times, spend an hour measuring out yeast and several 
more scrubbing drains, floors and cleaning fermenters. In my early 20s I used 
to go out with colleagues the night before a 6am start, and being around beer 
when you are hungover is torturous. These days I’m much less of a drinker, and 
prefer to keep a clear head at work as we deal with dangerous chemicals and 
high temperatures. We usually do tastings first thing in the morning, even 
though the last thing you feel like at 10am is alcohol. But it’s an important 
part of the job and has to be done.

A typical day begins at 8am, when we begin the brewing process, which takes 
between five and eight hours. The rest of the day is taken up with lab work, 
quality testing, cleaning and the normal admin found in any job. I have to 
ensure we have enough raw materials to produce the planned beers, as well as 
guaranteeing they’ll be ready to release by the date customers expect them. By 
the end of the day I’m usually exhausted from the combination of mental and 
physical exertion, but over the years I’ve learned my limits and know how to 
pace myself better.

The best part of my job is the people. Beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/beer> festivals are often an excuse 
to catch up with friends in the industry and to try each other’s beer. You can 
always count on a fellow brewer to give you honest feedback. On the whole, 
brewers are welcoming, warm, and want you to succeed. A brewer who tries to 
undercut others will not last long, and there is a real sense of community and 
friendship, bound together by a passion for beer.

As a woman in beer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/04/battle-brewing-female-beermakers-take-aim-at-industry-sexism>
 there are a number of challenges. Brewing is an overwhelmingly male pursuit, 
it involves lots of physical work and the hours can be antisocial.Beer marketing
 <https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/may/14/sexist-beer-ads-fosters> is 
oftenovertly sexist 
<http://www.maxim.com/maxim-man/worlds-first-vagina-beer-has-arrived-2016-03> , 
and this puts women off joining the profession, but positive changes seem to be 
under way to help the people who make beer reflect the growing numbers of women 
drinking it. There are societies dedicated tofurthering women working in beer 
<http://pinkbootssociety.org/> and the reputation of women making good new 
products always helps. I hope this encourages more women to don their brewing 
boots.

I have had some unpleasant experiences along the way. As breweries expand they 
can lose sight of their employees. Choices are often made in order to maintain 
public image and social media reputation, while behind the scenes there lurks 
an unhappy crew. People with money and no knowledge of beer are also starting 
up breweries, relying on bought-in (and badly paid) talent to make a name for 
themselves. Seeing someone else collecting an award for a beer that you spent 
the past year working on and improving can be quite disheartening, especially 
when you know there is no way that they could do it themselves.

Cheers to the women brewing (and drinking) beer
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/women-in-leadership/2016/apr/01/cheers-to-the-women-brewing-and-drinking-beer>
While most of my job involves the production of beer, it is impossible to 
ignore the beer culture that has developed, and this includes a lot of 
marketing noise. I don’t want to try to brew withspace dust 
<http://www.dogfish.com/community/blogfish/members/justin-williams/celest-jewel-ale-brewed-with-moon-dust-served-in-space-suit-koozies.htm-0>
; when a bottle is covered with senseless hyperbole I can definitely sympathise 
with those who dismiss craft beer as a hipster trend. Usually the brewers 
aren’t the ones doing this, and despite the marketing hype, we really care 
about making good beer that anyone can drink.

Saying that, I do love my job. Very few industries are as exciting and 
fast-moving, and you need to be one step ahead of the changes in fashion while 
still making popular styles that sell well. I also can’t take it too seriously. 
It’s great to be able to make something that is available around the world, and 
that people appreciate so much, but at the end of the day it’s just beer and 
it’s important to remember that.

• Are you a musician, a nurse or a architect? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 