
As Europe reels from terrorist attacks, Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/10/the-guardian-view-on-the-battle-for-aleppo-a-rebuke-to-america-and-the-world>
, once Syria’s second city, is suffering its own nightmare. The connection 
between these two developments is more than coincidence. As bombs, guns and 
knives were being wielded in France and Germany, a massive military operation 
was under way to besiege, and perhapsempty or starve, the eastern districts of 
Aleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/un-calls-for-ceasefires-to-ease-civilians-despair-in-aleppo>
 that since 2012 have beencontrolled by the anti-Assad rebellion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2012/jul/28/syrian-rebels-aleppo-besieging-assad>
.

UN calls for ceasefires to ease civilians' despair in Aleppo
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/25/un-calls-for-ceasefires-to-ease-civilians-despair-in-aleppo>
When responding to the latest terror in Europe, few if any western officials 
draw parallels with the plight of Aleppo. That is understandable. Public 
opinion is naturally more focused on the domestic fallout from traumatic 
events. When security fears take over and political passions are aroused, it is 
hard to look beyond what lies in your immediate vicinity. YetAleppo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/aleppo> will have consequences for Europe 
and for its citizens, and there is little cause to think they will be positive.

This is why: Islamic State <https://www.theguardian.com/world/isis> cannot be 
defeated just through military action in Iraq and Syria, or police operations 
in Europe. It can be defeated only if the attraction that the militant group 
exerts on young, confused Sunni Muslims, in the Middle East and elsewhere, is 
somehow neutralised. The massacres carried out by the Assad regime in Syria 
over the past five years, and the failure of the international community to put 
an end to them – or even to hold his power accountable – have provided no small 
reason for the radicalisation now making Europe bleed.

The summer of 2015 went down in history as a time when the chaos of the Middle 
East suddenly became a vivid reality for Europeans because of the refugee 
crisis. The summer of 2016 may go down as the tipping point when all hope of a 
negotiated settlement in Syria’s civil war, one that would deprive Isis of much 
of its ability to recruit and sow terror, entirely faded.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fforces-aleppo-mourns-terror-assad-victims-syrian-anger-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71e4c859d79976c7bc28edbd03b71541fb7bbd86%2F0_215_720_900%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20forces%20besieging%20Aleppo%20are%20counting%20on%20our%20indifference%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fforces-aleppo-mourns-terror-assad-victims-syrian-anger-isis%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20forces%20besieging%20Aleppo%20are%20counting%20on%20our%20indifference%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F31%2Fforces-aleppo-mourns-terror-assad-victims-syrian-anger-isis%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F71e4c859d79976c7bc28edbd03b71541fb7bbd86%2F0_215_720_900%2F720.jpg>
 A Twitter post shows the plight of the Hamami family, terrified by Russian 
bombs in besieged Aleppo. Photograph: Courtsey of Zaher Sahloul 
In recent days, Bashar al-Assad’s army, assisted by Russian air power and 
Iranian-connected ground forces 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jun/30/iran-covertly-recruits-afghan-soldiers-to-fight-in-syria>
, has achieved its long-held objective of encircling eastern Aleppo, where 
200,000 to 300,000 people are now helplessly stranded and under attack. Any 
European who remembers the 1990s should think about parallels with the siege of
Sarajevo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/ng-interactive/2015/dec/14/sarajevo-portrait-city-20-years-bosnian-war-dayton>
, and theSrebrenica massacre 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theguardian/1999/nov/17/features11> 21 years ago. 
As one UN official put it this week: “In the 1990s, we said never again. Aleppo 
is the new Srebrenica.” Those who rightly express solidarity with refugees need 
to go one step further and ask why nothing has been done to prevent the mass 
atrocities that have sent so many people struggling over land and sea to reach 
our world. We should question the faulty western strategies that have focused 
entirely on combatting Isis and not on protecting Syrian civilians.

Right now more questions should be asked about Russia’s behaviour in Syria 
than about itscyber warfare in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/27/donald-trump-russia-hillary-clinton-emails-dnc-hack>
 (however huge that story) because the consequences of Moscow backing Assad are 
a bigger threat to Europe’s liberal, democratic order. If Assad stays in power, 
which seems to be the ultimate goal of recapturing Aleppo, more – not less – 
radicalisation will ensue; the absence of political transition in Syria will 
fuel the Sunni anger that Isis thrives on. That, in turn, will lead to more 
terrorism in Europe, providing even more fertile ground for far-right movements 
who want to up-end fundamental democratic principles.

And if progressives who care about preserving those principles join the dots, 
they should realise the need to look a bit further outwards. However strong the 
“no more wars” slogans of the western left, in the past five years there have 
been no significant street demonstrations against the war that Assad and his 
allies have waged on Syrian civilians. What does that say about the solidarity 
with Muslims that many claim to profess?

We mourn our dead in Europe, and that sorrow cannot be minimised; but our 
difficulty in concentrating even a little on the suffering of Syrians may one 
day be something that haunts us. Rather thanworry about how jihadi terrorists’ 
pictures are published in our newspapers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/jul/27/french-media-to-stop-publishing-photos-and-names-of-terrorists>
, we’d do better to relentlessly draw attention to the wider picture of how an 
unravelling in the Middle East leads to a political unravelling in European 
societies; and we should spend more energy trying to overcome the difficulty of 
covering Syria and what its citizens are being put through.

There are no simple answers to the mess the Middle East finds itself in, but 
building awareness of how the safety of citizens in Europe cannot be 
dissociated from the question of protecting civilians in Syria should be a 
constant focus. In recent decades no large-scale atrocity, whether Rwanda, the 
Balkan wars or post-2003 Iraq, has affected Europe’s political and social 
fabric like the Syrian war has. As Aleppo’s agonies deepen, the distant dream 
of a peaceful, democratic country emerging from the wreckage may live on among 
the Syrian diaspora inEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>. 
But in the meantime, it is our confusion and our fatalism – the “western bombs 
are the biggest problem” line, or the “what can we possibly do” line – that so 
many refugees live among.

It’s a good thing voices are calling for Europeans to stay steadfast and to 
refrain from conflating immigrants with terrorists. But we are still missing 
part of the equation: we can no longer ignore the connection between our fate 
and that of Syrians whose remaining hopes of being saved are fast dwindling.

The forces now besieging Aleppo are counting on our indifference as much as on 
their military hardware – witness the effort they have put into producing 
propaganda images. Russian and Syrian official announcements about “
humanitarian safe passage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/30/aleppo-fear-safe-passage-trap>” 
aren’t just aimed at tightening the noose on a whole population before it falls 
prey to a state machine of repression (a tactic from the Kremlin’s Chechnya 
war, by the way). They are also a ploy aimed at making the rest of us turn our 
gaze away, in the – not unfounded – belief that our attention span and our 
empathy for distant victims are limited.
 