
Sheryl Sandberg gave the commencement speech 
<http://qz.com/684804/you-are-not-born-with-a-fixed-amount-of-resilience-sheryl-sandbergs-powerful-commencement-speech/>
 at UC Berkeley last weekend, during the course of which she said many stirring 
things about the future awaiting the class of 2016. She also built on her 
much-commented upon Mothers’ DayFacebook post 
<https://www.facebook.com/sheryl/posts/10156819553860177>, in which she spoke 
for the first time about life in the wake of her husband’s death last year. 
These two elements, the motivational speaking and the personal reflections on 
grief, combined to do something that has so far eluded Sandberg and the 
corporate world generally: the acknowledgement that people are human.

The best commencement speeches: from Jill Abramson to Neil Gaiman
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/15/best-commencement-speeches-jill-abramson-neil-gaiman>
Since entering public life three years ago, one of the most likeable aspects 
of Sandberg has been that she is not, in some ways, a terribly good public 
speaker. While her words are always resolutely on message, full of phrases that 
make people outside the corporate world want to rip their own eyes out (not 
least, at this point, “lean in”), her delivery is uncertain and she is often 
visibly nervous. I say this with caution; as Sandberg has herself pointed out, 
the need to be likable is a criterion only applied to women and is measured in 
terms of softness, vulnerability, unwillingness to offend.

To avoid this, women in high executive office often assume a corporate persona 
that overcompensates by being either brittle and defensive, or Thatcher-esque 
in terms of belligerence. Either way doesn’t leave room for much in the way of 
doubt or shade. Early editions of Lean In suffered from this stylistic tic, an 
infuriating certainty, a spit-spot efficiency that failed to take into account 
the generations of women who had been trying to figure out the problem of 
workplace discrimination before Sandberg came along and saved us with her study 
of the data.

Since then, Sandberg has been on what she herself would almost certainly 
describe as a steep learning curve. For later editions of the book, she learned 
to use the phrase “women of color” and to acknowledge the existence of women 
who haven’t been to Harvard Business School. She tried very hard to address 
earlier criticisms. In these, her latest pronouncements, her corporate identity 
is less absolute and she seems finally persuaded of the fact you can’t live by 
data alone.

This seems important given the constituency of Sandberg’s audience. She is not 
speaking to people who relax after a hard day’s work by rereading a couple of 
chapters ofHelene Cixous <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H%C3%A9l%C3%A8ne_Cixous>
. She is not interested in whetherlogocentrism 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logocentrism> subjects thought to a two-tier 
system or what that means in terms of ingrained bias against minorities and 
women. She is a corporate beast, talking to other corporate beasts, and if she 
is able to expand the range of their vocabulary to include some sampling of 
lived experience, that can surely only be a good thing.

In the Facebook <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/facebook> post on 
Mothers’ Day, Sandberg talked about what she had learned from the sudden, 
shocking loss of her husband. Unlike the 8 million other single mothers in the 
US, half of whom live with their children below the poverty line, Sandberg is 
in a position of extraordinary privilege. But this doesn’t negate her 
experience, and there was something gratifying to hear her acknowledge the 
emotional if not the financial difficulties of single motherhood, not least 
because, in the first edition of her book, she blithely advised women that the 
most important career decision they could make was “choosing the right partner” 
to marry and have kids with. (I am a single mother of two kids, neither of whom 
had been born when that book came out, but I recall reading her advice and 
thinking, glumly, oh, terrific; so everything in a woman’s life still boils 
down to a question of who she marries).

In the commencement speech, Sandberg reiterated the difficulty of her last 12 
months, and, because she isSheryl Sandberg 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/sheryl-sandberg>, extrapolated a 
motivational message from it: a hope that the students might “learn in life the 
lessons that I only learned in death”.

She said, “you will be defined not just by what you achieve, but how you 
survive.” And, “You are not born with a fixed amount of resilience. It’s a 
muscle. You can build it up and then draw on it when you need it. And in that 
process, you figure out who you really are. And you just might become the very 
best version of yourself.”

These are slogans which lend themselves to the motivational posters that adorn 
the walls of Facebook campus. (In fact, as I recall, “Be Your Best Self” is one 
of them). You can quibble with the language, and recoil at the tone. But for 
once, the message is off-message enough to actually broaden minds in Silicon 
Valley.
 