
If, like Lost in Showbiz, your New Year resolution is to invest vast swaths of 
time in displacement activities, you may already be gripped by Donald Trump’s 
failure so far to sign any major artists to play at his inauguration. Indeed, 
it should by now be your primary concern.

For what it’s worth, I don’t think the musical element to the event has to be 
that complicated. If he’s not retired, can’t they just bookthat chap who played 
the banjo in Deliverance <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uzae_SqbmDE>? Apart 
from it being a suitably evocative passage of music, I’m sure Trump would 
regard it as a yugely gracious shout-out to his Appalachian heartlands. It’s 
certainly the first and last they will be getting, at least until he “reopens 
the coalmines”.

Unfortunately, whoever is in charge of booking the gig hasn’t got to this 
emotional space yet. And so it is that we are currently in the phase where a 
procession of celebrities are grandly announcing that they have turned it down, 
presumably because they have nothing in common with Trump’s movement except
OxyContin dependency <http://www.latimes.com/projects/oxycontin-part1/>.

Either way, the roll call is seemingly endless. Timberlake’s a no. Dion’s a 
no. Kiss are no. Revealing his unwillingness to play for Trump,Elton John 
inquired rhetorically 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/07/elton-john-i-really-hate-the-cult-of-celebrity>
: “Why not ask Ted fucking Nugent? Or one of those fucking country stars? 
They’d do it for you.” (I do think Theresa May missed a trick overlooking Elton 
for the top EU diplomat’s job that was vacated this week. But I suppose we know 
the thing about the prime minister – perhaps the only thing – is that she 
simply won’t be told.)

Former X Factor runner-up Rebecca Ferguson has revealed she was asked to 
perform at the inauguration, and replied that she wouldonly accept if she could 
sing Strange Fruit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/02/rebecca-ferguson-says-she-will-play-trump-inauguration-if-she-can-sing-strange-fruit>
. Bit of a risky strategy. Rebecca thinks she has ruled herself out with that – 
but she should be prepared for a surprise, yes, given that Trump is likely to 
simply regard the song as being about fruit that is strange. Remember, his 
presidential campaign was marked by a long succession of artists telling him 
ineffectuallynot to use their music 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2015/sep/10/donald-trump-rocks-to-the-left-with-rem>
. And asis traditional with rightwing politicians seeking backing tracks 
<http://www.neatorama.com/2012/11/13/The-Most-Misunderstand-Political-Campaign-Song-in-History/>
 on the stump, it was clear that Trump failed to even understand the choruses 
of his favourite songs, almost all of which served as savage indictments of the 
arseoisie to which he indisputably belongs. Keep on Rockin’ In the Free World, 
It’s the End of the World As We Know It – basically, if it hated on people like 
him and all their works, he was quite happy to use it as an accompaniment to 
his arrival for a press conference, typically via a descent on a gold 
escalator. Never get to fall in love / Never get to be cool …

Anyhow. One big surprise is that Andrea Bocelli won’t do it. Did you ever? 
Bocelli is the original tenor-for-a-tenner (10 million, but the point stands). 
He’ll do Time to Say Goodbye at a wedding at the drop of a cheque – yet 
apparently even he feels there is“too much heat” 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/music/news/andrea-bocelli-backs-away-trump-inauguration-much-heat-fans/>
 with this one.

Hang on – speaking of expensive wedding singers, what about Sting? Surely, 
surely Sting would be up for it? A few years ago, Sting took between a million 
and two million to do that gig for the regime of the late hideous Uzbek dictator
Islam Karimov 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2010/feb/22/sting-uzbekistan>
, who was accused almost hourly by human rights organisations of things such as 
conscripting armies of children for slave labour and boiling his enemies. Say 
what you like about Trump, no one’s accused him of boiling anyone yet. Like I 
say: don’t rule Sting out before time.

Or what about Mariah Carey? After the singer’s very public technical 
malfunction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2017/jan/01/mariah-carey-shrugs-off-new-years-eve-performance-trouble-in-message-to-fans>
 in a Times Square performance on New Year’s Eve, Mariah’s agent should be 
seeking to get her back on the horse as quick as possible – and where better 
than at the inauguration? Furthermore, we are talking about an artiste whose 
most famous quote is her reply to an interviewer’s question concerning Jennifer 
Lopez. Namely:“I don’t know her.” <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XMWZQrkdtew> 
Mariah is probably the only celebrity who could carry off some line about not 
even knowing who Trump is.

My own preference, however, is for Trump to do what he always does, and turn 
to his kids. Ladies and gentlemen, I give you: the Von Trump family singers. As 
well as being a nod to his Mitteleuropean heritage, please just picture them 
all in their best clothes, doingSo Long, Farewell 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Qy9_lfjQopU> on the world stage. It’d KILL. I 
see the family troupe as comprising Ivanka, Donald Jr, Eric, Tiffany, Ivanka’s 
husband Jared Kushner, and whichever of Donald Jr or Eric’s wives is less 
likely to have repaired to a “rest facility” by 20 January. Most adorable star 
of it all is naturally Barron Trump, who would take the Gretl von Trapp role. 
This would leave Barron last on stage at Papa’s party, inching backwards up the 
stairs as the world bidsauf wiedersehen and goodnight to America. Picture the 
moment, as he quavers, “The sun has gone to bed and so must I,” before curling 
up in mock sleep and being borne offstage by Ivanka. I’d rather watch that than 
Taylor Swift any day.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstars-wont-do-presidential-inauguration-hand-to-family-von-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F445e147bb5f985c874977ac3fc795a943ce110d8%2F0_27_4895_2937%2F4895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20stars%20won%E2%80%99t%20do%20the%20presidential%20inauguration%3F%20Hand%20it%20to%20the%20family%20Von%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstars-wont-do-presidential-inauguration-hand-to-family-von-trump%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20stars%20won%E2%80%99t%20do%20the%20presidential%20inauguration%3F%20Hand%20it%20to%20the%20family%20Von%20Trump&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Flostinshowbiz%2F2017%2Fjan%2F05%2Fstars-wont-do-presidential-inauguration-hand-to-family-von-trump%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F445e147bb5f985c874977ac3fc795a943ce110d8%2F0_27_4895_2937%2F4895.jpg>
 Barron and Melania Trump: will they make it to Canada? Photograph: Chip 
Somodevilla/Getty Images 
Still, poor dear little Barron, who never looks anything other than terrified. 
Surely someone must rescue him from the clutches of the gauleiters, and smuggle 
him and Melania across the mountains to a metaphorical Switzerland – Canada – 
where they can live freely and wear clothes made out of reproduction Louis 
Quatorze curtains? If they don’t, he could well be appointed head of the NSA 
before he hits puberty.

In the end, though, these should be sobering times for the celebrity 
community, who have been forced by various events in rightwing populism to 
confront the limits of their previously assumed superpowers. Contrary to the 
received wisdom of a couple of decades of the most overblown celebrity culture, 
no amount of endorsements or threats to move to Canada seem to wield any real 
clout these days. Hillary Clinton’s final rallies included performances by Jay 
Z, Beyoncé, Bruce Springsteen, Lady Gaga and Bon Jovi, and somehow – I believe 
there’s a Los Alamos computer tasked solely with explaining this mathematical 
impossibility to the celebrities – she still lost.Celebrity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/celebrity> endorsement is not what 
the media and others used to imagine it to be – in fact, some have suggested it 
is a form of “elitism” that may even move the dial a few points in the other 
direction.

So whatever musical entertainment or otherwise is finally scraped together for 
the inauguration, the celebrity community probably needs to get away from the 
idea that their refusal to perform is any sort of exercise of power. Guys: he 
is about to take delivery of the most apocalyptically sophisticated nuclear 
arsenal on the planet. I expect he is quite pissed off he can’t book Katy Perry 
– but there’s the end of the world; and then there’s the end of the world.
 