
A master’s abroad is basically a year-long holiday, isn’t it? It involves 
little or no studying, costs a fortune and is largely spent drinking, partying 
and Instagramming, right? Wrong. These courses are not just for bilingual 
jet-setters; they offer the opportunity of life-changing learning for all kinds 
of people. Here are five reasons you should think about getting academic 
overseas:

1 You make global contacts

Anushka Fernando, 31, works for a charity that helps refugees. She studied for 
a master’s in international education policy at Harvard University in 2010 and 
says the experience was invaluable for making contacts around the world.

“International places draw international people,” she says. “I found a diverse 
community at Harvard, where students came from different walks of life from 
disparate corners of the world. The work I do now has been boosted by them, for 
example by enabling me to recruit to volunteers to work on projects.”

2 You get the best accommodation

Undergraduates can walk around campus acting like they own the place, but in 
reality, postgraduates are boss. After all, they get the big rooms (often 
en-suite) in the best locations. Most universities guarantee a place in student 
accommodation for all international master’s students if the application is 
made within the deadline. And for those who want to find their own place to 
stay, universities often provide advice, including lists of approved landlords. 
They may even act as guarantors for private rentals if necessary.

Don't choose a master's before taking these four steps
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/28/advice-to-consider-before-doing-a-masters-degree>
Salih Bosca is from Turkey. He is currently studying a master’s at the 
University of Warwick and chose to live on campus.

“It has so many advantages,” he says. “I got to choose the best accommodation 
available and I am still in walking distance to cafes, restaurants and the 
cinema. I get to spend more time with friends rather than wasting my time on 
the bus every day.”

3 You discover new ways of learning

Studying abroad <https://www.theguardian.com/education/studying-abroad> can 
bring lots of new experiences: you may be taking a subject that isn’t available 
in your home country, and are likely to encounter new teaching methods. Anushka 
Fernando says one of the most beneficial aspects is being exposed to the 
insights of people from different cultures.

“My classes were very international and the different perspectives and 
experiences resulted in a very rich and meaningful learning experience,” she 
says.

Others agree. Gemma Silk, 35, is studying for a master’s in educational 
leadership and management at the Open University, while living in Malaysia.

“I came to Kaula Lumpur for my job and then chose to complete my master’s at 
the same time,” she explains. “Living abroad has had such a positive impact on 
me. The course is based online, but you don’t only learn through the studying – 
you learn through the life you are living too.”

4 You can get financial support

Organisations such as Erasmus <http://www.erasmusprogramme.com/> and DAAD 
<https://www.daad.de/deutschland/stipendium/datenbank/en/21148-scholarship-database/?status=&origin=&subjectGrps=&daad=&q=&page=1&back=1>
 offer numerous funding opportunities and awards. According to Dr Georg 
Krawietz, director of DAAD, there are about20 scholarships 
<http://www.daad.org.uk/en/12900/index.html> available for UK students to study 
in Germany each year, and there are also many funding schemes available from 
research institutions such as theMax Planck Society <https://www.mpg.de/en>. 

What student life is really like at a Spanish university
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/01/what-student-life-is-really-like-at-a-spanish-university>
But there are question marks over the future of programmes funded by the 
European Union, which may not be available once the UK has left the EU. 
Alternatively, many foreign students have part-time jobs to help them with the 
cost. “No one is supporting my master’s so I’ve kept a job alongside my 
studies,” says Silk.

5 You don’t have to know the language

Although living abroad is an opportunity to improve your linguistic skills, 
being able to banter in a foreign language isn’t essential. There are a huge 
number of courses taught in English – there are about 970 such courses in 
Germany alone, for example.

“My advice to anyone thinking about it is to go for it,” Silk says. “I have 
lived, worked and studied abroad and I’d say it’s the best decision I ever 
made.”

Keep up with the latest on Guardian Students: follow us on Twitter at
@GdnStudents <https://twitter.com/gdnstudents> – and become a member 
<https://register.theguardian.com/students/> to receive exclusive benefits and 
our weekly newsletter.
 