
As a young woman with a degree from a good university, I am something of an 
exception in a business that employs mostly middle-aged men with little or no 
higher education who made their way up from employee or trainee department 
manager to store manager. I was directly recruited at deputy store manager 
level and promoted quite quickly to manager, which means that I am a good 20 
years younger than my peers in management.

At first, I was worried that people would think less of me because of that or 
think that I’d had it easy. But I found out that it was quite the opposite: 
most of my employees admire the fact that I have a good degree but am willing 
to work 12-hour days, including at weekends.

Want to spend less time in supermarket queues? Stand behind full trolleys
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/shortcuts/2016/sep/12/spend-less-time-in-supermarket-queues>
What they see as a bad deal I see as a good one: I enjoy my job, and despite 
the long hours the pay is decent. My first pay cheque was higher than my 
mother’s – admittedly meagre – salary, and she has been teaching for 30 years.

I do sometimes feel bad about the fact that my employees earn so little. When 
I was a student I lived on both a (small) grant and income from my weekend 
jobs. It was a struggle at times, despite the fact that I lived alone, so I can 
only imagine what it’s like when you have to make one, two or three extra 
people survive on such a small salary.

I take comfort in the fact that I work for a big company that gives a few 
perks to its employees that can make a real difference. I also feel that I work 
in one of the few sectors where there is true upward mobility, provided that 
you are motivated and willing to learn.

My store feels like a second home to me. I get up every morning at 4.30am to 
be able to get there before 6.30am. We open at 9am, but the early hours from 
6.30am to 9am are decisive: you need to make sure that the deliveries have 
arrived on time, the bakery is up and running, and the fruit and vegetables are 
fresh.

Sometimes, employees don’t turn up, so you have to fill in for them. I enjoy 
stacking shelves occasionally: it’s a great way to get to know your colleagues 
in an informal way.

The first thing I do when I arrive is go around the store and say hello to all 
my employees. It can seem pretty basic, and takes about half an hour, which may 
seem like a waste of time for some, but I think it’s time well spent. At the 
store I previously worked at the manager didn’t bother doing this, and then 
would be surprised when he asked for something to be done and it wasn’t.

At first, you only exchange brief greetings, but as time goes on, people open 
up a bit more. They will volunteer information about their family and private 
life, but also on the items that have the best sales or new items that aren’t 
faring too well. They will point out how they dusted the shelves to make their 
aisle look more enticing, or they will tell you which questions the customers 
have been asking. All this is invaluable information to me, as I can’t have my 
ear to the ground in all sections of a store that makes £40m a year.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsecret-life-supermarket-manager-store%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961d6108783d03e4752a5230ea62b51da252cfe3%2F0_171_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20supermarket%20manager%3A%20My%20store%20feels%20like%20a%20second%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsecret-life-supermarket-manager-store%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20supermarket%20manager%3A%20My%20store%20feels%20like%20a%20second%20home&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsecret-life-supermarket-manager-store%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F961d6108783d03e4752a5230ea62b51da252cfe3%2F0_171_5138_3083%2F5138.jpg>
 ‘Employees will point out how they dusted the shelves to make their aisle look 
more enticing.’ Photograph: Chris Howes/Wild Places Photogra/Alamy Stock Photo 
After doing the rounds, I usually analyse the store performance of the 
previous day: did we meet our target turnover? How does it compare to the same 
day last year? I can know in a couple of clicks how many items one of my 
cashiers scans a minute, or how many sales I missed out on when an item wasn’t 
available. I can find out if I have a majority of customers with children or 
without children, if they buy organic food, if they’ll go for discount items. I 
even get grades every three months on how clean my storage space is.

This information can be daunting, as with every metric comes its corresponding 
target and ranking compared with other supermarkets in the area, or other 
supermarkets the same size, or supermarkets with roughly the same kind of 
customers. I’ve had to learn to distance myself from all the data and try to 
focus on the bigger picture: quite simply, are we making enough money to pay 
all the salaries and the upkeep of the store, and then some?

The secret life of a child therapist: you have to accept you can’t fix 
everything | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/secret-life-therapist-deprived-struggling-parents-families>
If turnover is increasing every day, life is significantly easier: you can 
hire people without any questions asked and buy equipment for the store without 
having to justify the use of every single item. It gets trickier when the store 
is stuck in a downward spiral, which is, to be honest, the case for many 
stores, with online retail chipping away at our sales. Some colleagues in 
management can remember a time when you could buy yourself a car with your 
end-of-year bonus. Today, bonuses are not even a tenth of what they used to be.

But it’s not just about the money. By far the most rewarding part of my job is 
being able to make a difference in so many people’s lives. It can be something 
as simple as explaining to a customer how to choose a good melon, or ensuring 
that they can find any item at any time of the day. It can be chatting with a 
pensioner who comes to the store a couple of times a day because he is lonely, 
or congratulating an employee on a great job they’ve done and seeing their face 
light up.

Once, I interviewed a man who had a gaping hole in his CV. After asking a few 
questions, it became clear that he had done some time in prison. I hired him 
anyway. Recently he got promoted to trainee department manager. There are few 
achievements in my life that I am more proud of than that.

• Are you a personal trainer, a tax adviser or an imam? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 