
My client came tottering across the vast expanse of carefully striped lawn in 
a pair of heels that probably cost more than I make in a week. I stopped 
planting the wrong plant in the wrong spot that she had insisted upon, and 
awaited her arrival.

“I’m going out now,” she said, suspiciously eyeing up the hole I’d dug. “I 
won’t be able to pay you today unless you can come back around eight tonight? I 
don’t have any cash.”

She hadn’t paid me for the last four weeks but I assured her it was OK, and 
she could pay me next time. She nodded and waved her hand dismissively “Can you 
also check the gutter outside the study window. I think it’s leaking.”

I explained that I was a landscape gardener and I didn’t really do that sort 
of thing. She stared straight through me: “Just make sure there aren’t any 
leaves in there blocking the drainpipe. Maybe check the window frame too. There 
are also those little yellow leaves on the driveway again. Make sure you get 
rid of them and then straighten the gravel.”

She then slid on her large designer sunglasses and turned to walk back across 
the lawn, unsteadily towards her brand new car.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsecret-life-gardener-i-love-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0968e0293e12a3497a6d23b7d3ae65fce9b2c64%2F0_0_3722_4507%2F3722.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20gardener%3A%20backache%2C%20stroppy%20clients%20and%20know-alls%20%E2%80%93%20but%20I%20love%20it%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsecret-life-gardener-i-love-it%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20gardener%3A%20backache%2C%20stroppy%20clients%20and%20know-alls%20%E2%80%93%20but%20I%20love%20it%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F04%2Fsecret-life-gardener-i-love-it%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb0968e0293e12a3497a6d23b7d3ae65fce9b2c64%2F0_0_3722_4507%2F3722.jpg>
 Pruning clematis: ‘I am instantly barraged by questions about non-flowering 
clematis and slug-infested hostas.’ Photograph: Peter Anderson/Getty 
Images/Dorling Kindersley 
You might read this and conclude that I don’t like being a gardener, but 
nothing could be further from the truth. I retrained in my thirties and 
wouldn’t trade it for any job in the world – other than Premiership footballer, 
obviously. After trying a wide variety of jobs and going through a couple of 
redundancies, I decided that I needed to find a job that I could settle into, 
and which was relatively recession proof. I figured grass never stops growing 
so there would always be a call for gardeners.

There is nothing better than spending all your days outside in unloved places 
turning them into beautiful ones. I get an immense sense of satisfaction upon 
completing a big design job and seeing the delight on a client’s face, knowing 
I have made them a garden they will treasure for years to come.

In my 15 years of gardening, I have dealt with people from all walks of life. 
But I have to say, the majority of the difficult clients tend to be very rich. 
They want absolute perfection in the least amount of time and for the very 
minimum price you can give them. They will argue over every last penny and even 
time your lunch break to make sure they are getting the utmost effort for their 
money.

Apart from the rich, the next most difficult client would have to be what I 
call the “Gardeners’ World gardener”. They are the enthusiastic amateurs who 
read gardening magazines and know all the Latin names but don’t want to do the 
physical work. They hover over your shoulder at all times and direct 
operations, which can be very wearing for eight hours. On many an occasion I 
have been very close to snapping at them as they asked for the plant I had 
already planted four times in different positions to be moved to yet another 
corner.

My dream client is one who allows me to get on with my work with little 
interference and a decent budget. These jobs are very rare but when one comes 
along I am very grateful and will often put in extra unbilled hours just for 
the joy of it.

It is a rare day when I get up in the morning and can move freely: some 
mornings my fingers are like claws

Aside from the weather, one of the worst things about being a gardener is the 
constant pulling of muscles, and backache. Not so long ago I did my back in and 
was in immense pain, but I still had to work. Unluckily, it was a week when I 
was building a small patio courtyard. I managed to get through moving three 
tons of sand and all the cobbles. thanks to a mixture of gritted teeth, strong 
tea and painkillers.

It is a rare day when I get up in the morning and can move freely: some 
mornings my fingers are like claws and my back is so tight that I move like a 
robot. I don’t think I will be able to garden for much longer. I am 45 years 
old and I would guess I have another seven or eight years at most before I am 
physically unable to complete jobs. I have no idea what I will do after that, 
but it will have to be something with no heavy lifting involved.

There is a constant worry about not being able to work because of injury or 
illness and the fact that we now have no real safety net in this country for 
people like myself.

As a gardener, downturns don’t affect me as much as you might think. Of course 
there is some drop-off at the lower end of the business, but the people I 
mostly work for are recession proof and have too much land for them to ever 
take care of themselves. But I am a positive person and I think I have more to 
contribute to the world than my biceps and a knowledge of turfing.

Another bugbear of being in this business is social occasions. I dread people 
finding out what I do for a living as I am instantly barraged by questions 
about non-flowering clematis and slug-infested hostas. I always try to avoid 
the questioning by saying, “I will give you my card later and I can come and 
have a look for you,” which tends to be greeted with a disappointed look. 
Everyone wants advice but no one wants to pay for it.

All in all it has been a good 15 years, and I wouldn’t swap it for the world – 
unless my back gives in or Mourinho has space upfront for a slightly balding, 
overweight 45-year-old.

• Are you a life coach, a chef or a civil servant? We want to hear your candid 
accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting your 
story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 