
In July of this year, a 25-year-old black army veteran, Micah Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/09/dallas-shooting-more-details-emerge-about-micah-xavier-johnson>
, drove to a peaceful Black Lives Matter rally in Dallas, got out of his car 
with an AK-47 and started shooting at white police officers as retribution for 
the police shootings of black men in Louisiana and Minnesota. It’s the kind of 
retaliatory violence that white Americans have feared for centuries. The kind 
that the writer and authorTa-Nehisi Coates said we should have seen coming 
<https://mic.com/articles/148602/ta-nehisi-coates-speaks-hard-truths-of-dallas-shooting-and-race-relations-in-the-us>
. The kind that is depicted in The Birth of a Nation, Nate Parker’s much 
anticipated and equally maligned slave rebellion film that opened over the 
weekend. And the kind that, frankly, I’m somewhat astonished we don’t see more 
often.

New York first-night moviegoers shrug off The Birth of a Nation controversy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/08/birth-of-a-nation-movie-opening-night-nate-parker-controversy>
Parker, who wrote, directed and stars in the Nat Turner biopic, which debuted 
in January at the Sundance Film Festival 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/jan/26/the-birth-of-a-nation-review-sundance-slavery-epic-as-brutal-as-braveheart>
 – where it won both the grand jury prize and audience award, and sold to Fox 
Searchlight for a record $17.5m – has been embroiled in controversy for months; 
in August, Variety magazine reported the suicide of the woman who accused him 
of rape 17 years ago. At the height of his publicity tour to promote the film, 
Parker was besieged with questions and demands for accountability, which he 
either deflected or addressed in a staged setting with an eerie lack of empathy 
(made even more noticeable given how the women in the film are depicted, 
particularly the two who are raped). Judging from this weekend’s box office,
where the film brought in far less than projected 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/09/girl-on-the-train-birth-of-a-nation-us-box-office>
, maybe he should have handled things a little differently.

Back when the film sold, black America was still reeling from the most recent 
deaths in what has become a seemingly endless and horrific wave of police 
killings of black people since the 2014 shooting death ofMichael Brown 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/aug/12/ferguson-missouri-shooting-michael-brown-civil-rights-police-brutality>
 in Ferguson, Missouri. The month prior,Mario Woods 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/feb/12/mario-woods-autopsy-san-francisco-police-fatal-shooting>
, a 26-year-old black man, was shot 20 times by five police officers in San 
Francisco after allegedly stabbing a man in the arm. Woods died on the scene, 
and the police officers went back to work. Tweets and Facebook posts from black 
people everywhere echoed the same grief-stricken sentiment: “This can’t go on. 
Stop killing us.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Di18z1EQCoyg&media=>
The racial and political climate was ripe for a film about black uprising, 
even about one of the bloodiest slave revolts in American history – and soon 
after, as the hashtag#OscarsSoWhite went viral during the 2016 Oscars 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/25/oscarssowhite-right-and-wrong-academy-awards-audience>
, the Academy of Motion Pictures couldn’t believe its good fortune. Oscar buzz 
was immediate for The Birth of a Nation, and its handsome, hardworking, golden 
boy director, Nate Parker. I was certainly among the legions of black 
supporters who saw this as a remarkable and major moment: in the wake of all 
these black male bodies being killed, here was one black male body that was not 
just living, but showing up for and on behalf of us, telling our history, and 
being celebrated for it.

History, though, has a way of being told when and whether we want it to or 
not, and the death of Parker’s accuser put him and his friend Jean Celestin in 
the hot seat during a time of heightened awareness of the meaning of“rape 
culture” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/07/anti-rape-activists-vigil-birth-of-a-nation-nate-parker>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fthe-birth-of-a-nation-problems-nate-parker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc14ea4fb699ab027461369027c6db20e1d409c%2F0_139_2316_1388%2F2316.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Birth%20of%20a%20Nation%3A%20how%20Nate%20Parker%20failed%20to%20remake%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fthe-birth-of-a-nation-problems-nate-parker%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Birth%20of%20a%20Nation%3A%20how%20Nate%20Parker%20failed%20to%20remake%20history&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffilm%2Ffilmblog%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fthe-birth-of-a-nation-problems-nate-parker%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffcc14ea4fb699ab027461369027c6db20e1d409c%2F0_139_2316_1388%2F2316.jpg>
 Nate Parker earlier in October. Photograph: Evan Agostini/Invision/AP 
According to court records, in 1999, a 19-year-old woman at Penn State 
reported that she had been raped by Parker and Celestin, who, both 20 at the 
time,claimed the sex was consensual 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/aug/29/nate-parker-ebony-interview-rape-accusations-consent>
. Celestin was convicted of sexual assault and served almost two years in jail. 
Parker was acquitted of all charges, and now holds firm that he was 
“vindicated” and so it’s time for everyone to move on.

Black folks quickly divided ourselves into two separate camps: those who will 
see the film, and those who will not. Roxane Gay wrote an especially poignant 
essay 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/08/21/opinion/sunday/nate-parker-and-the-limits-of-empathy.html>
 about why she belongs to the latter camp, in which she states, as a rape 
survivor: “I cannot separate the art and the artist, just as I cannot separate 
my blackness and my continuing desire for more representation of the black 
experience in film from my womanhood, my feminism, my own history of sexual 
violence, my humanity.”

Nate Parker criticizes rape case coverage: 'Do they care about anyone 
involved?'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/05/nate-parker-criticizes-press-coverage-rape-case>
I feel much the same, although as a cultural critic and a black woman who 
thinks constantly about art and its artists, blackness, womanhood, feminism, as 
well as my own history ofsexual assault  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jul/11/casting-couch-coercion-rape-shame-victims>
and my humanity, I can’t turn away from a film that purports to use art as a 
way of addressing racial injustice, especially right now,in this particular 
moment 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/10/8-years-in-obamas-america.html#aug-9-14>
, when we are fighting and dying, rising and falling, and yet still pushing 
onward out here in this malignant and exacting struggle – there’s too much at 
stake.

As it turns out, the film is not so much art at all. It’s an egregiously 
average, sweeping epic drama in the tradition of Braveheart or Spartacus, that 
is both predictable (Strange Fruit plays while black bodies are swinging from 
trees; Swing Low, Sweet Chariot underscores the wide shot of a cotton field; a 
little white girl skips playfully as she leads a little black girl by a rope 
tied to her neck) and devoid of character development, particularly among the 
women, who are all one-dimensional (Turner’s beloved nana gives a big speech 
about pride and heritage and then promptly dies), in direct service of their 
menfolk, and have about 50 lines between them throughout the two-hour film.

About three-quarters of the way through the screening at a nearly empty 
theatre in Brooklyn, a young black woman leaned across the open seat between us 
and whispered as she pointed at the screen: “You think that one with the blood 
on his shirt is the brother who did time?” I whispered back that I didn’t think 
Jean Celestin had a role in the film, but that he was credited as co-writer of 
the movie’s screenplay. She nodded her head, and seemed a little disappointed 
as she sunk back into her seat – like she’d sat through one whole hour and 45 
minutes of this movie waiting for something interesting to happen, and then she 
couldn’t even get that out of it.

I wasn’t necessarily looking for anything especially interesting to happen, 
although I was open to being pleasantly surprised – the potential was certainly 
there. Mostly, I was unmoved by the film. I left the theater thinking not about 
who we were during pre-civil war slavery, but rather who are not in post-civil 
war slavery, when black people are profiled and policed and killed and 
incarcerated for no reason other than being black. The character of Turner’s 
wife, Cherry, played by Aja Naomi King, says virtually the same thing after 
Nat’s rebellion has failed and black people all across the county are being 
arbitrarily hanged as punishment.

Slavery has evolved in modern America, but we black Americans have evolved, 
too. We don’t need to kill white people to get free. We need to kill slavery 
and the systemic racism that preserves its legacy by continuing to hold up our 
humanity in a country with a history of not seeing us as human.
 