
A rival emerges to the annual Kardashian drama about what the Kardashian 
Christmas card will look like. It is a drama about whether there has simply 
been too much drama for the Kardashians to bring themselves to do aChristmas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas> card.

Time was that America’s first family would gather without exception for a 
festive tableau 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2013/dec/05/kardashian-christmas-cards-ghosts-of-khristmases-past>
, whose production values grew higher in accordance with whatever DUI 
arrests/72-day marriages they were required to gloss over that year. The 
high-water mark of this era was undoubtedly 2013’s effort, shot on a 
gazillion-dollar budget by one-note photographer David LaChappelle, which 
showed the various Kardashian women disporting themselves ina sort of 
post-apocalyptic gameshow set 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/dec/05/kardashians-christmas-card-illuminati-message>
, with then-paterfamilias Bruce Jenner trapped in some kind of glass chrysalis. 
It was an absolute masterklass, and its meanings are still unfurling themselves 
to me like so many golden lotus flowers.

Last year, however, the annual ritual seemed in grave peril. Speculation was 
rife that no card would appear, particularly given that Khloé Kardashian’s 
estranged husband, Lamar Odom, had spent a period in a coma after overdosing 
four days into a stay at a brothel. Frankly, I would have popped a Santa hat on 
him and styled it out, but in the end, the Kardashians went with a card simply 
featuringa group shot of all their children 
<http://www.eonline.com/shows/kardashians/photos/10480/kardashians-christmas-cards-throughout-the-years/668309>
.

This year, the family once again approaches the festive season involved in 
dramas not immediately suggestive of interpretation via the medium of synthetic 
snow and eveningwear. Not only has Kim withdrawn from the limelight after being 
the victim of a violent burglary in Paris, but her husband, Kanye West, was 
last week admitted to apsychiatric ward suffering from what was described as 
exhaustion 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/30/kanye-west-out-hospital-exhaustion-saint-pablo-tour>
. He has now returned home, but the prospect of him participating in a card 
seems slim.

Then again, perhaps we once again underestimate the clan. After all, when 
Kanye was first admitted, many reports declared that E! had indefinitely 
suspended production on Keeping Up With the Kardashians. This seems to have 
been an assumption too far for the network, which will tolerate a lot of 
suggestions about itself, but not that one. It promptly moved to issuea 
statement correcting this falsehood 
<http://deadline.com/2016/11/kim-kardashian-e-denies-keeping-up-with-kardashians-kanye-west-production-shut-down-hospitalization-1201861099/>
, declaring: “Keeping Up With the Kardashians is currently in production and 
has not been halted.”

Well, how disgraceful of anyone to have assumed otherwise. Let no one have the 
temerity to accuse the network of seemliness again – and let us hope the famous 
Christmas card is just as “in production”, too.
 