
We thought the United States would step back from the abyss. We believed, and 
the polls led us to feel sure, that Americans would not, in the end, hand the 
most powerful office on earth to an unstable bigot, sexual predator and 
compulsive liar.

People all around the world had watched and waited, through the consecutive 
horrors of the 2016 election campaign, believing the Trump nightmare would 
eventually pass. But today the United States – the country that had, from its 
birth, seen itself as a beacon that would inspire the world, a society that 
praised itself as “the last best hope of earth”, the nation that had seemed to 
be bending the arc of history towards justice, as Barack Obama so memorably put 
it on this same morning eight years ago – has stepped into the abyss.

Today the United States stands not as a source of inspiration to the rest of 
the world but as a source of fear. Instead of hailing its first female 
president, it seems poised to hand the awesome power of its highest office to a 
man who revels in his own ignorance, racism and misogyny. One who knows him well
describes him as a dangerous 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/jul/19/trump-co-writer-says-candidate-could-end-civilisation-the-art-of-the-deal-tony-schwartz>
 “sociopath”.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
And what awesome power he will soon have. Republicans did not just defy almost 
every projection, prediction and data-rich computer model to win the 
presidency. They also won the House of Representatives and much of the Senate. 
Trump will face few checks on his whims. A man with no control of his impulses 
will be unrestrained, the might of a superpower at the service of his ego and 
his id.

The most obvious impact will be on the country he will soon rule. Just think 
of what he has promised. A deportation force to round up and expel the 11 
million undocumented migrants who make up 6% of the US workforce. A ban on all 
Muslims entering the country, later downgraded to a pledge to impose “extreme 
vetting” on anyone coming from a suspect land. A giant wall to seal off the 
Mexican border. “Some form of punishment” for women who seek an abortion. And 
prison for the woman he just defeated.

People will say that all that was just talk. But they said that throughout the 
campaign, insisting that Trump would “pivot” to a more moderate stance, that he 
would become more “presidential”. He never did. And surely he will see this 
victory as proof that he was always right, that his instincts are perfect and 
never to be challenged. There is no reason for him to moderate at all. The 
office of Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, Franklin Roosevelt and John F 
Kennedy is now his playpen. He can do what he likes.

This will be America’s ordeal primarily. But it will affect all of us. A 
reality TV star with no experience of either politics or the military will have 
the nuclear button as his toy. This, remember, is the man who reportedly asked 
several times, during a military briefing, why the US didn’t use nuclear 
weapons since it had them. This is the man who has said “I love war”. Whose 
proposed solution to Isis is “to bomb the shit out of them” and steal the oil.

Think of the anxiety this morning in Riga, Vilnius or Tallinn. In the summer, 
Trump told the New York Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/07/21/us/politics/donald-trump-issues.html> he did 
not believe in Nato’s core principle: that an attack on one member should be 
met by a response from all. He seemed to see Nato as a mafia protection racket: 
unless the little guys paid up, they should be left undefended. Vladimir Putin 
– Trump’s hero, admired as the very model of a leader by the president-elect of 
the United States – will not need more of a hint than that. The Russian 
dictator will surely see his opportunity to invade one or more Baltic states 
and expand his empire. President Trump would only admire the macho swagger of 
such a move.

A trade war looms with China, the imposition of tariffs that could imperil the 
entire global trading system. America is about to turn inward, towards 
protectionism. The markets have already delivered their verdict on that. They 
plunged.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump's%20victory%20speech%20in%20full%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%27s%20victory%20speech%20in%20full%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fdonald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video&media=>
Donald Trump’s victory speech in full – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/donald-trumps-victory-speech-in-full-video>
And what about our planet? Trump believes climate change is a hoax 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/>
 perpetrated by the Chinese. He will do nothing to reduce emissions: he does 
not believe they exist.

But beyond all that, there is another consequence of this terrifying decision, 
no less dark. Trump’s success has delighted white nationalists and racists in 
his own country and beyond. His victories in the key battleground states were 
hailed by David Duke, a former luminary of the Ku Klux Klan: “God Bless Donald 
Trump,” he tweeted <https://twitter.com/DrDavidDuke/status/796217486685458432>. 
“It’s TIME TO TAKE AMERICA BACK.” The Dutch nationalist Geert Wilders was in 
similarly cheery mood: “The people are taking their country back,” he said, “So 
will we.” Marine Le Pen will feel the same jubilation, as will every other 
populist or nationalist who traffics in hate.

For they have seen the power of a message built on fear and loathing. It’s not 
good enough to say this is all about the economic anxiety of those who have 
been left behind, though that clearly played a part in winning rustbelt states 
for Trump. But it’s an incomplete explanation because Trump did not only win 
those voters. He won63% of white men and 52% of white women 
<https://twitter.com/rogue_fireball/status/796215739564728320>. Not all of 
those were the left behind. A lot of them were people drawn to a message that 
was, in part and however thinly coded, about reinstating white privilege.

Who is to blame? The list is so long, 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/07/who-is-to-blame-us-election-trump>
 from the Republican party to the media, from the pollsters and data nerds who 
got it so wrong to the Clinton campaign team that took onetime Democratic 
bastions for granted, including Clinton herself, who for all her strengths was 
a flawed candidate. You can condemn all of them, but on a day like this who 
really cares about blame? The most powerful country in the world is to be led 
by its most dangerous ever leader, a figure who could have walked out of a 
school textbook narrating the darkest history of the 20th century. The wartime 
holder of the office that in January will be Trump’s once told Americans they 
had “nothing to fear but fear itself”. That is not true today. America and the 
rest of us have plenty to fear – starting with the man who now stands on top of 
the world.
 