
In Crieff on Friday morning on the second day of the annual conference of 
Scotland’s local authorities an otherwise unremarkable panel session took place 
to discuss local government reform. In the middle of the proceedings, Willie 
Rennie, the Scottish Lib Dems’ leader who always looks like a small-town bank 
manager about to admonish an old customer for his prodigal spending habits, 
threw out a challenge to the audience. “Are there any SNP members here who want 
to put a question of the government,” he asked.

The government was represented on the panel by Derek Mackay, the recently 
appointed finance minister. To the surprise of no one in the room the silence 
of the grave rapidly descended. There were plenty of SNP members present but, 
as everyone in Scottish politics knows, any nationalists who valued a future in 
the party would rather go dooking for chips in a deep fat fryer than question 
its financial husbandry. Rennie’s interjection was timely and pertinent. In a 
Scotland dominated by the SNP on every political level the task of maintaining 
the daily conduct of democracy, the practice of holding central government to 
account, falls a little more heavily on the shoulders of those party members 
who have been elected to office. Rennie’s challenge to the SNP faithful came 
just a few hours after it had been announced thattheir party had taken the 
council ward of Garscadden and Scotstounhill 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14787827.SNP_by_election_victory_in_Labour_heartland_signals_power_shift_in_Glasgow/?ref=rl&lp=2>
 in the north-west of Glasgow.

This area, long a Labour stronghold, was furiously contested as each side 
sensed that the outcome would act as a weathervane pointing to the overall 
outcome of next May’s local authority elections. The SNP have coveted control 
of Glasgow city council since they came to power nationally in 2007. At the 
2012 local elections the SNP were just beginning to break out the champagne in
Glasgow <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/glasgow> when it was announced that 
Labour, against all the odds and the prevailing nationalist headwind, had 
managed to hold on to the most prized of its municipal jewels.

Scotland bans controversial gas extraction technique
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/06/scotland-bans-underground-coal-gasification-ugc>
Since then though, all the indications have suggested that the SNP has 
virtually annexed the city. In 2014, Glasgow was only one of four Scottish 
local authority areas to vote Yes in the independence referendum. The following 
year, every one of the city’s seven Westminster seats fell to the SNP, in the 
fierce after-shock of the constitutional division. And although Labour 
recovered a little lost ground in Glasgow in this year’s Holyrood elections, 
the momentum is firmly with the nationalists. If they do take Glasgow then 
their writ will effectively run in every important area ofScotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>. This is why Rennie’s challenge is 
such a pertinent one.

Tories have made much of their elevation to become the official opposition at 
Holyrood and there has been much silly talk about the emergence of their leader 
Ruth Davidson as a credible future first minister. In reality though, Davidson 
has been a major disappointment at Holyrood. She has failed adequately to 
distance herself from the hard right, which has annexed the UK Conservative 
party at Westminster with its sinister anti-immigration views. Her policy 
programme begins and ends with opposing a second referendum in independence. 
She charges the SNP with obsessing about independence; in truth though, no one 
is more obsessed by it than she and it has made her position as leader of the 
opposition faintly ridiculous.

It is virtually certain that the government of Scotland will remain in the 
hands of the SNP for a generation, yet already this party is beginning to fall 
into the same bad habits that finally did forLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> in Scotland. They talk a great 
deal but so far have delivered little. At the local authority conference, 
Mackay, whose performance was described as lacklustre and predictable, could 
only say that people had to be prepared to pay more if they wanted improved 
public services. Not a scintilla of fresh or innovative thinking in funding 
models, which the much-lauded community empowerment bill might have been 
expected to open up.

Mackay was saying this even as it was being revealed that the NHS 24 computer 
project has experienced a73% hike in cost to more than £130m 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14787758.Future_of_NHS_24_in_doubt_as_crisis_hit_IT_project_costs_soar_by_73_/>
. Elsewhere it was revealed thatNHS Tayside needs to make £58m of savings 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14787747.Crisis_hit_Scots_NHS_board_has__no_plan__to_deal_with___11_6m_budget_deficit__says_auditor/>
 following years of government bail-outs. ScotRail, the national rail operator 
has long been a national disgrace. Last week it was revealed that its Dutch 
owners Abellio has admitted makingso much money from the deal 
<http://www.heraldscotland.com/news/14762449.Abellio_making___1_million_profit_a_month_from_ScotRail_franchise/>
 that it can plough the profits back into its Netherlands operation. Despite 
all of this, the SNP have become politically untouchable. Yet Labour is in no 
position to land a single blow.

Hard Brexit could cost Scotland £2,000 a head and 80,000 jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/oct/06/hard-brexit-could-see-scotland-lose-80000-jobs-and-cost-2000-a-head>
No matter how you try to crunch the numbers from Thursday’s by election they 
convey disquietude for Labour. Certainly, the turnout at 24% was ridiculously 
low and the margin of victory slim, but it still represented a 20% swing to the 
SNP. In 2012, Labour gained 60% of the city vote. If the SNP do take Glasgow 
next year it will be less of a testament to its popularity and competence than 
the utter failure of Scottish Labour to engage at any level with voters. They 
really ought not to be losing so much ground in Scotland’s biggest city. The 
SNP’s antipathy to Glasgow is both real and historic.

This city, which has suffered disproportionately from re-drawn local authority 
boundaries and health inequality, continues to drive Scotland’s economy. Yet 
the SNP annually cuts its Holyrood block grant while throwing a third of 
Scotland’s overall budget at a failing health service, which excels only at the 
rate at which it has increased managerialism and secured the financial futures 
of the children of thousands of NHS executives. Glasgow is lamentably 
under-represented at cabinet level in the SNP government. The neglect of 
Glasgow by the SNP should be on every Labour councillor seeking re-election 
next May.

On 10 October, Glasgow will reveal its blueprint for thriving in the face of 
Brexit uncertainty. The theme of this fightback document will be Glasgow is 
Open For Business. It’s not dissimilar to London’s response but it doesn’t have 
the vast riches that make it easier for the English capital. If Glasgow can 
convey and then maintain a sense of optimism in the face of Brexit and of 
deploying its gifts for innovation laughing in the face of adversity the SNP 
threat may yet be put to flight.
 