
The Conservative party has made a strategic decision to stuff young people. 
Not out of sadism, not because it derives vicarious thrills from inflicting 
misery on the next generation: the Tories don’t care because they have 
calculated that they don’t have to.The young are less likely to vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/18/fewer-young-people-vote-worse-for-britain>
, goes their rationale, and they are certainly unlikely to vote for us. We can 
safely ringfence them for economic pain, balancing the nation’s books on their 
youthful backs, and we will suffer few political consequences for it.

Short-termism doesn’t cover it. Britain’s destiny is now in the hands of a 
generation soaked in pessimism, scarred by economic insecurity and decline, 
demonised by politicians and press barons. It did not need to be so: it was a 
choice.

Consider the findings of the Prince’s Trust in its annual Youth Index 
<https://www.princes-trust.org.uk/about-the-trust/research-policies-reports/youth-index-2017>
. The overall wellbeing of young people, it has announced, is lower now than at 
any point since it launched the index eight years ago. Over a quarter of young 
people report feeling a lack of control over their lives; over a third feel 
they will have a “worse standard of living than their parents”; 42% feel that 
“traditional goals” such as owning a home, or getting a steady job are 
“unrealistic”. The young will pay for political developments they 
overwhelmingly did not vote for: nearly six out of 10 say that recent political 
events and the current economic climate make them feel anxious for their future.

They have stolen the essential of human existence, that which offers assurance 
at times of difficulty: optimism

Other research hints at an even graver lack of confidence in the future. A 
poll last year found that half of Britons think today’s young people will have 
a worse lot in life than their parents;just 22% of younger Brits believe their 
life will be better 
<https://www.ipsos-mori.com/researchpublications/researcharchive/3369/people-in-western-countries-pessimistic-about-future-for-young-people.aspx>
. The suffering is made more tangible by appalling figures on mental health. 
Between the rise of Thatcher and the mid-2000s, rates of depression and anxiety 
among the young haveincreased by 70% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2004/sep/13/childrensservices.mentalhealth>
; andamong 15- and 16-year-olds 
<http://www.nuffieldfoundation.org/sites/default/files/files/Changing%20Adolescence_Social%20trends%20and%20mental%20health_introducing%20the%20main%20findings.pdf>
 specifically,they have doubled 
<http://www.youngminds.org.uk/about/whats_the_problem/mental_health_statistics> 
in the past 30 years.

For the sake of her political brand, Theresa May this week said laudable 
things about confronting the stigma of mental illness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-mental-health-pledges-cuts>
 and giving physical and mental health parity of esteem. But the truth is that 
her government is undermining the mental wellbeing of young women and men: not 
just with cuts to mental health services, but also with policies that have left 
a generation in an ever tightening vice.

No developed OECD nation other than Greece has suffered such a fall in 
workers’ real wagesas Britain 
<https://www.tuc.org.uk/economic-issues/labour-market/uk-workers-experienced-sharpest-wage-fall-any-leading-economy-tuc>
: among our younger fellow citizens,the decline has been even more acute 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/27/uk-joins-greece-at-bottom-of-wage-growth-league-tuc-oecd>
. According to a social mobility commission reportlast year 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/state-of-the-nation-2016> – 
commissioned by the government itself – hourly pay for young workers has 
slumped by 15% since the crash. We live in a country where young workers, 
particularly from black and minority ethnic backgrounds,are far more likely to 
be underemployed than their older counterparts 
<http://strongerunions.org/2016/11/17/young-workers-challenge-6-underemployment/>
.

And it is not only job insecurity and low wages gnawing away at the living 
standards of those who constitute this nation’s future. Hundreds of thousands 
grow up in overcrowded homes which – as a Shelter report a decade ago 
highlighted – has a “lasting impact on a child’s health and wellbeing 
throughout their life”,leaving them more likely to suffer everything from 
meningitis to asthma to depression 
<https://england.shelter.org.uk/__data/assets/pdf_file/0007/66364/Lifechancereport.pdf>
.

The housing crisis leaves its muddy footprints on the bank statements of a 
generation. According to the social mobility commission, housing costs have 
risen twice as fast as the incomes of Britain’s under-44s. Home ownership is in 
freefall among that age group – the commission’s figures suggest it is 17% 
lower than a decade ago – and the leading Conservatives believe that building 
social housing“just creates Labour voters”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/02/nick-clegg-george-osborne-cut-welfare-poorest-boost-tory-popularity>

And so a generation is stuffed into an unregulated private rented sector, hit 
by soaring rents and unable to put down roots. Is it any wonder that, last 
year, nearly half of Britons between 18 and 30 said that they were postponing 
having children? “Suspended adulthood” ishow the Young Women’s Trust describes 
it 
<http://www.standard.co.uk/lifestyle/low-pay-and-lack-of-work-mean-under30s-are-living-in-suspended-adulthood-a3352186.html>
.

What has happened to youth services is indicative of the political elite’s 
contempt for young people. Local authorities have been pummelled by Tory cuts, 
and youth services are selected for the scalpel because those who depend on 
them are politically expendable. According to a recent report by Unison, £387m 
was taken from the coffers of youth services between April 2010 and April 2016. 
The consequences? Thedecimation of youth provision 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/content/uploads/2016/08/23996.pdf> in modern Britain:
603 youth centres gone 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/2016/08/we-must-support-young-people-and-the-services-they-rely-on/>
, nearly 140,000 fewer places for young people.

Theresa May's mental health pledges don't roll back years of Tory cuts | 
Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-mental-health-pledges-cuts>
What a message to send young Britons. We expect you to work, but we will make 
you poorer for it. We will preach the benefits of home ownership, and give you 
housing insecurity. We will remove the spaces you have to congregate and 
develop. We will punish your aspirations for education with debt.

We will give you a society that treats wealth as synonymous with success while 
robbing you of opportunity. And we will steal that most essential quality of 
human existence, the thing that makes you want to get out of bed in the 
morning, that feeling which offers assurance at times of difficulty: optimism, 
that what will come will surpass what has been, a better lot in life than your 
parents could have expected.

We will not solve the woes of the next generation by directing the insecurity 
elsewhere and penalising older Britons instead. And lack of resources is no 
excuse, for this is a wealthy country. We can afford to invest in and cultivate 
a new generation – indeed we have no future unless we do. We can build housing 
they can afford, and which gives them comfort and space for a family; we can 
pioneer a German-style industrial strategy that creates skilled jobs with 
dignity, not the zero-hour insecurity we see in the service sector; cease the 
discrimination in the minimum wage and social security provision; we can give 
them the services that make them well-rounded and content.

If we fail to do all these things, our society will suffer for it. It may be 
politically expedient for the Conservative party to not just ignore the young 
but victimise them as well, but how can it be in the interests of this country?
 