
In the Oscar-winning The Big Short 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/the-big-short>, Steve Carell plays the angry 
Wall Street outsider who predicts (and hugely profits from) the great financial 
crash of 2007-08. He sees sub-prime mortgages rated triple-A but which, in 
reality, are junk – and bets billions against the banks holding them. In real 
life he is Steve Eisman, he is still on Wall Street, and he is still shorting 
stocks he thinks are going to plummet. And while he’s tight-lipped about which 
ones (unless you have $1m to spare for him to manage) it is evident he has one 
major target in mind: continental Europe’s banks – and Italy’s are probably the 
worst.

Why Italy? Because, he says, the banks there are stuffed with “non-performing 
loans” (NPLs). That’s jargon for loans handed out to companies and households 
where the borrower has fallen behind with repayments, or is barely paying at 
all. But the Italian banks have not written off these loans as duds, he says. 
Instead, billions upon billions are still on the books, written down as worth 
about 45% to 50% of their original value.

The big problem, says Eisman, is that they are not worth anywhere near that 
much. In The Big Short, Eisman’s staff head to Florida to speak to the owners 
of newly built homes bundled up in “mortgage-backed securities” rated as AAA by 
the investment banks. What they find are strippers with loans against multiple 
homes but almost no income, the mortgages arranged by sharp-suited brokers who 
know they won’t be repaid, and don’t care. Visiting the housing estates that 
these triple-A mortgages are secured against, they find foreclosures and 
dereliction.

What is very negative is that in every country in Europe, the largest owner of 
sovereign bonds are that country’s banks

In a mix of moral outrage at the banks – and investing acumen – Eisman and his 
colleagues bought as many “swaps” as possible to profit from the inevitable 
collapse of the mortgage-backed securities, making a $1bn profit along the way.

This time around, Eisman is not padding around the plains of Lombardy because 
he says the evidence is in plain sight. When financiers look to buy the NPLs 
off the Italian banks, they value the loans at what they are really worth – in 
other words, how many of the holders are really able to repay, and how much 
money will be recovered. What they find is that the NPLs should be valued at 
just 20% of their original price. Trouble is, if the Italian banks recognise 
their loans at their true value, it wipes out their capital, and they go bust 
overnight.

“Europe is screwed. You guys are still screwed,” says Eisman. “In the Italian 
system, the banks say they are worth 45-50 cents in the dollar. But the bid 
price is 20 cents. If they were to mark them down, they would be insolvent.”

Eisman is careful not to name any specific Italian bank. But fears about the 
solvency of the system – weighed down by an estimated €360bn in bad debts – are 
not new. In official “stress tests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jul/29/rescue-package-in-place-as-europes-oldest-bank-fails-stress-tests>
” of 51 major European banks in July by the European Banking Authority, Italy’s 
third largest bank, Banca Monte dei Paschi di Siena, emerged as the weakest. It 
triggered a rescue package – and soothing words from Italy’s finance minister, 
who said there was no generalised crisis in the banking system. But MPPS’s 
share price remains at just 25 cents, down more than 90% from two years ago.

How worried should British bank account (and shareholders) be? “I’m not really 
worried about England’s banks,” says Eisman. “They are in better shape than 
most in Europe.” When it comes to the US, Eisman’s outrage, so central to the 
plot of The Big Short, has melted away (just don’t start him onHousehold 
Finance Corporation 
<https://www.ft.com/content/afcfac42-34a2-11e6-ad39-3fee5ffe5b5b>, the 
HSBC-owned lender at the heart of sub-prime crisis). “I think the regulators 
did a horrendous, just horrendous job pre-crisis. But under the Fed, the banks 
have been enormously deleveraged and de-risked. There are no sub-prime 
mortgages any more... the European regulators have been much more lenient than 
the US regulators.”

Eisman was of the view that US banks were rather boring as an investment – 
although Donald Trump’s victory has changed that. “I have a feeling there could 
be a softening in the Department of Labor rules (anObama-led crackdown 
<http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-04-14/brokers-handling-iras-face-tougher-rules-under-obama-backed-plan>
 on how banks sell financial products) and the regulatory environment has now 
changed in favour of the banks.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbig-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f6d0a291270c4c80d07f0e48b1c2f4c6430d970%2F0_46_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Big%20Short%3A%20is%20the%20next%20financial%20crisis%20on%20its%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbig-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Big%20Short%3A%20is%20the%20next%20financial%20crisis%20on%20its%20way%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Fnov%2F19%2Fbig-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7f6d0a291270c4c80d07f0e48b1c2f4c6430d970%2F0_46_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Steve Eisman: ‘I’m not really worried about England’s banks. They are in 
better shape than most in Europe.’ Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images 
Trump’s victory has sent the bond markets into disarray, with the yield on 
government bonds rising steeply. While this sounds good for savers – interest 
rates could rise – it is bad news for the holders of government bonds, which 
fall in value when the yield rises. Eisman sees that as another woe for 
Europe’s banks, who hold vast amounts of “sovereign bonds”.

“What is very negative is that in every country in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>, the largest owner of that 
country’s sovereign bonds are that country’s banks,” he says. As the bonds 
decline in value, then the capital base of the banks deteriorates.

He doesn’t share the optimism around Deutsche Bank since Trump’s victory. The 
troubled German bank 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/27/deutsche-bank-how-did-a-beast-of-the-banking-world-get-into-this-mess>
, facing a $14bn fine in the US for mortgage bond mis-selling, was for a long 
time one of the biggest lenders to the Trump business empire. In the three days 
after Trump’s victory, shares in Deutsche Bank, regarded as Europe’s most 
systemically important bank, jumped by a fifth from €12.90 to €15.30 as traders 
bet onTrump-inspired leniency over the fine 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/wonk/wp/2016/09/30/trumps-unthinkable-conflict-millions-in-debts-to-german-bank-now-facing-federal-fines/>
.

But Eisman doesn’t buy it. By his reckoning, Deutsche Bank was less 
fundamentally profitable than its rivals, and relied more on leverage to boost 
earnings. His analysis suggests it will struggle to return to its former 
profitability.

Critics will point out that shorting the likes of Banca Monte dei Paschi di 
Siena or Deutsche Bank sounds fine – except that the share price of both have 
already fallen so dramatically the bad news is already in the price. But we 
don’t know for sure if they are Eisman’s precise targets – because he’s not 
willing to say unless you give him at least $1m to manage in one of his 
“personal accounts”.

Eisman now effectively runs his own “boutique” operation within a bigger Wall 
Street firm, Neuberger Berman. His “Eisman Long/Short SMA” account has opened 
to wealthy investors, and in January he will be in London drumming up interest 
among investors.

But not everything Eisman touches turns to gold. He declines to say how much 
he made during the financial crash, when he was manager of funds at FrontPoint 
Financial Services, though it was reportedly as much as $1bn. But in 2010 
FrontPointran into trouble 
<https://www.ft.com/content/266d513c-f8d7-11df-b550-00144feab49a> after one of 
its manager pleaded guilty to insider trading and was given a five-year prison 
sentence.

Eisman later set up a hedge fund, Emrys Partners, gathering nearly $200m from 
investors, but its returns were relatively humdrum compared to the drama of the 
great crash, making 3.6% in 2012 and 10.8% in 2013, according to the Wall 
Street Journal.

Did he think the film accurately portrayed what went on? He visited the set, 
and gave Carell and the other actors (Brad Pitt and Christian Bale also 
starred) advice and notes.

“When I saw the film, I thought it was great and that Steve Carell was 
wonderful. But I thought, hey, I wasn’tthat angry. After the crash I was 
interviewed by the Federal Crisis Inquiry Commission, and I saw a transcription 
later on. After reading it, I realised that ‘yes’, I really was that angry... 
but the Fed has done a very good job since.”
 