
In an asymmetrical neckline, Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> declares her asymmetrical 
vision. Asymmetrical because there is no balance between so many of her 
pronouncements; indeed, some are quite contradictory. There is no point at 
which opposing views are squished together into some kind of Blairite 
compromise. Nor is it the economy, stupid: it’s about identity. It is a 
rightwing power grab that hopes to scoop up those who have just about managed 
to vote Labour in the past.

It is new and it is scary and, although May is the unelected head of a 
government with a small majority, she is acting as if she has a huge mandate to 
fundamentally change the nature of the UK. It is not enough that we are leaving 
Europe, she is attempting to nail down the Tories as the party of the workers, 
absorbUkip <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ukip>, intervene in business 
via the state, and hit the left where it hurts them personally. She is 
reclaiming the notions of fairness, compassion and moral superiority. Right 
now, the left is in one of its death spirals of vicious piety. So here is May, 
the toffs tossed away, to talk of meritocracy and ordinariness. She embodies 
the notion that, what you don’t have in charisma, you can make up for in long 
hours. But as she draws people into her big tent, we can already see that it is 
more of a gazebo and it’s invite only. The decked-out monstrosities ofBake Off 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/the-great-british-bake-off> have a 
lot to answer for: a version of the 50s with gays, immigrants and cake – woo! A 
fantasy that has now been flogged off.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-tory-party-conference-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May's%20speech%20to%20Tory%20conference%3A%20%E2%80%98Change%20has%20got%20to%20come%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-tory-party-conference-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%27s%20speech%20to%20Tory%20conference%3A%20%E2%80%98Change%20has%20got%20to%20come%E2%80%99%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F05%2Ftheresa-may-tory-party-conference-video-highlights&media=>
Theresa May’s speech to Tory conference: ‘Change has got to come’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-tory-party-conference-video-highlights>
These are new bakes indeed. Chancellor Philip Hammond’s dismantling of deficit 
targets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/03/the-guardian-view-on-philip-hammonds-conference-speech-missed-opportunity-for-a-new-strategy>
 is part of repairing the failing neoliberal structures, so May talked of tax 
avoidance and workers’ rights. But this comes at a cost and that cost is 
social: the dismantling of a liberal consensus. This means hatred of 
difference, spreading fear, inflexible uniformity, the assertion of one kind of 
citizenship over another, a puritanical stifling of joy.

May’s vision rewrites the relationship between the state and business, and 
also insists on the social over the individual. But in this radical garb, she 
and her ministers found the enemy within. Those who voted remain have 
overcompensated by offering up suspicion and exclusion of all “foreigners”. 
Those who take our jobs – even the ones who save our lives – must be listed, 
and instructed where to be. This is appalling. British workers do have British 
jobs and won’t work in the fields for £3.50 an hour. Meritocracy is a local 
policy, it turns out. It is for white English people, though it calls 
Englishness British, as always. Add to the enemy list of foreigners, human 
rights lawyers and the liberal elite. We wait in vain for health and safety 
gone mad. The Tories take on the culture war as the economy shrinks. This 
xenophobia may result in actual bloodshed.

It is as if the message of Brexit was not mixed, as if it was simply a 
referendum on immigration. It was more than that. May dismays by playing only 
one chord. So we now have members of the elite – being PM is fairly elite – and 
leaders of parties such as Ukip (Farage was leader when I started writing this 
sentence, but may not be when I have finished) saying they don’t mind being 
poorer if there are fewer immigrants, but they are never going to be poor, of 
course.

Yet the walling-in of economies to protect us from globalisation (government 
is in partnership with the state, the talk of responsible capitalism) is, as 
the IMF says, not simply a British reaction. May’s version is a closing down 
and a direct challenge not just to economic neoliberalism, but to liberalism as 
the dominant discourse. She pitches the chattering classes, the liberal elite, 
against ordinary people. The liberal elite sneer at patriotism, at ordinary 
people’s views on immigration and crime. There is some truth in this, although 
ordinary people are not a monolith.

I now live in a liberal elite bubble made easier for me by social media, which 
allows me to chat with people who mostly think more or less like me. But 
because identity is hybrid, a base part of me remains horrified by how 
narrow-minded this elite is. Those who would lead the masses disdain them. The 
liberal elite will lead its sheeple out of its Jeremy Kyle-induced pit of 
despair and into the uplands of good wine, laughing at comedians on Radio 4 and 
voting the correct way. May is right to say these people do not have the 
monopoly on compassion. Many are hypocrites. Just after the Brexit vote and the 
election, there was a total empathy vacuum. The liberal elite boasted it didn’t 
know anyone who voted Tory or Brexit because these people were thick, immoral. 
What a lovely socialist and internationalist reaction.

So May will strike home with this. But for all her lefty drag, where she and 
her ministers have been so divisive is on immigration and race. While the 
Scottish Tory leader,Ruth Davidson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ruth-davidson>, has welcomed immigrants, 
May cannot even countenance Scottish independence – what she calls divisive 
nationalism.

This move to the centre works only if the centre is white and Scotland keeps 
quiet.Nicola Sturgeon <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon> 
has provided the best opposition to this nasty fear and loathing. For May is 
sowing all kinds of division. The centre can’t hold when it cannot keep the 
union together.

The dots are not joined here at all. The language of belonging matters. The 
redrawing of these new boundaries is being done in the language of the left, 
but it is the most extreme move to the right I have seen in my lifetime.

“Stop the world I want to get off” turns into: “If you believe you are citizen 
of the world, you’re a citizen of nowhere.” A slight affront to the easyJet 
generation, a death sentence if you are on a dinghy in the cold sea. This is no 
move to the centre but a plunge into dark, dangerous waters.
 