
A new two-part study published in Climatic Change by a team of scientists led 
by Stephan Lewandowsky examines mathematically what happens to the risks posed 
by climate change when the scientific uncertainty increases.Part 1 of the study 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-014-1082-7> explores two 
important points.

First, the probable range of climate sensitivity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/may/10/climate-change-warming-sensitivity>
 to the increased greenhouse effect isn't symmetrical. Instead, based onthe 
available evidence and research 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/climate-sensitivity-advanced.htm>, it's more 
likely that we'll see a large amount of global warming than a small amount in 
response to rising carbon emissions. By itself, this means that more climate 
uncertainty translates into an even bigger risk of painful consequences than 
relatively benign consequences. More uncertainty means a slightly better chance 
of the low warming outcomes, but it also means an even bigger chance of the 
high warming outcomes, because the scientific data have a harder time ruling 
those out.

The second critical point is that economic models agree that once we reach a 
certain tipping point, the costs of climate damage increase at an accelerating 
rate. The models don't agree on exactly where that tipping point lies, but they 
do agree on the shape of the curve and the acceleration of the climate damage 
costs once we pass that tipping point (even the 'skeptics' agree on this 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jan/24/more-global-warming-worse-economy>
).

Lewandowsky's team combined the shape of the curve 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/pics/RoeBaker.jpg> showing the probable values 
of the Earth's climate sensitivity with the shape of climate economic costs 
curve, and came to an inescapable conclusion: more climate uncertainty means 
the expected damages from climate change are higher.

In fact, because both curves are more heavily weighted on their high sides 
(greater probability of high climate sensitivity than low, and climate damage 
costs accelerating with more warming), this conclusion holds true even if the 
shape of one of the curves changes. For example, even if climate sensitivity is 
equally likely to be low as high, the accelerating nature of climate damage 
costs with more warming would still mean that greater climate uncertainty 
translates into more climate damages.

Part 2 of the study 
<http://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10584-014-1083-6> also shows that 
greater climate science uncertainty means we're more likely to blow past the 
internationally accepted'danger limit' 
<http://www.skepticalscience.com/monckton-myth-5-dangerous-warming.html> of 2Â°C 
global surface warming. To meet that target we have a certaincarbon emissions 
'budget,' 
<http://skepticalscience.com/the-critical-decade-part-3-emissions-reductions.html>
 but there's also uncertainty associated with the exact size of that budget. If 
the total budget turns out to be less than the emissions we have already pumped 
into the atmosphere, then mitigation has already failed to keep temperatures 
below the 'danger limit.'

With more climate uncertainty, the range of possible carbon budget sizes 
becomes wider. The shape of this curve also means that the average estimated 
carbon budget value increases. This means that with more uncertainty we're more 
likely to think the budget is larger than it actually is, and hence we're more 
likely to miss our target and cause dangerous global warming.
 Mean peak global temperature response as a function of cumulative carbon 
emissions. The darker shaded area corresponds to lower uncertainty, the lighter 
area to higher uncertainty. 
By analogy, this is because if we've already spent $1000 halfway through the 
month, and we don't know what our total monthly budget is exactly, then we're 
more likely to have over-spent if our uncertainty over the budget is greater. 
If we think the budget is somewhere between $1900 and $2100, we'd be fine, but 
if the budget is anywhere between $500 and $3,500 then we run the risk that our 
$1,000 expenditure has already exceeded our budget. So the greater the 
uncertainty about the remaining carbon budget, the more likely it is that we 
have already exceeded it with existing carbon emissions.

Putting all these results together, it indicates that larger climate 
uncertainty mathematically compels greater urgency to address global warming. 
This conclusion runs in direct opposition to the claims of climate contrarians, 
who often argue against taking action to address climate change because they 
believe there is too much uncertainty to determine the optimal path forward. 
This argument exhibits afailure to grasp the concepts of basic risk management 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/aug/23/climate-change-greatest-risk-management-failure>
, as illustrated inthe cartoon below 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/mar/04/cartoon-climate-change-contrarian-managing-risk>
 created by John Cook.
 The climate contrarian guide to managing risk. Created by John Cook 
As Lewandowsky notes, his team's research demonstrates that the contrarian 
argument is exactly backwards.

"in the case of the climate system, it is very clear that greater uncertainty 
will make things even worse. This means that we can never say that there is too 
much uncertainty for us to act. If you appeal to uncertainty to make a policy 
decision the legitimate conclusion is to increase the urgency of mitigation."

When it comes to global warming, the only way to justify inaction is if we're 
quite certain the consequences will be relatively benign, but that simply isn't 
the case. Arguing that climate science has large uncertainties, as climate 
contrarians do, actually compels us to tackle global warming.
 