
The attack in Nice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/bastille-day-truck-attack>, in which 84 
people were mown down by a French resident of Tunisian origin, has been a 
watershed in French politics. After the trauma of the killings, incidents of 
open, blatant, anti-Muslim hatred have sparked a new, worrying phase.

The strong north African heritage behind the attacks | Imen Yacoubi
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/killings-nice-truck-attack-tunisian-link-france-immigration>
“Why France <https://www.theguardian.com/world/france>?” has been the question 
on many lips, as the nation recovers from its third mass-slaughter terror 
attack in 18 months.

Some point to the French republic’s specific brand of secularism – its model of
laïcité (the prohibition of religious influence on anything that relates to 
the republic) inherited from the 1905 law separating church and state – 
which is often caricatured and misunderstood. Others point to France’s recent 
military interventionism in the Muslim world, from west Africa to Iraq. Yet 
more highlight the discrimination its Muslim minorities suffer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/17/killings-nice-truck-attack-tunisian-link-france-immigration>
. None of this can be ignored.

But an essential backdrop to many of the reactions to recent terror is 
France’s history, which ties its domestic politics to the turmoil of the Arab 
world like those of no other European state. France and Germany have the 
largest Muslim populations in Europe. Unlike Germany, whose Muslims are mostly 
of Turkish origin, France’s minority is overwhelmingly Arab because of the 
country’s colonial past. (In the UK, for reasons also linked to empire, Muslims 
are generally of Asian background.)

Chaos and violence in the Middle East resonate in France as nowhere else in 
Europe. This is rarely mentioned by French politicians and officials, who tend 
to point to the fact that jihadi terrorism targets all western societies. But 
France’s specific complexities are hard to overlook.Talk of a country “at war” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/13/paris-attacks-shootings-explosions-hostages>
, in the aftermath of terrorist attacks whose perpetrators and accomplices have 
in most cases been French Muslims, stirsthe ghosts of the Algerian war of 
1954-1962 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2012/jul/05/50-years-algeria-independence-france-denial>
.

In France, the colonial past is not dead, and it’s not even the past. Marine 
Le Pen’s Front National is often described as a neo-fascist party, but unlike 
other far-right movements in Europe, its origins aren’t found in the ideologies 
of Mussolini and Hitler but in France’s colonial history.

The historian Benjamin Stora 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/03/29/world/europe/a-life-spent-remembering-a-war-france-has-tried-to-forget.html?_r=0>
 has described this backdrop as a “transfer of memory”: memories of the 
colonial era across the Mediterranean are transferred to contemporary France. 
Millions of people in France still live with conflicting views on Algeria: the 
families of the one million French conscripts who served in the war; those of 
the approximately one million colonialpied noirs (Christian and Jewish people) 
who fled Algeria after its independence in 1962; those of hundreds of thousands 
ofharkis, Muslim Algerians who worked alongside the French colonists and later 
also fled to France.

And then, of course, there are the children of migrants from North Africa, 
many of whom feel disenfranchised.Gilles Kepel 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/bac6166a-b7c8-11e5-bf7e-8a339b6f2164.html>, a 
prominent French academic, has written about how some of these youths, 
consciously or unconsciously, are “refighting” the battles their parents or 
grandparents papered over when they settled in France.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fattacks-france-colonial-past-war-terror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc6b53f80877d4d2c7b8e167d3dbeb6d610f2d07%2F0_101_3023_1814%2F3023.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20attacks%20in%20France%20show%20that%20its%20colonial%20past%20endures%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fattacks-france-colonial-past-war-terror%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20attacks%20in%20France%20show%20that%20its%20colonial%20past%20endures%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F22%2Fattacks-france-colonial-past-war-terror%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbc6b53f80877d4d2c7b8e167d3dbeb6d610f2d07%2F0_101_3023_1814%2F3023.jpg>
 ‘Memories of the colonial era across the Mediterranean are transferred to 
contemporary France,’ French armed forces suppress an uprising in colonial-era 
Algeria. Photograph: Loomis Dean/Time & Life Pictures/Getty Image 
Look no further than France’s current state of emergency to see how the 
Algerian war is ever present. The French 1958 constitution and its high 
concentration of executive power was born from that conflict. Words such as 
“assimilation” and “integration”, much used to this day when immigration is 
discussed, hark back to this era. France has a hard time thinking of Islam in 
terms other than assimilation or ghettoisation, and that has to do with the way 
it treated its Algerian territory from 1848 to 1962. This predatedlaïcité.

It seems the attack in Nice has opened a Pandora’s box of painful memories and 
prejudice. Unlike the 2015 attacks inParis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/paris>, this onslaught occurred in a region 
characterised by a strong presence of “repatriated” families from colonial 
Algeria and their children and grandchildren. The south-east of France has been 
a hotbed of the Front National’s political rise.

Nostalgia for French colonial might is still powerful, if unspoken

This is the context in which some families of the Muslim victims of the 
Bastille Day attack (an estimated third of those killed) have reportedly been 
insulted in the streets of Nice, in some cases just after they had visited the 
morgue.

The parallel with France’s Algerian past is the perception that this is now 
a war with no frontline, in which danger can emerge at any time, anywhere, and 
in which Arabs living among the supposedly “real” French form a distinct, 
homogeneous, threatening entity.

The Front National may, under Marine Le Pen, have neutralised its antisemitism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/apr/10/dont-be-fooled-by-marine-le-pen-front-national-toxic>
 (breaking away, for electoral purposes, from the leftovers of the Vichy era of 
Nazi occupation); but it very much continues to pander to the colonial notion 
that “true” French identity is threatened by Muslim culture. The roots of its 
narrative, in a nutshell, are: good Muslims are those who stay subdued and 
dominated, as in the heyday of France’s colonial possessions.

Algiers: a city where France is the promised land – and still the enemy
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jan/27/algeria-france-colonial-past-islam>
Nostalgia for French colonial might is still powerful, if unspoken. Yet as 
Stora and others have analysed, knowledge of that era remains patchy, among 
both France’s Muslims and its non-Muslims. The National Museum of the History 
of Immigration was inaugurated only in 2014.

In a recent parliamentary debate on the state of emergency, one of France’s 
younger politicians,Bruno Le Maire 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/from-yes-man-to-his-own-man-bruno-le-maires-eu-gamble/>
, made an extraordinary statement that reveals much about where the country is 
heading. Le Maire is running in the rightwing primaries for the presidential 
election and he comes from the Gaullist side of the political spectrum – not 
the Front National (which hates De Gaulle because he negotiated Algeria’s 
independence).

According to Le Maire, the enemy that must be “fought with utmost strength 
within France” is “political Islam”. He didn’t say “jihadi fundamentalism”. He 
defined political Islam as “Islam that criticises our culture” and “wants to 
make women invisible”. This is what French colonists thought about Muslims in 
general.

France’s republican model is not responsible for the terrorism it endures. But 
it is a European country that, unlike others struck by terrorism, still has to 
come to terms with its colonial past if it wants to build an inclusive, 
promising future for all its citizens.
 