
Passions have been aroused across Europe, not least in Poland itself, 
following the illiberal turn taken by the country since the election of the 
conservative and Eurosceptic Law and Justice government last October. The
European Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> has now launched an 
unprecedented probe into the rule of law in Poland, after the new government 
put through bills curtailing the independence of the judiciary, media and civil 
service.

Some see this as meddling in the internal affairs of a member state. Others 
have applauded it as a counter to democratic backsliding which will discourage 
further deterioration. Critics of the move point to the fact that Hungary was 
never put under this kind of pressure by Brussels, in spite of the 
authoritarian policies of its populist prime minister, Viktor Orbán. They also 
argue that Poland’s previous government, the centrist Civic Platform, was 
hardly without fault. Such arguments cannot be wholly dismissed, and there is 
no denying that the Polish electorate gave Law and Justicea clearcut victory 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-34631826> last year in both the 
presidential and the parliamentary elections.

Poles wanted change – if only because so many of them felt they were not 
benefiting from economic growth as low wages pushed young people out of the 
country to seek jobs in Germany and Britain. The shift was radical, yet can be 
reasonably seen as part of the normal democratic process. ButPoland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> is a country that has since 1989 
stood as a model of post-communist transition, and the danger that it might 
turn its back on the checks and balances that are at the heart of liberal 
democracy should not be minimised. It has regional clout and plays an important 
role in Europe’s security architecture.

Nor is this is a dispute over minor regulations, but about the fundamental 
democratic norms that have always been a condition of EU membership. The 
European commission has wisely avoided sanctions. When Austria was put under 
sanctions in 2000 after it formed a governing coalition that included the 
far-right politicianJörg Haider <https://www.theguardian.com/world/jorg-haider>
, the EU later found itself in a bind, divided as to when they should be 
lifted. Later, Hungary was treated with relative indulgence because it was 
protected by the rightwing EU parliamentary group to which Mr Orbán’s party 
belongs.

But it is natural that, because of its size and geopolitical importance, 
closer attention should be paid to Poland. The European commission has been 
right to follow up its words with actions. It is now up to the Polish 
government to make a case for itself and for the laws it has pushed through 
parliament.

President Andrzej Duda has argued 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/04425cfa-bb88-11e5-b151-8e15c9a029fb.html#axzz3xcMkH1oK>
 that “democracy and media freedom are not endangered in the least”, and that 
relations with Germany will remain solid. Many Poles do not agree, asa series 
of huge demonstrations <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-35142582> has 
shown. Poles put aside their divisions to battle dictatorship, but in the years 
since those divisions have re-emerged. A deeply Catholic and nationalist 
conservatism has captured popular discontent in the face of globalisation and 
liberalisation, and is opposed by a more secular, liberal and pro-EU part of 
the population. Poles now need a new consensus if the achievements of the last 
two decades are not to be squandered. For that to happen, the leaders of Law 
and Justice must stop using majority rule to crush opposition or purge key 
institutions. Europe is watching, because Poland matters.
 