
With one breath, the friends of power told us that global capitalism was a 
dynamic, disruptive force, the source of constant innovation and change. With 
the next,they told us 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2016/12/09/voting-intention-labour-voting-intention-lowest-le/>
 it had brought aboutthe end of history 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/mar/21/bring-back-ideology-fukuyama-end-history-25-years-on>
: permanent stability and peace. There was no attempt to resolve this 
contradiction. Or any other.

We were promised unending growth on a finite planet. We were told that a 
vastly unequal system would remove all differences. Social peace would be 
delivered by a system based on competition and envy. Democracy would be secured 
by the power of money. The contradictions were crashingly obvious. The whole 
package relied on magic.

The 13 impossible crises that humanity now faces | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/13-crises-we-face-trump-soil-loss-global-collapse>
Because none of it works, there is no normal to which to return. The Keynesian 
measures espoused by Jeremy Corbyn and Bernie Sanders – in a world crashing 
into environmental limits andthe mass destruction of jobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-climate-change-war>
 – are as irrelevant in the 21st century as theneoliberal prescriptions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 that caused the financial crisis.

Pankaj Mishra, in his book Age of Anger 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/297618/age-of-anger/>, explains the current 
crises as new manifestations of one long disruption that has been ripping up 
society for 200 years or more. Our sanitised histories of Europe and America 
allow us to forget that bedlam and carnage, civil and international war,
colonialism and overseas slaughter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2009/jun/08/british-empire-colonies-banks-reform>
, racism and genocide, were the norms of this period, not exceptions.

Now the rest of the world is confronting the same disruptive forces, as 
industrial capitalism is globalised. It destroys old forms of authority while 
promising universal freedom, autonomy and prosperity. Those promises collide 
with massive disparities of power, status and property ownership. The result is 
the global spread of the 19th-century European diseases of humiliation, envy 
and a sense of impotence. Frustrated expectations, rage and self-disgust have 
driven support for movements as diverse as Isis, resurgent Hindu nationalism 
and stomping demagoguery in Britain, the US, France and Hungary.

How do we respond to these crises? Raymond Williams 
<https://www.versobooks.com/books/642-resources-of-hope> said that “to be truly 
radical is to make hope possible, rather than despair convincing”. I know I 
have made the case for despair seempretty convincing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/13-crises-we-face-trump-soil-loss-global-collapse>
in the past 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/donald-trump-george-monbiot-misinformation>
. So this column is the first in an occasional series whose purpose is to 
champion new approaches to politics, economics and social change. There is no 
going back, no comfort in old certainties. We must rethink the world from first 
principles.

There are many points at which I could begin, but it seems to me that an 
obvious one is this. The market alone cannot meet our needs; nor can the state. 
Both, by rooting out attachment, help fuel the alienation, rage and anomie that 
breed extremism. One element has been conspicuously absent from the dominant 
ideologies, something that is neither market nor state: the commons.

A commons is an asset over which a community has shared and equal rights. This 
could, in principle, include land, water, minerals, knowledge, scientific 
research and software. But at the moment most of theseassets have been enclosed 
<http://www.monbiot.com/1994/01/01/the-tragedy-of-enclosure/>: seized by either 
the state or private interests, and treated like any other form of capital. 
Through this enclosure we have been deprived of our common wealth.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdespair-mess-commons-transform-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07d51987dc19415ef865400978824260041b2e65%2F0_52_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20case%20for%20despair%20is%20made.%20Now%20let%E2%80%99s%20start%20to%20get%20out%20of%20the%20mess%20we%E2%80%99re%20in%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdespair-mess-commons-transform-society%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20case%20for%20despair%20is%20made.%20Now%20let%E2%80%99s%20start%20to%20get%20out%20of%20the%20mess%20we%E2%80%99re%20in%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdespair-mess-commons-transform-society%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07d51987dc19415ef865400978824260041b2e65%2F0_52_3872_2324%2F3872.jpg>
 A fishermen’s cooperative in Stonington, Maine. ‘Some commons still exist. 
They range from community-owned forests in Nepal and Romania to lobster 
fisheries in Maine.’ Photograph: Alamy 
Some commons still exist. They range from community-owned forests in Nepal and 
Romania to lobster fisheries in Maine, pastures in east Africa and Switzerland, 
the internet, Wikipedia, Linux, journals published by thePublic Library of 
Science <https://www.plos.org/>, the timebank in Helsinki 
<https://stadinaikapankki.wordpress.com/in-english/helsinki-timebanks-abc/>, 
local currencies and open-source microscopy. But these are exceptions to the 
general rule of private and exclusive ownership.

In his book Land <https://www.unitism.com/>, the community organiser Martin 
Adams urges us to see the land as something that once belonged to everyone and 
no one, yet has been acquired by a minority that excludes other people from its 
enjoyment. He proposes that those who use the land exclusively should pay a 
“community land contribution” as compensation.

This could partly replace income and sales tax, prevent land hoarding, and 
bring down land prices. The revenue could help to fund a universal basic 
income. Eventually we could move to a system in which land is owned by the 
local community and leased to those who use it.

Similar principles could apply to energy. The right to produce carbon by 
burning fossil fuels could beauctioned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2008/jul/01/climatechange.carbonemissions>
 (a smaller pool would be available every year). The proceeds could fund public 
services and a transition to clean energy. Those who wish to use the wind or 
sunlight to generate power should be asked to pay a community contribution. Or 
the generators could be owned by communities – there are alreadyplenty of 
examples 
<http://www.energysavingtrust.org.uk/sites/default/files/reports/Community%20and%20locally%20owned%202015%20report_final%20version%20171115.pdf>
 in Scotland.

Rather than allow corporations to use intellectual property rights to create 
an artificial scarcity of knowledge, or to capture the value generated by other 
people (such as Google and Facebook), we could move towards a “social knowledge 
economy” aspromoted by the government of Ecuador 
<http://commonstransition.org/wp-content/uploads/2014/11/Commons-Transition_-Policy-Proposals-for-a-P2P-Foundation.pdf>
. A share of profits could (with the help of blockchain technology, which 
underpins digital currency Bitcoin) be exchanged for helping to build online 
platforms and providing the content they host.

The restoration of the commons has great potential not only to distribute 
wealth but also to change society. As the writerDavid Bollier points out 
<http://thenextsystem.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/DavidBollier.pdf>, a 
commons is not just a resource (land or trees or software) but also the 
community of people managing and protecting it. The members of the commons 
develop much deeper connections with each other and their assets than we do as 
passive consumers of products.


No country with a McDonald’s can remain a democracy | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/mcdonalds-democracy-corporate-globalisation-trump-le-pen-farage>
Managing common resources means developing rules, values and traditions. It 
means, in some cases, re-embedding ourselves in the places in which we live. It 
means reshaping government to meet the needs of communities, not corporations. 
In other words, reviving the commons can act as a counterweight to the 
atomising, alienating forces now generating a thousand forms of toxic reaction.

This is not the whole answer. My hope is that, after exploring a wide range of 
potential solutions, with the help of your comments and suggestions I can start 
to develop a synthesis: a new political, economic and social story that might 
be matched to the demands of the 21st century. Realising it is a further 
challenge, on which we also need to work. But first we must decide what we 
want. Then we decide how to get it.

• A fully linked version of this column will be published at monbiot.com 
<http://monbiot.com/>
 