
For all the attention given to the role of cars in our urban landscapes, lifts 
are becoming the global city’s truly indispensable transport. At a recent event 
held by Otis to sell its new “Gen2 Life lift 
<http://www.utc.com/News/BIS/Pages/Otis-to-Take-UK-Skylines-to-New-Heights.aspx>
” into London’s ascending skyline, there was a real sense of being in a bull 
market.

“Already two billion people travel by lift every day ­– that’s a quarter of 
the world,” said Otis’s commercial director Bertrand Rotagnon. “Cities are 
becoming taller and need densification. Mass lift transit is part of the future 
city landscape.”

Add ageing populations, disabled access, the lust for “signature skylines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/09/london-changing-skyline-tall-buildings-planned>
” with better lift technology, and the future of the lift appears secure and 
profitable – a market estimated to be worth$125.22bn by 2021 
<http://www.marketsandmarkets.com/Market-Reports/elevator-escalator-market-221792102.html?gclid=CKeZ7PHX7tACFcqT7QodaqIJmg>
.

 “There’s been a meteoric rise in lifts,” says Patrick Carr, with no pun 
apparently intended. Carr is the New York-based director of theElevator 
Historical Society <http://www.elevatorhistory.org/Sys/Login>, which, until it 
closed down last summer, claimed to be the world’s only lift museum. “There are 
many hundreds of thousands more elevators now than there were 15 years ago. In 
China, the growth of lifts has been massive. Otis and Schindler are in a life 
and death struggle to get the best lift out [on the market].”

 So the vertical transportation trade and R&D war is on. Otis’s Gen2 Life 
model aims to bring the “smart lift” to the mass market, with an app that calls 
the lift from your smartphone, plus “revolutionary flat-belt technology” said 
to allow the working guts of the lift to be more compact and energy efficient.

Meanwhile, its arch rival Schindler has introduced a solar panel lift 
<http://www.schindler.com/content/fi/internet/fi/about-us/ekologisuus/_jcr_content/rightPar/downloadlist_1/downloadList/304_1376996586734.download.asset.304_1376996586734/solar_elevator.pdf>
, and ThyssenKrupp is launching acable-less lift 
<https://multi.thyssenkrupp-elevator.com/en/> powered by magnet-based 
technology. There are also growing numbers of double-decker lifts; and, of 
course, an ongoing race to be the fastest – currently riding high is theTaipei 
101 building in Taiwan 
<http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/1392ab72-64e2-11e4-ab2d-00144feabdc0.html?ft_site=falcon#axzz4ScyWPwNS>
, where the lift travels at 37.7mph.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb17c2e674ef5dc0e855fedec8b446d55297e3a1c%2F0_0_6108_4110%2F6108.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'meteoric%20rise'%20of%20lifts%3A%20will%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20elevator%20transform%20our%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%27meteoric%20rise%27%20of%20lifts%3A%20will%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20elevator%20transform%20our%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb17c2e674ef5dc0e855fedec8b446d55297e3a1c%2F0_0_6108_4110%2F6108.jpg>
 Taipei 101 has the world’s fastest lift. Photograph: Alamy 
Soon enough, lifts will move horizontally as well as vertically 
<https://www.dezeen.com/2014/12/01/thyssenkrupp-multi-elevator-uses-magnets-to-move-vertically-and-horizontally/>
 within buildings. They will do without buttons and become part of theinternet 
of things 
<http://www.networkworld.com/article/3076849/internet-of-things/otis-elevator-looking-to-iot-digital-transformation-to-provide-a-business-lift.html>
, gathering data about components and users, anticipating your floor stop, and 
monitoring your “dwell time”.

 This may cause panic among those of us that don’t particularly like lifts – 
but if you don’t want cities to sprawl, Carr says, we’ll just have to accept 
them. “If every building stopped at the fifth floor – which is the maximum 
people want to walk – then New York would stretch to Ohio and London halfway to 
Manchester.”

Shaping the urban realm

 In the 150 years or so of their commercial existence, lifts have shaped the 
urban realm. InLifted: A Cultural History of the Elevator 
<http://nyupress.org/books/9780814787168/>, author Andreas Bernard notes how 
the lift has not only changed the appearance of cities, but their inner life: 
moving luxury living from the ground to the once-cheaper top (inHaussmann’s 
Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/mar/31/story-cities-12-paris-baron-haussmann-france-urban-planner-napoleon>
, the least desirable garrets were always the highest); even possessing a 
certain sky-bound romanticism (the Empire State Building’s 86th floor viewing 
area has long been a marriage proposal destination).

We need to be directed to stairs as lifts have been prioritised for too long
Paul Nuki 
Lifts even trump nature. At Dubai’s Burj Khalifa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/burj-khalifa>, currently the world’s 
highest building, you can see two sunsets in a day by viewing it on the ground 
floor, then taking the lift to the top.

Still, lifts carry a certain baggage of alienation. Urbanist guru Jane Jacobs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/may/04/jane-jacobs-100th-birthday-saskia-sassen>
 wasn’t a fan, thinking that the creation of “elevator apartments” hollowed out 
street life. And they can be incubators of anxiety: those queasy mirrors, the 
blank faces of fellow, forward-facing passengers – not to mention the 
ever-present fear of getting stuck, or plummeting to the floor.


So lift designers are trying to humanise their cabs and siphon off those 
underlying worries. Carr, who remains a big fan of large early lifts (“I 
particularly love ‘birdcage’ elevators with velvet seats”) says much effort is 
being put in “to make elevators prettier and less claustrophobic”. For its 
part, Otis is promising to transform the lift into what it calls a “fashionable 
and functional room”.


At the same time, proponents of active health design suggest we might be too 
reliant on lifts, and there are growing moves to steer us away from them.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2453a4c88f262ca4293b436175318cca4a056710%2F0_0_4997_2999%2F4997.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20'meteoric%20rise'%20of%20lifts%3A%20will%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20elevator%20transform%20our%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20%27meteoric%20rise%27%20of%20lifts%3A%20will%20a%20new%20breed%20of%20elevator%20transform%20our%20cities%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcities%2F2016%2Fdec%2F23%2Fmeteoric-rise-lifts-magnetic-smart-elevators-transform-cities%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F2453a4c88f262ca4293b436175318cca4a056710%2F0_0_4997_2999%2F4997.jpg>
 ‘Statement stairs’: Switch House at the Tate Modern. Photograph: View 
Pictures/Rex/Shutterstock 
In the US, the Center for Active Design 
<https://centerforactivedesign.org/stairprompt> encourages stair use – as does 
the NHS – and the health injunctions for “incidental activity 
<http://www.nhs.uk/News/2011/06June/Pages/health-incidental-movement-fidgeting.aspx>
” are growing, with stair climbing an obvious first step. A social enterprise,
StepJockey <https://www.stepjockey.com/> (seed-funded by the UK Department of 
Health) aims to nudge behavioural change by way of branded signage. “We need to 
be directed to stairs as lifts have been prioritised for too long,” says its 
director Paul Nuki.


 Most walkers can tolerate five or six floors, and most buildings go up to 10 
floors – still manageable for many. But even in taller buildings you can cut 
down on lift use.

“Often companies take four floors in bigger buildings; we believe they should 
encourage staff to walk between them, to the gym, the canteen,” says Nuki, who 
thinks that lifts are a 20th-century idea, defined by the anachronistic notion 
that true luxury is being inactive.

It is also argued that lifts are less efficient. A 2010 IBM Smart Cities paper 
found that US office workers in 16 cities over one year spent anet 33 years 
waiting for lifts, 
<http://www.networkworld.com/article/2208412/data-center/time-spent-waiting-for-elevators--16-years-for-nyc-office-workers.html>
 with clear effects on productivity. And rather than bring people together, 
lifts can be antisocial: when US biotech firm Sigma-Aldrich installed a central 
staircase, itraised employee interaction 
<https://www.1843magazine.com/design/stair-flair>.

Where is the world's most hi-tech city? (And it's not San Francisco …)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2016/oct/19/where-world-most-hi-tech-city-not-san-francisco>
Meanwhile, there’s been a return to grander “statement” stairs. Tate Modern 
Switch House architects Herzog & de Meuron’s wide and graceful stairs are 
specifically designed to promote interaction. Apple has patented the design of 
its in-store – and on-brand – glass stairs, while Paul Cocksedge Studio’s 
planted“living staircase” 
<http://www.paulcocksedgestudio.com/news-page/2016/4/7/the-living-staircase> 
for the Ampersand office building in Soho is designed to bring people together.

But as lift consultant John Newbold of SVM Associates <http://www.svma.co.uk/> 
says: “Stairs are stylish but space-hungry, so they tend to be emphasised by 
more progressive developers rather than volume developers.”


Given they’re inevitable, lift companies are working to make their products 
more attractive – and more active. “As cities became more impersonal,” says 
Rotagnon, “we now have to make lifts feel more personal.” As well as smart 
technology, this means promoting better interior design so that, as Newbold 
puts it: “lifts become more like a cosy room, with inviting surfaces and media.”

The next thing, perhaps, is to bring back a bit of that old glamour. Joe 
Kilgallon, sales director at Otis, says he is increasingly fielding calls from 
private buyers and boutiques asking for “Zen” all-white lifts, and revivals of 
old iron concertina lifts.

Some of us will always try and walk – and good for us. But lift historian Carr 
is firmly in the other camp: “I say reserve all that energy for the fun stuff,” 
he growls.

Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter <https://twitter.com/guardiancities> and 
Facebook <https://www.facebook.com/guardiancities> and join the discussion
 