
“Our generation has a housing crisis but when you’re disabled, it’s so much 
worse,” says Clare Phipps, 27, from her flat in a terrace block in Forest Hill, 
south-east London. “It makes you feel so depressed.”

Phipps has idiopathic hypersomnia, a neurological condition that means she 
can’t stop herself from falling asleep and is constantly drowsy when awake. She 
shares a studio flat – rented cheaply from her aunt – with her boyfriend, Matt 
Hawkins.

In December 2015, building work from the flat next door damaged the 
foundations of their home and created a hole in the wall. “Our flat started 
tipping,” Phipps explains – meaning that, for the past year, the couple have 
been living with a collapsing bathroom. The door and the roof are held up by a 
temporary steel prop. The hole and cracks in the wall are so big that you can 
see through the bathroom wall outside. Mice come in through the cracks when it 
is cold out. But with only Hawkins’ wage as a charity worker, they can’t afford 
to move.

Phipps started a PhD scholarship in 2013 – a paid programme that also offered 
her job opportunities – and last year applied for social care to make it 
possible; without a carer to wake her throughout the day, her disability means 
she stays asleep for up to 20 hours without drinking, eating or going to the 
toilet. She was refused any funding from her local authority – instead, she 
says, they offered her an alarm clock – and had to suspend her PhD, as well as 
a job teaching the university choir.

Hawkins, also 27, tries to fill in as Phipps’ carer – he has lost two stone 
and developed anxiety from the pressure – but when he can’t work from home, 
Phipps has no one to help her.

“If I’m not awake, I can’t work,” she says. “Even a part-time job is my aim … 
Most people could never settle for that but I’m not even getting that.”

The difficulties faced by millennials 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/series/millennials-the-trials-of-generation-y>
 – the generationborn between 1980 and the mid-90s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/millennials-generation-y-guide-to-much-maligned-demographic>
 – are now well documented: from unstable work and student debt, to rising 
house prices and rents. But, stacked on top of this, young disabled adults in 
Britain are struggling with their own distinct problems: from cuts to social 
care and social security and a lack of accessible housing, to barriers to 
employment and higher education.

If a generally defining characteristic of millennials is that they are not 
hitting the stages of adulthood at the same time as previous generations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/07/revealed-30-year-economic-betrayal-dragging-down-generation-y-income>
, for disabled millennials, the trap of so-called eternal adolescence is 
particularly acute, with the most basic aims of young adult life – going to 
further or higher education, getting a job, meeting friends and partners – 
often out of reach.

Against a backdrop of recent cuts to social care, disability campaigners 
report that it is now common for disabled adults, struggling with inadequate 
care slots from their local councils, to be forced to go to bed at 8pm. With 
the social care crisis growing, last weekMPs pressed Theresa May to take action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/social-care-crisis-theresa-may-under-pressure-to-act-fast>
. Research released last month by the disability charity Scope on the 
experiences of disabled young people finds those in their early to mid-20s are 
more likely to experience barriers to living independently than any other age 
group.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00c104567c4caaa89a1393db10617fb9402e7c0%2F0_22_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20crisis%20of%20disabled%20millennials%3A%20'It%20feels%20hopeless'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20crisis%20of%20disabled%20millennials%3A%20%27It%20feels%20hopeless%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff00c104567c4caaa89a1393db10617fb9402e7c0%2F0_22_6582_3949%2F6582.jpg>
 Ryan Worth. Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
In Crewe, Cheshire, Ryan and Ashley Worth, who both have the severe 
muscle-wasting condition Duchenne muscular dystrophy, are spending their early 
20s stuck in rigid roles.

The brothers – 22 and 26 – use powered wheelchairs and need 24-hour care for 
help with anything from drinking (the condition means they choke easily) to 
moving. Their parents do what they can – the brothers live at home with their 
mum and dad and three younger sisters – but as they have got older, Ryan and 
Ashley rely more on personal assistants. However, because they live under the 
same roof, their local council has forced them to share 24-hour care between 
them.

It means the two constantly have to be in the same place at the same time. 
“We’re being treated as the same person,” Ryan says.

They have 24 extra “independent hours” a week – where each of them can go out 
or do something alone but they say that’s “not enough” to build a life. Until 
recently, the brothers had to go nine hours a day without any help at all; the 
council only gave them the current package after pressure from the charity 
Muscular Dystrophy UK.

Ashley says he often misses out on going out with friends because he is bound 
to his brother’s plans. For Ryan, it means he hasn’t been able to go to 
university. “I want to study politics and history and I can’t,” he says. “If I 
went, my brother would have to come.”

Ryan campaigns for Labour and wants to be an MP. He went to the party’s annual 
conference in Liverpool in September but, because he didn’t have enough care 
hours, he had to come home after a day. “I have to save them up if I want to go 
somewhere for a couple of days,” he explains. “So I’d have to not go out for 
weeks to be able to go.”

In some ways, young disabled adults such as Phipps and the Worths are at an 
advantage compared with previous generations of disabled people: where it was 
once culturally expected – and entirely legal – to segregate or exclude 
disabled people from jobs, transport, or education, today’s twentysomethings 
with disabilities have grown up with at least some expectation that they will 
be treated equally. But to many, this makes the hurdles that still exist more 
frustrating, whether that’s inequality in housing, work and care, or the 
attitudes around disability that mean young disabled people are still seen as 
not wanting the same adult lives as their non-disabled peers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa94814f256a18e20dbd0daa927d3701d895c64dd%2F0_353_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20crisis%20of%20disabled%20millennials%3A%20'It%20feels%20hopeless'&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20crisis%20of%20disabled%20millennials%3A%20%27It%20feels%20hopeless%27&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F08%2Fthe-crisis-of-disabled-millennials-it-feels-hopeless%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa94814f256a18e20dbd0daa927d3701d895c64dd%2F0_353_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 Gabi Howard-Lovell from Brighton, who has Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. Photograph: 
Alicia Canter for the Guardian 
When Gabi Howard-Lovell from Brighton, who has Ehlers-Danlos syndrome 
<http://www.nhs.uk/conditions/ehlers-danlos-syndrome/Pages/Introduction.aspx> – 
an inherited condition that weakens connective tissue, including her joints – 
and autism, became homeless in July 2015, the 25-year-old was told by 
professionals she might as well live in a home for the elderly. “My social 
worker said: ‘With all your conditions, we should put you in a care home,’” she 
says.

Instead, the council gave her temporary accommodation on the fifth floor of a 
six-storey block: 103 steps to get up and a lift that was always broken. “I’m 
not even supposed to take the stairs,” she says. The flat was covered in mould 
and was very damp and cold: last winter, Howard-Lovell wore six pairs of 
pajamas to keep warm and “you could still see my breath”.

The council re-housed her in August but after more than a year in the flat, 
it’s had a “life-changing” impact on her health: she developed respiratory 
problems that mean she has not had an antibiotic-free week for 18 months, and 
her health team is now looking at her using a wheelchair.

Howard-Lovell says the problem for councils is, with a nationwide shortage of 
accessible housing for disabled people 
<https://www.leonardcheshire.org/about-us/publications/latest-publications-download/hidden-housing-crisis>
, “there isn’t anywhere to put us. For example, I need a wet room, but lots of 
places have baths.”

This crisis in suitable properties exists whether you’re a disabled person 
trying to get social housing, rent from a private landlord – who often won’t 
accept adaptations – or buy your own place. Charities and campaigners have told 
me of young wheelchair usersstuck in accommodation meant for the over-60s 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/31/paralympic-star-disability-support-cuts>
, of disabled people without accessible bathrooms having to wash in sinks and 
buckets, and fortysomethings forced to still live in their childhood bedrooms.

Back in south-east London, Phipps has put in another request to her council 
for social care but has been turned down again. Without support to go back to 
work, she’s only got £84 a week from her disability benefit to live off. That’s 
meant to pay for the extra costs of disability – such as taxis – but she is 
spending it on food and bills. She has had to temporarily move out of her flat 
while repair work is undertaken to make it habitable. She is now living with 
family outside London.

Phipps says the thought that this is what her life will always be like – never 
being able to have a career and earn money, or afford a decent place to live – 
is impacting on her mental health.

“My mum talks to me about her pension and I can’t imagine that. Or having my 
own home,” she says. “It feels hopeless. I can’t see how it’s getting better.”
 