
Spinning alongside Totley Moss in bright sunshine, the road sinks down into a 
hollow at Barbrook Bridge before climbing again under Flask Edge. Beyond and 
still out of view is the elongated roundabout at Owler Bar, where the Clarion 
Rambler Bert Ward once lived, high above Sheffield. This is my favourite part 
of any cycle ride. The tarmac is warmly smooth and after the short climb ahead 
my route home is mostly downhill. Best of all, after a couple of hours in the 
saddle, my mind has wandered off and I'm left in the blithe state of 
non-thinking that is, it seems to me, the entire purpose of moderate exercise.

Without warning, two meadow pipits are alongside me, one to my left, off my 
front wheel, the other to my right, just behind my pedalling feet so that for a 
moment the three of us form a diagonal across the road. The right-hand pipit 
soon veers off in the direction of White Edge, but the other remains. For a few 
seconds the pipit holds my course, undulating through the air like a dolphin 
off the prow of a boat. Despite my speed, I risk a prolonged glance down at 
this lithe brown form some three feet from my wheel and perhaps 18 inches from 
the ground.

Meadow pipits are cast as the mugs of the bird world, the prosaic victims of 
that malevolent con artist, the cuckoo, which displaces pipit eggs for its own 
â€“ or else as prey for more charismatic species like merlins or hen harriers, 
their eggs predated by foxes and weasels. Even their display flight is a long, 
anxious drift back to the ground, their lispy song weakly apologetic against a 
neighbouring skylark's joyful riot. I scan the pipit's glassy black eye for any 
reaction to the hiss of my bicycle wheels, marvelling at the unconscious genius 
of its flight, before the bird finally veers off into the heather on important 
pipit business, oblivious to our opinion of it, leaving me to pedal home.
 