
“What’s the appeal of entrepreneurship? Personally, it’s freedom. I don’t have 
to be at work at 9am or take lunch at 1pm. I can opt out of the things I don’t 
like,” says Natalie Campbell, serial entrepreneur and co-founder of consultancy
A Very Good Company <http://www.averygoodcompany.com/>.

Campbell started her first venture, a franchise of fashion chain Morgan de 
Toi, while at university. Now, alongside her consultancy, she is a director and 
board member of a number of other companies.

Enjoying serial success in her early 30s, Campbell is among a successful 
cohort of women serial entrepreneurs – 38% of serial entrepreneurs under 35 are 
female, according to areport 
<http://centreforentrepreneurs.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/Serial_entrepreneurs_report.pdf>
 (pdf) from Coutts and the Centre for Entrepreneurs. This age group fares 
better than women overall. When all ages are taken into account, women make up 
just 19% of serial entrepreneurs and they start both fewer and smaller 
companies than men.

[For men] it’s about investment, it’s about money, it’s about being the best
Natalie Campbell 
Why is there such a stark difference between the genders? Cultural bias and 
discrimination have undoubtedly limited the number of female role models in 
business. Perhaps this is only just starting to even out. As Matt Smith, 
director of theCentre for Entrepreneurs <http://centreforentrepreneurs.org/> 
puts it, female entrepreneurs are “playing catch up” with their male 
counterparts.

But could it also be that women and men have different motivations for 
launching businesses, which influences the number they start and how fast these 
grow?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b4f7cfe25b259918a32faff19bd3ebc4e6bb53d%2F492_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women-led%20startups%20smashing%20the%20glass%20ceiling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women-led%20startups%20smashing%20the%20glass%20ceiling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7b4f7cfe25b259918a32faff19bd3ebc4e6bb53d%2F492_0_2765_3456%2F2765.jpg>
 Natalie Campbell. Photograph: Natalie Campbell. 
Campbell certainly thinks so. “[For men] it’s about investment, it’s about 
money, it’s about being the best. They buy into the competitive nature of 
entrepreneurs, into the Alan Sugar and the Dragons’ Den proposition. [Whereas] 
women go into it thinking how can I have a life that I really enjoy? How can I 
work with people I want to be around? How can I be creative and make a 
difference?”

Smith, however, says it’s less clear cut than that. “There are women that are 
incredibly hungry for success and doing extremely well. And there are men that 
have a relaxed attitude to business and take their time. I don’t think it can 
be applied straight down the middle between genders.”

Nonetheless, Smith notes that another Centre for Entrepreneurs report 
<http://centreforentrepreneurs.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/Shattering_Stereotypes_Women_in_Entrepreneurship.pdf>
 (pdf) into women in entrepreneurship highlighted some clear gender divides. 
While women were shown to have just as much appetite and growth ambition as 
men, their risk-taking was more measured and few were willing to risk losing 
staff for the sake of growth. “This is perhaps a little bit of a healthier 
approach to growing a business,” says Smith.

Rachel Bell is one female serial entrepreneur whose businesses have proven her 
commitment to supporting staff. Now in her 40s, she was inspired to start her 
first business, Shine Communications (where she remains CEO), in 1999 due to 
her dissatisfaction with a former employer. Bell says: “I wanted to build a 
business where people felt encouraged to do their best work, the antithesis of 
what my career experience had been up to that point.”
 Rachel Bell says each of her spin-out businesses have been created to be sale 
ready. 
She fulfilled that aim: in 2012 Shine was named the Sunday Times best small 
company to work for and Bell was also recognised as the UK’s best boss of a 
small company. It has been a formula for success – annual turnover stands at 
more than £10m.

Partnerships between Bell and her staff have also led to a number of other 
business launches in the PR and marketing industry, including John Doe, 
Mischief and Aduro, most of which were sold. Bell explains: “Part of my 
aspiration [with Shine] was to ensure that people never left the business 
through lack of opportunity to learn and grow. So it became important to me to 
provide a way of fulfilling people’s ultimate career aspirations. For some I 
recognised that would be best achieved by creating their own business.”

While Bell has never taken on investment, these spin-out companies provided 
profitable exits. She says: “Each business was created with the goal of making 
it sale ready, to ultimately exit, but the person I founded it with could 
dictate when the exit happened.”

Putting staff ahead of fast growth does not necessarily lend itself to 
attracting investment or to exiting a business for a substantial sum – both 
common in serial entrepreneurship. Nevertheless, a measured approach and serial 
success are not mutually exclusive.

The biggest hurdle to women growing numerous, large businesses is a lack of 
funding opportunities – exacerbated by the fact that the vast majority of 
investors are men.

According to a CrunchBase report 
<https://techcrunch.com/2016/04/19/the-first-comprehensive-study-on-women-in-venture-capital/>
, just 10% of global venture capital funds between 2010 and 2015 funded 
startups with at least one female founder. Meanwhile, in the UK just 14% of 
angel investors are women, according to a2015 report 
<http://www.enterpriseresearch.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/01/ERC-Angels-Report..pdf>
 (pdf).

Nancy Cruickshank is a successful serial entrepreneur who has faced this 
conundrum. Her businesses have included Handbag.com, a content website for 
women, a property website andMyShowcase <https://www.myshowcase.com/>, a 
personal beauty shopping service through which women can set up their own 
business as stylists.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a53282c8cfb47ed6e933717d7833f63c9ca156%2F0_30_3302_4128%2F3302.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20women-led%20startups%20smashing%20the%20glass%20ceiling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20women-led%20startups%20smashing%20the%20glass%20ceiling&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsmall-business-network%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fwomen-led-startups-smashing-glass-ceiling-investment%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F50a53282c8cfb47ed6e933717d7833f63c9ca156%2F0_30_3302_4128%2F3302.jpg>
 Nancy Cruikshank says when seeking investment she’s largely faced a room full 
of men. 
And yet, while her credentials have helped Cruickshank to catch investors’ 
attention, she still faces the challenge of pitching a business aimed at women 
to male financiers. “I’m fundraising for MyShowcase as I speak. Having done 
three rounds now, I’ve found I am largely in a room talking to men. I’m talking 
about beauty, which doesn’t relate to them, and I’m talking about women 
starting businesses.”

Cruickshank thinks women can overcome this challenge by emphasising the 
earning potential and market demand for their product or service. But she 
admits that getting male investors to really understand a female-focused 
product can be tough.

Two successful female entrepreneurs are trying to tackle this problem with a 
new funding platform aimed squarely at women.AllBright <http://allbright.co/> 
was launched last October by Debbie Wosskow, founder and CEO of Love Home Swap, 
and Anna Jones, CEO at Hearst Magazines UK. It includes an angel network, a 
crowdfunding platform and learning resources through its AllBright academy.

For Wosskow and Jones it was important to combine funding with support. In the 
UK’s business culture, wherefour out of five 
<http://www.fsb.org.uk/docs/default-source/fsb-org-uk/fsb-women-in-enterprise-the-untapped-potentialfebc2bbb4fa86562a286ff0000dc48fe.pdf?sfvrsn=0>
 (pdf) of those that run businesses are men, it follows that women need more 
encouragement.

Boosting women’s confidence in themselves and their business ideas is the 
greatest challenge, says Wosskow. “Women are less likely to ask for financing 
and that obviously results in them receiving less. So one of the key messages 
for AllBright is to set a marker in the sand to say that this is a place for 
women to come for investment and advice.”

'Nothing to lose': why we sacrificed education for serial success
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/small-business-network/2016/dec/13/nothing-to-lose-serial-entrepreneurs-sacrifice-education>
A confidence gap is a running theme when discussing the number of female 
entrepreneurs.

But positive changes are taking place, including the growth in the number of 
women angel investors, from 7% in 2008 to 14% now, and a fund such as 
AllBright’s that combines investment with mentorship and business support.

Campbell suggests the approach taken by women – growing sustainably, looking 
after staff, and building something they are proud of – is influencing men too.

“The big shift that I’ve seen over the last couple of years is that more and 
more women are saying actually, I don’t need to play the boys’ game. I’m going 
to do it on my own terms. Perhaps an increasing proportion of female serial 
entrepreneurs could lead to a culture shift in business.”

Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here 
<https://register.theguardian.com/small-business/> for more advice, insight and 
best practice direct to your inbox.
 