
This is how, in a democracy, you win when you are outnumbered: you purchase 
the results. It’s how politics now works. The very rich throw money at the 
parties, lobby groups and thinktanks that project their demands. If they are 
clever, they keep their names out of it.

Here’s an example: a campaign fronted by the former England cricket captain 
Sir Ian Botham, calledYou Forgot the Birds <http://www.youforgotthebirds.com/>. 
It appears to have two purposes: to bring down theRSPB – the Royal Society for 
the Protection of Birds – <http://www.rspb.org.uk/>and to get the natural 
history presenterChris Packham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2015/sep/09/bbc-chris-packham-countryside-alliance>
 sacked from the BBC.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fchris-packham-and-ian-botham-clash-over-grouse-shooting-ban-audio&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Chris%20Packham%20and%20Ian%20Botham%20clash%20over%20grouse-shooting%20ban%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fchris-packham-and-ian-botham-clash-over-grouse-shooting-ban-audio>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Chris%20Packham%20and%20Ian%20Botham%20clash%20over%20grouse-shooting%20ban%20%E2%80%93%20audio&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Faug%2F12%2Fchris-packham-and-ian-botham-clash-over-grouse-shooting-ban-audio&media=>
Chris Packham and Ian Botham clash over grouse-shooting ban – audio 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/aug/12/chris-packham-and-ian-botham-clash-over-grouse-shooting-ban-audio>
It likes to present itself as “... a network of people who are passionate 
about bird habitat. Some of us are conservationists or self-confessed birders, 
some are farmers and landowners, some work full-time in the countryside while 
others are volunteers from the cities.” And this is what it revealedin a 
footnote at the bottom of one of its press releases 
<https://raptorpersecutionscotland.wordpress.com/2015/05/19/you-forgot-the-biology/>
, that has since vanished from the web: “The You Forgot the Birds campaign is 
funded by the British grouse industry.” Ah, the grouse industry. Who would have 
guessed?

Fragile habitats, but sturdy Ikea flatpacks | Brief letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/22/fragile-habitats-but-sturdy-ikea-flatpacks>
To shoot grouse you have to be exceedingly rich: it costs around £7,000 per 
person per day. The owners of grouse moors, who are also exceedingly rich, 
justify these fees by ensuring that there are vast numbers of birds to shoot. 
This requires, across great tracts of our uplands, the elimination of almost 
everything else.

Grouse are wild birds, but cosseted at the expense of other life forms. 
Predators and competitors must be eliminated, either legally or, in the case of 
protected species such asperegrine falcons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/jun/16/birdwatch-peregrine-falcon>
, golden eagles, red kites and hen harriers, illegally. Many grouse moors are 
black holes for birds of prey. Theydisappear and their satellite tags stop 
working 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/11/eight-tagged-golden-eagles-disappear-scottish-highlands>
in the same places, again and again. Alien abduction? Russian black ops? No:
shooting, trapping and poisoning by the gamekeepers employed to maximise grouse 
numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/aug/12/grouse-shootings-rich-influential-backers-join-forces-fire-on-critics>
, most of whom, on these remote moors, get away with it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fgrouse-shooters-kill-first-casualty-is-truth-astroturfing-botham-rspb-packham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05adfebb5781cf2aef66e74681b741a25d1ce8c1%2F0_175_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20grouse%20shooters%20aim%20to%20kill%3A%20the%20first%20casualty%20is%20the%20truth%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fgrouse-shooters-kill-first-casualty-is-truth-astroturfing-botham-rspb-packham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20grouse%20shooters%20aim%20to%20kill%3A%20the%20first%20casualty%20is%20the%20truth%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F16%2Fgrouse-shooters-kill-first-casualty-is-truth-astroturfing-botham-rspb-packham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F05adfebb5781cf2aef66e74681b741a25d1ce8c1%2F0_175_2048_1229%2F2048.jpg>
 A red kite found poisoned near Cromdale in Morayshire. Photograph: RSPB/PA 
Producing as many grouse as possible also means burning and draining the land, 
to create a monoculture of the young heather the birds eat. Sure, this releases 
the carbon in the soil, pollutes rivers andhelps to flood the towns downstream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/deluge-farmers-flood-grouse-moor-drain-land>
. But to hell with the plebs.

To rub our noses in it properly, we pay them for the privilege: grouse moors 
are subsidised by us. At the height of his austerity programme, as essential 
public services were cut to the bone, David Cameron’s governmentraised the 
subsidy for grouse moors by 84%, to £56 per hectare 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/apr/28/britain-plutocrats-landed-gentry-shotgun-owners>
. Some owners now harvest hundreds of thousands of pounds of our money every 
year.

Cameron also tried to close the national wildlife crime unit 
<http://www.nwcu.police.uk/>, which would have pleased his friends no end. It 
was saved only by a public outcry. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/01/uks-national-wildlife-unit-wins-late-reprieve-from-closure>
Conservationists have called for a law of vicarious liability, making the 
owners of grouse moors responsible for the wildlife crime they commission, 
rather than leaving only the gamekeepers to take the rap. But this proposal was
struck down by Cameron’s environment minister, Richard Benyon 
<https://raptorpersecutionscotland.wordpress.com/2011/08/13/no-vicarious-liability-for-england/>
. I’m sure it had nothing to do with the fact that he owns a grouse moor.

But through the efforts of wildlife campaigners (like Packham and the RSPB) 
and people whose homes have been flooded downstream, the grouse industry is now 
being called to account. Last week, the petition posted by the conservationist 
Mark Averycalling for an end to driven grouse shooting – where wild birds are 
sent towards the guns by “beaters” – passed the 100,000-signature threshold 
<https://petition.parliament.uk/petitions/125003>: the issue is now likely to 
be debated in parliament.

Through the efforts of wildlife campaigners like Chris Packham, the grouse 
industry is now being called to account

The result is You Forgot the Birds, championed by the Daily Mail, which 
describes it as “a grassroots campaign by farmers and conservationists” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3094619/I-ll-sue-RSPB-libel-charity-s-incompetence-misleading-ads-says-former-cricketer-Sir-Ian-Botham.html>
. It is, of course, coincidental thatPaul Dacre, the Mail’s editor, owns a 
grouse moor <http://www.euro-correspondent.com/eu-insider/304-dacre-s-acres>.

We know who’s in front of this “grassroots campaign”: Botham, who runs a shoot 
in North Yorkshire 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2805710/RSPB-spends-quarter-cash-saving-birds-Sir-Ian-Botham-leads-landowners-blast-charity.html>
. But who’s behind it? Only one funder has so far been identified: the 
billionaire hedge fund ownerCrispin Odey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/22/hedge-fund-manager-crispin-odey-billionaire-to-millionaire-profits-plunge>
. We also know that the campaign is run by a lobbying company calledAbzed 
<http://www.abzed.com/>. It boasts that “a besieged grouse moor community 
turned to Abzed <http://www.abzed.com/grouse-shooting/>. Our approach was to 
turn the spotlight on to the RSPB.” Very grassroots, I’m sure.

Claims made by the campaign keep falling apart. Last year the Telegraph had to 
issue a humiliating correction and apology to the RSPB 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/wildlife/11781729/RSPBs-failure-with-hen-harrier-nests-in-2m-scheme.html>
after it repeatedstatements in a You Forgot the Birds press release that seem 
to have been conjured out of thin air. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/aug/05/is-rspb-blame-loss-englands-rare-hen-harriers>
 Last week,in the Mail  
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3727489/Sack-eco-warrior-Packham-BBC-told-countryside-campaigners-including-Sir-Ian-Botham-rally-against-Springwatch-presenter-Chris-outspoken-attacks-hunting.html>
and on the Today programme, Botham recited figures for the rare birds found on 
grouse moors during a survey by the British Trust for Ornithology.The BTO says 
it has conducted no such survey 
<http://markavery.info/2016/08/12/bto-press-release/>.

The purpose of the countryside, for people like Botham, Odey and Dacre, is an 
exclusive playground for the rich. For them, authentic country people are those 
who own or rent significant tracts of land, many of whom live in cities, and 
those who work for them, as long as they wear tweed instead of Gore-Tex. As for 
theRSPB <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/rspb> and its members, they’re 
bipedal vermin. Never mind that many of them live and work in the countryside; 
they are interlopers with no right to a voice in rural life.

The media collaborates. News reporters describe shooting and hunting lobbyists 
as “countryside groups”, anointing them as the authentic rural voice and 
casting those who oppose them – who often seem to possess a far greater love 
for and knowledge of the countryside – as interfering townies. 
Documentary-makers seek a stereotyped rusticity which, though politically 
charged, is presented as the neutral and immutable spirit of rural life. The 
co-presenter of the series Clarissa and the Countryman wasSir Johnny Scott, a 
baronet who owns 5,000 acres in the Scottish borders 
<http://www.areyoureadytoorder.co.uk/interview.php?id=17>: that’s what the BBC 
means by countryman. Where is he now? Ah yes, fronting up You Forgot the Birds 
with Botham.

This flood was not only foretold – it was publicly subsidised | George Monbiot
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/deluge-farmers-flood-grouse-moor-drain-land>
When opposition is seen as illegitimate, it appears to be legitimate to cheat 
and bludgeon. That’s how the lords of the land have long maintained their 
pre-eminence. Today you can no longer call out the yeomanry, sit in judgment 
then have dissenters hanged. But there are other means of bypassing democracy. 
You buy yourself a crowd, or at least an outfit that looks like a crowd. You 
demand, from your position of comfortable anonymity, the silencing of people 
who contest your claims, like Packham. You use a corrupt and partisan media to 
hound them.

This is how politics works these days: astroturf groups (fake grassroots 
movements) and undisclosed interests are everywhere 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/01/24/books/review/dark-money-by-jane-mayer.html?_r=0>
. The same forces are at play in the tobacco industry, fossil fuels, junk food, 
banking, guns, private health provision, in fact throughout public life. They 
recruit celebrities to front their campaigns. The astroturf groups confuse and 
obfuscate, make up stories andgrant their anonymous backers plausible 
deniability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/sep/12/thinktanks-crushing-democracy-pr-agenices>
.

They are a threat to democracy. Call them out, expose them to the light, and 
don’t believe a word they say.
 