
The last-ditch intervention in the Israel-Palestine conflict by Barack Obama’s 
administration is imbued with a sense of eleventh-hour desperation. It is still 
worth assessing on its merits. Benjamin Netanyahu, settler movement leaders and 
others have already dismissedJohn Kerry’s speech 
<https://www.state.gov/secretary/remarks/2016/12/266119.htm> on Wednesday as 
hostile to Israel, just as they did the UN security council resolution 
demanding a halt to all settlement in the occupied territories. But, asmany 
within Israel <https://twitter.com/btselem/status/813457775539826688/photo/1> 
and the Jewish diaspora have made clear, that is unfair. True, they are 
anti-settlement, anti-occupation and, in the case of Wednesday’s remarks, 
anti-Netanyahu – but also pro-Israel. As the US secretary of state observed, 
the growth of settlements is destroying the two-state solution, for so long 
viewed as the best way to defend Israel.

Mr Kerry’s speech, which also criticised the Palestinian leadership, was the 
most outspoken attack on Israeli government policy made by a senior US official 
for years. That does not mean that Mr Obama’s administration has veered from 
longstanding US policy; he has been less willing than predecessors to allow 
throughcritical UN resolutions 
<http://forward.com/opinion/358516/actually-this-un-resolution-is-much-better-than-71-others-the-us-allowed-to/>
 and has pledged $38bn in military aidover the next decade 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/09/14/world/middleeast/israel-benjamin-netanyahu-military-aid.html>
. It reflects the shift in Israel’s coalition towards what the secretary of 
state called “the most rightwing in Israeli history”.

He said it was a time to stand up for what is right; but the sensible 
principles for negotiations were in essence those he drew up in March 2014. He 
reportedly thinks they should have been tabled formally, and wantedto make this 
speech that year <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/.premium-1.761927>. That 
would have been a braver and bolder move. Remarks made as the administration 
exits, with no need to ponder electoral risks, inevitably carry far less 
weight; but with the continuing expansion of settlements, the changes on the 
ground matter as much.

Mr Kerry’s commitment to winning peace has been measurable in air miles and 
hours of meetings. But the administration has been timid, perhaps prioritising 
the Iran nuclear deal as his priority, and fearing the domestic damage that Mr 
Netanyahu could cause him and his party. The Arab spring and its fallout still 
consumes much of the government’s attention; today’s ceasefire in Syria gives
little hope of a lasting settlement there 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/29/syrian-government-and-rebels-have-signed-ceasefire-agreement-says-putin>
.

Meanwhile, Mr Netanyahu has paid only lip service to the two-state solution. 
His dismal ambition – rather than, as predecessors have sought to do, finishing 
David Ben-Gurion’s project by settling the country’s borders – appears simply 
to be outlasting Mr Ben-Gurion as the country’s longest-serving prime minister. 
Some have already suggested that the criminal investigation he now faces 
fuelled the vehemence of his reaction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/28/israel-attorney-general-orders-criminal-probe-benjamin-netanyahu>
. The Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, meanwhile, reportedly promised to 
respond to the 2014 proposals but has never done so. For all these reasons it 
is unsurprising that both the chief foreign envoy of the Yesha council, 
representing Israeli settlers, and the Palestinian-American co-founder of the 
Electronic Intifada website described Mr Kerry’s address as an eloquenteulogy 
to the two-state solution 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/28/world/middleeast/kerry-netanyahu-obama-trump-israel.html?_r=0>
. Polls suggest only a very slim majority of Israelis and Palestinians still
support that outcome <http://www.haaretz.com/israel-news/1.737973>; a growing 
number believe it isno longer possible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/the-two-state-solution-in-the-middle-east-all-you-need-to-know>
. “Stay strong Israel, January 20th is fast approaching!” Donald Trump tweeted 
after Mr Kerry’s speech. He has already vowed to move the US embassy to 
Jerusalem, a move likely to inflame the conflict, and haschosen an ambassador 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/15/trump-israel-ambassador-david-friedman>
 notable for his hardline pro-settlement stance and strong opposition to the 
two-state solution.

On the other hand, Mr Trump’s choice for secretary of state, Rex Tillerson, 
has little public record on the issue, and ties to oil producers in the Gulf; 
and the president-elect characterises a peace agreement as “the mother of all 
deals”. No doubt his vanity would relish such a triumph, but the futile peace 
talks to date have required almost infinite amounts of patience and 
persistence. Mr Trump has neither. His political career has been built on 
disruption, not conciliation.

Mr Kerry’s speech is better late than never; its symbolic effect is better 
than none. The international community should reaffirm its commitment to the 
two-state solution when foreign ministers from 70 countries meet at a Middle 
East peace conference inParis on 15 January 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/27/mahmoud-abbas-un-resolution-lays-groundwork-to-end-israeli-settlements>
. No one has a better plan. But no one expects all this to revive the process. 
It is about attempting to prevent a sharp turn for the worse, and if necessary 
to allow something to be salvaged in a post-Trump era.
 