
Can it really be true? Can the glorious victory of Brexit have led indirectly 
to another consequence? Are we truly on the point of losingKatie Hopkins 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/katie-hopkins> to America? If so, we are 
living through the most ballsed-up afterparty since the Treaty of Versailles.

Yet the indications seem clear. Brexit plus-plus-plus, as Donald Trump trailed 
his then only potential victory, has drawn some of Brexit’s biggest 
cheerleaders to try to make it in the US. According to Katie’sprevious words on 
the matter <https://twitter.com/kthopkins/status/672742991841333248>: “If 
Donald Trump wins the race to the White House, I’m moving to America. Daring to 
bare what some people really think.” Given that someone at Trump’s formal 
victory speech appeared to shout “Kill Obama!”, Katie is going to have to dig 
deep for shock opinions yet unbared. But I’m sure she’ll scrape manfully away 
until she does. As she is fond of pointing out, she has “girl balls”.

On the one hand, Katie doing one to America seems wrong, as brain drain is 
normally a consequence of oppression or moral outrage. Searching for the 
commensurate historical parallel in terms of human capital flight, you would 
probably go for the time when Justinian shut down the Platonic Academy in 
Athens, and the philosophers took all their learning to Persia, while the Dark 
Ages set in for Europe. Try to imagine something similar here, except with 
Katie taking scrolls oftweets calling migrants cockroaches and whatnot 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/2015/apr/24/katie-hopkins-cockroach-migrants-denounced-united-nations-human-rights-commissioner>
.

On the other hand, we have to accept a small provincial backwater such as the 
UK can no longer hold Katie’s talents, and that she was always going to sign 
for a bigger club at some point. The US is the obvious answer. After all, the 
one thing this election has shown is that the US really lacks for strident and 
intemperate voices, and Katie would help to address that drought. Under any 
points-based immigration system you care to construct, she would be the right 
kind of immigrant. Furthermore, Trump himselfonce noticed Katie on Twitter, 
writing <https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/674936832010887168>: “Thank 
you to respected columnist Katie Hopkins of DailyMail.com for her powerful 
writing on the UK’s Muslim problems.” Erotica to madam’s ears, no doubt.

As for what plans she has to draw adoring attention to herself as she makes 
the transition to a big pond, we must wait to see. Her act may need a little 
local fine tuning. My feeling is she’ll retire her constant refrain that fat 
people bring it entirely on themselves. Katie once put on four stone for a 
documentary designed to prove the latter point, and although I would like to 
see her reprise it for her new heartlands, instinct suggests she’ll not make it 
part of her introductory American offering.

The other big Trump question, showbiz-wise – I accept there are one or two 
bigger ones politically, but this is a celebrity column – is whether the UK 
will take delivery ofcelebrities fleeing his presidency 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3921370/So-s-flight-Celebrities-pledged-leave-U-S-Trump-won-including-Lena-Dunham-Amy-Schumer-Miley-Cyrus-mocked-Twitter.html>
. An awful lot did promise to, from Girls creator Lena Dunham, who earmarked 
Vancouver, saying: “I know a lot of people have been threatening to do this, 
but I really will.” Then there was pop’s Miley Cyrus, who declared: “I am 
moving if he is president. I don’t say things I don’t mean!” There was even 
talkshow host and comedian Chelsea Handler, who stated: “I did buy a house in 
another country just in case. So all these people that threaten to leave the 
country and then don’t –I actually will leave that country. 
<http://thehill.com/blogs/in-the-know/in-the-know/279809-handler-i-bought-a-house-in-another-country-in-case-trump-is>
”

For what minuscule amount it’s worth, Lost in Showbiz hasn’t got a huge amount 
of time for celebrities pre-emptively announcing that they will deprive a 
country of their personages in the event of electoral disappointment. I think 
they should stay and fight, just likePhil Collins should have stayed when 
Labour won in 1997 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/32590242/do-celebrities-leave-the-country-after-a-general-election-no---not-really>
, and fought – with his drumsticks, if necessary – to give us a William Hague 
victory in 2001. Still, it’s no use crying over spilt milk.

Let’s turn instead to more positive thoughts. Who are the major potential 
celebrity gainers in all this? Which stars might do well out of Trump’s 
victory? As so often previously,this column’s thoughts turn to Steven Seagal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/nov/03/steven-seagal-granted-russian-citizenship-vladimir-putin>
. Only last week, Seagal was regarded as having picked the wrong side in a new 
cold war, taking Russian citizenship from Vladimir Putin, having already long 
functioned in Russian roles as diverse as arms firm spokesmodel and 
presidential aikido buddy. But now, well – all bets are off. Who would 
seriously rule outthe On Deadly Ground legend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/apr/11/steven-seagal-60-best-film-roles>
 as the ideal US ambassador to Russia? Think about it: he has all the relevant 
contacts, the intellectual heft to which Trump is naturally drawn, and he was 
straight out of the traps to congratulate the president-elect, cheering that he 
was “looking forward to making AMERICA great again!” Also, I think the various 
direct-to-app projects in which Seagal is involved could prove fairly easy to 
extricate himself from.

Yet Seagal wasn’t the only Hollywood notable – don’t argue with that epithet – 
to avoid crying into Instagram about the victory. Francis Ford Coppola 
described Trump as a“really practical person” 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-S4mhYP0QII>, in a digression chiefly notable 
for the revelation that the pair had been at the same military school. This is 
now my favourite Hollywood/political education-based mash-up since learning that
Al Gore’s Harvard roommate 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/08/16/politicians-famous-roommates_n_3767848.html>
 was Tommy Lee Jones.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=How%20the%202016%20US%20election%20night%20unfolded%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Fhow-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video&media=>
How the 2016 US election night unfolded 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/09/how-the-2016-us-election-night-unfolded-trump-clinton-video>
Finally, as far as newly minted major celebrities are concerned, you would 
have to go some way to avoid the Trump progeny themselves. Needless to say, 
Ivanka is being touted as a future president, because the Oval Office is now 
basically the Iron Throne, and only families can fight for it. But for many who 
watched the family line up on stage alongside Trump for his victory speech,it’s 
all about his 10-year-old son, Barron, now. 
<https://www.bustle.com/articles/194244-barron-trump-looks-as-sleepy-confused-as-you-are-during-donald-trumps-victory-speech-photos>
 We can only hope Barbara Walters does the right thing and names Barron her 
Most Fascinating Person of 2016.

Oh, I know some people will point to Barron’s apparent flinch when the guy 
shouted “Kill Obama!”, and suggest he could grow up the Saffy-from-Ab-Fab in 
all this – a lone, horrified rationalist trapped in a household of emotionally 
incontinent narcissists. But those are people who clearly got it wrong and are 
still asking the wrong questions. God knows we’re all surrounded by the wrong 
questions. I myself have a four-year-old son who stared at Barron throughout 
Trump’s speech and kept asking “Why is that boy sad?” Luckily, I was on hand to 
correct him on his privileged stating of the obvious, and explain that if he 
and his lamestream buddies bothered to look at the electoral data as opposed to 
acting out their SJW bullshit, they would see Barron was happy and it was WHITE 
WOMEN who made him so. I will not raise a four-year-old elitist who fails to 
understand that his debunked “poor Barron” narrative is a lie that butthurt 
liberals can no longer tell themselves.

All in all, then, it’s shaping up to be a time of intriguing shifts in the 
celebrity firmament. Consider your stars in sudden flux, and stockpile 
emergency supplies accordingly.
 