
Liz Truss, the justice secretary, did the right thing in ordering an urgent 
review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/04/truss-orders-review-to-ban-abusers-tormenting-victims-in-family-courts>
 into the best way of stopping abusers tormenting their victims through the 
family courts. It is entirely unacceptable that, asthe Guardian has been 
reporting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/22/revealed-how-family-courts-allow-abusers-to-torment-their-victims>
, some women face aggressive cross-examination by an abusive former partner 
(one was even made to sit beside her ex while the court watched a police video 
of her reporting an assault). There is, simply, no justification for this. No 
justification: but there are explanations, and they point to a solution higher 
up the food chain than the courts themselves.

The immediate problem was widely predicted before Ms Truss’s predecessor 
Chris Grayling took the axe to his department’s budget. Legal aid is now 
denied in most family cases. The main exception is for a victim of domestic 
abuse. Ms Truss, who has already beaten austerity to get more money to increase 
the number of prison officers, would win the gratitude of thousands of 
individuals if she could also get funding to roll back the worst aspects of 
austerity in the court system. Cuts of more than 30% 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/tools_and_resources/fiscal_facts/public_spending_survey/cuts_to_public_spending>
 are crippling access to all sorts of justice. But in the family courts it can 
mean a renewal of old traumas; worse, a mistake can see a vulnerable child 
being put at risk of further abuse.

Family court judges insist most of them are sensitive to the trauma 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/27/abuse-and-secrecy-in-the-family-courts?CMP=Share_iOSApp_Other>
 that can be caused when an abusive partner is allowed to question their victim 
in court. But their options are limited, and now that in six out of 10 cases 
neither side has a lawyer to represent them, a confrontation between 
ex-partners becomes harder and harder to avoid. One course of action, resorted 
to by thepresident of the family division, Sir James Munby 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2014/jun/09/top-family-judge-adjourns-custody-case-legal-aid-impasse>
, was to halt the hearing and order that legal representation was made 
available. But his order was overturned by the court of appeal. Sometimes the 
judge or a court official or even a legal adviser takes over questioning; but 
often judges are reluctant to appear to shed their neutrality. They face other 
pressures too. For good reasons, the Children and Families Act 2014set a 
time limit of 26 weeks for care cases 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2014/6/contents/enacted>, and judges are 
under pressure to deal with all cases as quickly as possible. Performance is 
closely monitored – a factor that in an under-resourced system militates 
against halting proceedings to arrange representation.

To their critics, like Women’s Aid, who pick up the pieces, it appears that 
judges simply don’t understand the impact of the experience of abuse, or the 
many ways it can be perpetrated. Their surveys suggest that the courts are 
heavily biased in favour of granting contact between a child and a parent, even 
if that parent is abusive – something that may involve fundamental human rights 
questions – and against women whose evidence, they argue, is too easily 
disbelieved or discounted.

The review Ms Truss has now promised has to consider these complexities; it 
will also cross with another review she is committed to into the workings of 
the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act that implemented the 
cuts. For family courts and for Women’s Aid, however, there is one 
recommendation that would transform the court experience for vulnerable people: 
make representation compulsory where an individual accused or convicted of 
abuse wants to interrogate their partner; that’s been the rule in criminal 
courts for more than a decade. There is no low-budget alternative.
 