
Britain’s referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jun/17/eurozone-finally-approves-75bn-greek-loan-business-live>
 will, in the end, be a test of common sense and values. That the British 
electorate may be getting ready to commit an act of national self-sabotage by 
choosing to pull out of the European Union is something that baffles many 
Europeans. It scares those who care about democracy. But those who, on the 
contrary, promote intolerance are full of hope that it will happen – witness 
the statements made by France’s Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/20/marine-le-pen-could-campaign-for-uk-to-leave-eu-referendum>
.

IMF chief urges Britain to stay in Europe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/17/imf-chief-christine-lagarde-urges-britain-to-stay-in-europe>
Just months ago, no one expected it would come to this. Now everyone is 
watching British people putting at stake the very survival of the United 
Kingdom and the stability of the economy, in a move that would send toxic 
ripple effects acrossEurope <https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news>.

Most people watching from the continent are bewildered. No one is discovering 
out of the blue that Britain has always had a particular approach to the 
European project, drawn from its history and its taste for “the open sea”. But 
problems have piled up for Europe in recent years, and the possibility that a 
key member of the union may now fall out of it promises severe uncertainties 
for everyone. The march to Europe’s disintegration would not just rattle 
institutions, treaties, economic growth, trade – it would threaten democratic 
values, the essence of what we are supposed to stand for.

If Britain drops out, there will be efforts to limit the damage. EU leaders 
have already started discussing the reassurances they would give that the 
European project, created to harness peace and solidarity, will live on, even 
without Britain. Expect solemn declarations and well-choreographed summitry. 
But deep down, everyone will know that something essential will have been lost. 
That’s likely to have important consequences, and it’s hard to be certain that 
Britain wouldn’t be affected over time.

Make no mistake, there are external actors hoping to see the EU collapse, for 
which Brexit might be a catalyst

I can already hear the objections: Britain’s democracy is hundreds of years 
older than the1957 treaty of Rome 
<http://europa.eu/eu-law/decision-making/treaties/index_en.htm>, and joining 
the bloc in 1973 was never meant to protect heritage – it was all about drawing 
economic advantages. Democracy in Europe was anchored through the defeat of 
Nazism and then by the US security umbrella provided during the cold war. 
Saying Brexit would suddenly make democracy unravel across the continent is 
alarmist. Nor is the EU a beacon of democracy. Its institutions have often been 
criticised for their “democratic deficit”. Not to mention that some member 
states – namely Hungary and Poland – have been sliding into illiberalism and 
autocratic politics.

Let’s take those points in reverse order. It’s true democratic governance has 
faltered in several EU states, and that the union as such was unable to prevent 
that from happening: Hungary’s and Poland’s governments were, after all, 
democratically elected. But the union’s rules are the first and main mechanisms 
that can, and should, be leveraged to get those countries back on a democratic 
track. It’s EU membership that provides the safeguards, and that’s what many 
Hungarian and Polish democrats are counting on. Many of the EU’s democratic 
flaws have less to do with its own institutional set-up than with the choices 
national governments have made, whether on eurozone governance or on the 
migration issue: remember that the heart of power in the organisation is the 
European council, where heads of state and governments gather – not technocrats.

The European project may not be perfect, but its very existence has done much 
to spread democracy on the continent. It acted as a magnet for Greece, Portugal 
and Spain when they rejected dictatorship. It deployed soft power to help 
reform countries that broke out of communist totalitarianism. It should 
continue to exert – although this effort has slowed – a powerful influence on 
Balkan nations that fought devastating wars until just over 15 years ago, and 
are now hoping to be allowed into the club. Britain’s role in much of this has 
been crucial. The referendum campaign has focused on immigration statistics – 
the obsession of Brexiters – but the wider picture is that European 
reunification has been a historical accomplishment, something that those who 
remember the 1970s or 1980s could never have predicted.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Faftershock-vote-leave-eu-rebound-britain-lurch-disintegration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe09cf27b26074184761752ddff7063677b6150a%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20aftershocks%20of%20a%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20EU%20will%20rebound%20on%20Britain%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Faftershock-vote-leave-eu-rebound-britain-lurch-disintegration%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20aftershocks%20of%20a%20vote%20to%20leave%20the%20EU%20will%20rebound%20on%20Britain%20%7C%20Natalie%20Nougayr%C3%A8de&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F18%2Faftershock-vote-leave-eu-rebound-britain-lurch-disintegration%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe09cf27b26074184761752ddff7063677b6150a%2F0_161_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 ‘Britain is unique, but not so unique. Its politics resonate in many ways with 
what is going on in the rest of Europe.’ Photograph: Ben Stansall/AFP/Getty 
Images 
Democracy is easily taken for granted. In my country, France, Britain has 
often been described as a spoilsport, blocking high-minded European federalist 
projects, but these days French politics isn’t exactly a model of democratic 
stability, nor of “European spirit”, with the rise of the far right and an 
ongoing state of emergency. Europe is plagued by populist, xenophobic movements 
that have capitalised on the mismanagement of the migration crisis and on years 
of middle-class disgruntlement with globalisation and the recession. Britain is 
unique, but not so unique.Its politics resonate in many ways with what is going 
on in the rest of Europe. A recentPew study 
<http://www.pewglobal.org/2016/06/07/euroskepticism-beyond-brexit/> shows a 
massive drop in support for the EU across member states since 2015, when more 
than 1 million people arrived in Europe. Today, fewer French citizens (38%) 
than British citizens (44%) view the EU favourably.

Make no mistake, there are external actors hoping to see the EU collapse, for 
which Brexit might be a catalyst. They see the EU as decadent and weak. What 
Brexit would do is deliver a devastating blow to all those who want to protect 
whatever is left of moderate, common-sense views in Europe – and send an 
encouraging signal to extremists of all stripes. It would weaken the mechanisms 
that have been created to protect tolerance and decency. The EU is 
fundamentally about democracy and individual freedoms.

Nigel Farage's anti-migrant poster reported to police
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
It’s the timing of the UK referendum, not just the polls, that makes it so 
worrying for many Europeans. If it had been held in 1986, 1996, or 2006, when 
circumstances were very different in Europe, it wouldn’t have been the 
potential earthquake it has now become. In none of these other decades was 
democracy under such threat as now, both inside and outside Europe. 
Authoritarianism and the appeal of strong men have been on the rise in 
important parts of the world. The EU has a unique global voice to defend 
democracy – if only because as an entity it never invaded anyone and it was 
never a colonial power. If Britain separates from it, both the EU and Britain 
will lose that clout.

As the UK referendum approaches, the first place to worry about democracy is 
in Europe. That’s because we live in an era of hyper-connectedness. Discourses 
of prejudice and nationalistic hubris resonate across borders instantly. What 
happens in one country can undermine the moral dimension of the wholeEuropean 
Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, and decisively so. This is not 
about budgets and technocracy, it’s about values. That’s the first reason why 
democrats in Europe would like remain to win.
 