
Ladies and gentlemen, we have started our descent. From now until closing time 
on Christmas Eve, we are destined to fall towards an existential abyss. Some of 
us are fated to experience an unpleasant altercation with another shopper on 
Black Friday over the last discounted PS4 in a warehouse on the North Circular. 
Others will be on our knees in Hamleys begging the assistant to check again in 
the storeroom to see if they have thaton-trend Zoomer Chimp 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/money/top-childrens-toys-christmas-2016-8205198>, a 
£119.99 plastic robotic ape that comes complete with voice command recognition 
and – please God, no – 100-plus tricks. And then, sometime around 10am on 
Christmas Day, our nation will be united by a warm fuzzy feeling. What’s that 
feeling called again? Buyer’s remorse.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca709b3d54e41a6355ddf93c4d35fb9bed45dff%2F0_0_2641_3459%2F2641.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffca709b3d54e41a6355ddf93c4d35fb9bed45dff%2F0_0_2641_3459%2F2641.jpg>
 Walter Benjamin ... ‘the “modern” [is] the time of hell’ the Frankfurt School 
leader wrote. Photograph: Alamy 
One thing I’ve learned in researching the lives of that bunch of mostly dead 
neo-Marxist German Jews calledthe Frankfurt School 
<https://www.marxists.org/subject/frankfurt-school/> is that shopping isn’t so 
much a satisfying pastime that boosts the economy as a burning wheel ofIxion 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ixion> on which we are bound until death secures 
our release. “The ‘modern’ [is] the time of hell,” wrote Walter Benjamin, the 
brains behind the Frankfurt School operation, in his critique of consumer 
capitalism,The Arcades Project 
<http://www.lrb.co.uk/v22/n12/tj-clark/reservations-of-the-marvellous>. He 
wasn’t writing about Saturday at 5pm in Toys R Us, but he could have been. Here 
then are 10 lies about shopping to help you escape the seasonal consumerist 
circle of hell so appalling that even Dante didn’t dare imagine it.

1 More choice makes us happier

No, it doesn’t. The idea of shops offering us 101 kinds of muesli is that we 
are rational utility maximisers who have the time and temperaments to make 
sense of endless options. But we aren’t: that’s why Nobel economics laureate 
Herbert Simon came up with the idea of“satisficing” 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Satisficing>. Any firm that tried to make 
decisions that would maximise its returns would bankrupt itself in a 
never-ending search for the best option. Instead, they “satisfice”, which means 
they content themselves with results that are “good enough”. And what goes for 
firms goes for shoppers: endless choice makes us miserable and so to reduce 
that misery we make bumbling choices that are good enough. The Frankfurt School 
argued that we have been conditioned to accept the goods that are on offer; 
effectively, we are ideologically shaped to demand what is supplied. That is 
why Theodor Adorno and Max Horkheimer in their classicDialectic of Enlightenment
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/apr/08/frankfurt-school-dialectic-of-enlightenment>
 wrote, “freedom to choose an ideology – since ideology always reflects 
economic coercion – everywhere proves to be freedom to choose what is always 
the same”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89bdf3873e39622eed51111354b561fe25f1dfc%2F0_1201_1941_1500%2F1941.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb89bdf3873e39622eed51111354b561fe25f1dfc%2F0_1201_1941_1500%2F1941.jpg>
 We are ideologically shaped to demand what is supplied ... Christmas shoppers 
in Oxford Street. Photograph: Lauren Hurley/PA

2 Stuff comes for free

On the back of the Zipvan in my street is a logo telling passers-by that the 
rental car firm pays for fuel, insurance and the congestion charge, adding in 
brackets, “We’re nice like that”. Did these guys never hear ofMilton Friedman 
<https://www.goodreads.com/author/quotes/5001.Milton_Friedman>? “There is,” 
said the economist, “no such thing as a free lunch.” Somebody always pays for 
it, usually me. Businesses are never “nice” and don’t give stuff away without 
expecting to cultivate misplaced positive feelings from their customers and as 
a result prise more cash from their bank accounts. When Adorno and Horkheimer 
wrote the following words, they weren’t thinking of my experiences in BOGOF 
bookshops or with on-street car rental firms, but they apply to them perfectly 
well: “All the violence done to words is so vile that one can hardly bear to 
hear them any longer.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c64393b77dd999908a1286c4066ae087156b942%2F191_33_4951_2970%2F4951.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c64393b77dd999908a1286c4066ae087156b942%2F191_33_4951_2970%2F4951.jpg>
3 Stuff is built to last

No, it isn’t. In 1921 the Phoebus cartel created lightbulbs that would break 
after 1,000 hours instead of providing the 1,500-2,000 hours previous bulbs 
managed. Why? To make profit from, as far as I can tell, consumer misery. The 
nightmare of ending-is-better-than-mending consumption imagined by Aldous 
Huxley in 1932’sBrave New World 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2014/oct/13/100-best-novels-brave-new-world-aldous-huxley>
 has been realised. Nowadays the practice is everywhere: you have to buy a new 
toothbrush because the batteries can no longer be replaced.

Walter Benjamin recognised that in consumerist society we’re locked into a 
kind of degrading compulsion: we buy new stuff to conceal from ourselves our 
disappointment about the failings of the old stuff. And then the new stuff 
becomes old, and so we upgrade – in part to hide from ourselves our 
disappointment at the unbearable failure of our earlier purchase. Benjamin 
strove to make us see that what we’re doing is nuts. As Benjamin scholar Max 
Pensky puts it: “The promise of eternal newness and unlimited progress encoded 
in the imperatives of technological change and the cycles of consumption now 
appear as their opposite, as primal history, the mythic compulsion toward 
endless repetition.” Which is just one reason why you shouldn’t upgrade to an 
iPhone 7.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37916cbf5c66557c790c856514c59706eff2944%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff37916cbf5c66557c790c856514c59706eff2944%2F0_0_5333_3200%2F5333.jpg>
4 Some brands can be trusted to make great products

Remember the Apple Newton <http:>? Of course you don’t. Steve Jobs pulled the 
plug on this much-mocked disaster in 1997, four years after it was launched. It 
was supposed to be a personal digital assistant that worked through handwriting 
recognition: you scribbled on the pad and – lo! – a digitised note appeared. 
Except it didn’t: like Mr Magoo, it was always mistaking something for 
something else. Garry Trudeausatirised the Newton in his Doonesbury cartoon 
strip <https://fortunedotcom.files.wordpress.com/2011/10/db930827.gif>: it 
misreads the words “Catching on?” as “Egg Freckles”. Maybe some of you are 
thinking Apple’s Siri is the Egg Freckles of voice recognition software. I 
couldn’t possibly comment.

If Benjamin were still alive, he would own an Apple Newton. He collected the 
worthless, the trashy, the things that seemed to promise utopia but quickly 
became embarrassingly naff, obsolete. In doing so he thought he could expose 
the lie at the heart of consumer capitalism and effect revolutionary change. 
But the revolution, you’ll have noticed, didn’t happen. Argos still exists; 
Amazon Prime still seems like a solution to, rather than cause of, our 
problems. We’re still in the hell he diagnosed.

5 You can never have too many shoes
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61847d3cf0a16bea0495af8c3476388732da6d17%2F0_100_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F61847d3cf0a16bea0495af8c3476388732da6d17%2F0_100_1872_1123%2F1872.jpg>
 Well heeled ... some of Imelda Marcos’s shoes. Photograph: Sipa Press/Rex 
Features Photograph: Sipa Press / Rex Features 
Such, at least, is the wisdom of Joanna Lumley’s Patsy Stone 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZAfmM06pVUw> from Absolutely Fabulous. (The 
full quote is even more bonkers: “You can never have too many hats, gloves, and 
shoes.”) In fact you can. Consider Imelda Marcos. She left behind 1,220 pairs 
of shoes when she fled Manila with her husband, President Ferdinand Marcos, 
during a 1986 uprising. That’s too many. Thirty years laterthat collection of 
shoes is reportedly worthless 
<http://www.csmonitor.com/World/Latest-News-Wires/2012/0924/Imelda-Marcos-shoe-collection-now-worthless-says-Philippines-government>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9d97fa74f08f04e0251e3140af8745100a1c4c%2F0_257_1527_1871%2F1527.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-7%23img-7&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fba9d97fa74f08f04e0251e3140af8745100a1c4c%2F0_257_1527_1871%2F1527.jpg>
 And the same goes for hats and gloves ... Joanna Lumley as Patsy Stone. 
Photograph: Everett Collection/Rex Features 
Marcos’s shoe fetishism is an example of what Marx called the fetishism of 
commodities, and which the Frankfurt School thought had become more widespread 
since their mentor wrote Das Kapital in the Victorian era. What is the 
fetishism of commodities? When a pair of shoes or an iPhone is sold, it is 
exchanged for another commodity (money for instance). The exchange takes no 
account of the fact that, for example, some of Apple’s overstressed and 
underpaid workerscontemplated suicide 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/aug/05/woman-nearly-died-making-ipad>
 in order to escape the penal servitude of manufacturing must-have commodities 
for you and me. That erasure of the economic circumstances in which a commodity 
is made, and the phantasmagoric, unreal life it takes on as a result, makes us 
fetishists.

György Lukács, the great influence on the Frankfurt School’s developing 
neo-Marxism, put it in his classicHistory and Class Consciousness 
<https://www.marxists.org/archive/lukacs/works/history/lukacs3.htm> that a new 
kind of human arises in this world of rampant commodity fetishism, along with 
20th-century mechanisation and specialisation of industrial work processes. 
That new human sees the world as a series of commodities and his or her own 
self as a thing to be bought and sold. That new human is so degraded that 
buying and selling is its essence: truly, the new human Lukács envisaged can 
say: I shop therefore I am. Instead of uniting to start the revolution, we buy 
more shoes.

6 It’s worth paying more for quality
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13108ad5d13f4b5418f74317bc7581ff0c8d4015%2F0_9_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-8%23img-8&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F13108ad5d13f4b5418f74317bc7581ff0c8d4015%2F0_9_2464_1478%2F2464.jpg>
 Vivienne Westwood (centre) ... her ‘choose well and buy less’ advice isn’t so 
simple. Photograph: Steve Wood/Rex Features 
When Vivienne Westwood launched a collection in 2010, she said we should not 
buy new clothes for six months. “My message is: choose well and buy less,” she 
said – as if to suggest you should buy one Westwood dress rather than filling 
Primark trolleys regularly with disposable tat. But, Dame Vivienne, sustainable 
consumerism isn’t that simple. A couple of years afterI interviewed Westwood 
about her fashion worldview 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/dec/03/vivienne-westwood-cool-earth-environment-fashi>
, a friend bought me a Vivienne Westwood watch. It was beautiful and I was 
happy, thinking it was built to last. Then the numbers fell off, the strap 
broke and the clock hands collapsed within a year. Next time I need a new 
watch, I’ll try Poundland.

Just as, in some religions, an object invested with supernatural powers 
becomes a fetish for those who worship it, so commodities under capitalism are 
accorded magical powers and illusory autonomy. The Vivienne Westwood brand had, 
for me, just such magical powers. Even when its logo appeared on a dodgy watch 
made under licence. Reading the Frankfurt School disabused me of this fetish. 
When it comes to shopping, I don’t trust anyone anymore, not even one-time punk 
couturiers.

7 There are things that we “must have”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ddaa8f9bf3e71990592e5569d2617e2bc5bd34%2F0_80_4096_2807%2F4096.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-9%23img-9&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F07ddaa8f9bf3e71990592e5569d2617e2bc5bd34%2F0_80_4096_2807%2F4096.jpg>
 Actually, too much choice makes us miserable ... Photograph: Erik S Lesser/EPA 
Hollister has a range of must-have T-shirts 
<https://www.hollisterco.com/shop/uk/guys-must-have-tees>. Business Insider can 
direct you to a list of20 must-have tech accessories for under £20 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/best-tech-accessories-under-20-dollars-2016-5> 
(including a multi-port USB wall charger, armband phone case and a carphone 
mount). And then there’s musthave.co.uk, whose beauty products includea 15ml 
pot of Truefitt & Hill Moustache Wax for £17.50 
<https://www.musthave.co.uk/shaving/>. What do all these must-haves have in 
common? You don’t need them.

Why haven’t we revolted against consumer capitalism and its system of lies 
masquerading as injunctions? Because, for the Frankfurt School, we’ve become 
comfortably corrupted. Such at least was the view of Herbert Marcuse in his 
1964 classicOne-Dimensional Man 
<http://www.marcuse.org/herbert/pubs/64onedim/odm1.html>, where he despaired of 
the working classes to rise up and cast off their guided chains: “If the worker 
and his boss enjoy the same television programme and visit the same resort 
places, if the typist is as attractively made up as the daughter of her 
employer, if the Negro owns a Cadillac, if they all read the same newspaper, 
then this assimilation indicates not the disappearance of classes, but the 
extent to which the needs and satisfactions that serve the preservation of the 
Establishment are shared by the underlying population.” As Malcolm X put it in 
a different context: “I say you’ve been misled, you’ve been had, you’ve been 
took.”

8 There are things that are “investment pieces”

Most cars lose between 50% and 60% of their value in the first three years of 
ownership 
<http://www.whatcar.com/advice/buying/depreciation-what-is-it-and-how-do-i-avoid-it/>
. The great French novelist Marcel Proust, who was a profound influence on the 
thoughts of Walter Benjamin, saw through that kind of nonsense at the age of 
18: “Desire makes all things flourish,” he wrote, “possession withers them.” 
True, he was mostly focused on the objects of sexual desire, but his words 
apply equally to a used BMW X5.

9 Flatpack furniture makes a happy home
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd947b17def89a0fb1c4308b7adbea5114dba1b34%2F0_105_4860_2917%2F4860.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday's%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2010%20lies%20%E2%80%8Babout%20Black%20Friday%27s%20consumerist%20circle%20of%20hell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flifeandstyle%2F2016%2Fnov%2F24%2Fblack-friday-shopping-lies-consumerist-hell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-10%23img-10&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd947b17def89a0fb1c4308b7adbea5114dba1b34%2F0_105_4860_2917%2F4860.jpg>
 When we buy Ikea we’re buying flat-packed misery’ ... Photograph: Alamy 
Earlier this year my wife and I assembled a Pax wardrobe. Only because we have 
agreed to lock the memory of that weekend in our marital psychic vault does our 
relationship survive. Indeed, there’sa very useful pie chart 
<http://thoughtofthejay.blogspot.co.uk/2011/05/off-to-ikea.html> showing how 
time is spent immediately after shoppers return from Ikea: just under 25% 
involves making “that’s what she said” jokes, more than 40% involves swearing, 
and a substantial proportion includes taking whatever you were assembling apart 
because you did it wrong.

But here’s the twist, diagnosed by the Frankfurt School 70 years ago. We all 
know that when we buy Ikea we’re buying flat-packed misery, but we carry on 
shopping regardless. Our knowing cynicism about shopping doesn’t stop us 
buying, since we’re too ideologically entrenched. As Adorno and Horkheimer put 
it: “The triumph of advertising in the culture industry is that consumers feel 
compelled to buy and use its products even though they see through them.”

How to make sure you really are saving on Black Friday bargains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/24/make-sure-saving-black-friday-bargains>
10 Happiness rises in line with material possessions

On the contrary. “Strong materialist values are associated with a pervasive 
undermining of people’s wellbeing, from low life satisfaction and happiness to 
depression and anxiety, to physical problems such as anxiety, and to 
personality disorders, narcissism, and antisocial behaviour,” wrote 
psychologist Tim Kasser inThe High Price of Materialism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2003/oct/18/society>.

For the Frankfurt School, the pursuit of happiness through shopping and 
material acquisition is obscene. Benjamin wrote: “There is no document of 
civilisation which is not at the same time a document of barbarism.” One 
application of this dictum is that the pursuit of happiness through buying 
consumer goods involves erasing the human misery and exploitation that made the 
degrading and, ultimately, self-defeating pursuit possible.

Merry Christmas <https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/christmas>, 
everybody!

• Grand Hotel Abyss: The LIves of the Frankfurt School by Stuart Jeffries is 
published by Verso. To order a copy for £15.57 (RRP £18.99) go to
bookshop.theguardian.com 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/grand-hotel-abyss.html> or call 0330 333 
6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
 