
I ended up working in parliament more by accident than design. While at 
university I started helping a local MP simply to gain some work experience. If 
it hadn’t been for a well-timed maternity leave at the moment I graduated, I 
wouldn’t have had the opportunity to make the step up.

The secret life of an anaesthetist: if surgeons are the blood, we are the 
brains
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/secret-life-anaesthetist-surgery-doctor>
Most parliamentary assistants have followed a well-trodden path: public 
school, PPE at Oxbridge, parliament. Those without that background, such as me, 
have to find a different way in. I haven’t got a politics degree, I just 
started with a part-time job in the constituency and worked hard to prove that 
I was capable of joining the parliamentary office.

By far the best part of working in the Westminster village is the feeling of 
being at the beating heart ofpolitics <https://www.theguardian.com/politics>, 
which for most of us there is an all-consuming passion. This outweighs the 
monotony of the work itself. Parliamentary assistants are fairly low in the 
food chain, certainly below special advisers or office managers, and many I 
know are simply glorified tea carriers doing mind-numbing admin work from 8am 
until 6pm.

It’s sometimes how I feel too, perhaps after I’ve sealed my thousandth 
envelope of the day, but generally I’m more fortunate. I have a very good 
relationship with my boss and colleagues. I don’t have fixed office hours, and 
provided I get the work done I’m given a generous degree of autonomy and 
responsibility. The downside is that I never get a real break from work. In the 
24/7 world of politics, I can be called upon at any time. During election 
campaigns, our whole lives are engulfed by work.

Many people believe politicians, and by extension their staff, are detached 
from reality, but I don’t agree with that. Working in an MP’s office is like 
having a window into the lives of the most desperate and underprivileged people 
in society. An MP is often the last port of call for people who have been 
abandoned or ignored by everyone else. We always do all we can to help, but 
we’re not miracle-workers, and there are limits to the influence MPs have.

Of course, people’s frustrations can spill over, and dealing with the fallout 
is the hardest part of the job. Assistants are always first in the firing line. 
The fact that email and social media have made offensive communication 
apparently more acceptable – and the fact that politicians in particular are 
seen to be fair game – means we have to deal with all kinds of mindless abuse – 
even the odd death threat.

Then you get the conspiracy theorists who write 20-page letters to you every 
day about how the government’s controlling everyone. I’m afraid to say that 
after a while these go straight into the bin unopened. But if they decide to 
phone, there’s no escape. I once spent an hour talking to a woman who was 
convinced MI5 was after her, so had locked herself up in a Travelodge. In many 
ways the saddest thing about the job is realising how widespread mental health 
issues are in society and how little is done to support the people affected.

One element of what makes this job unique is the place of work itself, the 
Palace of Westminster. Despite theaccurate reports that it’s falling to bits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/08/mps-must-leave-houses-of-parliament-4bn-repairs>
, it is still a truly magnificent building – full of living, breathing history, 
with a peculiar but fascinating set of traditions, codes and customs. The place 
is a labyrinth of corridors and passageways, secret rooms and locked doors. The 
moment I received my Commons pass I felt like I was being given the keys to 
Hogwarts.

Some politicians feel they can behave as they like in the 'compound' of 
parliament, without fear of consequence

The most interesting part of my job, even though it’s a fairly menial task, is 
to visit theTable Office 
<http://www.parliament.uk/mps-lords-and-offices/offices/commons/departments/> 
to deliver the member’s written questions, which takes me through dark, hidden 
passageways and stairwells to a room where you can look right into the Commons 
Chamber, which I get a real buzz from.

But not only is it in disrepair, the whole place is woefully ill-equipped for 
the 21st century. The Wi-Fi is agonisingly slow, the heating comes and goes as 
it pleases, and the toilets are pretty grim. It’s certainly not as palatial as 
you’d expect.

But it’s still a workplace for thousands of people, and the daily 
peculiarities and incidents are really what make the job so interesting. One 
day you might be sitting opposite a cabinet minister in the canteen as he 
spills soup on his trousers, then walk past the PM on your way to a committee 
room.

Despite politics being combative and occasionally nasty, the atmosphere in 
parliament is normally friendly, though the EU referendum and recent leadership 
contests have tested this. MPs’ offices are scattered about the estate almost 
at random. Every corridor contains an assortment of different political 
parties, which means you can have a chat and a joke in the lifts perfectly 
happily with people without necessarily knowing who they work for. Most of my 
personal impressions of politicians stem from whether or not they have held a 
door open for me.

A strange consequence of this is that some politicians seem to feel they can 
behave as they like once they’re in the “compound” of parliament, without fear 
of consequence. This probably explains the disturbinglyhigh number of occasions 
pornography is accessed from parliament 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2013/sep/03/parliamentary-network-pornography-websites-figures>
. Other MPs seem to be remarkably cavalier with their reputations. Last year I 
saw a group of male MPs, whom I now know all to be married, making very blatant 
passes at their parliamentary assistants at a Christmas party.

The secret life of a truck driver: at the sharp end of what the EU means, I 
want out | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/05/secret-life-music-business-truck-driver-tom-jones-driving>
Alcohol plays a very active role in the daily life of parliament. Researchers 
traditionally drink in the downbeatSports and Social club 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/15/parliamentary-bars-what-really-like>
, which looks like your average pub and is located behind the bins, where the 
waste from the dozen or so restaurants is emptied. Strangely, the only MPs who 
drink here seem to be Scottish. Infamously, it is whereEric Joyce punched 
someone 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2013/mar/15/eric-joyce-arrest-mp-police>.

My job is fascinating and I’m lucky to have it. But the novelty will wear off 
eventually. At the end of the day, it is largely an admin job. And the pay, 
while good for a graduate, takes you only so far in London, so most 
parliamentary assistants usually move on to something new after a while.

But when I move on, I know that it will have been a unique experience, and 
that later in life, when I take my kids to London, I’ll be able to point to the 
building and tell them I once worked there.

• Are you a train driver, a prosecutor or a chief executive? We want to hear 
your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on 
submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 