
Is it over? Can it be true? If so, it’s a victory for a campaign that once 
looked hopeless, pitched against a fortress of political, corporate and 
bureaucratic power.

TTIP <https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> – the Transatlantic Trade and 
Investment Partnership – appears to be dead. The German economy minister, 
Sigmar Gabriel, says that “the talks with the United States have de facto failed
 
<http://www.euractiv.com/section/trade-society/news/germany-says-ttip-dead-in-the-water/>
”. The French prime minister,Manuel Valls 
<https://www.euractiv.com/section/trade-society/news/germany-france-divided-over-ttip/>
, has announced “a clear halt”.Belgian 
<https://www.euractiv.com/section/trade-society/news/belgium-says-ttip-talks-seem-unbalanced-may-need-pause/>
 and Austrian ministers havesaid the same thing 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-eu-usa-ttip-austria-idUSKCN1161DC>. People 
power wins. For now.

Think TTIP is a threat to democracy? There’s another trade deal that’s already 
signed | Nick Dearden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/30/ttip-trade-deal-agreements-ceta-eu-canada>
But the lobbyists who demanded this charter for corporate rights never give 
up. TTIP has been booed off the stage but another treaty, whose probable 
impacts are almost identical, is waiting in the wings. And this one is more 
advanced, wanting only final approval. If this happens before Britain leaves 
the EU, we are likely to bestuck with it for 20 years 
<http://www.globaljustice.org.uk/news/2016/jul/4/eu-accused-trying-push-through-toxic-trade-deal-ahead-brexit>
.

The Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement (Ceta) is ostensibly a deal 
between the EU and Canada. You might ask what harmCanada 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/canada> could do us. But it allows any 
corporation that operates there, wherever its headquarters might be, to sue 
governments before an international tribunal. It threatens to tear down laws 
protecting us from exploitation and prevent parliaments on both sides of the 
Atlantic from legislating.

To say that there is no mandate for such agreements is an understatement: they 
have received an unequivocal counter-mandate. The consultation the EU 
grudgingly launched on TTIP’s proposal to grant new legal rights to 
corporations received 150,000 responses,97% of which were hostile 
<http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=20174>. But 
while choice is permitted when you shop for butter, on the big decisions there 
is no alternative.

It’s not clear whether national parliaments will be allowed to veto this 
treaty. The European trade commissioner has argued thatthere is no need 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/press/index.cfm?id=1524>: it can be put 
before the European parliament alone. But even if national parliaments are 
allowed to debate it, they will be permitted only to take it or leave it. The 
contents are deemed to have been settled already.

Only once the negotiations between European and Canadian officials had been 
completed, and the text of the agreement leaked,did the European commission 
publish it 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2014/september/tradoc_152806.pdf>. It is 
1,600 pages long. It has neither a contents list nor explanatory text. As far 
as transparency, parity and comprehensibility are concerned, it’s the 
equivalent of the landtreaties illiterate African chiefs were induced to sign 
<https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=FAz2vI5Jw2UC&pg=PA72&lpg=PA72&dq=land+treaties,+illiterate,+chiefs&source=bl&ots=I-T92xWbSS&sig=jqnQ0TDLzC3bCs2NHjvbZ9ZE2V4&hl=en&sa=X&ved=0ahUKEwiFj5zu9_nOAhXnIcAKHU5HBR8Q6AEIHjAA#v=onepage&q=land%20treaties%2C%20illiterate%2C%20chiefs&f=false>
 in the 19th century. It is hard to see how parliamentarians could make a 
properly informed decision.

If you seek to buy a secondhand car these days, the salesperson might wheedle 
and spin, but they will also – thanks to EU consumer protection laws – be 
obliged to explain the risks and caveats. If you want to know whether or not to 
buy this trade treaty, you have no such protection. The EU’s website tells you 
what a wonderful set of wheels this is but carries not a word about the risks.

Here is its answer to the question 
<http://ec.europa.eu/trade/policy/in-focus/ceta/questions-and-answers/> of 
whether the Ceta negotiations were conducted in secret. “Not at all ... During 
the five years of talks, the commission held various civil society dialogue 
meetings for stakeholders.” I followedthe link it gave 
<http://trade.ec.europa.eu/civilsoc/meeting_archive.cfm#_year-2013> and found 
that four meetings had taken place, all of them in Brussels, all dominated by 
corporate trade associations, which are likely to have been on the inside track 
anyway. Where was the publicity? Where were the attempts to reach beyond a 
gilded circle of lobbyists and cronies? Where were the efforts to take the 
discussion to other nations? Where were the debates, the drive to seek genuine 
public engagement, let alone consent? If this is transparency, I dread to think 
what secrecy looks like.

TTIP has been kicked into the long grass … for a very long time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/may/03/ttip-has-been-kicked-into-the-long-grass-for-a-very-long-time>
After long hours struggling with the treaty, I realised I hadn’t a hope of 
grasping its implications. I have had to rely on experts commissioned by groups 
such asAttac 
<https://blog.campact.de/wp-content/uploads/2014/12/Gutachten_CETA_engl_final_27112014.pdf>
 in Germany and theCanadian Centre for Policy Alternatives 
<https://www.policyalternatives.ca/sites/default/files/uploads/publications/National%20Office/2014/09/Making_Sense_of_the_CETA.pdf>
.

Like TTIP, Ceta threatens to lock in privatisation, making renationalisation 
(of Britain’s railways, say) or attempts by cities to take control of failing 
public services (as Joseph Chamberlain did in Birmingham in the 19th century, 
laying the foundations for modern social provision) impossible. LikeTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip>, it uses a broad definition of both 
investment and expropriation to allow corporations to sue governments when they 
believe their “future anticipated profits” might be threatened by new laws.

Like TTIP, it restricts the ways in which governments may protect their 
people. It appears to prohibit, for example, rules that would prevent banks 
from becoming too big to fail. It seems to threaten our planning laws and other 
commonsense protections.

Anything not specifically exempted from the agreement is considered covered. 
In other words, if governments do not spot a potential hazard before the hazard 
emerges, they are stuck with it. The EU appears to have relinquished its 
ability, for example, to insist that investment and retail banking be separated.

Ceta claims to be a trade treaty, but many of its provisions have little to do 
with trade. They are attempts to circumscribe democracy on behalf of corporate 
power. Millions of people in Europe and Canada want to emerge fromthe 
neoliberal era 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
. But such treaties would lock us into it, allowing the politics we have 
rejected to govern us beyond the grave.

If parliaments reject this treaty, another deal is being prepared: the Trade 
in Services Agreement <https://wikileaks.org/tisa/>, which the EU is 
simultaneously negotiating with the US and 21 other nations. Theresa May’s 
government has expressed enthusiasm: herDepartment for International Trade says 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/business/news/ttip-trade-deal-new-what-is-tisa-privatisation-pact-secret-threat-to-democracy-a7216296.html>
: “The UK remains committed to an ambitious Trade in Services Agreement.” So 
much for taking back control.

Corporate lobbyists and their captive governments have been seeking to impose 
such treaties for more than 20 years, starting with theMultilateral Agreement 
on Investment <http://www.monbiot.com/1997/04/15/making-government-redundant/> 
(it was destroyed, like TTIP, by massive public protests, in 1998). Working in 
secrecy, without democratic consent, they will keep returning to the theme, in 
the hope of wearing down our resistance.

When you are told that the price of liberty is eternal vigilance, this is what 
it means. This struggle will continue throughout your life. We have to succeed 
every time; they have to succeed only once. Never drop your guard. Never let 
them win.

• A fully linked version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>
 