
Anne Perkins

There’s nothing like a national conversation with a strict time limit. For two 
weeks of the Olympics, everyone talks knowledgeably about sports they’ve only 
just heard of. Entirely fact-free opinions are legitimised, and unlike, say, 
any mention of the Labour leadership, it does not end in tears.

The Olympics has almost fallen to the monsters of marginal advantage, so 
professional that the life’s been knocked right out of them. They don’t keep me 
up at night. Not that I disapprove of winning. I’m as easily lulled as the next 
person into basking in five minutes of reflected national glory. But the 
moments of jeopardy are more fun.

But Rio’s greatest three minutes was an interview RTE did with the O’Donovans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/14/ireland-odonovan-brothers-internet-sensations-silver-medal-win-rowing-rio-olympics>
, Gary and Paul, Ireland’s first ever rowing medallists. It was a joy to hear 
the two of them saying the craic was great, they’d enjoyed putting on the 
podium pants, but all the same they were almost sorry they weren’t home in 
Skibbereen with their mates. Then they said they’d had nothing to eat since 
bread and nutella two hours before the race and they were looking forward to a 
pizza. That’s my kind of Olympic spirit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F871fca18d586d0fb85deef5824d778e1d87dbef3%2F0_108_5560_3335%2F5560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20armchair%20Olympics%3A%20what%20have%20the%20Games%20meant%20to%20our%20panel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20armchair%20Olympics%3A%20what%20have%20the%20Games%20meant%20to%20our%20panel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F871fca18d586d0fb85deef5824d778e1d87dbef3%2F0_108_5560_3335%2F5560.jpg>
 Gary, left, and Paul O’Donovan brought the craic to Rio. Photograph: Brendan 
Moran/Sportsfile via Getty Images 
Suzanne Moore

In total I reckon I’ve watched about 15 minutes of the Olympics, and that’s 
been on YouTube. I just don’t do sports.

I will watch boxing and tennis. All else leaves me cold. If it’s been on TV I 
have to turn the sound down – not just because of the banal sexism of the 
commentators, but for the inane prattle in general, the continual repetition of 
the bleedin’ obvious. My cat could do better.

And yet the whole thing has been a lovely bit of uplift. The winners seem so 
thrilled and humble and lovely, and you would have to be completely devoid of 
feeling not to share in their happiness.

It’s sad, though, that they have to wear the dreadful outfits. Sometimes, too, 
what may be exciting to participate in just doesn’t make good telly. Cycling, 
for instance? They just look like a load of weird insects trapped in a wooden 
box. It makes me feel quite claustrophobic.

Matthew d’Ancona

It is a melancholy truth that every public good can be reduced to a financial 
statistic: every ambulance call-out and delivery to hospital costs about £255; 
the state spends £34,440 to educate each secondary school pupil; annual 
maintenance of roads costs upward of £9,000 a kilometre.

On Monday, the Guardian reported that the price of each medal at the Rio 
Olympics thus far had been £5.5m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/15/brutal-but-effective-why-team-gb-is-winning-so-many-olympic-medals>
. Posed so starkly, the price tag smacked of venality. So why am I still 
smiling? Because, more even than the London Games, these Olympics have cemented 
Britain’s position as a first-rank sporting nation. Sporting excellence 
requires subsidy and patronage. How could it be otherwise? We can rail against 
this simple reality in ascetic fury, or join in the revelry.

Since Orwell described international sport as “mimic warfare” and “war minus 
the shooting”, it has been commonplace to dismiss the Olympics as a petri dish 
of nationalism. But Orwell’s The Sporting Spirit was published in 1945 when the 
gap between patriotism and nationalism still seemed dangerously narrow. In 
2016, we can surely draw a distinction between the two.

Our extraordinary athletes exemplify the diversity of their home nation, and a 
spirit of grace in victory. They send back reports from the very borders of 
human potential. If that’s not the best of British, what is?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5fb5aa6a4f3c9674fe9c77b01984eca113544e1%2F0_246_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20armchair%20Olympics%3A%20what%20have%20the%20Games%20meant%20to%20our%20panel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20armchair%20Olympics%3A%20what%20have%20the%20Games%20meant%20to%20our%20panel%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsport%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Faug%2F19%2Fthe-armchair-olympics-what-have-games-meant-our-panel%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd5fb5aa6a4f3c9674fe9c77b01984eca113544e1%2F0_246_5568_3341%2F5568.jpg>
 Jade Jones with her women’s taekwondo gold medal. The Guardian reported that 
the price of each British medal was £5.5m. Photograph: Kirill 
Kudryavtsev/AFP/Getty Images 
Nosheen Iqbal

As suspensions of reality go, I’d rate going to this year’s Olympics opening 
ceremony 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/olympic-opening-ceremony-rio-2016-fernando-meirelles>
 very highly. We should, I was convinced for about four hours in what already 
feels like forever ago, all just carry on like this every day. All that mad 
spectacle, the rousing celebration of human endeavour, Gisele walking for a 
really long time across an empty arena … what better way to get really excited 
about peaceful co-existence and athletes doing stuff?

And so, because I had the surreal fortune to be in Rio, at the Maracanã, 
casually getting something in my eye when therefugee team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/aug/05/helplessness-rio-hope-olympic-refugee-team>
 walked into the stadium that first night, I assumed this OIympics would be my 
Olympics. The one where I’d really get into the dressage (quite compelling, 
actually) and understand the point of rugby.

I came back to London five days later swearing I was touched by the Olympian 
spirit – I was finally going to learn how to swim! – and prepared to lose hours 
championing the underdogs of field hockey. As it turns out, my attention span 
isn’t what it used to be. Those breathtaking feats of the human body have 
already become white noise. I’ve not actually been watchingRio 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/rio-2016> so much as absorbing it through 
WhatsApp chat and live blog feeds. No medals for endurance on my part. But I’m 
going to be champion at getting sappy over the closing ceremony.

Zoe Williams

The retrospect of Rio makes me realise how weird London was, to be possessed 
by that furious jingoism and never really waking up; in a way, 2016 is like 
waking up from a bender that went on so long I didn’t even realise how drunk I 
was. I remember this sick-making, skin-pricking fury, sitting next to an 
American journalist who was cheering after Victoria Pendletonhad to cede gold 
to that Australian bruiser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2012/aug/07/victoria-pendleton-loses-anna-meares>
 who squeezed her out of her lane.

I have lost my patriotic fervour, and now mainly see the British cyclists as 
superb through some combination of talent born not made, incredibly hard work, 
a sublime intelligence at both the level of the muscle and the mind; and not 
because they are British and understand at some cellular, interconnected level 
why bulldogs are cute and the NHS is great and bikes matter.

In the absence of obnoxious national pride, I now mainly enjoy the sports in 
which the difference between being the best in the world and being completely 
rubbish are naked to the untrained eye. There you are, watching judo. One 
minute they’re just poking each other. The next, one has a hundred points and 
the other is crying. Rhythmic gymnastics is particularly piquant for this. 
Sometimes you can’t tell for hours whether the tears are joy or loss. I love 
the things that don’t look that hard - archery, the 50km walk – and things that 
look superhuman.
 