
The historic union between the nations of Great Britain and Northern Ireland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/northernireland> is at risk once again.

Little over two years since Scots voted decisively to reject Scottish 
independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/sep/19/scotland-independence-no-vote-victory-alex-salmond>
, the Tories’ reckless Brexit gamble has threatened to end an Act of Union that 
has survived more than three centuries.

It is Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> – the party that 
believes in working together – that can save the UK for generations to come.

Power and wealth hoarded in one corner of our United Kingdom has not worked 
for the vast majority of people

Today, I am proposing a reform which would have far-reaching consequences not 
just forScotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland>, but for the entire 
United Kingdom: we need a new Act of Union for this century.

And we need a federal solution for the nations and regions of our country: a 
radical reshaping where every component part of the United Kingdom – Scotland,
Wales <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/wales>, Northern Ireland and the English 
regions – takes more responsibility for what happens in their own communities, 
but where we still maintain the protection of being part of a greater whole as 
the UK.

In the post-Brexit referendum era we live in a society more dangerously 
divided than at any point in our recent history. It is a society where every 
election or referendum we have brings about another mini-revolution. The public 
reject the status quo but there is no settled will about the direction we 
should take. And instead of grappling with the complex messages that people are 
sending us, and trying to find the solutions in the shades of grey, politicians 
of all parties are attached to solutions that are black or white, and dividing 
us further.

Anyone in Labour, or any party, who claims that we can sit on the margins and 
wait for politics to “settle down” will rightly be consigned to history. The 
future shape of the UK, how we govern ourselves and how our economy and society 
should develop is now the single biggest political question we face.

For the SNP, the answer to any question is always independence. But we must 
never forget why Labour fought to save our United Kingdom.

Why Britain needs a written constitution | Anthony Barnett
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/why-britain-needs-written-constitution>
I am proud – immensely proud – to have fought to keep the UK together in 2014. 
I was proud because it was a Labour argument I was making. The UK provides the 
redistribution of wealth that defines our entire Labour movement, and it 
provides the protection for public finance in Scotland that comes from being 
part of something larger. But there is no escaping that the battle of two years 
ago has unleashed polarised constitutional politics which have changed Scotland 
forever.

The Tories want Scotland in the UK and out of Europe, and the SNP wants 
Scotland in the EU, but out of the UK. Continuing to pull our country in each 
of these directions risks breaking the union once and for all. What is needed 
is a solution that meets the demands of the Scottish people.

For me, this starts with reaffirming our belief in the UK for the 21st 
century. Over time, political power has become concentrated in too few hands. 
Power and wealth hoarded in one corner of our United Kingdom has not worked for 
the vast majority of people.

That is why the time has come for the rest of the UK to follow where Scotland 
led in the 1980s and 1990s and establish a people’s constitutional convention 
to re-establish the UK for a new age.

The convention should bring together groups to deliberate on the future of our 
country and propose a way forward that strengthens the UK and establishes a new 
political settlement for the whole of our country.
 