
The garden task that gives me greatest satisfaction is the cutting of our 
winter wood stack <https://www.theguardian.com/environment/winter>. I like to 
joke that our logburner consumes only hand-prepared organic “food”, and there 
is even a sense in which each piece is an individual.


Over the years I’ve learned that the secret to preparing logs 
<http://www.boilerstoves.co.uk/firewood.html> is not some fancy axe or 
equipment. It is time. I have thus worked out a four-stage process that spans 
two years, beginning with the moment when the live trees are felled.

They are mainly self-sown sallows 
<https://www.woodlandtrust.org.uk/visiting-woods/trees-woods-and-wildlife/british-trees/native-trees/grey-willow/>
 that sprang up just after the war on the edge of my four boundary dykes at 
Blackwater Carr, when the fen was open grazing marsh. Decades of 
non-intervention allowed them to develop into linear thickets the length of the 
whole site.

Rather than permitting the mature trees to choke the dykes with leaf mulch I 
clear them off the banks while simultaneously restoring the original 
flower-rich pasture.

Why our hearts go out to Sherwood's ancient oak
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/15/why-hearts-sherwoods-1000-year-oak-country-diary>
The fresh timber is stacked at Blackwater, for 6-10 months of seasoning, 
completed under tarpaulin, when it can be used by breedingsolitary wasps 
<http://www.natureconservationimaging.com/Pages/nature_conservation_imaging_woodland_hedgerow_solitary_wasps.htm>
 or by overwinteringruby tiger moth caterpillar 
<http://bugguide.net/node/view/41933>s. Then after its transfer to Claxton 
comes a second rest, when it creates another great invertebrate habitat, 
especially for woodlouse spiders and a lovely group of moths called flatbodies.

Finally comes the log splitting for the woodsheds, when they are cut and 
restacked for anything up to six months in advance of use.

In his book Wildwood,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2007/jun/30/featuresreviews.guardianreview4>
Roger Deakin suggested that he was warmed three times by his logs: when they 
were felled, while being split and then finally as they burned. I enjoy an 
imaginative corollary, savouring each piece as I try to recall the 
circumstances of the cut, how it was subsequently stored and then the moment it 
was sectioned to fit the fire.

By the time it goes through the glass door I have two years of connections. 
Something about many of the logs – the thickness of the trunk, details in the 
bark or patterns in the grain – permits me to recognise them in their slow 
journey to the flames.

Follow Country diary on Twitter: @gdncountrydiary 
<https://twitter.com/GdnCountryDiary>
 