
Consistency and calm can be great strengths in a political leader in troubled 
times. But there is always a risk that they will look simply like a denial of 
reality. The speech that Theresa May gave to the Charity Commission on Monday 
morning fell into the latter category.Her failure to talk at all 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/the-shared-society-prime-ministers-speech-at-the-charity-commission-annual-meeting>
 about thewinter crisis in the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/08/an-absolute-warzone-nhs-doctors-describe-their-week-in-ae>
 will fuel the damaging sense that the prime minister is insensitive to the 
mounting roar of anguish from what – as Jeremy Hunt, the health secretary, said 
later in the Commons – isBritain’s most precious public service 
<http://www.parliamentlive.tv/Event/Index/6eda3191-6f6f-4e7c-8e6a-8c3f40918f69>
. The omission undermined what she was trying to say about her vision of 
society. And it amounts to a denial, against all the evidence, of the extent of 
the crisis – and that could jeopardise her capacity to win the nation’s trust 
as she sets out on her greatest challenge, negotiating Brexit.

Within hours of Mrs May’s speech, the Royal College of Emergency Medicine went 
public with its view that in the face of unprecedented demand,performance is 
the worst 
<http://www.rcem.ac.uk/RCEM/Quality_Policy/Policy/Winter_Flow_Project/RCEM/Quality-Policy/Policy/Winter_Flow_Project.aspx>
 in more than a decade. The college believes that, in order to protect basic 
patient safety, at least three-quarters of all A&E patients must be seen within 
four hours. On its assessment, a “substantial number” are failing to do so. It 
described a system in a state of acute distress that began some months ago. 
This view is echoed in every published official assessment, from the weekly
analysis of winter pressures 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN07057> 
compiled for MPs, showing that there were more temporary diverts for ambulances 
in place last week than at any time in the past five years, to the health 
thinktank the Nuffield Trust. Itsummarised data on operational pressures 
escalation levels 
<http://www.nuffieldtrust.org.uk/blog/black-alert-or-many-shades-opel> for 
December and found that as early as the second week of last month, 23 trusts 
were operating at the highest and second highest levels of pressure, with seven 
trusts operating at the highest, level four. Even Mr Hunt acknowledged to MPs 
that in some trusts, the situation was extremely fragile. More operations may 
now be cancelled. Elective surgery will continue to be postponed. The Red Cross
may have gone over the top 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-denies-red-cross-claim-of-nhs-humanitarian-crisis>
 with its talk of a humanitarian crisis. But the NHS is facing a desperate few 
months, and it will get worse over the coming years.

Yet it is also true that overall the NHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> is performing astonishingly well: on 
some days, a record number of people have been treated within the four-hour 
target, even though last year another 340,000 people celebrated their 80th 
birthdays, and life expectancy has increased by another year. But it is no good 
declaring that the health service is doing more than ever, if it is not doing 
enough. And despite the heroic efforts of its thousands of hard-working 
employees, only a few weeks into winter and with a cold spell heading towards 
the UK, it clearly is not.

Mr Hunt, citing the NHS’s unique offer of a four-hour wait for anyone arriving 
at A&E, called for an honest debate about what emergency actually means. Fair 
enough. Even more important though is an honest debate on what it will take to 
fund the health service so these kinds of pressures can be managed. This is the 
debate that the Guardian, along with every major health thinktank, has been 
calling for since before the last election. Our health service is exceptional 
value for money. The clearest way of assessing that is comparing share of GDP 
spent in the UK with similar EU economies. In 2000, Britain was spending 6%. By 
2009, after Tony Blair’s commitment to spend at EU average levels, it had risen 
to 8.8% – but the EU comparator had risen to 10.1%. Merely to keep pace with 
forecast economic growth, NHS spending should rise to £158bn by the end of this 
parliament. In fact, there will be a shortfall of £16bn. By 2020,according to 
the King’s Fund 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/blog/2016/01/how-does-nhs-spending-compare-health-spending-internationally>
, it will be back at little more than 2000 levels, a mere 6.6% of the national 
income.

Mrs May, who was an austerity home secretary, is said to find it hard to 
understand why the NHS can’t make cuts like the rest of Whitehall.Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> is in no doubt that, apart 
from the welcome but tiny amount of new cash for mental health services 
announced on Monday morning, there is no money left. Under pressure after her 
speech the prime minister repeated the widely disputed claim that the 
government was fully funding NHS England’s five year forward view. Ministers 
claim, inaccurately, that councils can raise what they need to meet the rising 
cost of social care through council tax, when more cash is so badly needed that 
three former health secretaries united to demand more before November’s autumn 
statement. How health care is delivered always needs to improve. But it cannot 
be done without the money.

• This article was amended on 10 January 2017. An earlier version said the 
Nuffield Trust found that last month 23 trusts were operating at level four, 
the highest level of pressure. In fact it found 23 trusts were operating at 
level three or four, with seven at level four.
 