
The sudden decision by Sinn Féin’s Martin McGuinness to step down as deputy 
first minister looks almost certain to capsize Northern Ireland’s assembly 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/martin-mcguinness-to-resign-as-northern-ireland-deputy-first-minister>
. His departure is the latest in a series of political dramas which have 
deepened a crisis building in the province for weeks. The scandal over a flawed 
renewable heating scheme, which will leave taxpayers facing a bill of at least 
£400m, has smouldered since February. But it erupted when it emerged that 
Arlene Foster, now the Democratic Unionist first minister but in 2013 the 
person in charge of the initiative,had been contacted by a whistleblower over 
its serious flaws <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-38247170>. 
These warnings went unheeded and the scheme was extended, increasing the 
liability for the taxpayer. Costs ran out of control because they were not 
capped.

With an insouciance bordering on arrogance, Mrs Foster dismissed critics, 
saying she could not expect as minister to know every “jot and tittle” of the 
unsound scheme. Although it was the smaller parties – particularly the Alliance 
party – that identified Mrs Foster’s clear conflict of interest, it was left to 
Mr McGuinness, a former IRA commander, to deliver the coup de grace to the 
present administration. With fractious exchanges between the DUP and Sinn Féin, 
the two largest parties in the assembly, little is being done to promote the 
trust and cooperation that is essential to making power-sharing work. In words 
and deeds both parties are putting a decade of the peace process, which has 
brought so many improvements to Northern Ireland (including a reduction in 
terrorist murders), at risk. It is clear that Mrs Foster should have stepped 
down as first minister while an investigation was carried out, as Sinn Féin and 
others demanded.Instead, she accused her opponents – who were male and female – 
of misogyny and of “playing chicken” 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-38504878>. This tough-talking no 
doubt plays well with certain sections of a unionist audience, but it is 
extremely foolhardy to call for an election, as Mrs Foster did, when the 
government of the province should be engaged with preventing a calamitous
outcome from Brexit on issues such as immigration and trade 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldeucom/76/76.pdf>.

The worry is a resurgence of a tribalism that rests upon a counsel of fears. 
Sinn Féin will be tempted to play its nationalist cards – not least to ward off 
attacks from the leftwing People Before Profit which won seats in its 
heartlands. Mr McGuinness is not in the best of health. If elections do now 
come early, as seems likely, he may not return to Stormont. Given his 
popularity, this could be a seismic shift in Sinn Féin’s leadership. For the 
DUP, there is a question about the biggest party trading in zero-sum politics 
which hinder reconciliation. Mrs Foster blocked funding to deal with inquests 
into the most controversial killings of the Troubles,a move criticised by the 
province’s senior judge <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-37277655>
. Packaged as a way of preventing the hearingsbeing skewed against the state 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/news/northern-ireland-assembly-election/dup-leader-arlene-foster-why-i-blocked-plans-to-speed-up-troubles-probes-34683461.html>
 it was a decision made with an eye on unionist votes.Just before Christmas the 
DUP cut bursaries for poor Irish language students 
<http://sluggerotoole.com/2016/12/23/department-for-communities-withdraws-funding-for-the-liofa-gaeltacht-bursary-scheme/>
 a few months afterfunding marching bands 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-northern-ireland-36758338> patronised mainly by 
unionists. It is in nobody’s interests to see the collapse of the assembly that 
has taken years to build. The electorate, if given the chance, should reject 
identity politics and cast their votes on the substantive issues facing the 
part of the UK with the highest levels of deprivation, unemployment and poverty.
 