
The thing you need to know about Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> is that he never loses. 
Never. Whether it’s in business or politics, Trump either wins outright or he 
was going to win until victory was stolen from him, usually through a crooked 
conspiracy of his enemies.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fus-presidential-election-rigged-donald-trump-wisconsin-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=US%20presidential%20election%20is%20rigged%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fus-presidential-election-rigged-donald-trump-wisconsin-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=US%20presidential%20election%20is%20rigged%2C%20says%20Donald%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F18%2Fus-presidential-election-rigged-donald-trump-wisconsin-video&media=>
US presidential election is rigged, says Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/18/us-presidential-election-rigged-donald-trump-wisconsin-video>
That’s why his assorted bankruptcies and collapses were never his fault, why 
even his multimillion-dollar failureswere actually successes 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/investigations/trumps-bad-bet-how-too-much-debt-drove-his-biggest-casino-aground/2016/01/18/f67cedc2-9ac8-11e5-8917-653b65c809eb_story.html>
. It’s why, when his TV show, The Apprentice, failed to win an Emmy, it was 
proof not that the programme was lacking but that the Emmys themselves were 
unfair, “all politics” and “horrendous 
<https://twitter.com/ezlusztig/status/787761549855199232>”.

Trump signalled that he would apply this same approach to his bid for the 
White House at the earliest opportunity. In February, Iowa held its caucuses, 
marking the traditional start to the primary process whereby each party chooses 
its candidate for president. Trump came second, losing to the Texas senator Ted 
Cruz. No one was very surprised. Cruz is a Christian conservative, and Iowa’s 
Republicans often pick Christian conservatives. Trump was a thrice-married New 
Yorker more familiar with mammon than with God. But to Trump there could be 
only one explanation.

“Ted Cruz didn’t win Iowa, he stole it,” 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/694879900256354304> Trump tweeted. 
“That is why all of the polls were so wrong and why he got far more votes than 
anticipated. Bad!” Forty-five minutes later, Trumptweeted again 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/694890328273346560>: “Based on the 
fraud committed by Senator Ted Cruz during the Iowa Caucus, either a new 
election should take place or Cruz results nullified.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3918044c146e5be6dbf464107176bfac0ad82d%2F0_0_1522_2048%2F1522.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fec3918044c146e5be6dbf464107176bfac0ad82d%2F0_0_1522_2048%2F1522.jpg>
 ‘His assorted bankruptcies and collapses were never his fault’ ... the Trump 
Taj Mahal in Atlantic City, New Jersey, one of the Republican candidate’s many 
expensive failures. Photograph: Ted Thai/Life Images Collection/Getty Images 
The basis of this claim was a release by the Cruz campaign falsely notifying 
Iowans that rival conservative candidate Ben Carson had dropped out of the race 
and urging Carson supporters to back Cruz instead. It might have been an 
innocent mistake or perhaps a dirty trick, typical of primary season. Either 
way, it was enough to allow Trump to claim he was robbed – and to give the US a 
glimpse of Trump’s modus operandi. When he loses, he claims immediately that 
the game is rigged.

He’s doing it again now. His current stump speech alternates between claiming 
that the women accusing him of sexual assault were too unattractive for him to 
abuse and warning his supporters that the Democrats and the press are colluding 
to steal the presidency from him. As hetweeted on Sunday 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/787699930718695425>: “The election 
is absolutely being rigged by the dishonest and distorted media pushing Crooked 
Hillary – but also at many polling places – SAD.”

Some Democrats take a kind of perverse comfort in the fact that Trump is 
banging this drum again. It’s a sure sign he thinks he’s losing. (The last time 
he talked of ballot rigging was in August, whenHillary Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/hillary-clinton> opened up a big lead.) It 
seems to be his way of getting his excuses in early, ensuring that no one 
brands him a loser on 9 November.

Trump might also be laying the ground for a post-election career in which he 
sets himself up as the champion of a diehard Trumpian rump within the 
Republican party or perhaps as the head of a new media empire – Trump News 
Network – that will outflank Fox News on the hard right. Either way, he 
understands that there is no more potent variety of political rocketfuel than a 
righteous sense of grievance. Trump is priming those who are now crying “Lock 
her up!” to bellow “We was robbed!”

But this comes at a cost that has made plenty of Americans – Republicans among 
them – anxious. Central to the self-image of the US is its status as a 
self-governing democracy. Election fraud is meant to be something that happens 
in other countries, with the US casting itself as monitor or even referee, 
determining which overseas ballots are free, fair and legitimate. Trump’s 
claims, pre-emptively challenging the integrity of a presidential election, 
seek to upend that notion, challenging the legitimacy of America’s own system. 
And they seem to be striking a chord: one survey released on Monday found that
41% of Americans 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/poll-41-percent-of-voters-say-the-election-could-be-stolen-from-trump-229871>
 believe the election could be stolen from Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78ed80d246e2a53543c14062d086807c65ceab9%2F0_0_4700_2918%2F4700.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe78ed80d246e2a53543c14062d086807c65ceab9%2F0_0_4700_2918%2F4700.jpg>
 ‘If Trump wants to claim media bias in this election, he could make a strong 
case that the bias has been in his favour’ – a Trump supporter outside the CNN 
building in Hollywood, California. Photograph: Frederic J Brown/AFP/Getty Images
Despite the US’s view of itself, this is not uncharted terrain. Claims of 
rigged contests have surfaced before 
<http://dailysignal.com/2016/08/08/rigged-election-a-history-of-presidential-candidates-whove-made-allegations/>
. In 1824, a narrow race was settled when the House of Representatives made 
John Quincy Adams president; partisans suspected behind-the-scenes dealmaking. 
In 1876, a similar dead heat left supporters of Samuel J Tilden furious when he 
won the popular vote but was denied the presidency thanks to the arcane 
mechanics of the electoral college. Amid allegations of multiple voting and 
shredded ballots, the incumbent president Ulysses Grant warned – in words that 
resonate today – that “either party can afford to be disappointed by the 
result, but the country cannot afford to have the result tainted by suspicion 
of illegal or false returns”.

More recently, some Republicans remained convinced that John F Kennedy was 
helped to his narrow victory over Richard Nixon in 1960 by ballot-tampering 
involving the mafia in Chicago, which helped him win the crucial state of 
Illinois. But what makes Trump’s challenge different is that he is contesting 
the election before it has happened. This has made many fearful that the fury 
Trump is stoking could get out of control. They worry that, should the reality 
TV star lose, things could get violent. They point to thetweet posted on 
Saturday by David Clarke Jr 
<https://twitter.com/SheriffClarke/status/787314656641712128>, a vocal Trump 
supporter and the sheriff of Milwaukee county in Wisconsin. Alongside a picture 
of an angry mob wielding weapons, Clarke wrote: “It’s incredible that our 
institutions of gov, WH, Congress, DOJ [Department of Justice], and big media 
are corrupt & all we do is bitch. Pitchforks and torches time.” In this 
climate, what if one crucial state is particularly close? Few have forgotten 
the photo-finish in Florida in 2000. How would such deadlock play out in this 
atmosphere?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc04b57b6ef6d89f47317acaf6fcbd0f80972eace%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc04b57b6ef6d89f47317acaf6fcbd0f80972eace%2F0_0_3072_1843%2F3072.jpg>
 ‘Some Republicans remained convinced that John F Kennedy was helped to his 
narrow victory over Richard Nixon in 1960 by ballot-tampering involving the 
mafia in Chicago.’ Photograph: Ed Clark/Life Picture Collection/Getty Images 
Because this is the US, no talk of election rigging can be separated from 
race. When Trump tells mainly white crowdsto spend election day monitoring 
voting 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/post-politics/wp/2016/10/01/trump-urges-supporters-to-monitor-polling-places-in-certain-areas/>
 in areas other than their own “because of you know what I’m talking about”, he 
is repeating, in the thinnest code, his accusation that Democrats will bulk up 
their vote by fraudulently inflating the numbers in African-American or other 
minority communities.

The hint is certainly not lost on his supporters. Witness the words of one 
Trump enthusiast, a 61-year-old carpenter in the crucial battleground state of 
Ohio by the name of Steve Webb. “Trump said to watch your precincts. I’m going 
to go, for sure,” he told theBoston Globe this weekend 
<https://www.bostonglobe.com/news/politics/2016/10/15/donald-trump-warnings-conspiracy-rig-election-are-stoking-anger-among-his-followers/LcCY6e0QOcfH8VdeK9UdsM/story.html>
. “I’ll look for ... well, it’s called racial profiling. Mexicans. Syrians. 
People who can’t speak American ... I’m going to go right up behind them. I’ll 
do everything legally. I want to see if they are accountable. I’m not going to 
do anything illegal. I’m going to make them a little bit nervous.”

It will comes as little surprise to those who have paid even the slightest 
attention to the post-truth campaign of Donald Trump that these claims of voter 
fraud and ballot rigging are almost entirelyfact-free and lacking in evidence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/13/boris-johnson-donald-trump-post-truth-politician>
. One legal scholar dedicated years to studying the issue and could find only 
31 cases of voter fraud out of more than a billion votes cast. As the 
ThinkProgress thinktankhas noted 
<https://thinkprogress.org/donald-trump-claims-polling-places-are-rigged-12ba70beb551#.bk0wz8ix8>
: “Iowa’s Republican secretary of state uncovered zero cases of voter 
impersonation at the polls during a two-year investigation.” Even thehard right 
Breitbart website 
<http://www.breitbart.com/big-government/2016/10/16/election-rigged-not/> – so 
close to Trump that its boss, Steve Bannon, is the chief executive of the Trump 
campaign – had to admit that, “given the sheer variety of jurisdictions that 
run a typical presidential election, the nationwide effect of voter fraud may 
be much harder to measure, and probably small”.

Conceding that point, Breitbart then attempted to redefine “rigged” away from 
the mechanics of ballot-stuffing and the like and on to the terrain of media 
bias. If the election is being stolen from Trump, runs the argument, it’s 
because the press is, in effect, acting as an ally of Clinton by being so 
hostile to the Republican nominee. Just look at the chorus of women assembled 
by the Washington Post, the New York Times, the Palm Beach Post and People 
magazine last week, all of whom alleged that had Trump sexually assaulted them. 
Surely that represents a coordinated attack, weeks before election day, 
designed to damage Trump and help Clinton?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4842ee22fdb6878bf26154efe5838a156fe99c%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5d4842ee22fdb6878bf26154efe5838a156fe99c%2F0_0_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Trump supports at a Hillary Clinton event in Miami, Florida. Photograph: 
Cristobal Herrera/EPA 
But it’s a perilously thin argument, for the media all but created the Donald 
Trump candidacy. During the primary campaign, they lavished attention and 
airtime on him in a way that squeezed out all his rivals. He only had to pick 
up the phone to be on the air with Fox or MSNBC, a privilege not extended to 
Jeb Bush or Marco Rubio. His rallies were carried live and at length; theirs 
were lucky to get a 10-second clip. One study showed that while Bush spent tens 
of millions on TV ads,Trump got $2bn-worth of airtime absolutely free 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/16/upshot/measuring-donald-trumps-mammoth-advantage-in-free-media.html>
.

But it was more than just quantity. The media allowed Trump to get away with 
lies they would have stamped on had Clinton been the culprit. For example, in 
recent weeks, Trump has been challenged on his wholly false claim to have 
opposed the invasion of Iraq. (At the time, he told shockjock Howard Stern on 
the record that he approved of it.) But, for many months, the supposedly 
liberal media, especially television, allowed him to get away with that 
fiction. If Trump wants to claim media bias in this election, he could make a 
strong case that the bias has been in his favour.

The other limb of the “rigged” argument is that the forces of Hillary have 
already fixed one contest this election season, corruptly engineering the 
Democratic primary race to defeatBernie Sanders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/bernie-sanders>. There’s no doubt that the 
rules – and the power given to party officials as “superdelegates” – favoured 
Clinton, nor that Clinton had much of the party machine on her side. That’s why 
Sanders, who wasn’t even a Democrat a year before he sought the nomination – he 
sits in the Senate as an independent – was always the underdog. But even the 
most diligent hacking of Democrats’ emails – undertaken, the FBI believes, by 
Russian intelligence and released in recent days by WikiLeaks – has not 
produced evidence that Sanders was defrauded of the nomination, rather than 
simply being outmuscled.

Indeed, you could make a decent case that an attempt to rig the 2016 election 
is underway – one designed to hurt Clinton and help Trump. WikiLeaks would be a 
key exhibit in that case. Julian Assange has been consistent in leaking 
documents that embarrass the Democratic nominee, yet strangely reluctant to 
publish any paperwork that might discomfort Trump. You would have thought 
WikiLeaks might have been able to produce the elusive Trump tax returns, for 
example, but no luck.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aefd75b63026831ca1f54e46a27b26d41dc5868%2F285_0_4087_2565%2F4087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20man%20who%20cried%20rigged%3A%20the%20problem%20with%20Trump%E2%80%99s%20election%20claims&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Foct%2F17%2Fman-who-cried-rigged-problem-with-trump-election-claims%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8aefd75b63026831ca1f54e46a27b26d41dc5868%2F285_0_4087_2565%2F4087.jpg>
 ‘During the primary campaign ... he only had to pick up the phone to be on the 
air with Fox or MSNBC.’ Photograph: Chris Pizzello/AP 
You would put the media in the dock, too, replaying all the softball interviews
Trump has been granted 
<http://www.usnews.com/opinion/articles/2016-09-08/nbcs-matt-lauer-receives-bad-reviews-for-his-forum-with-clinton-and-trump>
 – glossing over his multiple lies, his bankruptcies and his overt bigotries – 
while Clinton was grilled again and again over her use of a private email 
server. But your argument would not need to end there. You would also look at 
what’s actually set to happen – and already happening – at the heart of the 
matter: the ballot itself.

There is a mountain of evidence, going back years, of voter suppression: the 
deliberate exclusion of large groups of voters from the electoral rolls.Rolling 
Stone magazine has reported 
<http://www.rollingstone.com/politics/features/the-gops-stealth-war-against-voters-w435890>
 on a programme designed to purge rolls of voters wrongly eligible to vote in 
more than one state. It sounds technical, but it just so happens that the 
programme “disproportionately threatens solid Democratic constituencies: young, 
black, Hispanic and Asian-American voters – with some of the biggest possible 
purges underway in Ohio and North Carolina, two crucial swing states with tight 
Senate races.”

Few have been more vigilant on this subject than Ari Berman 
<https://twitter.com/ariberman>, the author of Give us the Ballot: the Struggle 
for Voting Rights in America. Every week, he brings word of another scheme by 
Republican authorities at state level – and, remember, Republicans are in 
charge in most of the 50 states – to suppress voting among those likely to vote 
Democratic. Recently, he reported on Wisconsin’s failure to issue
voter-identification documents 
<https://www.thenation.com/article/wisconsin-is-systematically-failing-to-provide-the-photo-ids-required-to-vote-in-november/>
 to people who needed them, a failure that disproportionately affects black 
voters. Some of his revelations arejaw-dropping 
<https://twitter.com/AriBerman/status/785894221349650432>, among them the story 
of an Indian-American woman, a US citizen since she was eight years old, who 
was told she had to spend $345 on naturalisation papers just to be able to 
exercise her right to vote.

Every four years there are incidents like this, such as polling places in 
African-American areas with too few voting machines, causing long lines. Were 
that not enough of a deterrent to voting, this year – thanks to Trump’s call 
for groups of vigilante polling monitors to take up their positions in urban 
areas – plenty of minority voters might well feel intimidated as well as simply 
put off.

So, Democrats could cry foul if they wanted to. They have the recent memory of 
Florida 2000, when Republican state officials stood in the way of a thorough 
recount, ensuring that George W Bush held on to a razor-thin lead. They could 
also point to Ohio 2004, where questions lingerover Bush’s defeat of John Kerry 
<http://www.motherjones.com/media/2005/11/recounting-ohio>.

But most who cherish US democracy choose not to go there. They prefer to 
defend the integrity of the system. They know the peril that could befall the 
republic if nearly half the country believe the person occupying the White 
House is there fraudulently. Yet that is precisely the chaos Trump is seeking 
to create. He is proving that Donald Trump represents a threat to the stability 
of the US even if he loses. But we should remember: he never loses.
 