
The news that two healthcare trusts in London are to experiment with a system 
to look up symptoms by text message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/05/nhs-england-trial-medical-advice-smartphone-app>
, to triage the kind of non-urgent queries at present handled by the NHS 111 
service, raises many questions. They may not seem urgent whenpeople are dying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/three-deaths-worcestershire-royal-hospital-nhs-winter-crisis>
 in the corridors of an NHS hospital for want of money, but in the long term 
they are just as important. Some are purely medical: is this an area that 
requires the attention of a human being, or is it one where purely factual 
answers will suffice? When will this project start using artificial 
intelligence? Some have to do with the way that the NHS is being privatised 
around the edges in ways that disadvantage the central public parts of it. 
Widest of all is the general question of the automation of brainwork, which 
might have effects quite as gigantic as the replacement of manual labour by 
technology has had.

Two kinds of claims are made for AI in medicine. The weaker and more plausible 
is that it can automate the processes where no judgment is required, only the 
clear and consistent following of well-understood rules. This kind of thing is 
whatthe 111 service <https://www.england.nhs.uk/ourwork/pe/nhs-111/> is 
supposed to do: the question that it answers is not “what’s wrong with you?” 
but “do you really need to see a doctor?” Some triage is necessary in any 
healthcare system, and the present system in the NHS is under huge and growing 
strain.

But the wider claim of healthcare automation is that there will be systems 
that can augment and eventually replace the judgment of trained human beings. 
The hope is that deep analysis ofunimaginable quantities of data 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/may/04/googles-deepmind-shouldnt-be-sucking-up-our-nhs-records-in-secret>
 will yield reliable knowledgesuperior to anything 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/05/google-deepmind-nhs-machine-learning-blindness>
 that unaided humans can produce. The placebo effect is important in medicine, 
and people who believe they are being treated by doctors who have the help of 
almost omniscient computers will probably do better than those who feel they 
are getting the harassed attention of an overworked GP even when the diagnosis 
and the remedies prescribed are exactly the same, as in most cases they will 
be. But that is not the basis on which we are promised a revolution in the 
delivery of healthcare. The revolution may come anyway: we are living through 
an enormous expansion in the reach and variety of machine learning systems, but 
it will not be for some time. The great majority of diseases do not require 
heroic diagnosis and exceptional treatment so much as the humane application of 
well-understood treatments. Much of what’s wrong with the NHS is a lack of 
money rather than sophistication. Even urgent large-scale threats such as the 
emergence of antibiotic-resistant pathogens don’t need artificial intelligence 
to avert, only the consistent use of the intelligence we already have.

It is the apparently small-scale automation of clerical work that we need to 
think about, because that might happen as quickly as the spread of smartphones 
did. Vast areas of bureaucracy are about the reduction of complex problems to 
simple ones for which the correct answers can be written down in a flow chart. 
This is artificial stupidity rather than artificial intelligence, but the two 
can merge inside computer systems to produce huge social change. Once the work 
has been broken down into simple algorithms, these can much more easily and 
quickly be followed by machines. The 111 service in north London is only one 
example of a much wider phenomenon. A Japanese insurance company has just
replaced 35 claims processors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2017/jan/05/japanese-company-replaces-office-workers-artificial-intelligence-ai-fukoku-mutual-life-insurance>
 with IBM’s Watson expert system. The Japanese government is preparing to 
automate the responses to parliamentary questions in a similar way. These are 
the first signs of a process that may annihilate millions of white-collar jobs 
in the same way that blue-collar jobs have already disappeared across the 
developed world. That would be a development to make last year’s political 
upheavals look like the mere premonitory tremblings of a real earthquake to 
come.
 