
My full email signature reminds me that I am a corporate social responsibility 
director. Don’t know what it means? Me neither. But Googling various 
definitions of the constituent words of my job title tends to sees me through 
to until 09.12am each morning. I’ll work it out, eventually.

Theresa May promised to tackle corporate atrocities. Now she must keep her 
word | Peter Frankental
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/theresa-may-tackle-corporate-atrocities-human-rights>
This isn’t how it was meant to be. I wanted to present Match of the Day 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/2016/aug/13/gary-lineker-presents-match-of-the-day-in-his-underpants>
. Thank goodness that the university careers department put me on the straight 
and narrow. Apparently there was no vacancy for beingAdam Ant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/may/26/adam-and-the-ants-heroic-sexy-warrior-bravado-kings-wild-frontier>
, either.

I couldn’t hack working in international development. Twelve months in West 
Africa in the early 1990s soured myLive Aid 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2015/jul/13/how-live-aid-continues-to-nourish-musicians>
-fuelled desire to work in foreign aid. There followed a traverse through an 
internship and on to a couple of jobs in human resources, before I stumbled 
into my current role in the early 2000s.

By 09.13am I’ve nearly figured out what I am supposed to be working on. This 
usually involves trying to convince everyone else in the business to do things 
they don’t really want to because “it’s the right thing to do”. Not all 
companies are naturally imbued with a moral compass. Historically, they have 
been asked to deliver products or services, ensure employment for people and 
make money; there’s been little pressure to do any of this in a specific way.

Conversations often go something like this: “Perhaps we should do our bit to 
minimiseglobal warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/aug/25/global-warming-is-melting-the-greenland-ice-sheet-fast>
 by setting carbon reduction targets that are based on the recommendations of 
theIntergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/oct/12/new-ipcc-chief-calls-for-fresh-focus-on-climate-solutions-not-problems>
?” “Sounds expensive. Will we have to pay a consultant to calculate that? Will 
we meet three-year payback on capital investments? Will it give us any 
marketing advantage? Can we pass on the cost to the consumer somehow?”

“Or maybe we should begin to explore possible human rights, child labour or 
modern slavery risks in our supply chains?” “Hmm… sounds like we might need to 
add headcount, and there’s no budget until the new financial year.”

The hard truth is that businesses invariably want to explore any potential 
commercial benefit of more ethical operations

You’d be forgiven for thinking it all sounds a bit wishy-washy, but corporate 
responsibility and sustainability are increasingly serious issues to 
businesses, and the wider public, apparently. Research suggests that up to 60% 
of consumers would pay more for environmentally or socially responsible 
products. Interestingly, the proportion of people who actually pay more for 
these products is significantly lower than those who say they will. I know of a 
leading American company that bases their investments on 15% of their target 
market paying more for a product with a positive sustainability story. I’m also 
aware that the so-called “discount” retailers have been aggressively recruiting 
CRS teams in recent years. This isn’t just for affluent mums to get excited 
about when they put their Essential Waitrose kaffir lime leaves in the boot of 
their Range Rover – this is mass market.

The idealists in the industry (and there are many) operate under the illusion 
that businesses should adopt full-scale sustainable practices overnight. I 
think it’s a naive view of how things work. While there are a small number of 
organisations that have been able to adapt their business models or products 
relatively quickly, for the vast majority it is inconceivable.

Success is achieved less through big wins and enthusiastic approval, but via 
little nudges and passive acquiescence. “Did they say yes?” “Well, they didn’t 
say no.” For all the time I’ve worked in the industry, I can’t remember a 
success that was achieved because anyone ever wanted to operate more 
responsibly or to be more sustainable. The victories have been about managing 
risk, protecting or enhancing brand reputation, saving money, competitive 
advantage, a created fear of inaction or, simply, grinding people down. It’s 
nudges, pokes, prompts, subtleties – and more nudges.

The cold hard truth is that businesses will invariably want to explore any 
potential commercial benefit of more ethical operations, looking at 
opportunities to “sell” sustainability either by charging a slight premium 
(“renewable only” energy tariffs) or by outcompeting a rival (two bars of 
chocolate at the same price, but one isFairtrade 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development/fair-trade>). But ultimately, 
it boils down to whether operating sustainably pays.

The troubling evolution of corporate greenwashing
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/aug/20/greenwashing-environmentalism-lies-companies>
I’ve heard people say that companies don’t need to be doing that much to 
operate more sustainably, as long as they aren’t doing nothing. These people 
tend to be rewarded based on their organisation’s financial performance only. 
Their holidays and kids’ Christmas presents are dependent on them making money 
for their employer. You could argue that morally they should act, but so should 
consumers. People say they want more responsibly produced products, but when 
they get to the tills it’s price that is king.

But it’s OK. We don’t have to move too quickly. It’s not like any of the 
sustainability issues – a collapse inbiodiversity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/biodiversity>, melting ice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/video/2016/apr/09/how-melting-ice-sheets-are-changing-the-way-the-earth-moves-on-its-axis-video-explainer>
, flooding, extreme weather events, drought,modern slavery 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/jul/10/modern-slavery-on-rise-in-uk> - 
are particularly urgent. Let’s see how they play out.

We’re on a journey in this industry. I’m not sure where we’re going. I do know 
it’ll take us ages to get there, but as long as nobody starts singing Summer 
Holiday I can probably cope. But, hey, it’s keeping me in a job, so I shouldn’t 
push too hard. Although I dread the day when climate change is fine,supply 
chains <https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/series/supply-chain> 
are all fair, nothing goes to landfill, workers are healthy and safe, pension 
funds are all responsibly invested and some companies pay a little too much 
tax. I mean, that sounds great … but what would I do all week?

• Are you a train conductor, a novelist or a headteacher? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 