
1 Climate carer

We need trees to survive. Trees absorb carbon from the carbon dioxide in our 
atmosphere, exhaling clean oxygen into the air, providing a breathable 
atmosphere for us all. With carbon removed from the air and locked in trees, 
the greenhouse effect is reduced and one of the causes of climate change held 
at bay.

2 Habitat and larder

As well as providing homes for us, trees are, of course, the natural habitat 
for many woodland creatures, from birds and squirrels to insects. Trees also 
provide food for many of the same creatures, through nectar, leaves and fruit.

 3 Air freshener

Trees can absorb pollutants, such as nitrogen dioxide released by vehicle 
exhausts, through their leaves. There’s a good reason the plane tree has 
survived in many cities; it is one of the best plants for coping with 
pollution, shedding polluted bark that prevents air reaching its trunk.

4 Climbing frame

For many kids – and adults – a tree is a play opportunity, for climbing or 
swinging. Go hang out with the trees and release your inner Tarzan!
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c36559b9ef8a788de5afc6b82aa12e7dd83111c%2F0_23_730_438%2F730.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20importance%20of%20trees%3A%2014%20reasons%20why%20we%20need%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20importance%20of%20trees%3A%2014%20reasons%20why%20we%20need%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4c36559b9ef8a788de5afc6b82aa12e7dd83111c%2F0_23_730_438%2F730.jpg>
 Get out in the fresh air and swing in the trees. Photograph: GalleryStock 
5 Umbrella

Who hasn’t taken shelter under a tree during an unexpected shower, or parked a 
car in its shade on a sunny day?

6 Recycling

Autumn leaf fall and the eventual death and decomposition of a tree provide 
needed nutrients for fungi, bacteria, insects and fuel for future trees.

7 Peace of mind

There’s no underestimating the calming effect of being close to nature. In the 
presence of trees – silent, sometimes ancient sentinels of the natural world – 
it seems easier to unwind.

8 Timber

The UK’s forests have been cut for timber to construct homes, fences, ships, 
sheds, benches, doors, dining tables, guitars, cricket bats and countless more 
useful items, never mind the paper stock for books and newspapers. Once 
harvested without regard for replenishment, forests are now carefully managed 
with cut-down trees replaced with new stock to ensure supplies continue.

9 Landslide barrier

Tree roots help give structure to the earth, holding soil in place. Without a 
frame of roots, the soil beneath our feet can easily be washed away by floods, 
resulting in mud or landslides.

10 Flood defence

During heavy rainfall, bare landscapes allow water to flow swiftly downhill, 
flooding rivers and homes. Trees help slow the progress of the rain, by 
catching it in their canopies and drip-feeding it to the ground, giving the 
soil more time to absorb the water. Tree roots also help excess water move 
downwards through the soil, removing it from the surface.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe105c7c2046027b69e6d47e571d3b31730e7461b%2F0_34_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20importance%20of%20trees%3A%2014%20reasons%20why%20we%20need%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20importance%20of%20trees%3A%2014%20reasons%20why%20we%20need%20them&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fwoodland-trust-64-million-trees%2F2016%2Fsep%2F22%2Fthe-importance-of-trees-14-reasons-why-we-need-them%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fe105c7c2046027b69e6d47e571d3b31730e7461b%2F0_34_1024_614%2F1024.jpg>
 Orchards - this one apple - have been nurtured for millennia. Photograph: 
Stephen Spraggon/Getty Images 
11 Orchard


Over millennia, humankind has nurtured orchards to provide myriad varieties of 
apples, pears, plums, cherries, walnuts and other fruit.

12 Medicine cabinet

Trees have provided many medicines. The bark of the cinchona tree produces 
quinine used in treatments for malaria, aspirin originally came from white 
willow bark, while eucalyptus trees provide an ingredient in cough mixture.

 13 Fuel for the fire

Wood is used as fuel for fires and stoves, as logs, charcoal, chips and 
sawdust, though this process releases the trapped carbon in the wood, adding 
the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide to the atmosphere.

 14 And there’s more ...


The bark of the cork tree is used to plug bottles of wine. Latex from the 
rubber tree is still gathered for use in tyres, belts and hoses. Many trees 
contain plenty of tannin, which is used in leather production. Gum from the 
acacia is used in ice cream and confectionery. Maple trees provide syrup. And 
don’t forget cacao, the source of chocolate!
 