
At the end of last year, it was reported that the Financial Conduct Authority 
was dropping its review into banking culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/dec/31/banking-culture-review-john-mcdonnell-urges-george-osborne>
. This led to a number of commentators saying the FCA doesn’t care about 
culture in financial services. I have been chief executive of the FCA for three 
months and I can tell you that nothing could be further from the truth. Culture 
matters a great deal.

 However, culture is not a tangible thing that can be taken down from a shelf 
and inspected. Culture is a way of doing things and a set of attitudes that 
determine behaviour by everyone involved in the organisation. It is shaped by 
many influences – incentive structures, risk management, the effectiveness of 
management and governance – all of which are examined by FCA supervisors in the 
firms we regulate. Getting the culture right means that the senior management 
of firms needs to set the right tone from the top – they need to take 
responsibility for the culture in their firms.

 Just over six months ago, thesenior managers and certification regime was 
introduced for all banks and building societies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/mar/07/fca-new-uk-banking-regulations-tracey-mcdermott>
, and a parallel regime came in for insurers. These changes place 
responsibility at the heart of how these firms conduct themselves.

 As chief executive of the FCA, I am responsible for the organisation that 
regulates the conduct of over 56,000 financial firms. I am rightly held to 
account – byparliament and ultimately by the public we serve.

 I believe in taking responsibility for my actions and that the FCA must live 
by the principles it espouses.

 Just before the new accountability regime was introduced, I was at an event 
debating the concept of responsibility – with many arguing that it is a 
difficult thing to define. A young lady stood up and said that she didn’t know 
what all the fuss was about – she was teaching her children to take 
responsibility for their actions – so why should people who work in financial 
services be any different?

 Six months on is a good amount of time to see how the new regime is bedding 
in. Generally, we have observed that firms are taking their responsibilities 
seriously and have broadly got the regime right. But we recognise culture 
change takes time and there is still more to do. So we have to keep a watchful 
eye on the progress firms are making.

 Since the regime was introduced, we have been undertaking work to ensure that 
senior manager responsibilities are properly allocated and understood in firms. 
In some cases, we have seen evidence of overlapping or unclear allocation of 
responsibilities. In other cases firms appear to be sharing responsibility 
amongst more junior staff, obscuring who is genuinely responsible. This goes 
against the intention of the senior managers and certification regime and 
should not continue.

 The regime will be extended in 2018 to cover all financial services firms, 
including asset managers and hedge funds. This means that the same high 
standards will apply in both the banking and the “shadow banking” sectors and 
supports a level playing field for competition.

 Trust in financial services will only be rebuilt when the public truly 
believe that senior managers in our financial institutions are taking 
responsibility for the actions they take.
 