
“I’m still hoping. I can’t really believe it’s going to happen, but in the 
back of my mind it’s always there. I love this country; I want to live here. I 
always dreamed of coming, because it was such an open-minded, lovely place 
where foreigners weregreeted. I think that’s part of why I was so shellshocked 
on 24 June: because this country I thought I knew suddenly turned up a very 
ugly face.”

Chris Hoffman is a 44-year-old freelance translator who lives in south 
Birmingham. She is originally from Stuttgart and first came to the UK thanks to 
the European Union’sErasmus student exchange programme 
<http://www.erasmusprogramme.com>. Later on, her husband started academic 
research in Birmingham, which then turned into a full-time job – and a little 
more than a decade ago, they settled in the city. They have an eight-year-old 
son. “He might not have a British passport,” she tells me, “but he was born 
here, and he feels British.”

Now, the prospect of Britain leaving the EU seems to have infected her life 
with anxiety. Does she think she might have to go back to Germany? “We’ll have 
to, if they chuck us out,” she says. “We haven’t got EU residency cards; we 
haven’t gone for naturalisation.”

Why not do that? “If the government starts throwing out EU citizens, I don’t 
want to live in this country any more,” she says.

On the first working day after the Christmas break, Hoffman has arranged to 
meet me in a cafe in the Kings Heath area of the city, along with two people 
who are campaigning alongside her against Brexit: 55-year-old Margaret Murray, 
who came to Birmingham 30 years ago from Ireland; and George Turvey, a native 
of south Wales who was, until recently, employed atBirmingham 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/birmingham> City University, but is now 
devoting his working time – on an unpaid basis – to trying to keep Britain in 
the EU.

The three of them are among the 15 people behind EU in Brum 
<http://www.euinbrum.org>, an amazingly active set-up that was founded in the 
days after last year’s referendum. None of them did any formal campaigning 
prior to the vote; they fully expected the leave campaign to amount to nothing 
more threatening than a sizeable protest vote, and for remain to convincingly 
win. Late last year, EU in Brum was also the host for a “national grassroots 
remain strategy meeting”, organised by the new national pressure groupBritain 
for Europe <http://www.britainforeurope.org>, and intended to coordinate the 
work of a whole host of campaigns.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0061c6c408c4f702c128ccb2622185cda93c846%2F420_0_1536_1536%2F1536.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fa0061c6c408c4f702c128ccb2622185cda93c846%2F420_0_1536_1536%2F1536.jpg>
 Chris Hoffman during a pro-EU rally in Birmingham in October 2016. Photograph: 
Jane Campbell/EU IN BRUM 
“There were about 40 organisations there,” says Turvey. “More dialled in on 
Skype. We had somebody from Gibraltar. There are a lot of expat organisations – 
people who travel from France and Germany to the meetings. It’s about 
collaboration, how we can work together, and grow the movement. We’re all 
linked now, and there’s work going on all the time.”

And what is their main objective?

“Remaining in the EU,” he says. “Of course.”

Some former remain campaigners, I remind him, are now seemingly resigned to 
Britain leaving the EU, and set on pushing for what political cliche calls a 
soft Brexit. How does he feel about that?

“We’re unequivocal; 100%,” he says. “We’re not going to compromise.”

The Conservatives are combining a rush towards the European exit door with the 
sense that they have no real negotiation plan. As of Tuesday, when great howls 
of dismay went up from left-leaning remainers, Labour’s position combinesJeremy 
Corbyn’s claim that “the UK can be better off out of the EU” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
 with a possible watering-down of the leadership’s support for the principle of 
free movement, suffused with the increasingly familiar sense of a party that is 
all at sea. So, while the SNP remains staunchly pro-European, it’s not 
surprising that, in England and Wales, people who passionately want Britain to 
stay in the EU feel they are not represented (apart from by the Lib Dems and 
Greens, perhaps – but with 10 MPs between them, that might amount to rather 
cold comfort).

In response to this growing political gap, initiatives aimed at fighting 
Brexit and somehow overturning the referendum result have been springing up in 
huge numbers. Besides EU In Brum, there areplenty of groups 
<http://www.britainforeurope.org/our_groups> rooted in specific places: 
Aberdeen for Europe,Hants4EU <http://www.hants4eu.org>, The Berkshire 48%, 
Glostays <https://www.facebook.com/glostays/>, Wessex for Europe, and many 
more. Online, you can choose from such national networks as Britain for Europe,
Sixteen Million Rising <http://16millionrising.wixsite.com/16millionrising>, 
Vote for Europe <http://www.voteforeurope.org.uk> and Want2Stay 
<http://want2stay.com>.

National tensions exposed within Brexit Britain | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/16/national-tensions-exposed-within-brexit-britain>
A somewhat secretive set-up called EU Flag Mafia 
<https://mobile.twitter.com/euflagmafia?lang=en> – whose people do not answer 
my enquiries on Twitter – has been founded with the aim of making sure the EU 
stars are seen as often as possible: back in September, they distributed around
2,500 EU flags at the Last Night of the Proms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/10/european-union-flags-handed-out-last-night-of-the-proms-brexit>
.March for Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/sep/03/pro-eu-protesters-join-march-for-europe-demos-around-uk>
 organised two anti-Brexit demonstrations in London last year, and another one, 
overseen by a network called I’m Still In, is planned for 25 March. On 20 
February, people will be involved inOne Day Without Us 
<http://www.1daywithoutus.org>, an attempt to highlight the contribution 
immigrants make to Britain via special events – or by simply not turning up for 
work – that will have a big anti-Brexit dimension.

As much as anything, this burgeoning resistance highlights what an insanely 
divided country the UK has become. Post-referendum conversations with convinced 
leave voters usually include unshakable views that have now hardened into 
cliche – chiefly, the idea that even now, we are only a few establishment 
manoeuvrings away from some great stitch-up that will overturn the result. And 
guess what? In the eyes of people who want out of Europe as soon as possible, 
that might be exactly what the anti-Brexit activists are aiming at.

The latter, of course, say that a minority of the overall electorate voted to 
leave and that there is hardly the thumping mandate for leaving Europe some 
politicians talk about – and that, besides all that, Brexit will be such an 
economic and social disaster that it has to be avoided.

Whatever, were you to put both camps together, there would be precious little 
common ground – which is perhaps why a lot of people talk about what George 
Turvey says is now very common – “the breaking-up of friendships, even rifts 
within families.”

Corbyn on Brexit: UK can be better off out of the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
For the people involved in the anti-Brexit movement, it is currently pretty 
much impossible keeping up with who is doing what, but what is happening is a 
prime example of how 21st-century politics increasingly works. The lumbering 
structures of parties and traditional top-down pressure groups are ill-suited 
to such a spontaneous upsurge. In any case, the fact that mainstream politics 
is barely representing anti-Brexit views has encouraged people to simply do 
something themselves, only to find that thousands of others feel the same way.

The day before my trip to Birmingham, I take a train to Manchester to find out 
more about one of the most vocal national anti-Brexit organisations –48 And 
Beyond <http://48andbeyond.com>, which is a hyperactive force on Facebook, and 
is set on encouraging the formation of yet more local anti-Brexit groups. Its 
founder is 32-year-old Eoin Ward, originally from Omagh in Northern Ireland, 
who is studying for a masters while also teaching English as a foreign language 
to, among other people, students from EU countries whom he says are now facing 
a very uncertain future.

We meet in a city-centre Pret a Manger, where he explains both his own staunch 
belief in the EU (partly down to where he’s from: “People in Northern Ireland 
see the EU in action every day,” he says), and the six-month story of what he 
started the day after the referendum.

At that point, he says, he had done “a bit of leafleting” with the official 
remain campaign, and was expecting a narrow win for his side – but when the 
unthinkable happened, he very quickly resolved to take action. On 24 June, he 
recalls, a group of English friends of Irish descent paid him a visit: “They 
had just been to the Irish Centre in Manchester to get their Irish passport 
forms; they were getting in there early. We sat and sympathised for a while, 
and then we said: ‘We really need to do something.’ So I started a Facebook 
group called The 48%. I invited about 30 Facebook friends to join. That was on 
the Friday afternoon. By Sunday evening, we had 20,000 people.”

The group is now closed (in the sense that permission has to be given for 
people to join), and has more than 50,000 members; itsFacebook community page 
<https://www.facebook.com/48AndBeyond/> has 30,000. There’s a steering 
committee of four people which does a video conference every Tuesday and meets 
up “every now and again” – but Ward says the group’s priority now is to 
manifest itself in the offline world. “We’re trying to get people off Facebook 
and out into their local area,” he says. “That’s a big push. Reading for Europe 
was the first; he says that Manchester for Europe is now close to hitting 200 
members. So how many local offshoots does he think 48 And Beyond have spawned? 
“At least 50,” he says.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdc8ed8426d0101e4602062eac7538408535856%2F204_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F6bdc8ed8426d0101e4602062eac7538408535856%2F204_0_3060_1836%2F3060.jpg>
 Eoin Ward(right) at a 48 And Beyond rally in September 2016. Photograph: Eoin 
Ward 
Campaigning, of course, comes with risks. In August, Ward was involved in 
organising a pro-EU demonstration in central Manchester. “At least 20 quite 
scary-looking people turned up with bandanas over their faces, holding up St 
George’s flags and filming everything. I don’t know what group they were from 
but, to me, they looked a bit kind of neo-Nazi, white supremacist – that sort 
of ilk. They were giving us a lot of grief, telling us we didn’t respect 
democracy.” What about online? “We sometimes get leave voters infiltrating the 
group, writing quite provocative things. But it’s water off a duck’s back. It’s 
much scarier in real life.”

What is his basic aim? “What we want, first of all, is for Theresa May to 
acknowledge that there are 16 million people who voted remain, and represent 
those people to some degree. So far, she has ignored almost half the country. 
At the moment, we don’t feel represented, and I think that’s why there are so 
many groups.”

Is he trying to overturn Brexit?

“Initially, I did say: ‘We will try to stop Brexit.’ I personally think we’ve 
gone too far down the line now. I’m not saying that’s the view of all the 
people in my group, but it seems like we’re on that path, with the deadline for 
article 50. And I’ve always been for the best possible deal for the people who 
voted remain. That means no change to employment protection, environmental 
protection, or free movement – all of those things we like about the EU. We 
don’t want those to change. Being a member of the single market? No question.”

And can he and the group make a difference? “Definitely. What’s the 
alternative? Just sitting back and accepting everything? We’ve got to at least 
try.”

EU in Brum had its first meeting about two weeks after the referendum, in the 
upstairs room of a cafe, where around 40 people showed up. At first, their 
conversation was more a kind of collective therapy than political action. 
“People were traumatised,” says Margaret Murray. “I think they wanted that 
space to meet other people who felt damaged, whereas within their own families 
or at work or wherever, they couldn’t express those things. Some of them felt 
like, ‘I don’t know the people around me any more.’”

Now, though, EU in Brum is all about being visible, and loudly making the case 
for Europe. It holds fortnightly public meetings, does regular street stalls, 
and makes a point of showing up at any number of local events, from last 
summer’s Labour leadership hustings, to gatherings of local businesspeople. In 
September, it held its first march in the city centre, which attracted around 
500 people, who were guided around a route taking in buildings that would have 
been inconceivable without EU funding. Not long after that, the group arranged 
another rally outside last year’s Conservative party conference, at the city’s 
Symphony Hall – ironically enough, the centrepiece of a development that was 
assisted by £50m funding from Brussels.

Three months on, the group still think that Brexit can somehow be overturned. 
“I think we still have every chance of achieving that,” says Hoffman. “It’s 
probably not going to be easy, but I don’t think it’s set in stone that we have 
to leave.”

“Theresa May could just turn it around,” says Turvey, who emphasises the 
constitutional fact – perhaps offset by the politics of Brexit – that the vote 
was advisory. “There’s no reason why she has to pursue this headlong crusade to 
ruin the UK.”

“There are many ways it could happen,” says Hoffman. “If you have a second 
referendum, or a general election … More and more, remainers are in the news, 
and people realise that this is still an ongoing topic. People are saying: 
‘Maybe I voted leave, but I’ve had a rethink.’ I have met several leavers who 
now regret voting that way.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5866d775cd1949e5dbb972fbf04f91fb31d8c60c%2F0_32_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Brexit%20resistance%3A%20%E2%80%98It%E2%80%99s%20getting%20bigger%20all%20the%20time%E2%80%99&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fbrexit-resistance-getting-bigger-pro-europe-eu-referendum-organising-groups%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5866d775cd1949e5dbb972fbf04f91fb31d8c60c%2F0_32_4849_2910%2F4849.jpg>
 The message is simple: a protester at the March for Europe. Photograph: 
Anadolu Agency/Getty Images 
What about the idea that a lot of people and places that voted leave did so 
after years of feeling completely marginalised – and that, if they were ignored 
again, their resentment would turn nuclear?

“That is one of the major issues: this sense of alienation and isolation in 
society,” says Turvey. “If people wanted to take advice from this advisory 
referendum, there’s a key piece of information. But the government is doing 
nothing to address it. That’s what they should be doing.”

There is one last devil’s advocate point. When leavers talk about the EU’s 
democratic shortcomings, or its embrace of the economics of austerity, they 
have a point, don’t they? Is it really an institution worth defending with this 
much passion?

“We pay less than 0.5% of our GDP to the EU,” says Turvey. “Think of all the 
incredible benefits: some research came out saying that we maybe get 5 or 6% of 
our GDP back, from the fact that we’re a member. If you weigh that against the 
fact that there needs to be reform, and we could make it better … the UK was a 
leader in the EU, and it should still be at the heart of it, making sure it is 
strong and fit for purpose and the best it can be. And the other thing is, 
what’s the alternative? It’s just a no-brainer.”

Which brings us to perhaps the most interesting question of all. Can the 
resistance movement not merely sustain itself, but actually grow?

“It’s getting bigger all the time,” says Hoffman.

“It is,” agrees Turvey. “And, really, it’s only a matter of time. There’s 
never been a good-news story for Brexit, has there? It’s all negative. If you 
look at the prospects for the UK, it’s disastrous.” He has been remarkably 
upbeat for the past hour and a half, but suddenly he almost seems to light up. 
“Surely, soon enough, people will have to realise that.”
 