
Please don’t read this unless you are feeling strong. This is a list of 13 
major crises that, I believe, confront us. There may be more. Please feel free 
to add to it or to knock it down. I’m sorry to say that it’s not happy reading.

1. Donald Trump

The next occupant of the White House 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/24/donald-trump-thanksgiving-message-tensions-video>
 will be a man who appears to possessno capacity for restraint, balance or 
empathy 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/andrew-sullivan-trump-america-and-the-abyss.html>
, but a bottomless capacity forrevenge and vindictiveness 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/27/alicia-machado-miss-universe-weight-shame-trump-speaks-out-clinton>
. He has been granted a clean sweep of power, with both houses and the supreme 
court in his pocket. He is surrounding himself with people whose judgment and 
knowledge of the world are, to say the least, limited. He will take charge of 
the world’s biggest nuclear and conventional arsenals, and the most extensive 
surveillance and security apparatus any state has ever developed.

2. His national security adviser

In making strategic military decisions, he has a free hand, with the capacity 
to act even without the nominal constraint of Congress. His national security 
adviser,Michael T Flynn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/19/michael-flynn-will-be-a-disaster-as-national-security-adviser>
, isa dangerous extremist 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/national-security/trumps-pick-for-national-security-adviser-brings-experience-and-controversy/2016/11/17/0962eb88-ad08-11e6-8b45-f8e493f06fcd_story.html>
.

3. The rest of his team
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20leaves%20the%20New%20York%20Times%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20booed%20as%20he%20leaves%20the%20New%20York%20Times%20office%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fdonald-trump-new-york-times-office-video&media=>
Trump booed as he leaves the New York Times office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-new-york-times-office-video>
Trump’s team is partly composed of professional lobbyists 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/11/16/drain-the-swamp-trump-mike-mckenna> 
hired by fossil fuel, tobacco, chemical and finance companies and assorted 
billionaires. Their primary political effort is to avoid regulation and 
taxation. These people – or rather the interests they represent – are now in 
charge. Aside from the implications for the living world, public health, public 
finance and financial stability, this is a vindication of thepolitical model 
pioneered by the tobacco companies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2006/sep/19/ethicalliving.g2> in the 
1960s. It demonstrates that if you spend enough money setting up thinktanks, 
academic posts and fake grassroots movements, and work with the corporate media 
to give them a platform, you can buy all the politics you need. Democracy 
becomes a dead letter. Political alternatives are shut down.

4. The transatlantic backdrop

Britain’s attempts to disentangle itself from the EU are confronted with a 
level of complexity that may be insuperable

Meanwhile, on this side of the Atlantic, Britain’s attempts to disentangle 
itself from the European Union are confronted witha level of complexity that 
may be insuperable 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/02/brexit-politicians-senior-academics-the-uk-in-a-changing-europe>
. Moreover, there may be no answer to the political fix in which the government 
finds itself. This is as follows: a) either it agrees to the free movement of 
people in exchange for access to the single market, in which case the 
pro-Brexit camp will have gained nothing except massive embarrassment, or b) 
the EU slams the shutters down. Not only is it likely to reject the terms the 
government proposes; but it might also try to impose anexit bill of about €60 
billion 
<http://uk.businessinsider.com/eu-wants-up-to-60-billion-exit-fee-in-brexit-negotiations-article-50-2016-11>
 for the costs incurred by our withdrawal. This would be politically impossible 
for the government to pay, leading to a non-negotiated rupture and the hardest 
imaginable Brexit.

5. Eurozone risks

The Italian banking crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
 looks big. What impact this might have on the survival of the eurozone is 
anyone’s guess.

6. … and their global ramifications

Whether it is also sufficient to trigger another global financial crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/19/big-short-financial-crash-steve-eisman-italy-banks-risk>
 is again hard to judge. If such a thing were to occur, governments would not 
be able to mount a rescue plan of the kind they used in 2007-8. The coffers are 
empty.

7. Job-eating automation

Automation will destroy jobs on an unprecedented scale 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/23/donald-trump-climate-change-war>
, and because the penetration of information technology into every part of the 
economy is not a passing phase but an escalating trend, it is hard to see how 
this employment will be replaced. No government or major political party 
anywhere shows any sign of comprehending the scale of this issue.

8. If Marine Le Pen wins

French politicians are now marching to Marine Le Pen’s immigration tune | 
Philippe Marlière
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/20/french-politicians-dancing-marine-le-pen-tune-immigration>
Marine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen> has a moderate 
to fair chance of becoming the French president in May. Whether this would be 
sufficient to trigger the collapse of the EU is another unknown. If this is not 
a sufficient crisis, there are several others lining up (especially the growing 
nationalist movements across central and eastern Europe in particular, but to a 
lesser extent almost everywhere) that could catalyse a chain reaction. I 
believe that when this begins, it will happen with a speed that will take 
almost everyone by surprise. From one month to the next, the EU could cease to 
exist.

9. The UN security council would look like …

If Le Pen wins, the permanent members of the UN security council will be 
represented by the following people: Donald Trump, Vladimir Putin, Xi Jinping, 
Theresa May andMarine Le Pen <https://www.theguardian.com/world/marine-le-pen>. 
It would be a stretch to call that reassuring.

10. The Paris climate agreement trashed

National climate change programmes bear no connection to the commitments 
governments made at Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/22/donald-trump-paris-climate-deal-change-open-mind>
. Even if these programmes arefully implemented 
<https://unfccc.int/files/meetings/paris_nov_2015/application/pdf/paris_agreement_english_.pdf>
 (they won’t be), they set us on a climate-change trajectory way beyond that 
envisaged by the agreement 
<http://www.nature.com/nature/journal/v534/n7609/full/nature18307.html>. And 
this is before we know what Trump will do.

11. … and the effects on migration

One of the many impacts of climate breakdown – aside from such minor matters 
as the inundation of cities, the loss of food production and curtailment of 
water supplies – will be the mass movement of people, to an extent that dwarfs 
current migration. The humanitarian, political and military implications are 
off the scale.

12. … with just 60 harvests left

According to the UN food and agriculture organisation, at current rates of 
soil loss we have60 years of harvests left 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
.

13. … an accelerating extinction crisis

The extinction crisis appears, if anything, to be accelerating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/oct/27/world-on-track-to-lose-two-thirds-of-wild-animals-by-2020-major-report-warns>
.

Enough already? Sorry, no. One of the peculiarities of this complex, 
multiheaded crisis is that there appears to be no “other side” on to which we 
might emerge. It is hard to imagine a realistic scenario in which governments 
lose the capacity for total surveillance and drone strikes; in which 
billionaires forget how to manipulate public opinion; in which a broken EU 
reconvenes; in which climate breakdown unhappens, species return from 
extinction and the soil comes back to the land. These are not momentary crises, 
but appear to presage permanent collapse.

So the key question is not how we weather them but how – if this is possible – 
we avert them. Can it be done? If so what would it take?

I write this not to depress you, though I know it will have that effect, but 
to concentrate our minds on the scale of the task.
 