
Tony Blair wanted to be remembered 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-35779235> for his education reforms, and 
the latest results from the OECD’s Programme for International Student 
Assessment –Pisa <http://www.oecd.org/pisa/> – the triennial survey of the 
skills of 15-year-olds suggest that if only he had concentrated on his domestic 
agenda, he probably would have been. The Pisa scores are notorious for 
revealing no consistent message, but it is striking that England’s 15-year-olds 
are performing about as well as three years ago, where Scotland and Wales, 
where reform was rebuffed, are in decline.

Overall, the UK’s performance is almost unchanged: a little above the OECD 
average, still a long way behind Singapore, Japan and Estonia, but well ahead 
of Italy, Israel and Iceland. There isa marginal improvement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/06/english-schools-core-subject-test-results-international-oecd-pisa>
 in the UK’s ranking, despite a slight decline in scores. It is unhappy reading 
for Tories who only last year pledgedin their election manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/feb/02/conservative-education-plans-branded-election-gimmicks>
 to make Britain the best place to study by 2020; but when the individual 
countries of the UK are broken out from the overall UK result, it becomes clear 
that Mr Blair’s aggressive focus on English education appears to have paid off. 
Education specialists argue thatit takes about a decade 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-wales-37826634> for changes to affect outcomes on 
a large scale. In science, reading and maths, England now outperforms the rest 
of the UK. Wales and Scotland both opted out of league tables and other 
Blairite reforms in the early 2000s. Now they are playing catch up. In 
particular Scotland, for so long the top performer in the UK, has suffered an 
unexpected fall in outcomes since 2012. No wonder the SNP now suggest the 
results “strongly reinforced” the case for change.

The real value of the Pisa survey lies in the detail. This makes bleaker 
reading for the UK as a whole. Twice as many Britons are low achievers in 
maths, for example, as are outstanding. Unexpectedly, there is no correlation 
between outcomes and either national income or per capita school spending. One 
worry is that the government will attempt to use figures to claim 
high-performing English grammar schools – which record near-perfect science 
scores – represent a model to replicate. They do not. The more academically 
selective systems are, the more socially selective they become. It’s true that 
the Dutch system bucks this trend, but it is the result of having selection at 
14, coupled with high levels of spending on those left behind. Whatever the 
Pisa scores reveal, ministers should promote high achievement – in every school.
 