
In the heart of downtown Calgary, under the shadow of the Calgary Tower, is a 
restaurant accented with reclaimed barn wood, big farm animal art and communal 
style tables. At the back is a big open kitchen where a pig’s head or a side of 
beef can usually be seen in the cooler behind the chef. Make no bones about it, 
theCHARCUT Roast House <http://www.charcut.com/#about> is a meat-eater’s dream 
come true.

Co-owners and co-executive chefs John Jackson and Connie DeSousa met roughly 
20 years ago when DeSousa apprenticed for Jackson at the prestigious Owl’s Nest 
Dining Room in Calgary. They connected instantly, knowing that their skills and 
passion for food would take them places.


Paul Brandt: ‘I had to leave to figure that Calgary is simply amazing’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/discover-cool-canada/2016/oct/28/paul-brandt-i-had-to-leave-to-figure-that-calgary-is-simply-amazing>
After the Owl’s Nest, Jackson trained with notable chefs in New York, and then 
in Europe at top restaurants including London’s River Café and Le Jardin des 
Cygnes in Paris. Meanwhile, DeSousa gained valuable experience working in top 
restaurants in Europe and across the US, winning awards for her culinary 
skills, including butchery.


In 2010, the chefs decided it was time to open their own restaurant. With the 
world their oyster, they picked Calgary. It was home to them, but also in need 
of culinary excitement. Their “back-to-basics” food – fresh, from scratch, but 
done with flair and an original twist – shook up the dining scene. Who in 
Calgary had ever had duck-fat poutine before CHARCUT? The awards poured in, and 
other restaurants have been stepping up their game as a result, making Calgary 
a new hotspot for dining in Canada.


“We like to put choices on the menu that we like,” DeSousa says, “and that’s 
why the duck-fat poutine is there. My favourite dish is our rotisserie chicken 
that is brined and then seasoned with my dad’s Portuguese pepper sauce. The 
flavours and subtle hints of smoke are so comforting to me.”


They have also recently opened charbar 
<http://www.charbar.ca/#argentinian-food>, a restaurant in the trendy East 
Village, with their Alley Burger Food Truck parked nearby. Even here, the chefs 
take things to the next level. “I am in love with the Whole Truck Burger,” 
Jackson says. “It has two patties made with longhorn beef, which is all 
grass-fed, topped with pretty much everything including chorizo bacon.”


DeSousa has a daughter and Jackson has two girls, and many of their 200 staff 
also have families, so they have built a culture that supports both home life 
and business. “When we made the decision to open CHARCUT Roast House in 
Calgary, we knew we wanted to re-connect with our home, and build a future for 
our families here,” says DeSousa.


Even though they are surrounded by food, staying fit isn’t a challenge for 
either. DeSousa is a marathon runner and explores the network of paths 
throughout the city. Jackson commutes six days a week on his bike, and is 
currently riding more than 125 miles a week as he gets ready for a cross-Canada 
journey – The Great Trail, which at 12,905 miles is the longest cross-country 
trail in the world.


“I live a couple minutes away from Fish Creek Park and it has some of the most 
amazing trails in the country,” says Jackson. “Calgary has some of the best 
pathways in the world and I love to watch the seasons change as I ride along 
the Bow river to work. You get to see some of the incredible birds and wildlife 
along the way.”


John Jackson and Connie DeSousa’s tips

Shokunin <http://shokuninyyc.ca/> 
“The restaurant scene in Calgary is exploding; we try to hit up pretty much 
all the top spots as well as some lesser known. If we’re working late, the 
go-to hot spot is a restaurant called Shokunin on 4th Street.”

Escape to Banff <https://www.banff.ca/> 
“We love to head to Banff and spend a weekend at the Banff Springs Hotel, 
hiking, eating and, of course, having a spa day.”

Calgary Stampede <http://www.calgarystampede.com/> 
“We would never miss a Stampede and always have friends and family down during 
this time to show off how amazing our city is.”

Shopping 
DeSousa: “I have lots of small local favourites like Espy 
<http://espyexperience.com/> in Inglewood and of course anything by local 
designers. I love the feminine layering ofPaul Hardy’s designs 
<https://www.paulhardydesign.com/#dooMCModal>. Really there are too many to 
mention.”

For more information and inspiration, see explore-canada.co.uk 
<https://uk-keepexploring.canada.travel/?utm_source=guardian&utm_medium=native_advertising&utm_campaign=uk_2016_p&utm_content=pd_advertising_alberta+influencers+x+3>
 