
“We’re simply focusing on how to survive.” Those are the words of a domestic 
abuse worker inNottingham <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/nottingham> – but the 
survival Chloe Cheeseman is describing refers to that of an organisation built 
to help women and girls in danger, rather than the women and girls themselves – 
an indictment of what’s happening to domestic violence services in this country

Equation <http://www.equation.org.uk>, the charity Cheeseman works for, offers 
the sort of services any of us would want in our community: training frontline 
workers – police, midwives, social workers – about domestic violence; 
supporting men’s services to help male survivors of abuse; and going into local 
schools to teach young people about healthy relationships to tackle abuse 
before it starts.

Teenage girls and domestic violence – the truth
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/16/teenage-girls-domestic-violence-truth-risk-message-schools>
For over two decades, it’s been funding from the city and county councils 
that’s made this work possible. But as of this financial year Equation has had 
its funding reduced by 20%. That translates to a cut of over £50,000 over the 
past year. The latest local authority contracts, Cheeseman tells me, don’t even 
fully cover overheads as basic as rent, heating, and phone bills.

More than 60 schools in the city are currently relying on Equation to deliver 
projects for pupils. (Sex and relationships education is still not a part of 
the national curriculum – despite the fact it is young women aged from 16 to 24 
who aremost at risk of domestic violence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/jun/16/teenage-girls-domestic-violence-truth-risk-message-schools>
). “We’ve built relationships with these schools for 14 years,” Cheeseman says. 
“Now we’re in a situation where we either ask the schools for more money, or 
fundraise ... Or we have to cut it.”

It would be convenient for Theresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/30/theresa-may-launches-tory-leadership-bid-with-pledge-to-unite-country>
 and colleagues, keen todistance themselves from austerity cuts 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/thetorydiary/2016/09/quietly-discreetly-and-without-a-fanfare-the-government-buries-austerity.html>
, for this to look like an isolated case, a council shirking its 
responsibilities. In truth, Nottingham’s budget cuts are the result of a 
government ideologically set on squeezing local authorities over key services, 
and it is happeningup and down the country 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/17/councils-face-billions-more-budget-cuts-april-england-local-authorities-funding-settlement>
.

This gets grimmer still when you consider that money the government’s set 
aside tohelp local councils 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/greg-clark-confirms-historic-4-year-settlement-for-local-government>
 is largely finding its way to wealthy, Tory-run areas, such as Surrey, 
Hampshire and Oxfordshire. Nottingham, like Liverpool, Manchester and others, 
sits on the list of councils that havereceived nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/tories-labour-councils-ministers-conservative-shires>
.

“Nottingham city council has tried so, so hard because they recognise how 
important this is,” Cheeseman says. “But the reality is, the pot is shrinking. 
There’s ever decreasing pots of money available.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fdomestic-violence-services-equation-nottingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b3bc4efa3a079564e75959f4b459fde0fca509%2F0_69_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20latest%20costly%20frivolity%20to%20be%20wound%20down%3F%20Domestic%20violence%20services%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fdomestic-violence-services-equation-nottingham%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20latest%20costly%20frivolity%20to%20be%20wound%20down%3F%20Domestic%20violence%20services%20%7C%20Frances%20Ryan&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F29%2Fdomestic-violence-services-equation-nottingham%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F72b3bc4efa3a079564e75959f4b459fde0fca509%2F0_69_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 The Million Women Rise in London earlier this year. ‘Nottingam’s police force 
is the first in the country to make misogyny – including wolf-whistling – a 
hate crime.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
In this climate Equation has been left – in Cheeseman’s words – to “plug the 
gap” of the cuts. Where it could once dedicate its time to tackling domestic 
violence in the city, the charity has been forced to fundraise for the money it 
needs to pay for it: anything from marathons, cake-baking, or bathtubs of 
beans. Cheeseman joined Equation as a fundraiser in 2012 – the organisation’s 
first one. “There was no need before then,” she says. “Now we’ve had to recruit 
two.”

Last year, in a bid to find more income, the charity had to make customers pay 
for its training services, rather than providing them for free. It is now 
approaching private companies to make Equation their “charity of the month”, 
but it’s an uphill battle: cancer and animal charities are “an easier choice” 
for companies in a society that still routinely hides domestic violence.

Austerity and then chicanery: how the Tories target cash strapped councils | 
John Harris
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/23/tories-labour-councils-ministers-conservative-shires>
Nottingham as a city was recently praised for its efforts to tackle 
gender-based harassment, with its police force becoming the first in the 
country to makemisogyny a hate crime 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2016/jul/13/nottinghamshire-police-count-wolf-whistling-hate-crime>
. Cheeseman herself was one of the first women to report such an incident to 
the police this summer when three men yelled sexually aggressive comments at 
her as she walked through a secluded wooded area in the city. She was on her 
way to work at the time.

There’s an irony that, as the city works to police abuse, violence and 
harassment, the choices of central government mean a service that’s tackling 
the problem is having its funding squeezed.

As with the closure of women’s refuges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/17/domestic-violence-protesters-sisters-uncut-direct-action>
 around the country, this isn’t just shortsighted or even dangerous. It sends a 
message that domestic violence services – much likechildren’s centres 
<http://www.leicestermercury.co.uk/children-s-centres-face-the-axe-as-part-of-4-million-council-savings/story-29712190-detail/story.html>
 and social care for disabled people and the elderly – are now a frivolity that 
the state feels free to discard.
 