
With words by one of the world’s greatest writers 
<http://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/literature/laureates/1913/tagore-bio.html>
, Jana Gana Mana is in a better class of national anthem, to the envy of those 
stuck with dirgeful God Save the Queen. Even so, it is hard to imagine that 
forcing moviegoers to stand for it ahead of the latest Star Wars or 
Transformers instalment will instil “a sense of committed patriotism and 
nationalism”, as India’s supreme court decreed recently. At least 12 film lovers
have been arrested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/13/moviegoers-arrested-refusing-stand-for-national-indian-anthem-kerala-india>
 and charged for refusing to comply with the ruling, which orders cinemas to 
play the song before each screening and audiences to get to their feet. Some of 
those had already been assaulted by vigilantes.

In the United States, San Francisco 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick was 
attacked forrefusing to stand for The Star-Spangled Banner 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/the_slatest/2016/08/29/the_reasons_why_colin_kaepernick_shouldn_t_stand_during_the_national_anthem.html>
 at pre-game ceremonies, declining “to show pride in a flagfor a country that 
oppresses black people and people of colour 
<http://www.nfl.com/news/story/0ap3000000691077/article/colin-kaepernick-explains-why-he-sat-during-national-anthem>
”. That has not deterredseveral more NFL players 
<http://www.espn.com/blog/nflnation/post/_/id/227095/nfl-players-who-protested-during-the-national-anthem-in-week-17>
 from joining him.

Demands for demonstrations of patriotism are not new. But at times they become 
more pointed, and harder to ignore because we can see that they are symptoms: 
“When a whole nation is roaring patriotism at the top of its voice, I am fain 
to explore the cleanness of its hands and purity of its heart,” Ralph Waldo 
Emerson wrote in the 19th century.

India has seen the rapid growth of Hindu nationalism and decreasing tolerance 
towards artistic and intellectual difference and dissent under Narendra Modi’s 
leadership – in contrast to the pluralism captured in the lyrics byRabindranath 
Tagore <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rabindranath_Tagore>. In the US, it was 
no surprise when Donald Trump waded in and suggested that Mr Kaepernick should 
“find a country that works better for him”. The pertinent British parallel 
isn’t republican Jeremy Corbyn agreeing, under pressure,to sing God Save the 
Queen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/sep/16/jeremy-corbyn-national-anthem-authenticity-queen-republican>
, nor Sajid Javid’s callfor an oath of allegiance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/18/sajid-javid-british-values-oath-casey-review-social-integration>
 to British values, but the attacks on those who sought a parliamentary vote on 
invoking article 50 as unpatriotic, even treasonous; the suggestion that judges 
who ruled in their favour wereenemies of the people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
; the idea that departing ambassadorSir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
could not be relied upon 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/opinion/2017/01/03/sir-ivan-rogers-should-replaced-someone-positive-brexit/>
 to push for a deal in the UK’s interests rather than the EU’s. As Emerson 
suggested, there is cause to be suspicious when the shores of national identity 
are patrolled so jealously.

Turning an accident of birth into an aggressive declaration of superiority is 
silly. But patriotism can be conceived in other ways. Countries are communities 
too, even if imagined ones, and communities work better when their members 
share a commitment to them. Such ties do not preclude belonging to other, 
broader communities – whatever some Brexiters believe. Nor do they preclude 
honesty about a country’s shortcomings; they may even mandate it.

Rituals and symbols help to construct and sustain a shared culture. But acting 
on one’s commitment to a country, in regular, unostentatious ways, is better 
than parading it. Either is better than policing other people’s patriotism – a 
particularly grotesque act in countriesthat have claimed diversity and liberty 
<http://acorn.nationalinterest.in/2016/11/30/pouring-supreme-scorn-on-liberty/> 
as defining parts of their identity. Affection cannot be created or shaped to 
order; at most, you can make someone fake it. Enforced declarations insult the 
ideals they supposedly uphold. By hollowing out what they claim to sustain they 
build mausoleums, not nations.
 