
Gavin Barwell hasn’t been housing minister for very long at all, but has 
already elicited a stinging rebuke from his boss at No 10.Speaking at a 
Conservative conference fringe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/09/skip-a-generation-when-passing-on-homes-says-housing-minister>
, Barwell pointed out that his parents had decided to disinherit him and 
instead leave their wealth to his children. When asked if he thought others 
should follow suit, he replied in the affirmative, though tempered that he 
didn’t want to live in a country where it was necessary.

Theresa May’s staff are perhaps a little cannier than Barwell, and seeing the 
headlines that followed,No 10 was quick to point out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/10/no-10-housing-minister-gavin-barwell-will-grandchildren>
 that Tory policy was building enough houses to meet need, not relying on 
inheritance.

Given the high cost of renting and exorbitant house prices, saving for a 
deposit is doubly difficult: it follows that the only hope many people have is 
a financial windfall that awkwardly coincides with a family death. But the 
statistics show that Barwell’s solution is unworkable for the majority of 
people. TheOffice for National Statistics 
<http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20160105160709/http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/was/wealth-in-great-britain-wave-2/inheritance-in-great-britain--2008-10/report--inheritance-in-great-britain--2008-10.html>
 showed 3.6% of people surveyed had received an inheritance in the previous two 
years – half had inherited under £10,000 and fewer than one in five had 
inherited property.

The majority of people won’t be able to purchase homes upon the death of their 
grandparents, or even their parents: my paternal grandparents passed away in my 
teens, followed by my father in my twenties. Neither bereavement resulted in 
financial gain, only grief. Most friends who have received an inheritance have 
been gifted enough to clear their lingering student overdrafts, not enough to 
get on the housing ladder. It’s here you see inequality in action: for all the 
talk of inter-generational inequality, inheritance is a way of bolstering your 
family’s position through the ages: if your parents are extremely wealthy 
you’ll live a good life while they’re here, then take on their assets.

But the Conservatives clearly don’t value all inheritances, for all their 
noise about the evils of inheritance tax, a tithe on extreme wealth that in 
practice afflicts barely anyone. As part of theHousing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/housing> and Planning Act they called for 
the end of lifetime tenancies in social housing. This is a clear attack on the 
lives of working-class people, denying families the opportunity to put down 
roots and treat a council house as it should be: a home.

When you return to a grandparent’s house or a former family home, the walls 
are steeped in memories: the architecture is burned into your muscle memory. 
It’s why people fight to keep homes they’ve lived in for decades, and why 
people leave houses rather than simply capital to family members.Removing the 
lifetime tenancies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/dec/09/council-tenants-lose-lifetime-right-to-live-in-property>
 essentially disregards the well being and wishes of social housing tenants and 
signals that social housing is a stopgap for the destitute, and the private 
rented sector is to be the new normal.

Most of my family won’t have homes to pass on to their children, because they 
live in social housing – but their children will be in an even worse position, 
forced into the private rented sector, unable to buy a home and excluded from 
social housing. For all their talk of the squeezed middle, the Conservatives 
are doing their utmost in housing to cleave the population into haves and 
have-nots: the children of the rich will be all right no matter what happens.

Their asset-rich parents may have to shave off a bit of that wealth to help 
them, but for them, a “helping hand” or wad of cash is enough to sign them up 
for monthly mortgage payments and a two-bed flat with an Ikea sofa. But the 
children of the average family have no recourse to enough spare cash for a 
deposit, rents too high to permit saving, and more chance of getting Jeremy 
Clarkson to join Greenpeace than ever moving into council housing.

Sign up <https://register.theguardian.com/housing/> for your free Guardian 
Housing network newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to you on the 
last Friday of the month. Follow us:@GuardianHousing 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianHousing>
 