
I had high hopes for the goverment’s Teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> Excellence Framework (Tef). 
Not every educator wants to be research-intensive, but in recent years, it’s 
been the main way that we have been judged.

Sexual harassment is rife in universities, but complaining means risking your 
career
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/aug/26/sexual-harassment-is-rife-in-universities-but-complaining-means-risking-your-career>
The Research Excellence Framework (Ref) has underpinned government funding, 
meaning that university resources have been thrown at demonstrating the impact 
of research. But this approach has seen teaching-intensive universities 
overlooked and their resources tightened; educators who don’t fit the 
researcher profile worry about the security of their jobs.

So I was looking forward to the recognition of inspiring and effective 
pedagogical practice. I hoped that the Tef would reward institutions and 
individuals who wanted to focus on teaching, especially those who served 
students from a diverse variety of backgrounds.

The Tef could have featured a portfolio of case studies of teaching excellence 
(not unlike the impact case studies of the Ref). It could have rewarded 
universities that demonstrate investment in their staff’s professional 
development, such as innovative practice workshops or the provision of learning 
technology specialists. It could have considered the proportion of staff with a 
recognised teaching qualification. And it could have demanded evidence of 
inclusive teaching practices and strong disability support.

Ultimately, institutions demonstrating teaching excellence could be granted 
more funds, to compensate for a potential comparative weakness in attracting 
research funds.

These are just ideas, but there was – at least in my mind – huge potential for 
the Tef to recognise the valuable job that teaching-intensive universities do, 
and encourage sound pedagogical practice.

Then we heard the detail. Rather than doing any of these things, the Tef will 
be based on three crude metrics: student retention and progression; the number 
of students in paid employment after graduation; and scores on selected items 
of the National Student Survey. Universities will be classified as outstanding, 
excellent or meeting expectations, with a pre-determined proportion in each 
category.

I've been dumped by the job I love
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/03/ive-been-dumped-by-the-job-i-love>
The reward for good teaching? If your university is found to be outstanding, 
you have won the opportunity to raise your students’ fees above the current 
£9,000 cap. And so the prize for excellence is the ability to extract more 
money from learners, creating yet more barriers to accessing and creating 
knowledge.

Methodologically, the Tef is flawed. For instance, students’ assessments of 
individual teachers show persistent gender bias, and the item on assessment and 
feedback hardly ever changes, whatever the context.

It’s also flawed conceptually: “satisfaction” is not the same as “learning”, 
as any psychology text will tell you. And besides, I suspect the final year of 
university is far too early for students to recognise the full value of their 
education. I worry, too, about the ethics of emphasising retention when there 
is a funding incentive. Some students need more time and patience to complete 
their degree and there should be no shame in that.

Of course I want my students to find job security after university and thrive 
in their careers. But their subsequent employment status is not a measure of my 
success as a teacher. It is a measure of many things, including their luck in 
negotiating an economy that often excludes people like them. Personally, I 
measure my success as a teacher by whether my students develop the capacity to 
learn, think and act independently, without my guidance. But these qualities 
are not the metrics of the Tef.

Instead, we will send our graduates out so laden with debt that they need to 
cling to the first job they can find – and call ourselves successful educators. 
We will compete like starved dogs over the reward of being able to raise fees, 
and proudly put our Tef status on promotional materials, ensuring a steady 
supply of students willing to pay inflated fees.

For the first time in 18 years, I don't feel welcome in Britain
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/jun/21/for-the-first-time-in-18-years-i-dont-feel-welcome-in-britain>
The Tef isn’t concerned with the art and practice of teaching. It does not set 
out to capture and promote those practices that inform, enlighten and inspire. 
It is a crowbar with which to prise apart universities, communities and 
families.

So what can be done? I don’t believe that universities have to resign 
themselves to the Tef structure as it is, or even to the notion of a Tef at 
all. But I can’t speak out: as a young academic, I’m far too financially 
insecure to risk rocking the boat.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 