
The massacre of 39 people in a New Year attack on Istanbul’s Reina nightclub 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/04/istanbul-nightclub-gunman-identified-says-turkish-foreign-minister>
,which Islamic State has claimed responsibility for 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/isis-group-claims-responsibility-for-istanbul-nightclub-attack>
, has plunged Turkey into new depths of grief and anxiety. It turned a festive 
night into a bloodbath, with dancers and partygoers felled by automatic rifle 
fire, echoing the November 2015Bataclan attack in Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/14/paris-attacks-bataclan-concert-hall>
. The world should express its solidarity with the victims as staunchly and 
vocally as it did with France’s.

But Turkey is a country racked by multiple traumas. A shaken nation lives in 
the fear that more violence may befall it in 2017, as it grapples with internal 
strife and the fallout from war and chaos in the Middle East. The trauma of 
terrorism exists alongside that of large-scale political repression in the 
aftermath ofJuly’s coup attempt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey-coup-attempt>, as well as tensions 
created by coping (often remarkably, at a human level) with the arrival of an 
estimated 3 million refugees in recent years. These forces are of course of 
different natures and dimensions; they should not be conflated with one 
another, nor automatically connected. But to grasp the immense pressure Turkish 
citizens are under, it is important to keep them all in mind. In any country, 
any one of these would be a massive challenge; taken together, they amount to a 
rare test, putting a highly polarised nation at an important, possibly 
decisive, crossroads.

That the Reina nightclub attack occurred in a city of rich, cosmopolitan 
history and numerous tourist sites, and that the victims were of 14 different 
nationalities, only enhanced the global resonance of the event. Isis said a 
“heroic soldier of the caliphate” had targeted a place where “Christians were 
celebrating their pagan feast”. The assailant, the group said, had acted “in 
revenge for God’s religion” becauseTurkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> was “the servant of the cross”. In 
the run-up to the attack the Turkish army had been heavily engaged in northern 
Syria, where it battles Isis as well as Kurdish armed groups.

Turkey’s recent policy shift in the Middle East, marked by a sudden alignment 
with Russia in facilitating the fall of rebel-held Aleppo, will have 
increasingly placed it in the firing line of a group that likes to claim it 
defends Sunni Muslim populations – all the while persecuting them. But the 
danger that Isis represents for Turkey predated this change in alliances, the 
principal motivation for which can be found in Ankara’s determination to 
curtail Kurdish territorial ambitions throughout the region.

The Istanbul tragedy came after a long list of murderous attacks in Turkey, 
making it the western country (as a Nato member with EU aspirations) that has 
statistically suffered the most from terrorism in recent years: more than 400 
people have died since mid-2015 in attacks attributed both to Isisand to 
Kurdish groups <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-38280638>. That’s more 
than anything France, Belgium, Germany and the US have had to counter since the 
creation of Isis. This fact has perhaps at times been overlooked: much of the 
comment on Turkey in recent months has understandably concentrated on Recep 
Tayyip Erdoğan’s brutal methods against any form of dissent – with political 
repression indeed reaching new heights since the failed coup attempt.

Turkey’s paranoid, autocratic president and his administration hardly warrant 
sympathy. More than 140 writers, journalists and intellectuals are imprisoned. 
Social media users are increasingly being investigated. Legal proceedings have 
begun against 80,000 people nationwide, in what amounts to massive purges. Last 
weekanother political trial got under way 
<http://www.aljazeera.com/news/2016/12/asli-erdogan-necmiye-alpay-zana-kaya-released-161229180114472.html>
, involving the novelist Aslı Erdoğan. Turkey’s relations with western allies 
have been strained as a result of the president’s human rights record as well 
as policy divergences in the Middle East.

It is easy, when looking at a country in the grip of authoritarianism, to see 
just the despot and not the millions of citizens who populate the land in all 
their diversity and with all their aspirations. One man captures all the 
attention because he is deemed to control so much – and, indeed, his power is 
unrelenting. But as a nation mourns its dead, one way to manifest solidarity 
is to remember that despite the pressures there remains a vivid civil society 
in Turkey, aspiring to democracy, openness and tolerance, not hatred and 
divisiveness, and it is showing much courage. The scale of the country’s 
simultaneous and multiple traumas make that spirit of resistance all the more 
admirable, especially when tragedy strikes. This citizens’ courage deserves not 
just our empathy but our active support.
 