
Pope Francis leads an organisation that fought against democracy, liberty, 
equality and feminism for nearly 200 years after the French revolution of 1789. 
It is a paradox that he is now heralded in some quarters as the global champion 
of all those causes, which everywhere seem under attack. The key to 
understanding this contradiction is that the pope is not himself a liberal. He 
is a conservative with a small c, mistrustful of all grand schemes of human 
betterment, whether socialist or libertarian, and he believes in sin and the 
devil – as do most of his 1.2 billion followers. If conservatism stands for 
anything more than the remorseless pursuit by the strong of their advantage 
over the weak, it is a profound suspicion of the human capacity to be good, a 
belief, as Milton put it, that we shall never cease “hammering from our flinty 
hearts the seeds and sparkles of new miseries for ourselves”. This isn’t the 
whole truth, but at a time when a world order seemingly based on rational 
self-interest is being consumed in greed and rage – including the“plague of 
terrorism” <http://www.reuters.com/article/us-newyear-pope-idUSKBN14L113> that 
Francis urged all to confrontas it struck Turkey again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/31/turkey-armed-attacker-opens-fire-in-istanbul-nightclub-reports>
 – a little of Milton’s grim scepticism is salutary; even, almost, hopeful.

For the pope, a world order based on the unlimited satisfaction of individual 
wants is unattainable, and the attempt to reach it destructive of the world 
around us, and of the peace of our inner worlds. As he wrote 18 months ago in 
his powerfulencyclical on the environment <https://laudatosi.com>: “When people 
become self-centred and self-enclosed, their greed increases. The emptier a 
person’s heart is, the more he or she needs things to buy, own and consume. It 
becomes almost impossible to accept the limits imposed by reality.” This attack 
was not confined to the one encyclical, but has been one of the most important 
themes of all his preaching, most recently in hisNew Year homily 
<http://en.radiovaticana.va/news/2017/01/01/pope_francis_homily_for_solemnity_of_mary,_mother_of_god/1282938>
: “The lack of physical (and not virtual) contact is cauterising our hearts and 
making us lose the capacity for tenderness and wonder, for pity and 
compassion.” But, he continued, “we are not interchangeable items of 
merchandise or information processors. We are children, we are family, we are 
God’s People.”

This is the development of a consistent line of Catholic criticism of the 
economist’s world that goes back at least​ as far as Pope Leo XIII’s 1891Rerum 
Novarum 
<http://w2.vatican.va/content/leo-xiii/en/encyclicals/documents/hf_l-xiii_enc_15051891_rerum-novarum.html>
, and arguably comes from the roots of western civilisation, in Aristotle and 
Aquinas.Catholic social teaching <http://www.catholicsocialteaching.org.uk/> 
offers a coherent perspective on how the individual fits into society. It 
addresses directly the two great questions of our time: how the economy should 
be arranged to benefit everyone, and how our societies should treat the natural 
environment. Pope Francis has been an astonishingly eloquent advocate for human 
rights, for the environment, for peace and against the ravages of capitalism. 
He doesn’t do fluffy. In fact, at times, he sounds like a pure revolutionary.

“We should be particularly indignant at the enormous inequalities in our 
midst,” hewrote <https://laudatosi.com> in his 2015 encyclical. “We fail to see 
that some are mired in desperate and degrading poverty, with no way out, while 
others have not the faintest idea of what to do with their possessions, vainly 
showing off their supposed superiority and leaving behind them so much waste 
which, if it were the case everywhere, would destroy the planet. ... We 
continue to tolerate that some consider themselves more human than others.”
Pope Francis’s approval ratings are highest in Europe and the Americas 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-20T15:23:04/embed.html>
With a passion perhaps possible only to a South American, he loathes the 
turbocharged US model of capitalism unleashed by Ronald Reagan: he entirely 
rejects the idea that greed restrained only by self-interest operating through 
a market will make the world just or good. His Catholicism is almost the polar 
opposite to the dominant strains of white American evangelical Christianity. He 
unequivocally opposes torture and the persecution of refugees, and even the 
death penalty, which are all causes dear to religious Republicans. More 
Americans support torture as an instrument of government policy than do the 
inhabitants of Iraq, Sudan or Afghanistan. With a series of dramatic gestures – 
visiting refugee camps; taking migrants into the Vatican; publicly washing the 
feet of a Muslim woman – the pope has demonstrated that he wants his church to 
stand alongside refugees and migrants. Asarchbishop of Buenos Aires he would 
visit the slums 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/03/slum-priests-pope-franciss-early-years/274201/>
 – and take a bus to get there.

These are gestures eloquent of a much deeper intent. They set him against much 
of the modern world and the regimes in both Moscow and Washington. But they 
have also aroused bitter and well-funded opposition within his own church. The 
Vatican is a deeply and perhaps necessarily reactionary organisation, but an 
intelligent conservative likePope Francis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/pope-francis> knows when times have changed 
and when to adapt. A reactionary confuses the present with the eternal, and 
thus can’t admit any change at all.

The enemies around him

Reactionaries must always lose in the long run. The world does change, and the 
change can’t be forever denied. But within the Catholic church they can and 
sometimes do manage to hold their positions for centuries. This is the dilemma 
that the pope faces as he tries to help the church come to terms with feminism. 
The Catholic church is a deeply patriarchal organisation: no one ever called a 
pope the Holy Mother; at the same time it is dependent on women whose work and 
devotion sustains the whole edifice. The concessions to feminism that he 
proposes don’t go as far as they might. He maintains the ban on women priests, 
and the complete opposition to abortion – although all priests may now forgive 
women who ask for it. But he has moved decisively to allow parishes to 
recognise some second marriages as real ones.

He has been denounced for this by the reactionaries 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2016/12/20/cardinal-burke-explains-plan-for-formal-correction-of-amoris-laetitia-in-the-new-year/>
 within the church as a heretic, a destructive progressive, and aman whose 
policies must lead to a historic schism 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2015/10/pope-francis-is-now-effectively-at-war-with-the-vatican-if-he-wins-the-catholic-church-could-fall-apart/>
 and break with tradition. At the same time he has greatly disappointed 
progressives who had hoped for some shift in substance on the full acceptance 
of gay people and on the role of women in the church’s hierarchy.

A champion of humanity

Once more the apparent paradox dissolves in the light of the fact this is a 
conservative who believes that sin can corrupt anything, even, or perhaps 
especially, the church he heads. Church law and church rules can themselves 
become unrealistic schemes for organising society, as destructive in their 
dogmatic application as the precepts of Ayn Rand. His reactionary enemies, 
already praying and plotting for his succession, want a pope to proclaim
“absolute moral norms that prohibit intrinsically evil acts and that are 
binding without exceptions” 
<http://www.catholicherald.co.uk/news/2016/11/14/pope-declines-to-answer-four-cardinals-amoris-appeal/>
 – which might sound reasonable until you realise they are not quoting a 
denunciation of war or slavery, but Pope John Paul II denouncing contraception.

Yet in a world full of bewildering change, progressives as well as 
conservatives need to remember that moral absolutes exist and that there are 
some evils with which it is always wrong to compromise. Their form changes. A
quarter of a century ago the Soviet Union fell 
<http://www.usatoday.com/story/news/world/2016/12/21/soviet-union-25th-anniversary-collapse-russia-putin/95341672/>
. The attitudes that shaped the church then will not help it – or us – now. 
Global poverty, global greed, and the destruction of the environment are what 
threaten us today, and, however unlikely, Pope Francis is a champion of 
humanity against these evils.
 