
A man in his 40s receives a pension projection that tells him his retirement 
income is going to collapse from the £38,000 he was expecting to £18,000. His 
company is having to find a sum equal to 45% of his salary to keep the pension 
scheme going, a crucifying amount for any employer, and the costs will keep on 
spiralling. It says it has no choice but to slash the scheme to ribbons.

This is the sort of dilemma facing the workers, and bosses, of Royal Mail and 
the Post Office. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/aug/10/royal-mail-pension-post-office-hit-brexit-defined-benefit>
 Strike action is looming – and quite rightly too, because the cuts are 
equivalent to someone losing £200,000 or even £300,000 over the course of their 
retirement.

Final-salary pension scheme shortfalls stubbornly high, advisers warn
 Read more  <https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/01/pensions-gilts> 
We are about to enter a new era of trench warfare over pensions. The early 
battles were easy victories for the employers. They decided to close their
final-salary schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/jan/01/pensions-gilts>to new entrants, 
but existing workers were protected and were able to carry on chalking up their 
entitlement to, let’s face it, rather generous retirement payouts. Nobody 
seemed to care too much about the millennials who were missing out on what 
their parents took for granted. Next came the more thorny shift from paying out 
pensions based on final salaries at age 60 or 65 to cheaper ones based on a 
“career average” salary. Again the employers won, but it was more bruising.

But now we’re moving into far more dangerous territory. The employers have 
begun to target existing workers, many in their 40s and 50s, who are in these 
career average schemes, saying: “You can keep what you’ve built up so far, but 
nothing beyond that.” In pensions terminology it’s called stopping “future 
accruals”; Royal Mail, thePost Office 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/post-office> and Marks & Spencer are all 
considering it.

To these companies it’s a foregone conclusion. They can’t possibly afford 45% 
of salary as a pension contribution, or in M&S’s case 34%. The snarky retort is 
that they’ll always find the money to pay silly sums into their chief 
executive’s pension, but not for the workers.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fscandal-closure-company-pension-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a8337153bce13f5421eeb7d5f47906869d1ff47%2F36_0_1638_2046%2F1638.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20scandalous%20changes%20to%20company%20pension%20schemes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fscandal-closure-company-pension-schemes%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20scandalous%20changes%20to%20company%20pension%20schemes&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2Fblog%2F2016%2Faug%2F13%2Fscandal-closure-company-pension-schemes%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F7a8337153bce13f5421eeb7d5f47906869d1ff47%2F36_0_1638_2046%2F1638.jpg>
 M&S is cutting its contributions from 34% to 12%. Photograph: Claire R 
Greenway/Getty Images 
The more serious retort is why do employers think the only alternative to 
“gold-plated” final salary schemes is the lousy world of stock market-based 
schemes, where the company pays in a pittance and workers have no guarantees 
about their retirement income?

M&S’s move is shameful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/22/union-usdaw-marks-spencer-talks-pay-pensions>
. It is telling longstanding workers that the cap on company contributions in 
its new scheme will be 12%. That’s an enormous cut from 34%. Is there no 
half-way house? Every time an employer closes a final salary scheme and places 
workers into a “defined contribution” scheme it shifts all the risk on to them. 
How about sharing some of the risk? How about saying: “We can’t afford to 
guarantee pensions of up to two-thirds of final salary – but we could 
underwrite a promise that your stock market-based scheme will at least give 
you, say, 25% of your final salary.” It would then be on the hook for some, but 
not all, of the risk.

At the moment we are letting employers get away with lots of gobbledegook when 
they say pension schemes are falling into unaffordable deficits. You may have 
noticed that theFTSE has soared  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/live/2016/jul/01/shares-rise-on-brexit-rate-cut-prospect-business-live>
since Brexit. Some schemes are almost in rude health. The problem is actuarial 
– gilt yields have slumped, which has the mathematical impact of deepening a 
scheme’s projected deficit. It doesn’t mean the scheme will actually be in 
deficit in 10 years’ time, but it does give employers a good excuse to shut 
them.

We’re between a rock and a hard place on pensions. Until now it is workers who 
have given up all their rights. It’s now time employers began to show a bit of 
flexibility – and rather a lot more long-term responsibility.
 