
The pictures from Poland <https://www.theguardian.com/world/poland> in the 
closing days of 2016 look very similar to those that preceded the fall of 
communism – a ruling party sulking about criticism, parliament in ill-tempered 
deadlock, police deployed against those protesting against the government’s 
anti-democratic measures and courts powerless to resist interference.

This is the year of a nail-biting election in France, and Angela Merkel’s 
sternest test yet in Germany after the migration crisis and terror attack in 
Berlin. But the country whose fortunes will play a major role in determining 
how far theEuropean Union <https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>, for all its 
frictions and shortcomings, remains a credible community of values, is Poland. 
There Jarosław Kaczyński, head of the Law and Justice party and de facto ruler, 
has spent 2016 eroding constitutional checks and balances on the judiciary, 
public appointments, army, press and broadcasting in a purge of liberals and 
the post-communist left.

A chaotic session of parliament before Christmas saw the annual budget voted 
through outside the main chamber without opposition support, while the outgoing 
president of Poland’s highest constitutional court accused Law and Justice of 
setting the country “on the road to autocracy”.

Kaczyński is betting that an EU preoccupied by unresolved economic woes in 
southern Europe and the backwash of Brexit will do little more than 
sabre-rattle, as the largest of the states that acceded to the union in 2004 
follows Viktor Orbán’sHungary <https://www.theguardian.com/world/hungary> into 
grumpy isolation; a 21st-century form of nationalist fervour and a two-fingered 
salute to the EU.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwhy-are-polish-people-protesting-against-their-government-video-report&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20are%20Polish%20people%20protesting%20against%20their%20government%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwhy-are-polish-people-protesting-against-their-government-video-report>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20are%20Polish%20people%20protesting%20against%20their%20government%3F%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video%20report&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F18%2Fwhy-are-polish-people-protesting-against-their-government-video-report&media=>
Why are Polish people protesting against their government? – video report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/dec/18/why-are-polish-people-protesting-against-their-government-video-report>
Call it the Polish problem – its implications ripple far beyond Warsaw or 
Budapest. The EU prides itself on being a grouping of states in which 
democratic norms underwritten by law were the criteria for accession in the 
early 2000s. But once membership is granted, the clunky EU machinery makes it 
hard to take action against a country that embraces autocracy.

Law and Justice rode to power on the back of frustration that the post-1989 
settlement failed to spread wealth more equally and frustration with endemic 
corruption. Kaczyński promises budget deficit-inducing spending programmes 
aimed at low earners. He cites Polish “ordinary working people” as dupes of an 
out-of-touch liberal elite or self-serving technocrats – both of which 
accusations contain an inconvenient grain of truth.

But the clampdowns of 2016 have far exceeded any defensible attempt at 
rebalancing political interests. The EU, for so long a destination of choice 
for progressives in central Europe, must then decide this year whether it is 
content to remain inactive when basic freedoms are gobbled up in the state that 
represents its sixth biggest economy. Or whether it should take the fight to 
Warsaw on the grounds that a supine EU has become a hollow shell, haemorrhaging 
credibility.

In a year when we will need to become more fluent in EU article-speak, article 
7 – the EU’s as yet untested vehicle for imposing sanctions – will be in the 
spotlight. There is, however, a catch: it can be invoked only by means of a 
unanimous vote which would enable Hungary, under the autocratic Orbán, to 
oppose it. (Fellow autarchs tend to stick together when confronted).

EU gives Poland two months to scrap changes to its highest court
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/21/eu-gives-poland-two-months-to-scrap-changes-to-its-highest-court>
So far, Kaczyński has concluded he can ignore imprecations from Brussels or 
half-hearted protests from members with their minds on other matters. His 
officials have taken to spouting lines reminiscent of the cold war in defence 
of purges of liberal incumbents, citing the “no interference in internal 
affairs” doctrine favoured by leaders under fire for bad behaviour at home.

What might change matters? There is one bold route around the problem, namely 
to persuade member states to trigger article 7.1 – which would allow sanctions 
to be deployed against both Poland and Hungary if they continue to disregard 
basic rights. That would neatly end the “fellow traveller” veto, by putting 
both of the EU’s rogue states in special measures. Failing to observe that 
warning could lead to the suspension of voting rights.

The threat carries some hefty risks. It plays to the view propagated by Law 
and Justice that the EU is meddling – and the experience of testing popular 
opinion against Eurocrats has not had a happy 2016. In addition, Germany, which 
would need to support a stronger line, will not be keen in election year to 
pick a fight with a querulous neighbour. But Warsaw’s position is more fragile 
than its rhetoric. It remains exposed to the whims of the even more vigorous 
autocracy to its east, Vladimir Putin’s Russia. Too great a tilt to stroppy 
isolationism, at a point when Washington’s policies towards Moscow are opaque 
and unreliable, and Poland risks becoming the friendless giant of eastern 
central Europe.

That is not enviable positioning when the region’s delicate security compact 
look less solid than at any time since before 1989. Moscow recently stirred 
uneasy ghosts by moving nuclear-capable missiles into the Kaliningrad enclave 
between Poland and Lithuania. A Poland flirting with self-imposed isolationism 
may find that the geo-political rapids of 2017 leave it looking for sound 
allies in edgy times, rather than more European noses to put out of joint.

Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the Economist
 