
“Do what you feel in your heart is right,” Eleanor Roosevelt once counselled, 
“for you’ll be criticised anyway.” Her advice was general; yet it seems 
pertinent to Michelle Obama, the most inspirational first lady since Mrs 
Roosevelt herself. Theadmiration – even adoration – earned by both women 
<http://www.nytimes.com/learning/general/onthisday/bday/1011.html> makes it 
easy to forget how widely they were derided at first, facing flat-out lies: the 
“Eleanor Tuesdays” on which black women supposedlybarged into 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/1993/01/motherjones-jf93-hillary-and-eleanor>
 white women; and the similarly non-existent tape in which Mrs Obama was said 
to rant against “whitey”. Mrs Obama was accused of a bizarre range of offences 
including (the horror!)wearing sleeveless dresses 
<http://abcnews.go.com/GMA/story?id=6986019>, but a constant theme was supposed 
racial bitterness, flagged up in ways that were barely coded (“angry”, as if 
only white men could express sentiments distinguishing themselves from 
doormats), or not coded at all (“uppity”). These attacks were not just 
politically motivated but reflexive; even the praise she receives has at times 
beenback-handed or condescending 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2017/01/02/michelle-obama-and-us>.

Like Mrs Roosevelt, she has proved to be not an old-fashioned helpmeet nor an 
ornament but a powerful advocate of equality in her own right. The Roosevelts 
had a close partnership yet notoriously unhappy marriage. The Obamas have been 
frank about marital tensions – due particularly to his political ambitions – 
yet their relationshipremains inspiring 
<http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2009/01/19/a-couple-in-chicago> to many. Mrs 
Roosevelt grew up in the elite, but her childhood was scarred by loss; Mrs 
Obama was born, amid the deep racism of 1960s Chicago, into a black 
working-class family that encouraged and expected her to excel. Those 
experiences have given her both a deep sense of what is wrong with America and 
of what people are capable of achieving. She brought to the White House not 
only a glamour and poise unseen since the Kennedys, but a commitment to 
inclusivity. Her hugs and goofy “mom-dancing” appearances spread warmth as well 
as cool. Most important, she has brought moral force to the east wing of the 
White House. Her critics went low; she went high. The job’s limitations 
precluded her disappointing. But her role was elastic and she stretched it. 
When she called herself “mom-in-chief 
<http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0912/80712_Page4.html>”, and focused on 
the issues of childhood obesity and military families, some saw it as a 
cop-out. She sidestepped issues such as gun control and healthcare.

But whether she became more assured – or always planned to extend her reach – 
her positioning, as well as the respect she has garnered, is partly what 
allowed her to be heard far and wide when she talked of watching her “beautiful 
intelligent young black” daughters in“a house built by slaves” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/jul/26/michelle-obama-democratic-convention-video>
. It meanther potent rebuke of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/14/michelle-obama-speech-transcript-donald-trump>
 – describing how his bragging about sexually assaulting women had“shaken me to 
my core” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/13/michelle-obama-donald-trump-misconduct-frightening>
 – resonated. Having the confidence to acknowledge her vulnerability as well as 
her strength has, along with her passion and clarity, made her an inspiration 
to anyone who believes they have a right to occupy a space in the world, even 
if that be at 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue, and to speak their truth. She pressed 
home that message, more important than ever as Mr Trump prepares to take 
office, in her final speech from the White House today, urging young people: 
“Know that this country belongs to you – to all of you, from every walk of life 
… Don’t ever let anyone make you feel you don’t matter or don’t have a place in 
our American society. You do.” She called on them to fight for those freedoms, 
adding: “Hope that when people see us for who we truly are … maybe they too 
will be inspired to rise to their best possible selves.” Eleanor Roosevelt 
remained highly influential after leaving the White House, playing a key role 
in drafting the universal declaration on human rights. Michelle Obama has made 
it clear she has no interest in running for office. But today she assured young 
people that she would be “with you, rooting for you and working to support you 
for the rest of my life”. Mrs Obama has not yet left, but we miss her already.
 