
The latest Brexit legal challenge goes right to the heart of the matter – a 
hard or a less hard landing; whether to stay in the single market or plunge 
over what Theresa May herself called a “cliff edge 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/government-working-hard-avoid-brexit-cliff-edge-business-theresa-may-cbi>
”.

Brexit ruling: senior Tories urge May to scrap article 50 appeal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/19/scrap-article-50-court-appeal-senior-tories-urge-may>
Judges are already at the centre of this. Next week the supreme court will 
hear a case 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/supreme-court-judges-views-on-article-50-legislation-anger-leave-campaigners>
 relating to parliament’s right to vote on triggering article 50. That’s a 
vital principle – for wasn’t the referendum all about sovereignty of parliament?

But this latest legal case could change everything. The argument hinges on 
whether the UK automatically falls out of theEuropean Economic Area 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2016/nov/28/article-127-new-article-50-leave-eu-stay-eea>
 on leaving the EU, or whether departure from it would require a vote in 
parliament. MPs so empowered could insist on staying in the EEA and thus the 
single market, accepting free movement. It would still be a self-harming 
madness to keep single-market obligations but without a seat at the table. 
Still, that would be less mad than leaving the single market altogether.

The ground is shifting, and Brexiters, such as Dominic Raab, are getting 
nervous <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38126899>: “The public have 
spoken; we should respect the result and get on with it, not try to find new 
hurdles that undermine the democratic process,” he says. But what kind of 
democracy is that, with just one lifelong vote – immutable, however many people 
review the altered facts and change their mind?
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Emily%20Thornberry%3A%20The%20British%20public%20needs%20to%20have%20a%20say%20on%20Brexit%20options%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Emily%20Thornberry%3A%20The%20British%20public%20needs%20to%20have%20a%20say%20on%20Brexit%20options%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F27%2Femily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video&media=>
Emily Thornberry: The British public needs to have a say on Brexit options 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/27/emily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video>
Remainers, meanwhile, like Labour’s shadow foreign secretary Emily Thornberry, 
feel the stirrings of an opportunity. She is the first Labour frontbencher to 
open the door to asecond referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/27/emily-thornberry-the-british-public-needs-to-have-a-say-on-brexit-options-video>
. Others, John Major and Tony Blair included, press for a second vote so 
citizens can approve the final deal. How wise that sounds: lay out the facts, 
explain the complexities and let the people decide.

But has no one learned the lesson of the last referendum? Never again, is what 
we learned, for how could a second referendum in what would probably be an even 
nastier atmosphere improve the national debate? How would it not, once again, 
be hijacked by lies?

We saw the last time how moderate, rational people of all parties who 
campaigned for remain failed to come to terms with the post-fact, post-truth, 
emoto-politics, where what you identify with trumps all else. We saw how the 
sight of a far-right tectonic shift, the deployment of terrifying statistics 
and the fire-alarm warnings from trustworthy experts all proved irrelevant to 
the 52% who wanted just one thing – out, as a badge, as a state of being, as a 
national identity and as sovereign freedom from foreigners in Brussels or over 
here.

How would a second referendum not, once again, be hijacked by lies?

The election yesterday of Paul Nuttall, the new Ukip leader  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/28/paul-nuttall-elected-as-ukip-leader>
already singing the nationalist song and promising to put the “great back into 
Britain <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38125432>”, won’t make that 
situation any better.

The second-referendum camp should reflect on the likely role once more of the 
rightwing, Eurosceptic press. And here we are in extraordinary territory, for 
the extent to which Paul Dacre’s Mail has followed Richard Desmond’s Express 
into the gutter has shocked even seasoned Mail-watchers. Think of his deranged
“Enemies of the people” assault on the judges 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/enemies-of-the-people-british-newspapers-react-judges-brexit-ruling>
 hearing the article 50 case. Remember his daily pre-referendum front pages: 
“Migrants spark housing crisis”, “Britain’s wide open borders”, “Deadly cost of 
our open borders”, “Britain’s broken borders”, “How many more can we take” … on 
and on. Consider that deluge when the Brexiters claim that anti-migrant racism 
played no part in the result?

Dacre’s relegation to page 30 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/24/daily-mail-jailing-jo-coxs-murderer-front-page>
 of the conviction of Jo Cox’s killer was astonishing, but no more than the 
extraordinary way in which the paper sought toelicit sympathy for her killer, 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3966766/Did-Neo-Nazi-murder-Jo-fear-d-lose-council-house-grew-Terrorist-thought-property-end-occupied-immigrant-family-MP-wouldn-t-help-him.html>
 highlighting the unproven, provocative claim that murderer Thomas Mair thought 
his “property could end up being occupied by an immigrant family – and the MP 
wouldn’t help him”.

Supreme court judge hints at legal hitch that could seriously delay Brexit
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/15/supreme-court-judges-views-on-article-50-legislation-anger-leave-campaigners>
There has been no reflection in Mail-land. Several Mail writers – like Dominic 
Lawson 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/debate/article-3977178/DOMINIC-LAWSON-horrific-murder-Jo-Cox-contemptible-campaign-smear-Brexit-supporters.html>
 – say it’s a remainer smear to connect her death in any way to the tone of the 
filthy Brexit campaign, a tone most influentially set by the Mail. But who can 
be surprised? “Hurrah for the Blackshirts <http:>!” is rooted deep in the 
paper’s DNA. As is an almost psychopathic ferocity, and this is something that 
the left, liberals and centrists seem ill-equipped to deal with. Any opponent 
of the right is attacked as part of the “establishment elite”. Any celebrity 
using their public platform to express a liberal or remain view – Gary Lineker, 
JK Rowling, for instance –are slaughtered as “luvvies” 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3659244/Luvvies-lament-Bitter-stars-line-tweet-abuse-ill-informed-economically-illiterate-decision-feared.html>
, with savage abuse calibrated to deter others. Those joining theStopFundingHate
 <https://twitter.com/StopFundingHate> campaign, urging companies not to 
advertise in the Mail and fear-mongering titles, are castigated as free-speech 
deniers.

And how does the liberal left respond? Hopelessly, for good people are easily 
framed in malevolent terms. And the riposte? We mutter about “rightwing 
bastards”; a catapult against a howitzer.

But we can’t go on like this. If the courts give MPs the right to vote to stay 
in the EEA and the single market, they will need nerves of iron, reserves of 
courage and every possible verbal weapon to confront the right’s angry 
entitlement, its brutish selfishness, its mean-spirited nativism. It won’t be 
easy; some won’t have the stomach for it. But they surely have a duty to stand 
up for the only kind of Brexit that might save us from ruin.
 