
This month marks six years since the beginning of the Arab spring, a series of 
events that were meant to be a major turning point in the modern Middle East. 
It was the self-immolation of a Tunisian street vendor and his death on 4 
January that initiated a revolutionary year. The subsequent protests energised 
ordinary Arabs, who recovered, it seemed, a popular self-confidence diminished 
by six decades of autocracy. The Arab streetwas honoured for its people’s 
courage and determination 
<http://content.time.com/time/person-of-the-year/2011/>, inspiring movements 
across the world. Protesters did not just voice their complaints, it was said, 
they changed the world. Four Arab leaders fell. Yet six short years on those 
dreams are now in tatters. In Egypt, the most populous Arab nation, a 
counter-revolution hasreturned a military dictatorship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/25/egypt-arrests-al-jazeera-journalist-mahmoud-hussein-fake-news>
. Much ofLibya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/may/26/british-special-forces-blew-up-isis-suicide-truck-in-libya>
 andYemen is reduced to rubble in a war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/everything-is-over-now-the-last-survivors-in-yemens-ground-zero>
 where outside powers are the principal actors, prepared to fight until the 
last local is dead.Syria is in ruins, stained by rivers of blood 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/02/hundreds-of-syrians-flee-as-assads-forces-bomb-groups-excluded-from-ceasefire>
. The sole democratic success was Tunisia, which did see a peaceful transition 
from authoritarian rule to elective government. The main Islamist party won 
power and last year declared it would end all of itscultural and religious 
activities to focus only on politics 
<https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/tunisia/political-islam-muslim-democracy>
 – becoming a Muslim democratic party, rather like its western Christian 
counterparts. But every silver lining has a cloud:Tunisians make up the largest 
number of foreign fighters in the ranks of Islamic State 
<http://soufangroup.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/12/TSG_ForeignFightersUpdate3.pdf>
.

The underlying reasons for revolt have not gone away. In many ways the 
conditions today are even more explosive than in 2011. The Arab state is in 
crisis almost everywhere:plunging oil prices have holed Saudi’s economy 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/saudis-brace-for-more-economic-pain-1482316202>; 
Egypt’sflawed leadership has created crisis after crisis 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/view/articles/2016-08-16/egypt-s-failing-economy-is-sisi-s-fault>
. The desperate men and women leaving for Europe want a better life than that 
found at home.According to the UN’s Arab Development Report 
<http://arab-hdr.org/PreviousReports/2016/2016.aspx> – the first since the Arab 
spring erupted – the Middle East is home to only 5% of the world’s population, 
but accounts for 45% of the world’s terrorism, 68% of its battle-related deaths 
and 58% of its refugees. This at a time, the UN warns, when the population of 
young Arabs exceeds 100 million and is growing fast – but not as fast as rates 
of unemployment, poverty and marginalisation.

The rise of the largest, best-educated and most highly urbanised generation of 
young people in the region’s history – far more pious than their peers in other 
parts of the world – looks like a destabilising force. The response in the 
region has been a crackdown: crushing dissent, but not addresssing the reasons 
why it exists. Small wonder the UN warns of an “accumulation of demands and 
their re-emergence more violently”. The reasons for another cycle of protest 
are obvious. The Arab world bristles with swords not ploughs, spending $75bn a 
year on arms in the past quarter of a century. A hereditary elite hoards power. 
Business is undergirded by “wasta”, the Arabic for connections. Corruption has 
resulted in the waste of vast resources: the UN says about $1tn has been 
pilfered over half a century. This could have been invested in creating jobs 
and improving basic services. The thinking that shuts out challengers to the 
status quo needs to be dispensed with.

In politics the dangers are clear. If there are no mechanisms for 
participation and accountability which allow for peaceful protest, then the 
disgruntled may explore direct, violent actions. In the Arab world this 
requires an insight into political Islam. The Sunni world is dealing with a 
psychology of anxiety. A people sharing a rich cultural, religious and 
linguistic heritage, the Arab world’s largest ethnic grouphas seen its great 
cities fall to rivals <http://time.com/4534096/syria-mosul-aleppo/>: Mosul, 
Aleppo, Jerusalem, Baghdad and Damascus. In the geopolitics, recent events have 
exposed how Arabs have once again become pawns on the chess board. The landmark 
resolution at the UN demanding a halt to all Israeli settlement in the occupied 
territories was not presented by an Arab nation. In Syria, a peace plan was 
delivered not by a Sunni Arab power, but by Russia, Iran and Turkey. The 
arrival of Donald Trump in the White House will allow Arab despondency to be 
dismissed.Theresa May’s ill-judged jab at US Secretary of State John Kerry for 
a speech criticising Israel was a move in this direction 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
. Mrs May,who refused to follow the Obama administration in blocking arms 
exports to Saudi Arabia after civilans were bombed 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/saudi-arabia-arms-sales-us-uk-theresa-may-angus-robertson-snp-a7474206.html>
, is more interested in defence sales than the well-springs of democracy in the 
Arab world. This is a mistake: those cut off from changing their own societies 
by democratic means may turn their anger inwards – or outwards.
 