
The East star Brit Marling is a Hollywood conundrum
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/jun/28/brit-marling-the-east-connundrum> 
Miracles are, by their very nature, unnatural. So when a missing blind woman 
abruptly reappears with her sight restored, it freaks people out. Where has 
Prairie been for seven years? How was her blindness cured? What’s with the 
weird scars on her back? These are just your starters for zen in the world of 
The OA, a cryptic new drama, arriving almost out of nowhere on toNetflix 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/netflix> this week.

The site imposed a media blackout on The OA, preventing any interviews or 
reviews around the show until after it launched, like the streaming equivalent 
of a Beyoncé-style surprise album drop. The opaque trailer that surfaced last 
Monday was one of the few concessions to its existence. “Maybe because we spent 
a lot of time figuring out the answers to our riddles and mysteries, we then 
became very protective of them,” says Brit Marling, star and co-showrunner. She 
compares it to checking out a movie at a film festival when all you know is the 
title. “We thought it would be fun to give the audience that experience,” she 
says, “rocketing into a mystery with very little information beforehand.” What 
if it’s so mysterious that it gets lost in the peak content shuffle? “We’ll 
have to see how that goes.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Ao_zYU3DeI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Ao_zYU3DeI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D0Ao_zYU3DeI&media=>
Becoming a showrunner fits in with Marling’s hands-on approach to her career. 
Most recently seen as a PR maven in Channel 4 cop-com Babylon, she has found 
her furrow writing movie scripts that marry mindbending concepts with indie 
budgets. She and her OA co-writer and co-director Zal Batmanglij refined the 
concept of the show, which also stars Jason Isaacs, while collaborating as 
writers on indie movies Sound Of My Voice and The East. “We actually spent a 
lot of time cracking the math of our mindbender really just for our own 
pleasure,” says Marling, “not necessarily even knowing that this story would 
ever find a home. We really did our homework.”

Just when you think you’ve got the measure of The OA’s lo-fi docu-realism – a 
local community being disrupted by a prodigal return – it transitions into 
something much more surprising and philosophical. The first of a series of 
rug-pulls takes place in the intriguingly lopsided first episode. “Brit and I 
had never made a TV show, so we weren’t indoctrinated with the history of the 
medium,” says Batmanglij. “So there’s an uneasiness to the storytelling because 
you don’t know what’s happening next. That’s going to be weird for people but 
hopefully also exciting.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a73380d57c87ad271fecd2459bac4b4795b683a%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20OA%3A%20revealing%20the%20secrets%20of%202016's%20most%20mysterious%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20OA%3A%20revealing%20the%20secrets%20of%202016%27s%20most%20mysterious%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a73380d57c87ad271fecd2459bac4b4795b683a%2F0_323_4928_2957%2F4928.jpg>
 Something mysterious occurs in The OA. Photograph: JoJo Whilden/Netflix 
With its corkscrewing flashback structure and parade of striking scenes – a 
young girl dipped in a frozen lake, a luminous guitar recital in Havana, an 
impromptu picnic on an autopsy table – The OA joins a long line of TV 
headscratchers from Twin Peaks to Lost, though it goes darker than most. “A lot 
of our show is an exploration of trauma,” says Marling. “If you survive a 
harrowing experience, does it make you dangerous to yourself or others? Or does 
it make you somebody who has some wisdom to offer because you’ve been through 
something so out of the ordinary?” Marling’s Prairie certainly returns scarred 
but not scared, demonstrating uncanny poise in clashes with both men and beasts.

Challenging viewers with a TV Rubik’s Cube comes with its own risks. Westworld 
was almost short-circuited by fans pre-empting its twists. Arriving in one 
eight-episode batch means season one of The OA is not likely to suffer a 
similar fate of week-to-week deconstruction and could become a word-of-mouther 
like Stranger Things. Even if the theorists do come to pore over its clues, 
Batmanglij is confident it will hold up: they’ve tried to “earthquake-proof” 
the series.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faebfd2f30acc3c1c6888aac8b21a7571f8572a1b%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20OA%3A%20revealing%20the%20secrets%20of%202016's%20most%20mysterious%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20OA%3A%20revealing%20the%20secrets%20of%202016%27s%20most%20mysterious%20TV%20show&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F16%2Fnetflix-the-oa-brit-marling-zal-batmanglij%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Faebfd2f30acc3c1c6888aac8b21a7571f8572a1b%2F0_33_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 The plot thickens… Photograph: JoJo Whilden/Netflix 
“Here in LA, buildings have to be able to sway,” he says. “I hope we’ve 
designed The OA in such a way that it will interact with real-world pressure in 
a positive way, rather than just falling apart.”

Marling is also angling for a visceral response. “All the pieces are supposed 
to come together to give you a deep sensation at the end,” she says. “Hopefully 
there’s a real emotional catharsis that is more primal than intellectual.”

So, now the show is live, can they finally start cluing people in to what The 
OA – pronounced as two letters – stands for? “The title is really an invitation 
to come and unravel the mystery,” says Marling. “So far we’ve never said out 
loud what it stands for…” Obvious Answers? That’s not the OA way.

The OA is on Netflix now
 