



The City watchdog is proposing to bring the shutters down on Britain’s biggest 
ever financial mis-selling scandal – the payment protection insurance debacle – 
byimposing a deadline 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/ppi-2018-deadline-fca-proposal>
 of spring 2018 for people to submit their claims for compensation.


What’s happening? 

The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) wants to bring the whole PPI saga “to an 
orderly conclusion” 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/news/statements/statement-on-payment-protection-insurance-ppi>
 to rebuild public trust in the financial services industry and reduce 
uncertainty for banks and other firms worried about the open-ended nature of 
potential PPI liabilities.


It is proposing a deadline for consumers to make their PPI complaints. The 
exact date has yet to be decided, but it almost certainly won’t be before the 
spring of 2018. Anyone who has yet to complain will need to do so by the 
deadline. If they don’t, they will lose the right to have their case 
investigated by the relevant firm or by theFinancial Ombudsman Service 
<http://www.financial-ombudsman.org.uk>.


PPI claims could face 2018 deadline under FCA plans
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2015/oct/02/ppi-2018-deadline-fca-proposal>
Remind me of the background to all this?


Banks and other financial institutions pushed PPI policies alongside loans and 
other credit deals with the promise that payments would be covered if borrowers 
found themselves unable to work. But in many cases, exclusions meant customers 
could never make a claim.


The FCA says that, to date, more than £20bn in compensation has been paid to 
more than 10m consumers. When you add in the amounts set aside that have yet to 
be paid out or claimed, the estimated total bill is more than £26bn – and 
rising.


So is this the beginning of the end for the scandal?

 A final date for claims would clearly draw a line under the debacle. The 
regulator says a deadline – backed by an industry-funded marketing campaign – 
would “prompt many consumers who want to complain, but have not yet done so, 
into action, resulting in them potentially getting redress sooner”. So we are 
likely to see a late flurry of activity as genuine claimants finally get around 
to submitting their complaints – and a fair few chancers trying their luck.


However, we could be heading for a fresh round of payouts totalling billions 
of pounds following a court ruling.The supreme court ruled in November 2014 
<https://www.supremecourt.uk/decided-cases/docs/UKSC_2014_0037_PressSummary.pdf>
 that if a PPI seller failed to disclose to a customer that it had received a 
large commission from the product provider, the sale was unfair. The FCA, under 
acting head Tracey McDermott, is proposing that a failure to disclose a 
commission of 50% or more would amount to an unfair sale, and would require 
compensation to be awarded. But, crucially, customers who have already received 
compensation for PPI mis-selling will not be able to claim again. And the 
proposed deadline would also apply to these complaints.


Will this mean an end to those annoying calls and texts from claims firms?

 Probably not in the short term – an FCA advertising campaign urging people to 
get their complaint in as soon as possible is bound to be exploited by claims 
management firms. However, many of these firms have already switched their 
attention to“the next PPI”: packaged bank accounts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/aug/29/packaged-bank-accounts-good-deal-ppi-scandal-misselling>
 that charge a monthly fee for a range of benefits.


What’s the best way to make a PPI claim?

 Don’t use a claims firm. Complain directly to the company concerned – and 
then to the ombudsman if you are not happy with the response. “Making a claim 
for mis-sold PPI is a free, straightforward process that you can do yourself,” 
says the FCA. PPI claim handlers oftenkeep as much as 30% of any compensation 
<http://www.fca.org.uk/consumers/financial-services-products/insurance/payment-protection-insurance/claim-ppi>
 – so if you receive a £5,000 payout, the claims firm may well pocket £1,500 of 
that.


What was the reaction to the deadline announcement?

 The banks were happy – the share prices of Lloyds Banking Group, Royal Bank 
of Scotland, Barclays and others rose on the announcement. The Financial 
Ombudsman Service is likely to be pleased, too – the costs of dealing with the 
PPI debacle have hammered its finances. But consumer body Which? says a time 
limit“must not reward those banks 
<http://press.which.co.uk/whichstatements/a-time-limit-must-not-reward-those-banks-that-have-dragged-their-heels-over-paying-out-compensation-which-response-to-todays-fcas-ppi-timeline-announcement/>
 that have dragged their heels over paying out compensation”.

 