
A common misconception about my profession is that we spend a lot of our time 
devising fancyavoidance schemes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/taxavoidance> usually involving exotic 
offshore destinations. I’m afraid that for firms like ours the reality is much 
more mundane – thinkCanvey Island <http://www.canveyisland.org/> rather than the
Cayman Islands <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/caymanislands>.

The majority of what we do is quite routine compliance work such as tax 
returns. But this is interspersed with some more interesting stuff, including 
planning, company reorganisation and acquisitions. I love this advisory work, 
not just because it’s the most profitable but also because it is intellectually 
challenging. Like most of us in tax, I’m a bit of a nerd.

There is a lot of nonsense talked about tax. Contrary to popular belief most 
rich people don’t avoid tax: they pay lots of it. It is very difficult for a UK 
resident and domiciled individual to legally avoid tax – most of the “tax gap” 
is caused by multinational companies, and to tackle that needs international 
cooperation.

I’ve found most people take a realistic approach to paying tax – they may 
grumble about it but in the end they’ll pay it. There are a few people who try 
to avoid paying any tax if they can, almost as a matter of principle. But they 
make nightmare clients, and I won’t deal with them.

Why fear inheritance tax? Your cash will all be gone
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/04/inheritance-tax-heirs-prudential>
Obviously a hot topic is where legitimate tax planning ends and unacceptable 
avoidance starts. My own view is that once you start introducing artificial 
transactions with no commercial purpose then you’re in danger of crossing the 
line from planning to avoidance.

I have never advocated “packaged” avoidance schemes to my clients, and in fact 
have actively discouraged people from using them. This is on practical as well 
as moral grounds – most just don’t work, as evidenced by HM Revenue and 
Customs’ (HMRC) current80% success rate 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/ten-things-you-need-to-know-about-tax-avoidance>
 when challenging them at tribunals.

Not many people appreciate that George Osborne probably did more to clamp down 
on tax avoidance and evasion than any other chancellor. Hisaccelerated payment 
notice 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/mar/18/osborne-targets-multinationals-and-tax-evaders-in-budget-crackdown>
 regime has basically killed off promoted schemes. Anyone who uses one these 
days is either very brave or very stupid.

There has been a lot of fuss recently over the fact that HMRC’s high-net-worth 
unit has apparentlyprosecuted only one person 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/01/hmrc-investigating-19bn-in-potential-tax-avoidance-by-super-rich>
 in the past five years. This doesn’t surprise me at all. If HMRC’s aim is to 
recover as much tax as possible in the shortest time, it makes sense to pursue 
a civil settlement – they get the tax plus interest and penalties (up to 100%) 
for comparatively little effort on their part. If they prosecute it can take 
years, costing millions, and there is no guarantee of a conviction at the end 
of it. The burden of proof in a criminal case is high and it can be difficult 
to prove intent.

I didn’t know what I wanted to do when I graduated at the end of the 70s and 
drifted into accountancy almost by accident. I qualified as a chartered 
accountant in the early 80s and spent the first few years in audit before 
moving to more general practice work. I found I was doing more and more tax 
work and enjoying it, so I took the exams and qualified as a chartered tax 
adviser.

I’m a partner in a small suburban practice. There are 20 of us in total and 
it’s a really nice place to work. I think so anyway, and most of our staff seem 
to agree, as very few people leave. We pay well and offer flexible working, 
which is very popular as many of our employees have caring responsibilities.

I do fairly normal office hours, although sometimes I’ll work late or over the 
weekend if there is a particularly tight deadline. My hourly rate is £200 to 
£300, depending upon the complexity of the work, and I earn a decent, 
six-figure income. That’s much less than partners in large firms earn, but I 
don’t think I could cope with the pressure they are under.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsecret-life-tax-adviser-sifting-nonsense-keep-family-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc963ad201421786cb5ecef33388d3adf67b5f%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20tax%20adviser%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20about%20devising%20fancy%20avoidance%20schemes%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsecret-life-tax-adviser-sifting-nonsense-keep-family-secrets%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20tax%20adviser%3A%20it%E2%80%99s%20not%20about%20devising%20fancy%20avoidance%20schemes%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F07%2Fsecret-life-tax-adviser-sifting-nonsense-keep-family-secrets%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5cc963ad201421786cb5ecef33388d3adf67b5f%2F0_0_5120_3413%2F5120.jpg>
 ‘Dealing with HMRC can be a nightmare due to cutbacks and constant 
reorganisations.’ Photograph: Alamy Stock Photo 
Much of my time is spent making sure that our clients don’t fall foul of what 
are sometimes very complex rules when carrying out normal commercial 
transactions. For instance, at the moment I’m working on a demerger, splitting 
a family business between two warring factions. There are reliefs available to 
enable this to happen without a huge tax bill but there are strict conditions 
too, and my job is to make sure they are all met.

Our client base is varied: mainly family businesses and their owners, plus 
some reasonably wealthy individuals but also quite a few high-net-worth 
individuals – people with a total wealth of at least £10m and in most cases 
considerably more.

Some people have very complex affairs, and to handle them properly you need to 
know a lot about them, including some very personal things. I think I know more 
about some of my clients’ personal affairs than their own partners do. 
Confidentiality is absolutely critical. They have to trust me, and that’s why a 
good rapport with the client is essential. I get on very well with most of 
them, and some have become personal friends. If you don’t get on, then the 
relationship doesn’t usually last very long.

The secret life of a GP: a family doctor is there for everyone else’s before 
their own | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/17/secret-life-gp-family-doctor-patients>
The clients who really annoy me are those who take decisions, sometimes 
involving significant sums of money, based on what they read in the newspaper 
or what their pals at the golf club have told them, without taking heed of 
professional advice. Usually it’s because they don’t want to pay for an hour of 
my time. A frequent mistake is to give an asset away to save oninheritance tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/inheritancetax> without realising there’s a 
possiblecapital gains tax liability 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/capitalgainstax>.

On the whole I like my job, but there are a number of frustrations. Dealing 
withHMRC <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/hmrc> can be a nightmare owing 
to cutbacks and constant reorganisations. A lot of their senior staff have left 
and been replaced with more junior people, sometimes barely above the level of 
call centre operatives. Then there’s keeping up to date with the torrent of new 
legislation appearing every year. Despite being a tax geek, I struggle. How the 
average unrepresented taxpayer is supposed to cope, I don’t know.

All in all, I’m pretty happy with my career choice. It’s given me a decent 
living doing something I like. I’m coming up to that age when thoughts turn to 
retirement but I’ve no plans to cut back in the near future. I imagine I’ll 
carry on doing something in this line, even if only for a couple of days a 
week, for as long as I’m able. One thing is sure: people will always need tax 
advice.

• Are you a mental health nurse, a humanist celebrant or a firefighter? We 
want to hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full 
details on submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 