


Britain faces a debt and savings crisis. Research published last year by debt 
charityStepChange <http://www.stepchange.org/> revealed 2.6 million people in 
the UK had a severe debt problem 
<http://www.stepchange.org/Portals/0/documents/media/reports/StepChange%20Debt%20Charity%20New%20Normal%20report.pdf>
 (pdf) and a further 8.8 million were in moderate debt.

The problem is exacerbated by an insecure labour market and the growing use of 
zero-hour contracts, which means a steady income is no longer the norm for 
millions of people.

As a result, the ability to save has become almost impossible for many 
families who are instead forced to rely on credit to cope with sudden demands 
on their income, such as paying for an unexpected car repair. For those who 
don’t have access to affordable credit, this means turning to high-interest 
lenders or, in some cases, loan sharks.

 Many politicians and charities believe credit unions are the answer to this 
crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2014/feb/23/church-credit-unions-parishes>. 
These not-for-profit co-operatives are usually established by members of a 
particular community, for example a workplace. They are regulated by the same 
authorities that oversee banks and building societies; however, asthey are run 
for the benefit of members, not shareholders 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2015/nov/17/credit-unions-beat-payday-lenders-wonga>
, they can offer ethical saving schemes, competitive loans and other financial 
products not usually available to people excluded from traditional financial 
institutions.

According to the Association of British Credit Unions Limited 
<http://www.abcul.org/home> (Abcul), there are 1.2 million credit union members 
in Britain <http://www.abcul.org/media-and-research/facts-statistics>, but the 
comparative scale of the sector still lags behind many other countries. So what 
can be done to raise awareness and help the sector grow? That question was 
posed to a panel of experts at a recentGuardian seminar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/jan/06/effective-uk-credit-unions>
, supported by Lloyds Banking Group, which was attended by an audience drawn 
from the credit union sector.

Debt is dealt with better in Scotland - we need the same for England and Wales
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/14/debt-scotland-england-wales-protection>
Panel member David Haigh, finance capability director at the Money Advice 
Service <https://www.moneyadviceservice.org.uk/en>, explained why there was 
such a need for credit unions. “About 21 million people in the UK – almost half 
of all adults – don’t have a £500 savings buffer,” he said. Their ability to 
cope with debt was therefore limited. In addition, many more people struggle 
with financial literacy. “We know around one in five people can’t work out 
their balance on a bank statement.”

Lack of access to a bank account

Chris Pond, vice chair of the Financial Inclusion Commission 
<http://www.financialinclusioncommission.org.uk/>, agreed the UK faced a 
specific problem. “Here we are, sitting in what we proudly describe as an 
international hub of financial services and 2 million of our fellow citizens 
don’t even have a bank account,” he said. “We have millions who don’t have 
access to affordable credit, millions who have no means of accessing savings … 
The problem is that many people don’t trust financial services.” If mainstream 
financial services aren’t trusted, then credit unions have a real role to play 
in increasing financial inclusion, he added.

Yet Pond also highlighted a limit to what credit unions could achieve at their 
current scale. The gap in affordable credit – between demand and supply – is, 
according to Pond, about £5bn. “Sadly, the credit unions are not going to meet 
that in the short term, unless they are able to expand by between eight and 10 
times,” he said. “In the meantime, people are turning to loan sharks.”

So what can be done to increase membership and therefore the amount of capital 
in the credit union sector? Mark Lyonette, chief executive of Abcul, said much 
work had already been done to widen their appeal, but more was needed. “There 
is a big job to do around awareness,” he said, pointing out that research 
carried out two years ago revealed that only 8% of the population suggested 
credit unions as a place where you could get a loan.

“The image of credit unions is all about serving people on the lowest incomes. 
We do a fantastic job of that, but if that’s all we do, then it will be very, 
very difficult to run a successful credit union,” Lyonette said.

The sector also needs to match the quick and easy, hi-tech offerings of other 
lenders, he added. “In 2016, if you’re not able to offer people a Wonga-like 
experience of borrowing money, then you are going to be missing a whole part of 
society that lives their lives on their smartphones.”

Government investment in the credit union expansion programme 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/credit-union-38-million-expansion-deal-signed>
 is bringing forward that technology, Lyonette said, while also suggesting 
credit unions should pool their resources to develop more digital products: 
“Successful credit union systems around the world all work together.”

Such collaboration was key to growth in the sector, agreed Sheila Murtagh, 
chief executive officer atSalford Credit Union 
<http://www.salfordcreditunion.com/>. “I don’t have a PR or marketing 
department, so being able to work with partners who have skills around 
communications, that’s something that offers real scope,” she said. Salford 
Credit Union is increasingly trying to work with the local city council and 
major housing partners to get them to use their websites to promote the credit 
union, she added.

Payroll saving

But perhaps most importantly for Murtagh – and many others on the panel – was 
the need to popularise credit unions through collaboration with employers. “We 
want credit unions to be normalised, to be a financial institutions of choice, 
so we want to do more work around payroll saving and borrowing – that’s a very 
important area,” she said.

Robin Bulloch, managing director of Lloyds Banking Group and chair of the 
Financial Inclusion External Steering Group 
<http://www.lloydsbankinggroup.com/Our-Purpose/helping-households/financial-inclusion/>
, agreed that credit unions “can supply a payroll saving mechanism – banks 
don’t do that. If you’re providing ease of access to savings, through saving 
through your payroll, that increases your membership. If you increase your 
membership, you increase awareness and you increase consideration.”

A number of audience members concurred and suggested further benefits. David 
Barclay, senior network coordinator at theChurch Credit Champions Network 
<http://www.theology-centre.org.uk/projects/economic-justice/church-credit-champions-network/>
, said that when staff are no longer worried about debt, they will be better 
employees.

Third-party capital

While the issue of payroll saving and employer collaboration enjoyed 
widespread support at the seminar, other issues generated much more heated 
debate: in particular, the idea of third-party capital. That is to say, 
traditional financial institutions, such as banks, lending credit unions money 
so they can increase their loan book.

“You need to find a way for the commercial banking sector to provide access to 
capital to credit unions,” said Pond. As calls of “No, no”, were heard from the 
audience, Pond pressed his case. How do we fill that huge cap we have got in 
access to affordable credit – that £5bn that people need? We can’t expect 
credit unions to do all of it. “If the judgment [from the sector] is it’s not 
sensible to access third-party capital, where does the rest of that affordable 
credit come from?” he asked. “What I’m hearing is limited ambitions.”

Many disagreed strongly, Lyonette among them. “It’s not limited ambition from 
the sector: its ambition is huge. It’s about growth at a sustainable pace,” he 
said. “Credit unions are wary of external capital because it changes that focus 
from serving only the members, to having this burden and new need you have to 
meet.”

Bulloch clarified Lloyds’ position: “It’s not our intention to be a capital 
provider: we give grants, then it’s over to you,” he told the seminar, 
referring to Lloyds’Credit Union Development Fund 
<http://www.creditunionfoundation.org.uk/projects/developmentfund>, which 
offers grants of up £100,000 to a credit union’s reserves.

Audience member Richard Priestman, president of East Sussex Credit Union 
<http://www.eastsussexcu.org.uk/>, pointed out that credit unions were bound by 
stringent regulation that made growth difficult, despite having the ambitions 
to do so: “The goodwill being put out, particularly by the government, is there 
in words and not in action.”

Lyonette was sympathetic, but said that, overall, he felt the regulatory 
balance was healthy. “The amount of time and cost that regulation represents in 
a credit union business is a tiny fraction of what banks and small building 
societies have,” he said.

Other audience members suggested credit unions should be more involved in 
educating young people to encourage saving at an earlier age – and in credit 
union membership – while it was also stressed how important a role local 
councils could play promoting credit unions, due to all the “touchpoints” they 
have with the local community.

Audience member Margaret Roffe, financial inclusion manager at Genesis Housing 
Association <http://www.genesisha.org.uk/>, summed up the passions of those 
working in the sector and their belief in the important role credit unions 
could play in raising the financial literacy of all members of UK society by 
concluding: “Credit unions are not just about affordable credit; it’s about 
creating that savings culture – and more.”

On the panel

 * Hilary Osborne (Chair) Money site editor, The Guardian

 * Robin Bulloch Managing director, Lloyds Banking Group

 * Sheila Murtagh Chief executive, Salford Credit Union

 * David Haigh Financial capability director, The Money Advice Service

 * Chris Pond Vice-chair, Financial Inclusion Commission

 * Mark Lyonette Chief executive, Abcul

 Fact file

 * Credit unions encourage members to save regularly, provide loans at low 
rates, and help members in need of financial advice and assistance.

 * There are about 350 credit unions across England, Scotland and Wales, with 
more than 1.2 million members and total assets of £1.32bn.

 * While credit unions in Britain remain relatively small, internationally 
there are active credit union sectors in 103 countries with more than 208 
million members and assets of $1.7tn (£1.2tn).

 * To reach a comparative scale in the UK, awareness of credit unions needs to 
be raised and more members are needed from all income groups.

 * Click here  <http://findyourcreditunion.co.uk/home>to find your local 
credit union. 
Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 