
To understand why scenes and scenarios in Planet Earth II were so affecting, I 
found myself reaching into an emotional vault I haven’t accessed since the 
1980s. The fairy tern, who had come back to her massacred egg and continued to 
incubate it, even while its yolk was dripping off her feet, brought back a 
horrible scene inFortunes of War 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fortunes_of_War_(TV_series)>, identical in every 
respect except with people instead of birds and Nazi shells instead of 
predators. Almost everything involving a monkey reminded me of a Godfather 
film. The great bower bird, not great at all, a bit OCD and usually wrong, was 
The Diary of a Nobody. There ought to be a word like supra-anthropomorphic, 
where a creature reminds you more of humanity than humans do, is more readable, 
has urgencies more urgent.

Planet Earth II is a stunning ensemble of talent, beyond David Attenborough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/david-attenborough>’s sober poetry, 
which he deploys judiciously, modestly and obliquely, to remind the audience 
not just that macaques are cheeky, but that the cameramen are shit hot as well. 
There is more going on than the majesty of nature. I’ve seen a bower bird in 
real life, right next to its courting nest, and it didn’t come close to the one 
on the telly. The editing is seamless, the music is delightful, the scripts are 
arresting, the perfectionism is there in every particular. But I find myself 
transfixed by its first principle: that we all have a visceral connection to 
nature, root for it, mourn with it, rejoice with it – even those of us who 
would previously have said dogs, OK, but iguanas, we could take or leave.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef9c8a695e0fe77de1a420fb987ca7d2ec49c41%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9ef9c8a695e0fe77de1a420fb987ca7d2ec49c41%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Cheeky … a macaque, captured by one of Planet Earth II’s cameras. Photograph: 
BBC 
Item one: a lot of these creatures are cute. Raccoons and sloths in 
particular, baby anythings, and giraffes. All cute. If the internet has taught 
us anything, it’s that. Just by way of digression, I love the pre-internet 
nomenclature of the series. Most people would give a show a name that Google 
would throw up first, before a million hits for the actual planet. Its very 
name is a throwback to a less transactional age, before search engine 
optimisers.

Item two: enthusiasm is a terrifically difficult thing to transmit. Like 
yellow jerseys and trapeze artists, contagious stans are outrageously rare. A 
colleague said that she and her peers (22-year-olds) genuinely don’t know what 
they’ll do when Attenborough retires (she actually said “dies”, but I find 
young people, like nature, a little brutal).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7da9ada927a8943d8811553d77ffa97502b5c0%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0e7da9ada927a8943d8811553d77ffa97502b5c0%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Enthusiasm … flamingos dance in the Andes. Photograph: BBC NHU/© Justin 
Anderson 
Item three: there is an incredibly strong sense of narrative, each story a 
self-contained vignette, intensified by its brevity, like a David Means short 
story or the opening rounds of the X Factor. Viewing figures for Planet Earth 
II among 16 to 24-year-olds, incidentally, massively outstrip those for X 
Factor, which the BBC notes for a reason: that they are emotionally quite 
similar, except Planet Earth is better. Theiguana hatchlings chased by snakes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/animal-magic/2016/nov/24/snakes-versus-dragons-how-we-filmed-this-sequence-for-planet-earth-ii>
 were the jewel in its crown, closely followed by the famished lions making an 
Ocean’s Eleven, last-ditch punt at a giraffe. A chase scene admits no 
explanation – you track it with your pre-verbal brain and could no more explain 
why than you could articulate the beauty of a face. But the surrounding 
dynamics, triumph and disaster, the symphony of co-operation, the elation of 
escape, underdogs battling desperate odds, these are the cornerstones of 
narrative, the stuff that drove us to invent language in the first place.

Item four: these battles tear at the elemental conflict between justice and 
strength. The Independent reported rather gleefully the findings of a YouGov 
poll,that Tories were most likely to want the predator to win 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/arts-entertainment/tv/news/planet-earth-2-ii-predator-prey-tories-labour-lib-dems-ukip-a7471616.html>
. But most people root for the prey, even when they do vote Conservative 
(Ukippers, FYI, do not like nature documentaries). Attenborough himself, 
however, manages a stance of neutrality, an ideal of balance the BBC cleaves to 
but, elsewhere, almost never achieves. The lions are neither good nor evil. 
They’re just famished. They’ve paced an area the size of Switzerland. His 
similes draw you in precisely because they don’t try to woo you. Switzerland is 
not, typically, thought of as terribly large. It is in the act of trying to 
imagine pacing its length for pesky antelope that you ascend to a brief oneness 
with the lion.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f109cd8f0cc0aa4b3811e4e921360882df638f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%2050%20best%20TV%20shows%20of%202016%3A%20No%201%20Planet%20Earth%20II&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F19%2Fthe-50-best-tv-shows-of-2016-no-1-planet-earth-ii%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F81f109cd8f0cc0aa4b3811e4e921360882df638f%2F60_0_1800_1080%2F1800.jpg>
 Symphony of co-operation … a famished lion hunting a giraffe. Photograph: BBC 
Adolescents <https://www.theguardian.com/society/youngpeople> respond to 
literature, art and nature very intensely. It’s what they’re known for, and 
periodically the Daily Mail will provide some hormonal reason for it, and it 
will be annoying, because you remember feeling like that and you know it wasn’t 
about testicles, it was about poetry. It was about experiencing the feelings in 
a fictive or otherwise unattainable world so strongly that you wanted to live 
there, but couldn’t – the heat of empathy and the chill of unbelonging, at such 
obliterating strength that the one became its opposite.

That’s the umbrella distinction of Planet Earth II 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/planet-earth-ii>, its overarching 
achievement; it is a teenage kick, a transport of wonderment that adult life 
mostly only reminds you of.

 * More on the best culture of 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/series/best-culture-2016>  