
Visiting Stonehenge becomes ever harder. You have to book ahead 
<http://www.english-heritage.org.uk/visit/places/stonehenge/prices-and-opening-times>
 as if it were a swanky West End show, endure a visitor centre when what you 
really want to do is commune with the mysterious past – and when you do finally 
get your chance to walk around (not among) the stones, you need to assiduously 
ignore the hum of traffic from the heavily congested nearby A303.

Chris Grayling gives go-ahead to road tunnel under Stonehenge
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/stonehenge-a303-tunnel-chris-grayling-world-heritage-site>
That, at least, is going to change. The government has decided to go ahead 
with a tunnel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/stonehenge-a303-tunnel-chris-grayling-world-heritage-site>
 that will take this very busy road underground for 1.8 miles, removing the 
horrible stream of honking traffic from the visible surroundings of Stonehenge, 
and so making it much easier to concentrate on the wonder of Europe’s greatest 
neolithic monument.

Archaeologists are understandably delighted... oh wait, they’re up in arms. 
Campaigners claim the road project will wreck the extraordinarily rich and 
complex archaeology of the area. “We have recently started to realise that the 
standing stones are just a beginning,” protests Dan Snow, president of the
Council for British Archaeology <http://new.archaeologyuk.org/stonehenge>. 
“They sit at the heart of the world’s most significant and best-preserved stone 
age landscape. The government’s plans endanger this unique site.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63267c8f83dd99b94e65234000c9945579941114%2F0_0_4707_3112%2F4707.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20will%20bring%20us%20closer%20to%20a%20mythic%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20will%20bring%20us%20closer%20to%20a%20mythic%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F63267c8f83dd99b94e65234000c9945579941114%2F0_0_4707_3112%2F4707.jpg>
 Winter solstice celebrated at Stonehenge in 2016. Photograph: Matt Cardy/Getty 
Images 
This is a battle between the aesthetic and the archaeological. The A303 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2013/may/14/a303-highway-sun-fort-review> 
really is a monstrous intrusion into the immediate landscape of Stonehenge. A 
tunnel will make the site more peaceful, more romantic, more emotionally 
powerful. It should therefore make it much easier to appreciate the grandeur of 
Stonehenge. How can that be a bad thing?

It is true that modern research keeps expanding Stonehenge in time and space, 
until experts can see the stones just as the tip of an archaeological iceberg.
One study <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/entertainment-arts-38530755> has even 
explored the acoustic archaeology of the site. Above all, instead of seeing 
Stonehenge as an isolated stone structure in the middle of an empty Wiltshire 
plain, archaeology now conceptualises it as part of the “Stonehenge Landscape”, 
a multilayered ceremonial space extending far beyond the stone circle itself 
and including everything from lost henges to barrow tombs. It seems this really 
was an incredibly important place in ancient times.

But archaeologists are putting fashionable theories before the pressing need 
to make Stonehenge a better place to visit. It may not be just a stone circle – 
but it does include the world’s most impressive stone circle, and it needs to 
better presented. Researching the past is important, but so is making it 
accessible to modern eyes. Stonehenge has been blighted by the A303 for too 
long. This and other modern intrusions make it impossible to see it asJohn 
Constable 
<http://collections.vam.ac.uk/item/O74470/stonehenge-watercolour-john-constable/>
 orThomas Hardy <https://www.theguardian.com/books/thomashardy> did, as a bleak 
romantic marvel.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7141ddc4b5c554550b5b898308d789582f8a6a%2F0_0_5003_3223%2F5003.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20will%20bring%20us%20closer%20to%20a%20mythic%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Stonehenge%20tunnel%20will%20bring%20us%20closer%20to%20a%20mythic%20past&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2Fjonathanjonesblog%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fstonehenge-tunnel-bring-closer-mythic-past-hardy-constable%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbe7141ddc4b5c554550b5b898308d789582f8a6a%2F0_0_5003_3223%2F5003.jpg>
 Constable’s painting Stonehenge, c.1835, which hangs in the V&A Museum, 
London. Photograph: Paul Robins/Bequeathed by Isabel Constable, daughter of the 
artist 
The very name Stonehenge suggests romantic bleakness, for it comes from 
Anglo-Saxon and means “hanging stones”. Medieval people must have thought it 
had a gallows-like darkness out there on Salisbury Plain. The chronicler 
Geoffrey of Monmouth attributed this strange marvel to the wizard Merlin. In 
Romantic art it is a remote secret, and in inHardy’s Tess of the d’Urbervilles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2008/nov/23/tess-d-urbervilles-thomas-hardy> 
a place lonely enough for a fugitive to take refuge.

The 20th century changed all that. Modern blights from busy roads to army 
manoeuvres to mass tourism have made it much harder to experience the mystery 
and magic ofStonehenge <https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stonehenge>.

These angry archaeologists can’t see the stones for the sonar studies. It is 
actually not news that Stonehenge is part of a vast ancient landscape – the 
antiquarianWilliam Stukeley 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/history/historic_figures/stukeley_william.shtml> observed 
as much in the 18th century. He published vivid drawings of such nearby 
monuments as the Cursus, a huge ceremonial earthwork. Yet the sculptural and 
architectural authority of Stonehenge itself, those silent yet eloquent stones, 
can touch us across time in a unique way. Putting the A303 underground will get 
us closer to this ancient power.
 