
Prime minister’s questions, when the House of Commons works itself into an 
adversarial frenzy, is not a forum made for non-partisan collaboration. So it 
was not surprising when, on Wednesday, a request thatTheresa May 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> convene cross-party hearings 
on the crisis facing the National Health Service had a mixed response.

Mrs May answered Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrat former health minister, 
with chilly civility. A handful of Labour MPs jeered. Mr Lamb, they say, is 
disqualified from caring about the NHS because he worked with the Tories in 
coalition. There is nothing unusual about such tribalism in Westminster and the 
health service always animates deep passions. Moments earlier, Jeremy Corbyn 
had exposed Mrs May’s lack of a coherent planto help struggling hospitals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/jeremy-corbyn-theresa-may-pmqs-nhs-john-crace-politics-sketch>
. Labour senses that the government is vulnerable on the NHS and is not about 
to surrender the advantage by signing up to a truce.

If Mrs May were seriously amenable to Mr Lamb’s proposal (and there is scant 
sign that she is), it would be as a tactical opportunity, drawing the sting 
from an issue on which she would otherwise be perpetually defensive. But she 
doesn’t want to inflate the status of the Lib Dems by granting them any 
convening power or limit her own room for manoeuvre.

Such calculations are unavoidable in politics, even if most voters consider 
them petty. Only in great national emergencies do rivals set aside visceral 
mistrust and historical grievance. The challenge facing health and social care 
services is reaching that scale. Mr Lamb has already recruiteda number of Tory 
and Labour MPs 
<https://www.politicshome.com/news/uk/health-and-care/nhs/news/79082/norman-lamb-liz-kendall-and-dan-poulter-urge-cross-party>
, including select committee chairs and former health secretaries, to his 
putative convention, which is also endorsed by many medical professional bodies 
and charities. Away from the pugilism of the Commons chamber, the need for a 
more considered, evidence-led approach is almost universally recognised.

The potential outline of an ideological compromise is also clear. Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> will have to concede that 
problems in the NHS are not simply a manifestation of wicked Tory austerity – 
that an ageing population and the rising cost of treating complex chronic 
illness makes the current structures hard to sustain even with increased 
funding. And the Tories must concede that funding is a problem and stop 
pretending that adequate resources are available. All sides will then have to 
look at ways to increase resources in ways that garner public consent – 
hypothecated taxes, for example. And all sides will have to think creatively 
about reducing demand on the system – serious investment in preventative public 
health measures, for example, perhaps co-financed by the private sector.

Currently, the gap is unbridgeable. Mr Corbyn needs the NHS crisis as his best 
available stick for beating the government. Labour shortly intends to defenda 
byelection in Copeland, Cumbria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/dec/26/copeland-byelection-we-are-a-community-of-two-halves>
, entirely on that basis. Meanwhile, Theresa May lacks the imagination to do 
anything other than deny the problem or tryto shift the blame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/09/the-guardian-view-on-the-nhs-crisis-theresa-may-is-in-denial>
. Eventually, the sheer scale of the crisis must overcome the impasse, forcing 
politicians to collaborate in search of solutions. The alternative is endless 
ideological trench warfare without progress or original thinking, leading to a 
catastrophic decline in vital services. That is an outcome no one in parliament 
would welcome, and yet sadly it is a scenario in which too many already collude.
 