
Walking though the calm, leafy campus at Warwick university, which is 
currently showing off its stunning autumn colours, Reem Doukmak says: “I think 
I’ve maybe even started to take things for granted, just like the people here. 
For instance, taking the bus – you never think that it’s not going to come – or 
that there is food, electricity, heating. At some point, you start to think 
that life is easy.”

None of these things are a given for this 33-year-old Syrian academic who, not 
so long ago, was teaching English as a foreign language at theal-Baath 
university in Homs <http://www.albaath-univ.edu.sy/>. There, one of the most 
embattled cities in Syria’s terrible war, the buses to work often didn’t come, 
because of fighting on the roads, or checkpoints that blocked and lengthened 
journeys. Classes were routinely curtailed because students could hear shooting 
and couldn’t concentrate – they could only think of getting back home before 
things got worse.

Walking through the huge al-Baath campus, Doukmak would hear gunfire, but not 
know where it was coming from, or where to take cover, or she would feel 
rockets shaking the earth. “People wake up every day and make some sort of risk 
assessment for the day,” she says. “You know something bad might happen, but 
you do it anyway, because you want to live your life in the space that’s left.”

Now having been in the UK for two years, Doukmak – who did her masters at 
Warwick in 2007 through a highly competitive British-Syrian scholarship – 
remembers reaching a point when, constantly sick from the stress, she couldn’t 
handle Homs anymore. “Syria was a peaceful place. We used to hear about 
fighting and bombing in Iraq, in Palestine, but we never experienced it inSyria 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/syria> in my generation. That’s why I found 
it really hard to cope, to accept this as part of life.”

Doukmak started to seek alternatives, and looked for grants, overseas 
programmes or scholarships. “And that’s how I found Cara, by accident,” she 
says. “What you find on Google, you don’t know that it will change your life.”

Cara <http://cara1933.org/> – the Council for At Risk Academics – is a UK 
charity set up in 1933 which helped academics expelled from Germany’s 
universities, and those facing internment by the UK, including neuroscientist 
Marthe Vogt and molecular biologist Max Perutz. Since then, it has been helping 
academics from all over the world, propelled by the humanitarian desire to 
relieve suffering, but also by the need to defend learning, to safeguard a 
nation’s intelligence wealth in the understanding that it will be needed to 
help rebuild countries once wars have ended. Currently, Cara works with 110 
universities around the UK and has assisted 140 people, plus 200 dependents. 
The academics it helps these days – by matching them to a sponsor university, 
by contributing to living costs and by facilitating laborious visa applications 
– are predominantly from Syria.

Academics coming to the UK through Cara might be working on a PhD – as is the 
case for Doukmak – or engaged in postdoctoral research, but in all cases they 
are here because a British university has waived its academic fees and often 
helped with living costs, too. At a time when universities might be more 
focused on the potential income streams provided by international students, 
when many higher education institutions are reliant on such fees to function, 
this kind of work with Cara seems to be bucking the trend – and perhaps finding 
away round the questions about refugee numbers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2015/sep/08/uk-refugee-plan-comparison-european-countries>
 that have recently become so vexed.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff64aded2e261a88d07eb8c61bd39c76ff453282a%2F18_79_2022_1214%2F2022.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%20universities%20offering%20a%20lifeline%20to%20Syrian%20academics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%20universities%20offering%20a%20lifeline%20to%20Syrian%20academics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff64aded2e261a88d07eb8c61bd39c76ff453282a%2F18_79_2022_1214%2F2022.jpg>
 Austrian-born molecular biologist Max Perutz was one of the first 
beneficiaries of the Cara charity, which was set up in 1933 to provide refuge 
for academics fleeing Nazi Germany. 
“They understand that they are helping people much like themselves,” says 
Stephen Wordsworth, Cara’s executive director, who adds that the pairing of 
academic to university is always premised on a mutually beneficial 
collaborative fit, in research terms. “Higher education is a global business, 
so people recognise that they have some responsibility when things go wrong.” 
And, he adds, there is an impetus to preserve global intellectual capital. “If 
one country’s intellectuals and academics are killed or scattered to the four 
corners of the world and end up working as taxi drivers, then we are all losing 
something – those people have something in their heads that is useful not just 
to their own countries, but more widely.”

Applicants to this scheme have to satisfy the UK’s stringent entry 
requirements – some are initially rejected but then succeed on appeal – and 
Cara, which is helping five or six people each week, says it hasn’t yet hit a 
wall. But clearly, in the current climate of hostility and panic about 
migrants, and with the Conservative government clamping down on entry routes, 
this can’t be an easy thing to navigate. Speaking at the Conservative party 
conference in Manchester earlier this month, home secretary Theresa May 
hardened her anti-migrant rhetoric 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/oct/06/theresa-may-announces-new-plan-to-limit-right-to-claim-asylum-in-uk>
 and restated her determination to limit student visas – the current 
restrictions on which are already, critics say, adversely affecting 
universities trying to attract international students.

Michael Barer, professor at Leicester university’s college of medicine, 
biological sciences and psychology, is closely involved alongside Cara with the 
process of sponsoring academics. “It’s a lot of work to get these things to 
come home, so the system as I’ve experienced it isn’t particularly comfortable 
with this,” he says. “Every case is taken as new, so you’re always starting 
from scratch.” In his experience, there is a lot of willingness at the 
university end, but, he adds: “I’ve no doubt [the government] have made life a 
lot more difficult. I’d love it to be a lot simpler, so that we can find space 
for bright and able people who have a real academic contribution to make.”

Now working with two sponsored Syrian researchers, Barer has in the past 
engaged with an Iraqi colleague who specialised in a groundbreaking diagnostic 
system for tuberculosis, with whom he is still in regular contact. He describes 
working alongside such academics as “a breath of fresh air, genuinely building 
capacity in intellectual life over shared intellectual aspirations”.

Of course, the reality of the entry system to the UK is that not everyone is 
assisted. “If a Syrian academic gets sponsored through a British university, it 
is breaking the norm – which is that it is very, very difficult indeed [to get] 
visas,” says Chris Doyle at the Council for Arab-British Understanding (Caabu), 
a London-based advocacy group. “It’s almost a lockdown for Syrians coming 
here,” he adds. “I’ve spoken to a lot of Syrians who have despaired, even for 
relatives trying to just come and visit them here.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F23%2F1445616668239%2Ffb912407-8b20-43de-b378-a58ae635a20b-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20UK%20universities%20offering%20a%20lifeline%20to%20Syrian%20academics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20UK%20universities%20offering%20a%20lifeline%20to%20Syrian%20academics&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2F2015%2Foct%2F23%2Fuk-universities-offering-lifeline-to-syrian-academics-refugees%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F10%2F23%2F1445616668239%2Ffb912407-8b20-43de-b378-a58ae635a20b-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Homs has been hit by fierce fighting between rebels and forces loyal to 
Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad. Photograph: Reuters 
Inevitably, this raises the issue of cherrypicking: whether it is only a 
certain kind of Syrian that the UK will help, and whether a charity such as 
Cara is reinforcing this sort of elitism. But, says Doyle, there is a wider 
appreciation of this approach, a realisation that “it is an investment 
ultimately in the future of Syria”.

Academics from that country are here on the understanding that, when safe to 
do so, they want to return; they are committed to rebuilding Syria. “Getting 
the education system back up and running is going to be vital,” says Doyle, of 
an academic infrastructure that has been pummelled: many universities, outside 
of Damascus, are not currently functioning, and one in five schools have been 
rendered unusable by Syria’s war. Moreover, Doyle adds, all sorts of academic 
research is going to be critical to efforts to rebuild Syria: “There’s a raft 
of issues, including the psychological impact, agricultural research, 
environmental damage, legal and transitional justice issues – these are just 
examples. At some point, there’s going to be a proper of assessment of what the 
academic and research needs will be.”

The project, though, is premised on there being a postwar period that enables 
such rebuilding efforts – sadly, the experience of working with Iraqi 
academics, many of whom returned to that country when the fighting formally 
ended, has shown that is not always the case. When Islamic State took over 
Mosul last year, theyshut down its acclaimed university and lecturers were 
sacked, arrested and tortured 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jun/10/mosul-residents-one-year-on-isis-brutality>
. Just last month,three academics from the university were executed by Isis 
<http://cara1933.org/isis-execute-3-academics-from-the-university-of-mosul/>. 
And in August, thegroup beheaded the 82-year-old, world-renowned antiques 
scholar Khaled al-Assad 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/aug/18/isis-beheads-archaeologist-syria>
, hanging his body in the main square of the ancient city of Palmyra, after he 
refused to reveal where precious artefacts had been stored for safekeeping.

Some international organisations – for example, the Committee to Protect 
Journalists and Reporters without Borders – have meanwhile been engaged in 
helping Syrian media workers who are trying to flee the war. And the Asfari 
Foundation is a notable example of a charity providing masters-degree grants in 
the UK for many young Syrians.

But while in the UK, academics from war-ravaged countries in the Middle East 
live an in-between existence, dedicated to their work in this country, but 
longing to go back home, to be with friends and family, to re-engage with their 
own academic networks, research, colleagues and students.

Now a student herself – her PhD is on drama as an aid to teaching English to 
refugee children, and she has been on research field trips to Syrian refugee 
camps in Turkey – Doukmak instantly smiles when she recalls her former students 
at Homs university. “I miss the teaching, going home tired after classes,” she 
says. “There is a relationship that grows with the students – you had fun, they 
learned things, you see them develop skills and grow. You miss their laughter 
and their noise.”

'We want to be part of the solution': universities reach out to refugees
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/02/universities-scholarships-jobs-offer-refugees>
For her, being on campus, even in another country, is soothing in its 
familiarity – the classrooms, the lecture halls, the continuity of sorts within 
an academic environment. Walking around the campus or the nearby fields, she 
says, always makes her feel better. She spends her spare time volunteering at a 
Coventry community centre, or involved in awareness- and fund-raising for 
Syrian refugees.

Stopping for tea at the university’s arts centre, Doukmak says she feels 
supported and encouraged, but also helpless, wanting to do more for other 
Syrians. You get the sense that, glad of her current opportunities, Doukmak 
would not allow herself to complain, but also that, constitutionally, she isn’t 
really the carping type. She says that she finds the British obsession with 
timekeeping is a little curious, especially over mealtimes. “I see people so 
dedicated to lunchtime, to that hour of lunch, like they have a timer on their 
stomach,” she says. “What if you are not hungry? It’s good to be punctual but …”

And on the subject of eating, well, there’s the matter of the food here itself 
– how, she says, so much of it is ready-made and cold: sandwiches instead of 
hot, home-cooked meals. What does she most miss? “Molokhia,” she replies 
without pause, referring to a hit Middle Eastern dish made from the gluey, 
green leafy vegetable that perhaps isn’t widely available in Coventry (although 
if that’s wrong, she’d love to know about it). “Mom gave me some when I was in 
Syria, but I finished it. Now, if I know someone is going to that part of the 
world, I ask them to bring me some.”

Scheduled to finish her PhD by the end of next year, the question of what she 
will do next is the only one she can’t answer. She tries not to think about it 
until there comes a time when she is forced to decide. Of course, she wants to 
return to Syria. “England is a really nice place to live,” she says. “But 
nothing is better than home.”

• This article was amended on 28 October 2015. An earlier version said Cara 
was set up to provide refuge for academics then fleeing Nazi Germany from 
Marthe Vogt to Max Perutz. Neither Vogt nor Pertuz, who was Austrian, were 
helped out Nazi Germany, but Cara provided help when they were faced with 
internment by the UK.
 