
There is a Facebook group called Meryl Streep is our goddess 
<https://www.facebook.com/Meryl-Streep-Is-Our-Goddess-209744399152860/>. This 
sentiment surely extends way beyond Facebook. Herspeech at the Golden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2017/jan/08/meryl-streep-golden-globes-speech-donald-trump>
 where she received a lifetime achievement award was typically brilliant.

I say typically, as she has a history of making powerful and lucid speeches 
even at these irritating fests of self-congratulation.

The joy of this particular instance was that she called Donald Trump to 
account without ever mentioning his name. She singled out rightly the lowest 
point in his campaign, when hemocked a disabled New York Times reporter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/nov/26/donald-trump-mock-new-york-times-reporter-disability>
. The pussy-grabbing remarks, remember, were exposed by others but his mocking 
of disability was done in plain sight at one of his rallies. This outright 
bullying would not be tolerated in primary school.

Streep said that this “sank hooks into my heart ... it wasn’t a movie it was 
real life. Disrespect incites disrespect. Violence incites violence. When 
powerful people use their position to bully we all lose.” She also asked for 
the press to be protected in order to hold Trump to account and said that 
Hollywood was composed of outsiders and foreigners without whom it would not 
exist. Without Hollywood, she said, there would be nothing to watch but 
football and mixed martial arts. She ended the speech quoting her friendCarrie 
Fisher <https://www.theguardian.com/culture/carrie-fisher>. Pretty much perfect.

Or just more liberal virtue-signalling that doesn’t extend beyond the room or 
a social media echo chamber? I ask because while I applaud the speech, it is 
clear that the tectonic plates of power are shifting. Much that has been taken 
for granted has now to be questioned and one of those things is the value of 
celebrity support. If Streep can be dismissed by Trump as just another of those 
“liberal movie people”, if the Hollywood establishment is chided as just 
another elite or ifthe remarks of an “out-of-touch granny” 
<https://twitter.com/LeahRBoss/status/818347297742393344> meant anything then 
“Hillary would be president”, where are we now? All these things have been 
voiced in the past few hours.
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
Meryl Streep, one of the most over-rated actresses in Hollywood, doesn't know 
me but attacked last night at theGolden Globes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/golden-globes>. She is a.....
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064> January 9, 
2017 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064> 
The star power that the Democrats can muster – Barack Obama had the support of 
the dream factory and most of the stars of the music world – has been seen as 
nothing but a qualified asset, the great are indeed “good”. When the beautiful 
and famous and talented are liberal, we bask in it.

The fact that Trump can get no one anyone has ever heard of to play at his 
inauguration has been a big joke and a small comfort. It reminds me of going to 
Tory party conference where the only celebs they could muster were Tony Hadley 
and Jim Davidson, whereas Labour always had a vast array of glittering famouses.

But in the end how much does this matter? Cool, decent people don’t support 
Trump or Farage but this is replayed back to their base not as philistinism but 
as a badge of their insurgency against an elite. They are taking on a cultural, 
as well as a political, establishment. The old rules seemingly don’t apply.

So it is not that Streep’s words are not true and important – they are – the 
thing is to understand how they are framed and understood. She is an Oscar 
winner calling out a reality TV star. She is a citizen calling the 
president-elect a bully. She is, by virtue of her success, part of an elite and 
yet Trump – who lives in a gold tower, who is not actually a self-made man – is 
really the voice of the elite.

The celebrity class may have been knocked sideways by not being on the winning 
side. They too have to reconfigure to find the best ways to put the heat on the
incredibly thin-skinned Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/08/once-the-baby-man-was-a-figure-to-be-mocked-now-manfants-such-as-donald-trump-are-taking-over>
, because he appears to care about celebrity as a guarantor of ratings, and 
approval, yet it is proving something money can’t quite buy. The man-baby has
already reacted on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/818419002548568064>, as he has 
nothing else to think about but an “overrated” actor. As ever, the priority is 
his ego. Streep’s speech is a spark. The fire needs to spread.
 