
On the whole, my clients are decent, lovely human beings, but they are not all 
singers <https://www.theguardian.com/music/series/guide-to-performing-singing>.

Sam, for example, comes religiously for an hour a week but rarely sings a 
note. She hates her voice and she hates singing, preferring instead to talk 
about her relationship or job. So why does she come? Perhaps it’s the idea of 
having someone’s undivided attention for an hour, an opportunity to vent or to 
be the centre of attention; or perhaps just not to be judged. At £35 an hour, 
perhaps it’s also a form of cheap therapy.

Then there are people like Mark. Mark really cannot sing. His voice is so 
hidden away up in his neck that I would need a crowbar and some heavy-duty 
machinery to get it out. His problem is insecurity: the idea that he is 
worthless or that his opinion is of no consequence. So when he sings, he locks 
his voice up inside where nobody will ever find it, behind walls of throttled 
vowels and guttural glottal stops.

In a nutshell, teaching singing is a responsibility, rather than a job

I attempt to extract it, and sometimes fool him into effortlessly 
“tum-te-tuming” a tune I pretend not to know, which he does with the precision 
of an opera singer and the relaxed ease of a Rat Packer. But usually he sees 
through my ruse after a few lines, and reverts to the choked maniacal sounds of 
a hangman’s victim. We keep trying though, not because I take pleasure from the 
sounds he makes, but because what I do is important – a duty even – tohelp 
people try to improve their lives a little bit by singing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/09/sing-choir-good-for-you>
. And maybe even enjoy themselves in the process.

My favourite case was Elodie. She was, until last year, a “normal” young 
woman, if you discounted her desire to sing and dance in public. One day 
something happened (I don’t know what) and she became withdrawn, anxious and 
irate with the world. Her psychologist and other medical professionals could 
not figure out what to do to help her and the only time she would be anything 
approaching her old self was when she was singing with me.

This went on for several months, until one day we attempted a song she had 
sung many times before but never really nailed. On this occasion the top note 
in the song, which had been previously unattainable, was loud and clear, and 
supported by all the relevant technique we had been working on. In that moment, 
her demons vanished. She reverted to her old self, except that now she gets 
paid to sing in the local area. For her, singing lessons turn a profit. Some 
people love teaching singing because they love to help people sing. I love 
teaching singing for moments like this.

A class should never just follow a set format 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2009/may/10/jazz-singing-advice>. Every 
client is different and a good teacher will adapt what they do to suit the 
needs of the singer, rather than the other way around. I like to start with a 
chat and then we do some warm-up exercises, which often turns into working on 
technique. Then we look at what we started last week which they have 
(hopefully) been practising. This is the part where we can really get to grips 
with a song; think about the story, how to tackle harder sections and how to 
generally make it an interesting performance rather than just a series of words 
put to music.

The secret life of a gardener: backache, stroppy clients and know-alls – but I 
love it | Anonymous
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/secret-life-gardener-i-love-it>
I have been teaching singing for more than 20 years now. I started with only 
two or three regular students as I was working in musical theatre six days a 
week. Now I have more than 30 clients and a small portfolio of other musical 
commitments, which I very much enjoy. I earn half the money I used to, but I’m 
happier with my work, and working at home means I canspend way more time with 
my son 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2011/may/08/singing-children-development-language-skills>
 than I otherwise would.

I have an incredible amount of choice as to how much, and when, I work. 
Currently, I do not want to work from Friday morning to Monday evening, so I 
don’t. I have a good core of regulars and a few that dip in and out, but it 
does surprise me how many people have the time, money and inclination to show 
up for a singing lesson every week. Clearlysinging is a priority for them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2008/aug/26/healthandwellbeing.fitness>
.

In a nutshell, teaching singing is a responsibility, rather than a job. If you 
understand that some of the people you teach are never going to be singers, but 
just need an hour to relax, disgorge personal information, have someone really 
listen to them, or even an hour just to feel special, then you have got what it 
takes to be a singing teacher. Of course, knowing how to sing is helpful too.

• Are you a jobcentre employee, a market trader or a gynaecologist? We want to 
hear your candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on 
submitting your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 