
Do the Leave campaigners care about the misuse of public money? No. How do I 
know? Because they have scarcely mentioned the European Union’s great bonfire 
of banknotes. You know, the item that accounts for roughly40% of the EU budget 
<http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/en/TXT/PDF/?uri=OJ:L:2015:069:FULL>, or 
£42bn a year, almost all of which is wasted. You don’t know? I rest my case.

I’m talking about farm subsidies. If the Brexiters have raised the subject at 
all, it’s only to assure recipients that these vast sums will continue to be 
extracted from taxpayers’ pockets if Britain leaves. Some – such asTheresa 
Villiers 
<http://www.newsletter.co.uk/news/northern-ireland-news/after-brexit-farm-subsidies-could-be-even-bigger-villiers-1-7254270>
 andOwen Paterson 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/business/brexit/no-stability-in-voting-to-stay-in-eu-owen-paterson-warns-farmers-34781544.html>
 – have suggested that the great giveaway of public funds could even be 
increased.

The leaders of the remain campaign are no better: George Osborne, while 
ripping down essential public services, has warned that if the UK votes out, 
this outrageous provision of unearned income might dry up. Weshould stay in 
Europe, he told the press in Northern Ireland 
<http://www.belfasttelegraph.co.uk/business/brexit/brexit-would-slash-farm-subsidies-says-chancellor-george-osborne-34777100.html>
, to ensure that brimming buckets of public money – £3bn a year in the UK – 
continue to be dispensed.

They would more accurately be described as land subsidies, as they are paid by 
the hectare. The more land you own or lease, the more public money you are 
given, so the richest people in Europe clean up. And not just in Europe: 
Russian oligarchs,Saudi princes <http://www.monbiot.com/2011/11/28/big-farmer/> 
and Wall Street bankers have bought up tracts of European farmland, thus 
qualifying for the vast sums we shovel into their pockets. Why is no word 
raised against these benefit tourists?

This racket is the strongest of all arguments for leaving the EU, but the 
Brexiters’ silence resounds

This is arguably the most regressive distribution of public money in modern 
times. Taxpayers of all stations stock the wine cellars ofdukes and hedge fund 
managers <http://cap-payments.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx>. As much as 80% of the 
funds are harvested bythe richest 25% of recipients 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-11216061>. The poorest farmers are 
excluded: you cannot claim subsidiesunless you own or lease at least five 
hectares 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/367701/cap-reform-october-2014-update.pdf>
. Areport by the European court of auditors 
<http://www.eca.europa.eu/Lists/ECADocuments/SR16_01/SR_FARMERS_EN.pdf> reveals 
that the EU has no useful data on farm incomes, and therefore no knowledge of 
whether farm subsidies serve any social purpose.

This racket is perhaps the strongest of all arguments for leaving the European 
Union, but the Brexiters’ silence resounds. Among the 13 Conservative MPs who 
signedan open letter last week undertaking not to cut subsidies 
<http://www.voteleavetakecontrol.org/leave_ministers_commit_to_maintain_eu_funding>
 for owning or leasing land if Britain leaves the union was Iain Duncan Smith. 
His wife’s family’s estate, on which he lives, receives£150,000 a year of your 
money, handed to them by the EU 
<http://www.desmog.uk/2015/07/27/landed-gentry-jackals-claiming-billions-farm-subsidies>
.

Remember what Duncan Smith did to the poor while he was work and pensions 
secretary? He presided over a system that drove many to food banks. I struggle 
to imagine less deserving beneficiaries of public charity than Iain Duncan 
Smith and family.

Hold on – I’ve just thought of one. Paul Dacre, editor-in-chief of the Daily 
Mail – which rails ceaselessly against other misuses of EU funds, real or 
imagined – hasextracted £460,000 in European subsidies since 2011 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/mar/30/daily-mail-editor-paul-dacre-received-88000-eu-subsidies-2014>
. How? By owning a shooting estate in Scotland and a tract of land in Sussex. I 
doubt Dacre knows much more about farming than the average reader of his 
newspaper, but you don’t have to be a farmer to receive this money; the rules 
say only that you must have “eligible land at your disposal”.

Paul Dacre’s EU subsidies hypocrisy won’t halt the Daily Mail’s Euro-lies | 
Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/mar/31/paul-dacre-eu-subsidies-hypocrisy-daily-mail-euro-lies>
Whenever you see someone lamenting the “something for nothing culture” in the 
press, or attacking “bureaucrats, lobbyists and other jackals that scavenge for 
taxpayers’ money”, you could place a hefty bet that either they or people close 
to them are stuffing their pockets with EU funds.

There’s another reason for calling these payments land subsidies: you don’t 
have to produce any food to receive them. Your land just has to look 
agricultural, which means bare. Among the “ineligible features” listed in
Westminster’s version of the European rules 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/406452/BPS_Handbook_-_final_v1.0.pdf>
 are ponds, wide hedges, regenerating woodland, reedbeds, thriving salt marsh 
and trees sufficient to form a canopy. The common agricultural policy is a 
€55bn incentive to destroy wildlife habitats andcause floods downstream 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/deluge-farmers-flood-grouse-moor-drain-land>
.

All the good things the EU has done for nature are more than counteracted by 
this bureaucratic idiocy. Millions of hectares of wildlife habitat in the EU 
are threatened by this rule; clearance has taken place already across vast 
areas. Why do we hear so little about it?

I spent part of this spring in Romania, in the midst of hundreds of thousands 
of hectares of wood pasture (below): a mosaic of flowering meadows, marshes and 
trees. I have seldom seen such a profusion of life anywhere on earth. I watched 
golden orioles, hoopoes, honey buzzards, red-backed and great grey shrikes, 
lesser spotted eagles, black storks, yellow wagtails, roe deer, wild boar and 
bears. Cuckoos were so common they flew around in flocks. All nine species of 
European woodpecker live in one small valley where I stayed; so do bee eaters, 
goshawks, corncrakes, quails, nightjars, tortoises, tree frogs, pine martens, 
wildcats, lynx and wolves.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071f57add831a21c73b74d76e4bf8617d5b349e5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20shocking%20waste%20of%20cash%20even%20leavers%20won%E2%80%99t%20condemn%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20shocking%20waste%20of%20cash%20even%20leavers%20won%E2%80%99t%20condemn%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F071f57add831a21c73b74d76e4bf8617d5b349e5%2F0_0_2560_1536%2F2560.jpg>
 Photograph: George Monbiot 
All this is now on the brink. Across Romania, farmers are beginning to realise 
that they can make money simply by cleansing the land. In eastern Transylvania 
I saw the heartbreaking results (below): the mass felling of trees and 
destruction of wildlife, not for any productive purpose, but just to meet the 
European rules. It’s the same kind of vandalism, driven by diktat and blindly 
enforced by bureaucrats, that the Romanians suffered under their former despot, 
Nicolae Ceausescu. The European subsidies rules are responsible for one of the 
world’s great unfolding disasters, which ranks only a little way behind the
fires in Indonesia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/30/indonesia-fires-disaster-21st-century-world-media>
and thecollapse of coral reefs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/07/the-great-barrier-reef-a-catastrophe-laid-bare>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edd5896ecd6619917d206a6e4a4c6c981a416c3%2F0_0_4000_2827%2F4000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20shocking%20waste%20of%20cash%20even%20leavers%20won%E2%80%99t%20condemn%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20shocking%20waste%20of%20cash%20even%20leavers%20won%E2%80%99t%20condemn%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F21%2Fwaste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3edd5896ecd6619917d206a6e4a4c6c981a416c3%2F0_0_4000_2827%2F4000.jpg>
 Photograph: George Monbiot 
This dog that hasn’t barked exposes the real agenda of the leading Brexiters. 
They denounce the transfer of public money from rich to poor; they are 
intensely relaxed about the transfer of public money from poor to rich. It also 
challenges those who wish to remain.

I will vote in on Thursday, as I don’t want to surrender this country to the 
unmolested control of people prepared to rip up every variety of public 
spending and public protection except those that serve their own class. But if 
we are to live in Remainia, we should insist on sweeping change. Daylight 
robbery and mass destruction: the EU is supposed to prevent them, not 
deliver them.
 