
When the nominations for pop music’s Brit awards – an event considered so 
central to public life that it will be broadcastlive on terrestrial television 
<https://www.thesun.co.uk/living/1971040/information-on-brit-awards-2017/> – 
are announced this month, there should be only one question that needs 
answering. Will the UK’s record industry finally acknowledge “grime” as this 
country’s most significant aural rebellion since punk? It certainly should. 
When last year’s Brit awards failed to nominate a single black artist in any 
major category, there was a chorus of outrage.Boycotts were threatened, and the 
hashtag #BritsSoWhite went viral 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/07/brit-awards-announce-voting-shakeup-after-britssowhite-outrage>
. In his profanity-peppered rap One Take Freestyle, grime’s Stormzy splattered 
the music establishment with imprecations; “embarrassing” being the most 
printable. This year grime, wreathed in strong London accents and strobing bass 
lines, is officially the Next Big Thing. The Brits have recruited new judges 
who promise to be in tune with music’s changing face. Grime’s rise – from angry 
underground soundtrack to British pop royalty – became obvious last year when 
the artistSkepta’s Konnichiwa beat David Bowie to the £25,000 Mercury prize 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/sep/15/mercury-prize-2016-goes-to-skeptas-konnichiwa>
.

Grime, with its recognisable staccato beats and machine-gun rapping, became 
popular in 2003 with rapper Dizzee Rascal’s debut album, Boy in da Corner, a 
shrewd breeze through the mini mean streets of London life. That precociously 
inventive album also won theMercury prize in the same year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2003/sep/10/arts.mercuryprize2003>. Despite the 
early plaudits, grime remained outside the mainstream, revelling in a playful 
revolt on crowded dancefloors. Its rebelliousness is encoded in its DNA. Born 
in London estates at the turn of the millennium, grime crackles with the 
high-rise tension of tower blocks amid shrinking opportunities and limited 
possibilities. Musically it builds up a sense of claustrophobia. But it has a 
message of freedom: that one can transcend narrowing horizons and overcome 
adversity by subverting the power of prejudice. Sometimes ethically 
problematic, grime is not easy listening. It standsaccused of sexism, and stars 
admit they shouldn’t litter lyrics with the N-word 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/35751552/stormzys-oxford-talk-sexism-in-grime-the-n-word-and-shutupcambridge>
.

As a predominantly black musical artform it was embraced by urban youth and 
found itself of interest to the authorities,who were accused of racially 
profiling grime clubs to shut them down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2009/jan/21/police-form-696-garage-music>. 
But grime’s defiance – rooted in confrontation over stop and search and rave 
raids – found wide appeal among a youth robbed of their future by austerity. By 
2011 Lethal Bizzle’s Pow! (Forward) wasthe unofficial soundtrack of the student 
protests 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2011/feb/03/pow-forward-lethal-bizzle-protests>
. Five years later grime’s leading artists wear their politics as a badge of 
virility: speaking outagainst Syrian airstrikes 
<http://www.mobo.com/news-blogs/skepta-stormzy-and-mic-righteous-speak-out-against-syria-air-strikes>
,reviving anarchist imagery 
<https://twitter.com/skepta/status/683956850006593536> and leading fans at 
Glastonbury tocondemn former prime minister David Cameron in ripe language 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/aug/19/novelist-review-xoyo-london-grime>
. Tory culture minister Matt Hancock missed the antipathy: he gave Stormzy a
“shout-out” 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/minister-for-digital-and-culture-creative-industries-speech>
 last September.Skepta’s Shutdown, adopted by Black Lives Matter UK, is the 
genre’s most vivid take on partying as politics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/feb/18/party-politics-why-grime-defines-the-sound-of-protest-in-2016>
. Grime’s credibility is that it rose with little mainstream radio support and 
few ad campaigns. Shutdown illustrates how an alternative music business was 
born of indifference. The track reached 39 in the charts but clocked up25m 
YouTube views <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MQOG5BkY2Bc>. Skepta runs his 
own record label, which signed uphip-hop star Drake 
<http://www.nme.com/news/music/skepta-11-1201361> and launched a mobile phone 
service 
<http://www.thewire.co.uk/news/18991/boy-better-know-launch-pay-as-you-go-mobile-network>
. Take note, Brits: grime’s revolution threatens not just to upend an industry 
– but to take it over.
 