
To the long list of things that Donald Trump’s election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-wins-us-election-news>
 has upended, we should add one more: the way Jews see the world.

Bannon’s unveiling as Trump’s chief strategist is a layer cake of horrors | 
Lindy West
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/steven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous>
For most of the last century, Jews have regarded America as a safe haven. 
While Europe had inflicted on its Jewish population a history of expulsion, 
persecution and eventually industrialised slaughter, the United States had 
given them a place where they could survive, and thrive.

The words on the base of the Statue of Liberty welcomed refugees like them: 
“Give me your huddled masses, yearning to breathe free” – words, incidentally, 
written by Emma Lazarus, herself a Jew. Not for nothing, did Jews refer to the 
US as thegoldene medina <http://www.jewishjournal.com/tag/goldene+medina>, a 
golden land, a place of comfort after centuries of suffering.

In recent years, that sense had only sharpened. Reports of rising antisemitism 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2015/04/is-it-time-for-the-jews-to-leave-europe/386279/>
, as well as a surge in xenophobic nationalism, in Europe confirmed for many 
Americans their sense that the old world was still haunted by its old, 
Jew-hating demons. For many US Jews, Europe seemed permanently stuck in 1938, 
on the brink of an antisemitic catastrophe. In this conception, the US remained 
comfortably immune from the virus of Jew-hatred.

That certainty has vanished in the last week – and the appointment of Steve 
Bannon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/15/steven-bannon-trump-chief-strategist-breitbart-white-house-dangerous>
 as the most senior adviser to the incoming president has deepened the anxiety. 
For Bannon is the boss of the far-right Breitbart website, which as well as 
attacking women, Muslims and African-Americans has targeted Jews. A recent 
columndenounced the journalist Anne Applebaum 
<http://www.breitbart.com/london/2016/09/27/anne-applebaums-russian-style-disinformation-offensive-msm-vs-anti-globalist-right-will-people/>
: “Hell hath no fury like a Polish, Jewish, American elitist scorned.” Another 
slammed the Republican editor of the Weekly Standard as a “renegade Jew”. Of 
course, one should always be wary of the accusations divorcing spouses make 
against each other, but Bannon’s ex-wife testified that he once objected to her 
choice of school for their daughters because “he didn’t want the girlsgoing to 
school with Jews 
<http://forward.com/news/breaking-news/354334/steve-bannon-didnt-want-children-going-to-school-with-whiny-jews/>
”. (Bannon denies this happened, pointing to the fact that his wife prevailed 
in her choice of school.)

If it were just Bannon’s back-catalogue that was at issue, perhaps the concern 
could be contained. But the problem is that Trump’s campaign trafficked in the 
full range of antisemitic motifs and tropes. It’s not just that Trump himself 
retweeted neo-Nazis, or that his campaign put out an image of Hillary that had 
been lifted from an antisemitic site – depicting Hillary Clinton against a 
giant backdrop of cash and asix-pointed star 
<https://mic.com/articles/147711/donald-trump-s-star-of-david-hillary-clinton-meme-was-created-by-white-supremacists#.atnP1Eqb2>
 uncannily like a Star of David. It’s that last month Trump warned that Clinton 
“meets in secret with international banks to plot the destruction of US 
sovereignty” – a line that could have been lifted straight from the Protocols 
of the Elders of Zion, the notorious Tsarist-era forgery that purported to be 
evidence of a global Jewish conspiracy.

Trump pushed the same age-old canard in his closing TV ad 
<http://talkingpointsmemo.com/edblog/trump-rolls-out-anti-semitic-closing-ad>. 
It featured a gallery of three villains, all of whom were Jews: philanthropist 
George Soros, the Federal Reserve chair, Janet Yellen, and the Goldman Sachs 
boss, Lloyd Blankfein. The narrator’s words used as each of those faces 
appeared came from the lexicon of classic antisemitism 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/opinions/anti-semitism-is-no-longer-an-undertone-of-trumps-campaign-its-the-melody/2016/11/07/b1ad6e22-a50a-11e6-8042-f4d111c862d1_story.html?utm_term=.99524b978804>
. Soros: “those who control the levers of power”. Yellen: “global special 
interests”. Blankfein: “global power structure”. Trump supporters have taken 
their cue and bombarded Jewish journalists with thevilest form of abuse 
<http://www.thejc.com/comment-and-debate/columnists/165627/pray-america-repudiates-trump>
.

Senator Al Franken accuses Donald Trump of launching antisemitic TV ad
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/06/senator-al-franken-accuses-donald-trump-of-launching-antisemitic-tv-ad>
None of this has ended with the campaign. The conspiracy theorist and 
propagandist Alex Jones says Trump has phoned him since his election, promising 
to appearon his radio show 
<http://mediamatters.org/blog/2016/11/14/conspiracy-theorist-alex-jones-says-president-elect-trump-called-thank-his-audience/214424>
 “in the next few weeks”. Last month Jones ranted against “the Jewish mafia 
<http://www.vox.com/policy-and-politics/2016/10/26/13418304/alex-jones-jewish-mafia>
 in the United States”.

It’s worth stressing two things. This is not antisemitism of the subtle 
variety. Nor is this antisemitism of the kind that we have got used to debating 
in Britain in recent years: an obsessive hostility to Israel that draws on the 
language or imagery of anti-Jewish racism. This is old-school, hardcore, 
Jews-are-taking-over-the-world antisemitism. And it is being voiced not by 
European leftists or Muslims – who, until last week, many American Jews held to 
be the chief source of modern antisemitism – but by America’s next president 
and his allies.

Of course some have tried to reassure themselves that there’s nothing to worry 
about. They point to the fact that Trump is close to his Jewish son-in-law, 
Jared Kushner, and that indeed Ivanka Trump hasconverted to Judaism 
<http://www.theatlantic.com/politics/archive/2016/09/what-should-american-jews-make-of-ivanka-trump/498476/>
. This is to ignore the fact that antisemites have often exempted those they 
deem to be “good Jews”, exceptions to an otherwise robust rule. They forget 
that antisemites frequently boast that “Some of my best friends are Jewish”, 
that those denouncing Jews will often place a friendly hand on the arm of the 
Jew in the room and say, “I don’t mean you, of course.”

Others have sought comfort in the fact that Trump has made some positive 
noises towards Israel, and that Binyamin Netanyahu has given hima friendly 
welcome 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/09/israel-donald-trump-netanyahu-jerusalem>
. But this is to forget what European Jews learned long ago: that nasty 
rightwing nationalists can be pro-Israel – for reasons utterly alien to Jews’ 
own feelings about the country. So ultra-nationalists might admire Israel 
either because they see it as standing up to those they deem the Muslim enemy 
or because they like the idea of a country far away that might take the Jews 
off their hands. Neither of these sentiments makes them pro-Jewish.

This distinction has set European Jewish communities at odds with Israeli 
governments repeatedly over the years. It’s happening again now in Austria, as 
the local Jewish community fears the far-right presidential candidate Norbert 
Hofer even as Israeli officials have engaged with him.

Small European communities have been saying for years now that pro-Israel is 
not the same as pro-Jewish. But they were too small to be listened to. Now that 
same argument is playing out on a much bigger stage, asAmerica’s 
Anti-Defamation League bravely 
<http://www.jpost.com/Us-Elections/ADL-slams-Trump-appointment-of-aide-with-ties-to-antisemitic-alt-right-472565>
 denounces the president-elect, while others say Trump should be given a chance.

Either way, this is unfamiliar and unwelcome territory for American Jews. They 
are discovering that antisemitism is not a thing of the past, nor confined to 
distant Europe. It is alive and active in their own, golden land – and now it 
is endorsed from the very top.
 