
“I can’t imagine anything worse than staring into someone’s mouth all day,” 
the man growls disdainfully from the dental chair. Personally I think that feet 
would be much worse. After quoting him the standard cost of anNHS 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> filling, he grumbles, “I bet that 
will help towards your Ferrari.”

I am definitely not poor, but I am not driving a Ferrari either, nor 
holidaying every month on sun-soaked islands. I work extremely hard for a 
living, sometimes doing 11-hour days to relieve as many cases of toothache as I 
can physically squeeze in. And a decade before my career even began I was 
studying furiously while many my age were out partying. So I think it is fair 
to say that I have earned my salary.

Being a dentist can be fantastically rewarding when you manage to transform 
someone’s smile, enabling them to find a partner with their newfound 
confidence, or simply helping them to eat their favourite chewy foods again.

One depressing new trend is the rise in hospital admissions to remove decayed 
teeth in children

But fear is a huge theme in my job: the sooner you get that painful tooth 
checked out, the quicker and more painlessly it can be resolved. Some people 
will do anything to avoid going to the dentist, from using superglue (which is 
the death knell for any tooth) to one particular lady who glued false nails 
onto her decaying teeth so they would look better from the front. Bad breath in 
the chair is rarely an issue because we wear masks. Although there are 
definitely occasions when a second mask would be preferable.

I work for the NHS, mainly because it offers far more dentistry jobs in my 
local area. I would ideally carry out private work too, so I can use the skills 
I trained for to their full extent. Very advanced, complicated treatment is 
just not economical under NHS constraints. For example the NHS does not cover 
cosmetic treatment such as tooth whitening or afull mouth makeover 
<http://www.cosmeticdentistryguide.co.uk/smile-makeover.html>. If you want the 
latter, the current highestNHS payment band of £233.70 
<http://www.nhs.uk/chq/Pages/nhs-dental-band-charges.aspx?CategoryID=74&SubCategoryID=742>
 will not even begin to cover the laboratory bill for artisan work, let alone 
the dentist’s labour time and all the surgery overheads.

However, the NHS does serve all other purposes allowing you to eat, speak and 
function pain-free with minimal oral disease. I can achieve fantastic results 
despite the financial limitations.

It’s a little known fact that both private and NHS dentists are self-employed. 
When people don’t show up to their appointment, we sit around completely 
unpaid. Yet during this empty time we still incur costs. An NHS practice can 
lose thousands a year from empty dental chairs owing to undelivered treatment 
under the NHS contract. Also, no-shows really delay the service, which is 
frustrating for people who need to see a dentist urgently.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fsecret-life-dentist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173fe19fa1c775cfecc6632e1928ae7cfe7a7ef7%2F0_74_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20dentist%3A%20some%20patients%20think%20superglue%20will%20fix%20their%20toothache%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fsecret-life-dentist%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20secret%20life%20of%20a%20dentist%3A%20some%20patients%20think%20superglue%20will%20fix%20their%20toothache%20%7C%20Anonymous&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjun%2F06%2Fsecret-life-dentist%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F173fe19fa1c775cfecc6632e1928ae7cfe7a7ef7%2F0_74_2872_1724%2F2872.jpg>
 ‘Most parents have the best intentions, but lack oral health knowledge.’ 
Photograph: Rui Vieira/PA 
Another scenario that really annoys dentists is when a patient only comes in 
for emergency appointments without ever returning to get the problem properly 
fixed. They will book long treatment appointments and fail to show up, 
sometimes two or three times in a row, and then nothing for a few months. One 
day, out of the blue, they will resurface in terrible pain, angry because you 
cannot miraculously restore their tooth in the five minutes before they’re due 
to fly off on holiday.

Everything you ever wanted to know about teeth (but were afraid to ask the 
dentist)
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/nov/01/health-advice-teeth-dentist-checkup>
The current NHS system is widely accepted to be flawed. Someone with good oral 
hygiene who has chipped a tooth will pay exactly the same amount as their 
neighbour who has not attended in 15 years and needs 10 fillings, three 
extractions and a root canal, as under the NHS you don’t pay for each 
individual treatment like you do privately. The way the system works, the 
success of an NHS dental practice is, wrongly, measured by how much treatment 
has been carried out. Some patients genuinely do not need any fillings, but the 
current NHS system gives a perverse incentive to carry out as much treatment as 
possible in order to meet the annual target.

I suspect this does occur; while it is highly unlikely a dentist would drill a 
perfect tooth, I sometimes see excessive treatment that may not have been 
strictly necessary. But it’s all somewhat subjective.

One depressing new trend is the rise in hospital admissions to remove decayed 
teeth in children 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/feb/27/england-hospital-treatment-children-severe-tooth-decay>
. Most parents have the best intentions but lack oral health knowledge. 
Frustratingly, my diagnosis of tooth decay is often met with a perplexed “but 
my son only ever drinks sugar-free juice, how could this happen?” There is mass 
confusion surrounding food-labelling claims of “no added sugar” versus 
“sugar-free”. Unhealthy diets and poor discipline are also an issue, with 
parents often saying, “My daughter won’t drink water – she will kick and scream 
until I give her a fizzy drink” as a justification for why their child has a 
mouth full of rotting teeth. I think we need stronger oral health education on 
a national level.

Trust me, I’m a dentist. You have nothing to fear | Ollie Jupes
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/apr/28/dentist-horror-jacobus-van-nierop-dentistry-pain>
For too long the mouth has been seen as a separate compartment to the rest of 
the body, when actually it is the gateway to general health and wellbeing.

Like everyone, I do have days when I don’t brush my teeth for as long as I 
should. However, I have never had a filling and I tend to eat whatever I like. 
The secret is, if you have a bucket of sugar and devour it within 15 minutes or 
so, you are less likely to get dental decay than if you grazed on that bucket 
of sugar all day long, exposing your teeth to constant attack from bacterial 
acids. It’s all about limiting the frequency of those sugary attacks.

At the end of a long day at work, I am glad I have been able to relieve people 
of their pain, which is why I became a dentist in the first place. I do try to 
separate my professional and personal life but I often see my patients in the 
supermarket and it is not unknown for them to whip out their salivary denture 
to try to make me inspect it.

• Are you a dog walker, a paramedic, a fashion designer? We want to hear your 
candid accounts of what work is really like. Find full details on submitting 
your story anonymouslyhere 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/aug/17/secret-life-of-work-teacher-doctor-cleaner>
 