
Last week at a council meeting inside Portsmouth Guildhall, a woman was 
arrested 
<http://www.portsmouth.co.uk/business/watch-campaigners-stage-noisy-protest-at-council-meeting-in-portsmouth-guildhall-1-7206699>
. The mayor walked out of the chamber as purple and green confetti rained down 
from a packed public gallery, where a group of women unfurled a banner and 
chanted in unison “two women a week: murdered”.

The arrested 25-year-old is a member of Sisters Uncut 
<http://www.sistersuncut.org/>, a growing movement of women taking direct 
action to stop cuts to domestic violence services. She was arrested on 
suspicion of setting off a firework, but the protesters say she only threw 
confetti – 4,745 pieces, each symbolising a phone call reporting domestic abuse 
in the city last year, according to theSafer Portsmouth Partnership 
<http://www.saferportsmouth.org.uk/>, which is responsible for reducing crime 
in the city on the Hampshire coast.

The provision of domestic violence services has suddenly become toxic for 
Conservative-led Portsmouth council. InDecember, a council meeting was shut 
down after protesters unfurled a banner reading “Cutting DV services kills 
women” and chanted “you cut – we bleed”. 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/home-news/sisters-uncut-activists-shut-down-portsmouth-council-meeting-before-180000-domestic-violence-cuts-a6766191.html>
 When it reconvened later the same evening councillors announced a £180,000 cut 
to an early intervention programme in spite of apetition signed initially by 
42,000 people 
<https://www.change.org/p/stop-portsmouth-council-cutting-funding-for-life-saving-domestic-violence-services>
 calling for it to be saved. On the backbench of the council chamber last week, 
Conservative councillor Scott Harris sat quietly under their gaze, just a few 
days after making national headlines for accidentally sending the group an 
email in which he was allegedlyplanning a smear campaign against them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/feb/05/local-campaigners-tory-councillor-plot-smear-portsmouth>
. Outside, fake blood dripped down the steps of the Guildhall where Sisters 
Uncut protesters lay, staging a “die-in” surrounded by more than 60 others from 
groups in the city.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsisters-uncut-were-not-accepting-george-osbornes-cuts-video&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F28%2F1448730418722%2FBK_1891_crop_640x480.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Sisters%20Uncut%3A%20We're%20not%20accepting%20George%20Osborne's%20cuts%20%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsisters-uncut-were-not-accepting-george-osbornes-cuts-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Sisters%20Uncut%3A%20We%27re%20not%20accepting%20George%20Osborne%27s%20cuts%20%C2%A0%E2%80%93%20video&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2Fvideo%2F2015%2Fnov%2F28%2Fsisters-uncut-were-not-accepting-george-osbornes-cuts-video&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Faudio%2Fvideo%2F2015%2F11%2F28%2F1448730418722%2FBK_1891_crop_640x480.jpg>
Sisters Uncut: We’re not accepting George Osborne’s cuts - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/video/2015/nov/28/sisters-uncut-were-not-accepting-george-osbornes-cuts-video>
“We’ve known for a little while that they’re a bit scared about the awareness 
raising we’ve been doing about the cuts but I don’t think any of us really 
expected that they would stoop to this level,” says Laura McCarthy, a woman at 
the heart of the Portsmouth group, the movement’s first local offshoot outside 
London.

When McCarthy moved to Portsmouth several years ago, she got rid of her phone 
and email account, changed her name on social media and cut contact with many 
of her friends. After their two-year relationship ended, her ex-partner had 
broken into her family home. McCarthy decided it was time to leave.

“I tried to leave him several times. If I hadn’t left, the cycle would have 
carried on,” she said. “He would never let me go out, controlled which friends 
I saw and would chaperone me to lectures to make sure that’s where I was going. 
When we had arguments it became physically and emotionally aggressive very 
quickly.”

Two women a week are killed in England and Wales by a current or former partner
 
<https://www.womensaid.org.uk/what-we-do/campaigning-and-influencing/femicide-census/>
, according to Women’s Aid. Last month, alandmark study 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/13/hidden-rise-violent-crime-growth-violence-against-women>
 led by Unesco’s head of gender research was published that re-examined the 
basis of national crime statistics, redefining rape as a violent crime and 
removing a cap on the number of incidents recorded by a single individual. The 
results challengeofficial figures from the Office for National Statistics crime 
survey that violent crime has been in decline across England and Wales for 
decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/apr/23/crime-rate-ons-lowest-level-england-wales-police>
 and that men are its most common victims. Instead, they point to a marked rise 
in domestic violence against women starting in 2009, which as campaigners are 
quick to point out coincides with the beginning of government cutbacks.

The cut to domestic violences services in Portsmouth was proposed as part of 
£11m worth of cuts the council has committed to for 2016/17. Local authorities 
in England and Wales face a 28% cut in core funding from April.

Sandra Horley, chief executive of the charity Refuge, says the funding 
situation is “deeply concerning”. As the largest provider of domestic violence 
services, it has had a reduction in funding across 80% of its service contracts 
since 2011.

“Cuts to local authority funding have had a huge impact on domestic violence 
services. No country, however enlightened, has ever phased out refuge 
provision,” she says. “There will always be women and children who need to 
escape a violent partner.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fdomestic-violence-protesters-sisters-uncut-direct-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5442c9737a4262c866ee0ad6ade23c7230e061a%2F0_0_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20domestic%20violence%20protesters%20who%20won%E2%80%99t%20take%20cuts%20lying%20down%20%7C%20Emma%20Howard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fdomestic-violence-protesters-sisters-uncut-direct-action%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20domestic%20violence%20protesters%20who%20won%E2%80%99t%20take%20cuts%20lying%20down%20%7C%20Emma%20Howard&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2016%2Ffeb%2F17%2Fdomestic-violence-protesters-sisters-uncut-direct-action%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc5442c9737a4262c866ee0ad6ade23c7230e061a%2F0_0_5184_3113%2F5184.jpg>
 Sisters Uncut dyed the fountains of Trafalgar Square red. Photograph: Jasna 
Buncic/Demotix/Corbis 
Sisters Uncut argues that the support available overall for domestic violence 
services is still dropping, evidenced bythe closure of 32 specialist refuges in 
England between 2010 and 2014 
<https://1q7dqy2unor827bqjls0c4rn-wpengine.netdna-ssl.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/11/SOS_Data_Report.pdf>
 and reduction in services across the country. It is now a year since the group 
held their first action, stopping traffic at London’s Piccadilly Circus on
Valentine’s Day to lay black flowers in commemoration of women who had lost 
their lives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/jan/29/2014-feminists-sisters-uncut-domestic-violence-direct-action-feminism>
. In October they captured national headlines when theystormed the red carpet 
of the London premiere of the film Suffragette 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/07/feminist-protesters-storm-red-carpet-at-london-premiere-of-suffragette>
. One month later, they marched through the capital anddyed the fountains of 
Trafalgar Square red 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/nov/28/trafalgar-square-fountains-dyed-red-anti-domestic-violence-protest>
. Since then, they have begun to get donations from the public and are starting 
to apply for grants.

Like McCarthy, almost all members of Sisters Uncut have experienced domestic 
violence, either themselves or through a family member or close friend.

They estimate they now have more than 150 members, but since they do not keep 
membership records they do not know. The policy is one of a number they say 
they have implemented to protect themselves and create a safe space that 
empowers survivors to take action. Men are not invited to come to protests or 
meetings, names are not used and previous actions are not discussed.

“We want to create an environment in which survivors of domestic and sexual 
violence feel safe to organise without the presence of people who may remind 
them of the things they’ve been through or may trigger either in their method 
of organising or in their language certain feelings of trauma in survivors,” 
says Samantha Hill, who has been part of the group for the past year.

“It is also because of the notion of self-liberation and emancipation – that 
women should be leaders of the struggle for women’s liberation. The aim is to 
create a space where women can assume those positions of leadership.”

Groups such as Sisters Uncut are the modern suffragettes | Ellie Mae O’Hagan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/08/sisters-uncut-suffragette-film-premiere-women>
When the council meeting in Portsmouth resumed after the direct action last 
week, the council leader, Donna Jones, presented its response to the public 
petition that had triggered a new debate on the issue.

“We pride ourselves on the first-class service here in Portsmouth but 
acknowledge even more can be done to help,” she said, before announcing that 
the council would take money from property investments and reserves to cover 
the service until April 2017. Afterwards it’s hoped the funding will come from 
the police, she said.

McCarthy says that the group welcomes the U-turn, but that the issue is a 
symptom of a longer-term problem that the council is trying “to pass on” to the 
police. The police previously indicated that the force will not be able to pick 
up the bill. She is concerned that around the country early intervention 
projects will be the first to go.

“If that’s the case it means that more women are going to be trapped in 
abusive relationships with no support to get out and eventually that abuse is 
going to escalate and they are going to become high-risk victims. We are 
basically subjecting women to going through the cycle of abuse before we’re 
willing to help them,” she says.

“I don’t doubt for a second that further services are going to be closed in 
the coming years. So this is definitely just the beginning for us – we’re going 
to be standing in solidarity with sisters up and down the country.”

According to the Department for Communities and Local Government, in the 
spending review the government announced increased funding of £40m over the 
next four years to support domestic violence victims. A DCLG spokeswoman says: 
“This government is fully committed to ensuring that no victim of domestic 
abuse is turned away from the support they need. Domestic abuse is a completely 
unacceptable and devastating crime, which is why we maintain a strong safety 
net for its victims.”

Some names have been changed. 
 