
Cicero would have seen a funny thing on the way to the forum this week. The 
issue before the highest court in the land was a fine nuance of constitutional 
law. The judge in charge,Lord Neuberger 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/04/david-neuberger-brexit-judge-supreme-court-president-article-50-appeal-judgment>
, was telling a howling mob to stop shouting over what he insisted was a boring 
legal decision. His judges would decide it themselves, boringly. Everyone go 
home.

To the mob it was not boring at all. It was raw politics. Cicero would have 
pointed out to his scribe, Tiro, that all the Brexiters were on one side of the 
case and all the remainers on the other. This is purely a matter of law? Pull 
the other one, Tiro, it’s got Capitoline bells on it.

Brexit: article 50 supreme court hearing day three – as it happened
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-three-live-updates>
The joy of an unwritten constitution is that everyone can claim to be its 
custodian. That includes journalists, scholars, soldiers and, in pride of 
place, judges. As for the last of these, it has long suited the British 
establishment to keep them aloof from the boggy no-man’s-land between the crown 
(government) and parliament (the people). That way everyone can chip in, and 
chop off King Charles I’s head if things get out of hand. The one thing borne 
in every Briton from birth is that parliament, not any judge, is absolute boss.

Hence this week’s theatrical fun and games at the supreme court over Brexit. 
Theresa May’s case is that she is “triggering” article 50 because the public 
told her to do so back in June. In 2015 parliament had specifically asked the 
electorate for a yes-or-no vote on Europe. No one then suggested Brexit would 
not mean Brexit. It was clearly understood that no meant leave. For parliament 
to call a referendum was for parliament to will its implementation.

Speaking for the government on Monday, Jeremy Wright QC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/07/attorney-general-jeremy-wright-defends-judges-criticised-brexit-ruling>
 pleaded thatthe custom and practice of treaties 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/2016/dec/05/brexit-supreme-court-article-50-appeal-case-opens>
 was for governments to negotiate and then seek parliamentary ratification. It 
happens all the time, as with those at Lisbon and Maastricht.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Attorney%20general%20opens%20government%20supreme%20court%20appeal%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Flaw%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F05%2Fattorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video&media=>
Attorney general opens government supreme court appeal – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/video/2016/dec/05/attorney-general-opens-government-supreme-court-appeal-video>
The reason is that treaties are tricky things. Their negotiation cannot be 
open to ongoing scrutiny or serial ratification. All the referendum did was 
start the process. It seems possible that a European court or other court could 
bolster this case by allowing that article 50 is revocable – indeed any 
ratification process would imply that. So what’s the big problem?

The government’s opponents argue that a decision to withdraw from the EU is a 
decision to change a range of domestic laws. Commencing that process should 
require parliamentary authorisation, not a mere plebiscite. The 1972 European 
Communities Act is not just about cod-fish quotas or climate change targets. It 
is about myriad laws that have been enacted since joining Europe.Article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/article-50> would formally embark on a 
road to rescind them. Any move down that path – revocable or not – should be 
legally “authorised”, they argue, by act of parliament, even just a one-liner.

The remain lawyer, Lord Pannick, today argued that ministers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/07/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-three-live-updates>
 do not have unlimited prerogative power in interpreting the will of the 
parliament. Parliament ordered a referendum, but it was for parliament then to 
decide what to do with the outcome. At present there is no law authorising the 
government to take Britain out of the EU, just various political statements 
around the time of the referendum. For May to interpret this as sufficient to 
dismantle the totality of powers in the 1972 act was going too far.

This is an argument over “going too far”. Pannick’s argument will of course 
convince the remainers, as it delays the path to Brexit. It will seem mere 
nitpicking to leavers. His strongest point is that ministers specifically did 
not amend the 2015 EU referendum bill to make the vote legally binding. But for 
myself I cannot see what real difference would be made now by a one-line act 
“authorising” the referendum.

We know that the country is deeply split on Brexit. Any leader would be wise 
to proceed with care and consultation, and that includes with parliament. May 
would clearly have been wise to guard her flank after the referendum and go 
straight to the Commons for a vote of confidence on triggering article 50. She 
would have been wise to promise updates to a trusty and confidential Commons 
committee. She would have been wise to have conceded, earlier than now, some 
sight of negotiating objectives, however vague. And she would have been wise to 
have under her belt a one-clause act of parliament.

But to say that the prime minister has played close to the wind of 
constitutional propriety is not to say she has acted illegally. In the supreme 
court on Monday, Neuberger made an elegant plea to respect his judges’ 
impartiality. But he was entering a snake pit. Legal judgments about the 
utility of one-clause bills are dancing on the head of a pin. If May is found 
to have been in the wrong, it will be a trivial sin, merely detracting from the 
many more serious tactical errors she has made so far.

Supreme court judges pick up the Treasury Devil on the detail | John Crace
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/05/supreme-court-judges-pick-up-the-treasury-devil-on-the-detail>
Much worse is that it will be howled out of court by an outraged tribe of 
leavers. They will be convinced, with some justice, that they are up against a 
London mafia of bad-loser judges, politicians and journalists, out to use every 
trick in the book to cheat the public of its decision. In this suspicion they 
would be correct.

All that should matter is how best to play out the fact of Brexit to the 
nation’s advantage. I can accept the wisdom – and legal rigour – of a 
one-clause act, authorising the government to obey the will of the people as it 
is already doing, but this borders on the nerdish. It is an argument more 
suited to a politics seminar than a supreme court.

What the judges should do instead is turn the case back on parliament. It 
rightly claims sovereignty. It can face down any government. It can demand the 
referendum be ignored and article 50 not be invoked. It can pass any motion and 
change any law. The trouble is it has lost such guts.

MPs are too spineless to act beyond the realm of the executive. When 
supposedly upset, they now want judges to do their work for them, to get them 
off the hook of badly drafted laws. The judges should tell the MPs they caused 
this mess. They should get themselves out of it. Case dismissed, not our 
problem.
 