
She has had time now to survey the dilapidated estate she has inherited. 
Theresa May and her chancellor, besieged by petitioners on every side, cannot 
plead ignorance of the condition of the country, as they allocate scarce 
resources in Wednesday’sautumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/20/autumn-statement-what-might-the-chancellor-have-up-his-sleeve>
. All around them, wherever they cast their eye, they can see the creeping 
dereliction of the public realm, a thinning social fabric, torn in some places. 
They may avert their gaze, block their ears and follow their predecessors’ 
footsteps with a few linguistic changes, but if so they face avoidable crises.

Philip Hammond’s ambitions stretch beyond ‘just about managing’ | Matthew 
d’Ancona
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/philip-hammond-just-about-managing-chancellor>
Over the last year I have been travelling around, tracking the slow, or 
sometimes rapid, disintegration of services that were once taken for granted. 
Last week I was in rural Shropshire where a vigorous campaign to keep local bus 
services failed. The county council can no longer afford the subsidy, leaving 
the elderly with free bus passes but no buses. The Link bus once ran four times 
a day, joining up villages, taking those without cars to work, to medical 
appointments or to visit relatives, in a sociable service linking isolated 
people on talkative bus journeys. When it was cut, some lost their jobs, 
children gave up out-of-school activities and hospital appointments were 
missed. The only bus now runs once a week and waits an hour and a half for 
shopping in Bridgnorth, before returning. One man, it is said, went to the town 
every day for a hot meal, enjoying the company, but after the bus was stopped 
he was found, several days after his death, with only baby food in the house.

Which services matter most? After 40% cuts and worse to come, councils at 
their wits’ end are assailed from all sides by angry citizens, unjustly blamed 
for government policy. Poorest Labour cities were hit hardest, Tory rural areas 
less: Liverpool is worst affected, Dorset least. But rivalry ends when the 
Treasury abolishes all revenue support grantby 2020 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/mar/23/osbornes-business-rate-changes-northern-powerhouse>
.

Out with environmental health officers – I found staff cuts lead to 
downgrading the risk levels of restaurants and food outlets. How long before 
food poisoning outbreaks or other inspection failures reveal to the public the 
weakening of checks that keep them safe? Even the Border Force is depleted, 
though controlling borders overrode all else for Brexit voters.Police are cut 
by 20% <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-34899060>, 60 crown post offices are 
closing 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/post-office-workers-balloted-strike-8494526>
, guards are taken off trains, parks are unkempt,local museums closing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/21/local-school-museum-classes-pupils-teachers>
, potholes worse. No, none of these are critical, just a thinning out that 
diminishes civilisation.

Those are slow burners, but real crises are erupting. Prisons bursting at the 
seams are at last frightening the government. Social care is collapsing:
Monday’s Panorama 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/nov/20/neglect-uncovered-care-homes-cornwall-bbc-panorama>
 only lifted one lid on a disintegrating service that leaves fewer receiving 
any help, and care homes going out of business. How does a council balance old 
people against children? More children than ever are taken into care for lack 
of prevention,800 children’s centres closed 
<http://www.cypnow.co.uk/cyp/news/1152747/childrens-centres-seven-councils-responsible-for-more-than-half-of-closures>
, health visitors and school nurses in retreat, while social workers burn out. 
A million public jobs are gone, and Whitehall is unable to cope with Brexit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftheresa-may-hands-tied-autumn-statement-tories-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219b334b6f9f8729782684c56260099566a57041%2F27_78_4541_2725%2F4541.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20will%20say%20her%20hands%20are%20tied%20this%20week.%20Don%E2%80%99t%20be%20bamboozled%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftheresa-may-hands-tied-autumn-statement-tories-nhs%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20will%20say%20her%20hands%20are%20tied%20this%20week.%20Don%E2%80%99t%20be%20bamboozled%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F21%2Ftheresa-may-hands-tied-autumn-statement-tories-nhs%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F219b334b6f9f8729782684c56260099566a57041%2F27_78_4541_2725%2F4541.jpg>
 Ambulances outside A&E at Gloucestershire Royal Hospital. It declared a major 
incident due to high demand in its A&E department last year. Photograph: Matt 
Cardy/Getty Images 
Some services burn on a slow fuse, but some fuses are already blowing. NHS 
ambulances are often stacked outside A&Es, unable to offload patients into 
overcrowded units, a sign of extreme pressure. As health packs most political 
punch it’s hard to believe the government really means there will be not a 
penny more. Nor that they really intend to see universal credit steal an 
enormous £2,800 from single parents in full-time work. This new system was 
hailed as the great work incentive. Housing will get something, but nothing 
close to a market-changer.

Each reader would make different choices as our concerns shift with life 
cycle, our luck and circumstance. But to govern is to choose. The chancellor 
confronts an unwelcome£100bn deterioration in finances  
<https://www.ft.com/content/acb33786-ac16-11e6-9cb3-bb8207902122>before Brexit 
has begun. But don’t be bamboozled, their hands are not tied. Within that iron 
envelope there is spacious leeway for Theresa May to make good her words on 
“the good government can do”.

Hospitals and care homes fail food safety inspections
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/sep/25/hospitals-and-care-homes-fail-food-safety-inspections>
Where would the money come from? They could abandon extravagant tax cuts. 
Raising the personal tax allowance will have cost the treasury £21bn a year by 
2020, 85% of it benefitting the top half of earners. Cutting corporation tax 
down to the planned 17% will have cost £12bn, in a cut-throat, 
beggar-thy-neighbour race to the bottom. Abandon changing personal and 40p tax 
thresholds to save £4.5bn. Why waste £1bn on cutting inheritance tax, only paid 
by 8% of estates, if she wants to put “government at the service of ordinary 
working-class people”? Restrict state pension rises to those who need it. Tax 
reliefs are untapped gold mines of loopholes: entrepreneurs’ relief is often a 
fiddle, losing the Treasury £4.6bn.

All of these are choices; she did say: “When it comes to tax, we’ll prioritise 
not the wealthy, but you.” But after Monday’s about-turn on puttingworkers on 
company boards 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi>
 at the first crack of gunfire, don’t rely on it.

A renewed assault on the public realm can be avoided if it really is her 
“mission to make Britain a country that works for everyone”. Wednesday will 
define her, leaving voters to decide if they want yet more tax cuts for the 
better off, and worse public services for everyone.
 