
Theresa May has defended her refusal to guarantee the rights of EU nationals 
currently living in the UK, telling prime minister’s questions thatDonald 
Tusk’s letter blaming Britain for the uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/donald-tusk-turns-on-tories-in-row-over-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-uk>
 showed it was vital to maintain a bargaining hand.

Guaranteeing the rights of EU nationals in Britain without first getting 
mutual assurances over Britons based in the bloc, as demanded by Labour, would 
have left the latter group “high and dry”, May argued.

The prime minister said she wanted to sort out the issue of mutual rights “at 
an early stage of negotiations” with the EU, but she appeared to rule out a 
deal before the two-year process triggered by article 50, due to be invoked 
next spring.

At the end of a stormy session at which May and Jeremy Corbyn exchanged blows 
over funding for the NHS and social care, May was asked aboutthe letter from 
Tusk 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/29/donald-tusk-turns-on-tories-in-row-over-rights-of-eu-citizens-in-uk>
, president of the European council.

Replying to a group of Conservative MPs who said the lack of clarity over the 
rights of UK nationals elsewhere in the EU, and EU citizens based in Britain, 
had caused “anxiety and uncertainty”, Tusk wrote that this was entirely caused 
by the Brexit vote, and that the MPs’ argument “had nothing to do with reality”.

Peter Lilley, a strongly pro-leave Conservative MP, asked May if the message 
from Tusk – who he wrongly identified as Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of 
the European commission – had “put EU processes ahead of common humanity”.

May said: “I think it is right that we want to give reassurance to British 
citizens living in the EU, and to EU citizens living here in the UK.


“But I think the reaction that we have seen shows it was absolutely right for 
us not to do what the Labour party wanted us to do, which was simply to give 
away the guarantee for rights of EU citizens here in the UK. As we have seen, 
that would have left UK citizens inEurope 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> high and dry.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=May%20and%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20and%20social%20care%20funding%20at%20PMQs%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=May%20and%20Corbyn%20clash%20over%20NHS%20and%20social%20care%20funding%20at%20PMQs%20%E2%80%93%20video%20highlights&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Fmay-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights&media=>
May and Corbyn clash over NHS and social care funding at PMQs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/nov/30/may-and-corbyn-clash-over-nhs-and-social-care-funding-at-pmqs-video-highlights>
Much of the rest of prime minister’s questions was taken up with Corbyn 
pressing his opposite number over the aftermath oflast week’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/autumn-statement-2016>, particularly what 
he called the “failure” of the government’s long-term economic plan, and 
funding for the NHS and social care.

“I’m not entirely sure where the government’s credibility lies on borrowing, 
since they are borrowing even more, the deficit is increasing and people are 
suffering,” Corbyn said.


The Labour leader continued: “Why was there not one penny more to social care 
in the autumn statement?”


May responded that there was “absolutely no doubt the social care system is 
under pressure”, noting the extra 1 million people aged over 65 since 2010, but 
insisted the government had pushed through extra spending on this. The NHS and 
local authorities needed to work better together on social care, she added.

Tusk highlights growing frustration but has not toughened EU stance
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/30/tusk-highlights-growing-frustration-but-has-not-toughened-eu-stance>
Corbyn responded by asking May why the government had cut corporation tax, 
saying: “Just what is this government’s real sense of priorities?”

The prime minister argued that under Labour’s former shadow chancellor Ed 
Balls – “lately of Strictly fame”, as she put it – there was no extra money 
promised for social care, adding: “Conservatives [are] putting money into the 
NHS and social care, Labour would deny it.”

There was less discussion of Brexit, though the Green MP, Caroline Lucas, did 
open the session by decrying the lack of government information about its plans.

The Conservative MP for Devizes, Claire Perry, also raised the issue, in part 
to coin a new conjoined word which she termed “Smexit”, meaning a “smart and 
smooth Brexit”.
 