
Burning injustices! As she said that, to the casual listener the prime 
minister’s “shared society” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-38545674> 
could have come from a Labour or Liberal Democrat leader, embracing those bonds 
of family, community and citizenship that all politicians yearn to reach. In 
her language of healing divisions, of common obligations, of understanding the 
struggles of those whose pay has stagnated, injustices are easy to list 
with burning sincerity, but without cashable remedies.

Maybot fails to channel happier times with theme of social injustice
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/maybot-fails-to-channel-happier-times-with-theme-of-social-injustice>
All leaders seek to brand their term in office, but often their language 
plants entirely false signposts. Not altogether cynical, Tory leaders may 
imagine they can be caring and compassionate, before they confront the hard 
budget choices that will define them. No one forgetsMargaret Thatcher’s sugary 
recital of St Francis’s prayer <http://margaretthatcher.org/document/104078> 
from the Downing Street steps.

A lazily sycophantic Tory commentariat will usually swallow most of what their 
leaders say, regardless of what they do. David Cameron’s early social-justice,
hoodie-hugging 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2006/jul/09/conservatives.ukcrime>, 
greenest-ever, socially liberal scene-stealers clung to him, even as he led the 
country into a dark tunnel of extreme austerity. One minor totemic act –gay 
marriage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/26/david-cameron-award-same-sex-marriage-pinknews>
, insignificant afterTony Blair’s civil partnerships 
<http://www.pinknews.co.uk/2015/08/13/tony-blair-civil-partnerships-only-happened-because-labour-forced-change/>
 – clothed him as a laid-back liberal, despite everything else he did.

Cut the “green crap” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/nov/21/david-cameron-green-crap-comments-storm>
, he said, as he stripped out green energy subsidies and caused an overnight 
loss of thousands of jobs in a crashing solar industry. Yet a vaguely green 
aura still hung around him to the end, with hisfuzzy green oak tree logo 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/5348630.stm> and that windmill 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/6505807.stm> he tried to fix on his 
roof. Nothing suggested by his“big society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2010/jul/19/david-cameron-big-society-launch>
 actually happened: on the contrary, charities took the full force of cuts to 
contracts and grants, and public society shrivelled measurably on his watch.

Theresa May’s new year message was designed to be startling for a Tory. She 
will heal the divisions “between a more prosperous older generation and a 
struggling younger generation; between the wealth of London and the rest of the 
country; between the rich, the successful and the powerful, and their fellow 
citizens”. What leader says they will divide and rule? What perplexed listeners 
was her view of the state, as she promised “a government rooted not in the 
laissez-faire liberalism that leaves people to get by on their own, but rather 
in a new philosophy that means government stepping up”.

Will she really roll out the red carpet of the state instead of rolling it up? 
This sounds good: “People who are just managing, just getting by, don’t need a 
government that will get out of the way. They need a government that will make 
the system work for them. An active government.” What a world away that is from 
her state-shrinking predecessors, as inCameron’s remark 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/4504722.stm>: “There is such a thing as 
society, it’s just not the same thing as the state.”

Is Mayism a radical departure? The more you study her text, the more the 
meaning slips between your fingers, leaving nothing tangible, absolutely 
nothing. Don’t ask which government agencies will step up to help whom, and 
how, because there is no hint of a suggestion. Will that matter? What matters 
in the airy politics of self-definition is the idea of herself as a sharing, 
communitarian, pro-state activist. If she’s lucky, that’s what will stick with 
enough of her well-wishers, heralding her new brand of Conservatism.

She talks of 'social reform' but steams ahead with £13bn in benefit cuts

But in the harsh world of deeds not words, her chancellor’s autumn statement 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/philip-hammonds-autumn-statement-welcome-reality-check-brexit>
 tells the all-too-familiar story of a Conservative government like all others. 
There, laid out, is her continuity austerity, with the state set on a 
trajectory that steps down not up. Year by year she is set to travel down the 
same anti-state path thatshed 1m public jobs 
<http://www.gmb.org.uk/newsroom/tories-slash-more-than-1-million-public-sector-jobs-since-power>
, thatcut local authority budgets by 40% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2015/sep/01/local-government-association-cannot-cope-further-cuts>
 with more to come, whereschool budgets will lose £477 per secondary pupil per 
year 
<https://inews.co.uk/essentials/news/education/school-cuts-worse-predicted/>, 
while police, post offices, courts, careers services, Border Force and 
children’s centres are stripped and shrunken.

She talks of “social reform” but steams ahead with £13bn in benefit cuts 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/benefit-cuts-will-leave-mothers-13bn-worse-off-over-course-of-current-parliament-a6914571.html>
 while cutting tax for the better-off half. Withnearly 4 million poor children 
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/child-poverty-facts-and-figures>, most in working 
families, her pleas for the plight of the just about managing above that 
working tax credit level is unpleasantly divisive, though politically cunning. 
She will see that “those just above the threshold that attracts the 
government’s focus today – yet who are by no means rich or well-off – are also 
given the help they need”. What help and why them first? They are ripe for 
political plucking, those who begrudge an imaginary generosity to the poor and 
rightly perceive extreme affluence at the top. They are where votes may be 
snatched from erstwhile Labour or Ukip demographics. Far from healing 
divisions, this deliberately drives a wedge, rubbing salt into a social grudge.

If May’s government is stepping up, will it grow in size? She ducked that 
because Treasury figures don’t lie, showing her state continues on George 
Osborne’s downward trajectory,towards some 36% of GDP 
<http://blog.policy.manchester.ac.uk/posts/2015/11/sr2015-spending-is-36-of-gdp-still-his-target/>
, well below any comparable EU country. There is no more money: instead her 
state will be “strong”, “strategic” and “effective”.

Mental health was her focus for the day – a richly deserving cause. It’s a 
political safe zone where everyone agrees about the shameful stigma and that it 
should get “parity of esteem”: David Cameron proclaimed “a mental health 
revolution” with equal sincerity and an equal lack of funds – a£600m cut 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/health-31970871>. But she ignored the diplodocus in 
the room – an NHS falling apart before our eyes. No one knows if she has been 
misled into believing this is just a winter blip, nor if they told her the
“£10bn extra” 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-may-nhs-labour-10-billion-spending-pmqs-live-a7369791.html>
 she quotes is a fiction, but afull-blown NHS crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/nhs-humanitarian-crisis-conservatives-british-red-cross>
 risks engulfing her. Deaths on trolleys in A&E corridors are political 
dynamite, the crunch where rhetoric meets reality.

Follow the money. Ideas, theories, “big societies” and sharing societies are 
talking points for political obsessives. But ahead lie monstrous tasks for May 
to solve, with Brexit trampling over everything else, while social care, 
climate change, energy and housing all urgently require her state to “step up”.

At its most dismally reductionist, the political history of recent decades can 
be written in graphs. They show Labour years of rising spending matched with a 
renewal of public services, while recent decades show austere spending and a 
thinned-out, weakened public realm. Nothing in May’s spending plans suggests a 
more “sharing society” between either rich and poor, or public squalor and 
private affluence.
 