
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> has said the 
media were responsible for a slump in the value of the pound by wrongly 
claiming her views about Britain leaving the EU equated to a hard Brexit.

The prime minister was responding to a question about the negative market 
reaction to her comments on Sunday when she hinted that the UK would not be 
able to remain a full member of the European single market, but would instead 
have tonegotiate a new trade deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/uks-brexit-approach-is-not-muddled-at-all-says-theresa-may>
.

After a speech in London, May was asked if the markets were getting her vision 
of Brexit wrong, or if she was getting it wrong. She said: “I am tempted to say 
that the people who are getting it wrong are those who print things saying I’m 
talking about a hard Brexit, it is absolutely inevitable it is a hard Brexit. I 
don’t accept the terms soft and hard Brexit.

Pound falls to 10-week low after Theresa May's Brexit comments
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/09/pound-falls-low-theresa-may-brexit-ftse-100-high>
“What we are doing is going to get an ambitious, good and best possible deal 
for the United Kingdom, in terms of trading with and operating within the 
European single market.”

The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, repeated her position that failure to 
accept the EU’s “four freedoms” would lead to restricted access to the single 
market.

Speaking at the annual meeting of the German Civil Service Federation, she 
said: “Access to the single market can only take place under the condition that 
you keep the four freedoms [movement of goods, capital, services and people].

“If that’s not the case, you have to negotiate curtailments.”

Merkel, who is running for a fourth term 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/20/angela-merkel-expected-stand-for-re-election-germany>
 in the German election this year, said: “One can’t carry out these 
negotiations as an exercise in cherry-picking. That would have fatal 
consequences for the other 27 member states, and we can’t allow such 
consequences.”

May also stressed that it would have to be a “new relationship”, because 
Britain would no longer be a member of the EU. “We will be outside the European 
Union and therefore we will be negotiating a new relationship across not just 
trading, but other areas with theEuropean Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu>,” she said.

Asked about Merkel’s comments, a Downing Street spokeswoman said: “We are 
about to enter a negotiation with 27 other countries. The British people made 
clear it’s important we take control of immigration, but this shouldn’t be a 
zero-sum game and we should be approaching this on how we can get the maximum 
freedom for UK businesses to operate in and trade with the single market.

“There are many countries around the world that have free trade arrangements 
with the EU.”

The prime minister also used her first speech of the year to flesh out her 
vision for a “shared society” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
, first outlined on the steps of Downing Street.

May said the time had come for a “new philosophy” of fairness and solidarity, 
saying Brexit was a once-in-a-generation chance to step back and decide what 
type of country Britain wanted to be.

Many of her comments will be seen as being aimed in part at her Conservative 
predecessor, David Cameron, and other politicians such as Tony Blair.

In particular, May attacked the failure of “mainstream, centre-ground 
politics” to respond to public concerns in recent years, which had resulted in 
people turning to “the politics of division and despair”.

“We see those fringe voices gaining prominence in some countries across Europe 
today – voices from the hard left and the far right stepping forward and 
sensing that this is their time.

“But they stand on the shoulders of mainstream politicians who have allowed 
unfairness and division to grow, by ignoring the legitimate concerns of 
ordinary people for too long.”

She said centrist politicians had embraced the “great forces” of liberalism 
and globalisation, but failed to understand that too many people on modest and 
low incomes saw those as things to be“concerned, not thrilled about” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/jun/26/brexit-is-the-rejection-of-globalisation>
.

The prime minister said she was talking about politicians who had supported an 
economic system that worked well for a privileged few but failed to ensure the 
prosperity was shared across the country.

“[These are] politicians who made the deals and signed the agreements that 
changed the nature of their country, but failed to listen to the public’s 
concerns – dismissing them as somehow parochial or illegitimate instead,” she 
said.


Theresa May’s ‘shared society’: magic policies that don’t need any money
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/shortcuts/2017/jan/09/theresa-may-shared-society-speech-magic-policies>
She said people were questioning whether globalisation was working for them 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/commentisfree/2016/jun/24/divided-britain-brexit-money-class-inequality-westminster>
 when they were losing their jobs and watching their wages stagnate. “They come 
to a simple conclusion: that there is one rule for the rich and powerful, and 
another for everyone else,” she said.

May said her government’s challenge was to show that centre-ground politics 
could deliver change, respond to concerns and set things right.


The prime minister outlined the key social injustices on which she wanted to 
focus: racial discrimination, poor life chances for white working-class boys, 
gender inequality and difficulties for young people.


She then focused her speech on new mental health policies, which had been 
trailed over the weekend 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/06/theresa-may-to-boost-mental-healthcare-provision-reduce-suicides>
. “An estimated one in four of us has a common mental disorder at any one time. 
The economic and social cost of mental illness is £105bn – roughly the same as 
we spend on the NHS in its entirety,” she said, promising to focus in 
particular on children.

May gave her speech exactly a year after Cameron delivered a major speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/11/david-cameron-revolution-maternal-mental-health>
 on the same subject, in which he pledged £1bn of extra funding for mental 
health. May did not provide additional funding on top of that, but offered a 
strengthened package on mental health, including piloting approaches within 
schools to identify and support children in need.

The prime minister has also commissioned two reviews, one of services for 
young people and the other on wellbeing in the workplace.

May was asked whether she would ringfence government funding for mental health 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/cash-to-boost-childrens-mental-health-not-getting-through-says-charity>
, given concerns that generalpressures on the health service 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/09/jeremy-hunt-denies-red-cross-claim-of-nhs-humanitarian-crisis>
 could squeeze this. She would not offer such a commitment, but insisted there 
would be accountability.


The prime minister said there was a need to recalibrate policy so it was not 
only about the poorest. “Government and politicians have for years talked the 
language of social justice, where we help the very poorest, and social 
mobility, where we help the brightest among the poor,” she said.

“But to deliver the change we need and build that shared society, we must move 
beyond this agenda and deliver real social reform across every layer of 
society, so that those who feel that the system is stacked against them – those 
just above the threshold that attracts the government’s focus today, yet who 
are by no means rich or well off – are also given the help they need.”

Despite insisting that the government would continue to focus on the most 
disadvantaged as well, some campaigners fear that May’s positioning will reduce 
the focus on the least well-off in society.

 