
There is no way it looks good. Two thousand medieval churches in England have 
fewer than 10 worshippers, and 8,000 more can barely muster 20. More Muslims go 
to mosques than Anglicans go to church. Yet almost all are listed as historic. 
These lovely buildings are simply emptying. Doors are locked. Grass grows in 
churchyards.

More than 900 churches are now on the English Heritage “at risk” register 
<https://www.churchofengland.org/media-centre/news/2014/10/church-welcomes-english-heritage-at-risk-register-featuring-churches-for-first-time.aspx>
, with 159 added last year alone. In 2013, the former archbishop of Canterbury 
George Carey warned that the Church of England was“a generation away from 
extinction”. 
<http://www.thetablet.co.uk/news/247/0/bishop-says-christian-faith-in-britain-could-become-extinct-in-a-generation>

Yet it is trapped in its own coffins. England’s churches tower over every 
community in the land, yet barely 2% of those communities profess any link to 
them. The rest see them as sanctuaries of a dying sect, a gaunt, empty 
presence lurking in their midst. At the present rate, they must one day 
collapse into ruin.

Anyone coming fresh to the Church of England’s predicament sees only the 
proverbial frog in boiling water. There is no way it can cope with its 
architectural inheritance. The church’s legendary wealth can only just pay for 
its clergy, who spend much of their time racing round seeking builders to patch 
roofs.

Britain’s railways in the 1950s were in a similar plight, with empty trains 
rattling through a beautiful but deserted countryside. When Dr Beechingreported 
in 1963 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2013/mar/02/beeching-wrong-about-britains-railways>
, there was no way anyone could see his rural lines reviving. It was not 
profitable passengers they lacked, it was any passengers at all.

Cathedrals have also become art galleries and concert halls, theatres and 
conference venues, social centres and schools

Likewise the Church of England plainly needs to dispose of a large swath of 
its capacity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2015/oct/15/we-must-do-to-our-churches-what-beeching-did-to-the-railways>
, probably at least half. But unlike the railways, its buildings cannot be 
demolished. So it agonises not over how to dispose of them but how to fill 
them. Given that half are rural, it is like praying for a revival not of the 
church but of the entire middle ages.

Last year, the bishop of Worcester, John Inge, faced pleas from some rural 
vicars that they were“close to drowning”. 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/religion/12017188/Rural-vicars-drowning-amid-battle-to-keep-empty-churches-open.html>
 In a report he proposed a conversion of hundreds of buildings into “festival 
churches 
<https://www.churchofengland.org/media-centre/news/2015/10/launch-of-major-new-report-on-how-the-church-of-england-manages-its-16,000-church-buildings.aspx>
”, used by local communities for the rest of the year. But Beeching-scale 
closures, he said, “would send out a very powerful message that the church and 
Christian faith have had their day in this country”. Somehow, empty buildings 
sent no such message.

As a result, most church effort goes not into managed retreat but into 
proselytising best practice. Ideas bloom for “reaching out”, embracing ethnic 
minorities and “engaging” with non-worshippers. Under the present archbishop, 
Justin Welby, as under Carey and Rowan Williams, Anglicans seem happiest in 
evangelical mode, with their backs to the wall.

A recent critique of this approach, by the Guardian’s Andrew Brown (That Was 
the Church that Was, with Linda Woodhead) 
<https://www.bookdepository.com/That-Was-Church-That-Was-Andrew-Brown/9781472921642#>
, points out that a decade of sustained evangelism has not “registered even a 
pimple on the chart of decline”. Only the urban lonely seemed to respond to the 
evangelists’ appeal – as long as they were lonely.

Yet there is an extraordinary exception to this trend: the 42 English 
cathedrals. In the last century it was widely thought they would deteriorate, 
stuck in ageing city centres without specific parochial commitment. Their 
decline matched that of local churches, but their gargantuan repair bills 
presaged hopelessness.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsave-ailing-churches-desanctified-secularised%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c14f10003676158088fb5aa01def43ddc2ff326%2F0_0_5760_3630%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There%20is%20one%20sure%20way%20to%20save%20our%20ailing%20churches%20%E2%80%93%20give%20them%20away%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsave-ailing-churches-desanctified-secularised%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%20is%20one%20sure%20way%20to%20save%20our%20ailing%20churches%20%E2%80%93%20give%20them%20away%20%7C%20Simon%20Jenkins&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fsave-ailing-churches-desanctified-secularised%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F0c14f10003676158088fb5aa01def43ddc2ff326%2F0_0_5760_3630%2F5760.jpg>
 Rector Sarah Lunn at Long Marton church, Cumbria. Photograph: Christopher 
Thomond for the Guardian 
With the turn of the 21st century, something happened. From declining by some 
5% a year, cathedral attendance numbers began to rise. Today, service 
attendance has grown by almost a third in a decade. This is quite apart from 
the boom in tourist visitors, now some8 million a year 
<http://www.frh-europe.org/growing-together-englands-cathedrals-and-civic-regeneration/>
. Cathedral revenues have doubled in 10 years and fundraising has proved an 
invariable success. Ten cathedrals now charge for entry and more could do so, 
relieving the call on central funds.

Whatever churches were getting wrong, cathedrals seemed to be getting right. 
Explaining this paradox has become an Anglican cottage industry. Cathedrals are 
semi-autonomous fiefdoms. Their deans and chapters can be ferociously 
introverted, dynamic and entrepreneurial. They are relatively free from the 
bureaucracy that grips the church’s national establishment and its enslaving 
meetings culture.

Attendances have risen most of all at evensong, congregations clearly drawn by 
music. Cathedrals have also become art galleries and concert halls, theatres 
and conference venues, social centres and schools. Canterbury holds sumptuous 
degree ceremonies for Kent University. St Albans is a one-stop shop to rival 
the local high street. Blackburn has initiated the comprehensive rebuilding of 
the town’s “cathedral quarter”. These institutions took the reins of David 
Cameron’s debilitated local government.

We must do to our churches what Beeching did to the railways | Giles Fraser: 
Loose canon
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/belief/2015/oct/15/we-must-do-to-our-churches-what-beeching-did-to-the-railways>
The appeal of the modern cathedral goes deeper. The religious thinktank Theos 
reports that a sixth of atheists and a quarter of lapsed Christians still visit 
cathedrals 
<http://www.theosthinktank.co.uk/publications/2012/10/12/spiritual-capital-the-present-and-future-of-english-cathedrals>
. They appeal to the “marginally” religious, those who decorously call 
themselves agnostic – if only when challenged. The sociologistGrace Davie 
<http://socialsciences.exeter.ac.uk/sociology/staff/davie/> wonders how many of 
the new “worshippers” are really worshipping. She sees cathedrals as places of 
“vicarious religion”. They are anonymous, where people can come and go without 
pressure or welcome, let alone having to hug strangers.

Visitors can “hide behind a pillar”. They need not pray or sing. They can 
listen to music and contemplate a sublime building without, as Brown puts it, 
“all that banging on about Jesus”.

I would go further. Cathedrals present themselves, like castles, as the great 
memorials to the nation’s past. The two dozen pre-Reformation survivors are, to 
me, the most beautiful things the English ever created. They are museums of 
medieval architecture, art, sculpture, stained glass and woodwork beyond 
compare. Filled with sunlight and music at the end of the day, they offer an 
irresistible experience. The key here is that a wider community of the 
unaffiliated, even the unbelieving, has come to see cathedrals as something it 
“owns”. If biscuit tins are any guide, half of England owns Salisbury Cathedral.

Whether this can be replicated at parish level must be doubted. But this issue 
of ownership surely can. As long as parish churches are seen as shrines 
belonging to a tiny minority of the community, any hope of wider commitment is 
pie in the sky. Struggling local churches must be secularised, desanctified. 
They must be vested in an endowed local trust or parish council that literally 
owns them, so they become community assets, for whose upkeep local rates can be 
levied, as with public parks and gardens. There will be many spills along the 
way. But these buildings cannot be demolished or nationalised. There is simply 
no alternative.

The railway parallel suggests nothing is for ever. Years after the Beeching 
cuts, many of his branch lines have been brought back into use by the boom in 
rail tourism, . There are now some 200 “heritage” railways in Britain, most on 
Beeching lines. But it took voluntary effort, imagination and, above all, 
ownership to bring this about. If Britain one day really does see a Christian 
revival, “heritage” churches will have been preserved and at its service. For 
the time being, there is no point in pretending.
 