
The axe fell yesterday, as the cap on what a family can receive in benefits 
was cut by£3,000 a year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/03/reduced-benefit-cap-families-dwp>
 in London, double that in the rest of the country. But that’s not the worst of 
what’s to come. Do cuts summon up“I, Daniel Blake” indignation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/26/welfare-sanctions-ken-loach-uk-benefit-system>
? No, pollsters find the benefit cap among the most popular of government 
policies.

Creating child poverty for a whole new generation. Take a bow, Theresa May | 
Aditya Chakrabortty
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/31/child-poverty-theresa-may-housing-benefit-cuts>
One of the great lasting legacies of this Tory era will be Iain Duncan Smith’s 
vilification of anyone on any benefit, turning hearts to stone. In the early 
days there was shock at the savagery of serial cuts hitting the same families 
over and over, children above all. Surely, they couldn’t get away with it? But 
they did. Less is reported now about the seismic effect of £18bn stripped away.

Victims make little noise, each family isolated with no collective voice. Once 
influential charities have been intimidated out of anything “political”. Even 
that unpleasant Victorian distinction between the “deserving” and the 
“undeserving” poor has gone. Those with disabilities are treated as harshly as 
the rest, skivers and shirkers all, who in Aprillose £30 a week in employment 
support allowance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/oct/27/charities-urge-ministers-to-drop-planned-cuts-to-work-support-allowance>
.

Most startling are the rolling cuts to mobility allowances: so far, according 
toMotability <http://www.motability.co.uk/>, of 71,000 disabled people 
reassessed, 31,000 have had their £57.40 weekly allowance stopped. A letter 
arrives from the Department of Work and Pensions telling them they no longer 
qualify, and seven weeks later their Motability car is gone, along with a 
connection to society and often to jobs.

Jason Evans lost a leg in the forces and says a car with room for a wheelchair 
is vital for him and his young family. When he lost his entitlement a 
low-loader came and took his car away. He only got it back through an appeal by 
theBritish Limbless Ex-Service Men’s Association <https://blesma.org/>. “Since 
the legal aid cuts, others can’t appeal as I did,” he says, from his office at 
the charityDisabled Motoring UK <http://www.disabledmotoring.org/> where he now 
helps others.

For an example of charity terror, when I called Motability, the company and 
charity providing these cars, I was surprised to be contacted immediately by 
the DWP demanding to know what I was writing. Loss of mobility is bad, but far 
worse is happening to disabled people with the loss of social care: the charity 
Scope tells me of people issued with incontinence pads in order to ration care 
visits for taking them to the toilet.

If I listed all the benefit cuts, your eyes would glaze over. People 
sanctioned for small, unknowing infractions at jobcentres end up in food banks; 
one in five of the sanctioned end up homeless. Uniquely, thebedroom tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/bedroom-tax> did fire public indignation – 
evicting people from family homes was highly unpopular. But that didn’t prevent 
it.

Each cut is spelled out in moral terms: people in social housing should leave 
their homes to make way for others, and people should have their benefits 
capped if they have no job. But these moral purposes failed: the Institute for 
Fiscal Studies foundvery few families left their homes 
<https://www.ifs.org.uk/publications/7482> – they just took the hit, often 
resorting to food banks in a crisis.

Very few took jobs. Why not? Because nearly 70% of all unemployed people get a 
job in six months anyway 
<http://cpag.org.uk/content/child-poverty-myths#footnoteref2_bdme6kb>, with 
another 22% working within a year. The rest have obstacles to work, mainly 
single mothers with babies. But these facts didn’t get in the way of government 
images of lazy people with their blinds down.

This callous benefit cap reduction will hit families hard this Christmas
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/housing-network/2016/nov/04/benefits-cap-reduction-families-christmas>
Universal credit, rolling out to new claimants, is still advertised as 
offering extra work incentives when the DWP knows that’s not so. Even Duncan 
Smith now admitsthe £3bn cuts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/apr/10/universal-credit-cuts-to-lose-low-income-families-up-to-200-a-month>
 he accepted to its work allowance seriously diminish it. For every extra pound 
earned, recipients lose 60p, some losing 90p. Partners, usually women, keep 
only 35p in every extra pound earned. Built into the system is a delay in 
paying housing benefit, so most recipients borrow, trapping some in permanent 
debt. Social landlords report79% arrears, now that rent is no longer paid 
directly to them 
<http://www.24housing.co.uk/news/universal-credit-leads-to-rent-arrears/>.

If there is good intent in Theresa May’s speeches about “just managing 
families”, these cuts to her party’s flagship universal credit scheme should be 
reversed in the chancellor’s autumn statement this month, as some Tory MPs 
campaign for clemency.

What people most need to know is the overall effect. The Child Poverty Action 
Group monitoring all research, distils it inImproving Children’s Life Chances 
<http://www.cpag.org.uk/lifechances>. IFS research concludes  
<http://cpag.org.uk/content/uk-set-biggest-increase-child-poverty-generation>
relative child poverty will rise by 50% by 2020: that means seven poor children 
in an average class of 30. The worst benefit cuts are invisible, theslow 
frog-boilers <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Boiling_frog> of benefit-freezes as 
inflation rises. You can argue about poverty, but it means lacking basics such 
as a spare pair of shoes, a one-week holiday, a birthday party – and enough to 
eat.

At prime minister’s questions last week, Theresa May snapped back at Jeremy 
Corbyn: “Many families struggling to make ends meet are paying the benefits of 
others.” Does she think the strugglers are not also relying on tax credits, or 
child or housing benefit? The Resolution Foundation points out that the 
chancellor has choices, despite a gaping black hole in Treasury receipts. If 
May’s strugglers come first, he could abandon cuts to corporation tax 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/03/george-osborne-looks-at-corporation-tax-cut-to-attract-overseas-investors>
, or theexpensive rise in income tax thresholds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/02/the-guardian-view-on-austerity-reversing-robin-hood>
, where 80% goes to the richest half.

But easing benefit cuts buys Hammond little short-term political credit. The 
culture of blame and spite has been spread far and wide by government, Tory 
press andBenefits Street 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/jan/08/channel-4-betrayed-residents-benefits-street>
 programmes pillorying the poor, the unlucky and the damaged. Duncan Smith’s 
myths die hard: he blamed drug and alcohol addiction butjust 6.6% of claimants 
are addicts <http://cpag.org.uk/content/child-poverty-myths>. He blamed divorce 
– but the working married are poor too. DWP press releases listed “The 10 top 
worst excuses used by benefit cheats <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-13587434>”, 
omitting official figures showingfraud at just 0.7% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2013/may/13/welfare-fraud-error-universal-credit>
.

They called it Labour’s “culture of dependency”, with mythical tales of 
families who never worked in three generations: Labour left the number out of 
work for five or more years atjust 4,220 
<http://www.channel4.com/news/welfare-reform-is-benefits-culture-a-myth>. 
Truthiness didn’t start with Donald Trump. But the social damage is deep and 
lasting: working people on miserable pay need benefits to survive, but are 
treated as state-dependent despicables.

We shall soon see what Theresa May really intends for her “just managing 
families”. But does she really know who the strugglers are, how they live and 
how much they too rely on benefits?

• This article was amended on 15 November 2016 to correct the period of notice 
given to disabled people who are reassessed as ineligible for the allowance 
that supports their Motability vehicle: it is seven weeks not three.

 