
In the debate about the government’s Brexit strategy, a good deal of ink has 
been spilt on the finer distinctions of the single market and the customs union.

Related: Our panel’s verdict on Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-prime-minister-britain>

Tuesday’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/leave-remain-theresa-may-single-market-brexit-liberal-democrats>
 by the prime minister – which confirmed she plans to take Britain out of the 
single market and parts of the customs union – will doubtless lead to more. But 
I’m not sure how much clarity this debate has provided – or will provide.

In my Bloomberg speech 
<http://press.labour.org.uk/post/154418958214/keir-starmers-speech-at-bloomberg>
 last December, Iattempted to put Labour’s position 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/13/labour-must-fight-battle-of-our-times-over-hard-brexit-says-keir-starmer>
 succinctly by focusing on function not form.

I indicated then that Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
would push for a Brexit model that maintains and protects our ability to 
successfully trade goods with and deliver services to the EU.

I spelt out what that meant: a model that ensures continued tariff-free trade 
for UK businesses with the EU; a model that ensures any new regulatory 
frameworks do not add bureaucratic burdens or risk harmful divergence from the 
EU market; a model that protects the competitiveness of our services and 
manufacturing sectors; and a model that ensures that existing protections at 
work provided by the EU are maintained.

Having travelled across the country in the last three months, it is clear to 
me that businesses, both large and small, as well as many trade unions and 
working people, agree with this approach.
 Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video. 
 Please upgrade <http://whatbrowser.org/> to a modern browser and try again. 
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
On Tuesday, Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> 
accepted the importance of these demands and promised to aim for “tariff-free 
trade with Europe” and a “comprehensive” free trade agreement that would ensure 
the “freedom to provide financial services across national borders”. She also 
stated that she wanted to “protect the rights of workers” set out in European 
legislation.’

That was the right thing to do. It is also important that the prime minister 
finally accepted Labour’s demand for there to bea vote on the final Brexit deal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/20/theresa-may-indicates-mps-parliament-not-vote-final-brexit-deal>
. This will ensure there is proper grip in the process and a key role for 
parliament in holding the government to account.

But there were also significant gaps in the prime minister’s speech – in 
particular over how she plans to deliver on these objectives.

That will take a lot of explaining, and she is taking a significant risk by 
giving up on membership of the single market and parts of the customs union. 
This will alarm many businesses and trade unions, so it is vital the government 
now produces robust economic analysis and a plan for delivery to support her 
decision.

The prime minister’s comment that the government does “not seek to hold on to 
bits of membership as we leave” also leaves serious questions about our future 
role in a wide range of common EU agencies.

Does this mean, for example, that we will soon be outside of the European 
Aviation Safety Agency <https://www.easa.europa.eu/>, which certifies aircraft 
before they are allowed to fly? TheEuropean Medicines Agency 
<http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/>, which ensures all medicines in the EU market 
are safe and effective? OrEuropol <https://www.europol.europa.eu/> and Eurojust 
<http://www.eurojust.europa.eu/Pages/home.aspx> – agencies I worked closely 
with when I was the director of public prosecutions and I know have been vital 
in tackling cross-border crime and terrorism? If so, this would be profoundly 
counterproductive.

This uncertainty is compounded by the prime minister’s threat to “change the 
basis of Britain’s economic model” if she fails to get the agreement she wants. 
We have to assume this is not a hollow threat and that the prime minister is 
willing to rip up many of the economic policies and principles that have guided 
successive UK governments for decades.

This brings into question her commitment to a whole host of social, economic 
and workplace rights. There is no mandate for the government to do this and it 
would – contrary to the prime minister’s belief – be an act of self-harm for 
Britain, and diminish our place in the world.

Related: May can think big all she likes. Britain’s about to find out just how 
small it is | Rafael Behr 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-britain-prime-minister-speech>

Labour will of course fight against this throughout the negotiating process. 
We are also actively considering amendments to any legislation the prime 
minister may be required to introduce after the Supreme Court makes its 
imminent ruling on the article 50 case.

So while we did not learn everything about the prime minister’s intentions for 
Brexit, we did learn more. Frankly it is extraordinary it has taken this long, 
and that the prime minister chose to make this announcement in a speech rather 
than in parliament.

But there is now the basis of a plan. The prime minister owns it, and the 
decision to take Britain out of the single market is hers alone.

What matters now is how she delivers the aspirations she has set out. That is 
how this prime minister and this government will be judged.

Labour will hold her to account every step of the way.
 