
When I was 17, I (too) briefly set up a website to help young people with 
mental health issues. It was my small way of trying to help others who might be 
having a tough time,as I had 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/nov/09/a-moment-that-changed-me-the-kindness-of-a-stranger-in-the-pub>
. One of the things I mentioned was my wish that all schools should have a 
counsellor or mental health trained staff member attached, and how this could 
avert mental health crises in young people which might go on to affect them for 
life. That was 10 years ago.

Today, Theresa May has given a speech promising just that 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
. Shouldn’t I be thrilled? Well, on the face of it; yes. The prime minister has 
promised that all secondary schools will receive staff mental health training – 
a third in 2017, and the remainder over the next two years. The government has 
also said it will look at how schools can work more closely with mental health 
staff working in the NHS, and this is in addition to a report expected this 
spring.

We will reduce stigma around mental illness, says Theresa May
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/we-will-reduce-stigma-mental-illness-theresa-may>
As well as this much needed focus on young people’s mental health, May has 
announced plans for more workplace support, the expansion of “digital mental 
health services” and more investment in community services.

All of this is good. All of it. The problem is this: when it comes to mental 
health, the Tories are both the boy who cried wolf and the wolf in sheep’s 
clothing.

The government talks about mental health as if it is a zeitgeist issue, or a 
crisis it has just discovered – and expects to be praised for discovering. But 
the mental health crisis in the UK is not new, and has been exacerbated 
significantly because of its policies, despite David Cameron’s promises last 
year of “a mental health revolution 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-01-11/david-cameron-to-promise-1bn-mental-health-revolution/>
”.

How galling it is for May to talk of mental health as a “hidden injustice in 
this country” when for years doctors, mental health professionals, advocacy 
groups, charities, service users and campaigning politicians have been warning 
of the situation. How sickening, when over the last parliament frontline 
services have been left in ribbons, for May to speak of wanting to use the 
“power of government as a force for good” when the state of mental health care 
in this country, under her party’s watch, means people aretravelling 300 miles 
for beds 
<http://www.communitycare.co.uk/2015/07/15/mental-health-patients-sent-hundreds-miles-beds-area-placements-rise-23-per-cent/>
; 62% of mental health trusts require improvement 
<http://www.nationalhealthexecutive.com/Health-Care-News/cqc-too-many-mental-health-trusts-rated-requires-improvement->
;ligature points are found on wards 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-devon-35343924>; children are detained in 
police cells (which, to the government’s credit, is soon to bebanned 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/restricting-the-use-of-police-cells-for-those-experiencing-a-mental-health-crisis>
);waiting list targets are being missed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/jan/25/nhs-mental-health-crisis-long-wait-for-treatment>
;units closed <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-birmingham-37616801>.

In fact, as the Liberal Democrats’ health spokesperson Norman Lamb 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/norman-lamb> has been consistent in 
reiterating 
<http://www.huffingtonpost.co.uk/entry/norman-lamb-nhs-mental-health_uk_58727c5ce4b0a1ff704246c1?>
, millions of pounds earmarked for children’s mental health is diverted by 
clinical commissioning groups (CCGs) to other services, to help with thewider 
NHS crisis 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-cannot-ignore-nhs-crisis>
. Freedom of Information requests found 64% of CCGs used funds for other 
purposes and that57% of CCGs plan to reduce 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/jeremy-hunt-breaks-pledge-raise-8889117> 
their spending on child mental health in 2017.

Every time I see the £1.4bn figure trotted out 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/dec/21/cash-to-boost-childrens-mental-health-not-getting-through-says-charity>
 that the Tories pledged to children and adolescent mental health care by 2020, 
I have the urge to scream. It’s as big a smudge as the £350m figure that was
plastered on to the Vote Leave bus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/26/eu-referendum-brexit-vote-leave-iain-duncan-smith-nhs>
.



The maths does not add up. Just as it doesn’t add up when Jeremy Hunt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-hunt> talks about a seven-day NHS 
while not increasing the number of doctors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2016/aug/26/jeremy-hunt-can-not-bully-his-plans-for-a-seven-day-nhs-through>
. The take-up for psychiatry posts in particular is one of the lowest (as with 
emergency medicine).

That’s not even the full, dismal picture. According to NSPCC figures, a fifth 
of children referred to mental health services are denied access to help 
<http://www.nationalhealthexecutive.com/Health-Care-News/a-fifth-of-children-rejected-by-mental-health-services-due-to-high-clinical-threshold>
. This all too frequently leads to a situation in which children (and adults) 
have to reach their lowest point before help is available.

As for May’s pledge to increase the (tiny) £15m into community services, it’s 
a fantastic idea. Especially when GPs and A&E units are under such pressure and 
community initiatives are anecdotally effective 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/17/doctors-should-prescribe-gardening-for-patients-more-often-says-report>
. But a) this will not be adequate all of the time – these services cannot 
entirely replace secondary care, and b) as former shadow mental health minister 
Luciana Berger has said perhaps it would have been better ifchildren’s centres 
and outreach services hadn’t been cut 
<https://twitter.com/lucianaberger/status/818248456351416321>.

Mental illness is a result of misery, yet still we stigmatise it | Richard 
Bentall
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/feb/26/mental-illness-misery-childhood-traumas>
Digital services 
<https://www.theguardian.com/healthcare-network/2014/may/12/mental-health-digital-treatments-nhs>
 is an area with great potential. But we have to be careful that the push does 
not involve pathologising general worries online and that online services are 
not used as a substitute for face-to-face. Further workplace training is vital, 
and despite the figures on mental health’sadverse effects on UK productivity 
<https://www.kingsfund.org.uk/projects/mental-health-and-productivity-challenge>
, it has taken this long to be acknowledged.

So, sure, everything in May’s speech sounds wonderful. But I had a teacher who 
used to tell me – as probably everyone’s teacher used to tell them – that 
“actions speak louder than words”. (In fact, she said this so much it sort of 
undermined her point).

The Tories are the world champions of words and not actions. I cannot tell you 
how pleased May’s team seem to be with the fact that in her first speech as 
prime ministershe talked about mental health 
<http://www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/politics/theresa-mays-first-speech-to-the-nation-as-prime-minister-in-full-a7135301.html>
, as if in that single sentence she rolled back the years of cuts. So all of 
this is great –if it happens, and the precedent isn’t there. 

We should all be watching, and holding the government to account on this. 
May’s words are to be welcomed, as are Hunt’s, when he is around and speaks 
well. But we are in danger of being lulled into security by the walls of stigma 
surrounding mental health being brought down, while the help available washes 
away. All this positive talk belies the fact that frontline services are 
decimated and those in need of real help are suffering, and at length. And 
that’s the problem with building something up when you’ve knocked it down so 
vigorously: it takes a long time.
 