
One contentious aspect of the government’s free schools policy is the building 
of free schools in areas where there is no need for a new school. Complaints 
about this faded somewhat as the Department for Education tried to switch focus 
to areas of obvious real need for places.

This may be about to change. Theresa May’s joint chief of staff Nick Timothy,  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
 has called for more emphasis on setting up new schools in areas where there is 
no shortage of places.

May appoints former advisers as joint chiefs of staff
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/15/may-appoints-former-advisers-as-joint-chiefs-of-staff>
Speaking to an invited dinner audience at the pro-market thinktank the Centre 
for the Study of Market Reform of Education (CMRE) in May, Timothy called for a 
“two-track” system for free schools: “basic-need new schools” – institutions 
set up in areas with a shortage of places – and truer “free schools” where 
there was no place shortage (“basic need” in the jargon), but not enough 
schools rated good or outstanding by Ofsted.

In the CMRE’s summary 
<https://www.dropbox.com/s/esuvmqqzhhdpb8j/nicktimothymarkettalkmay2016.pdf?dl=0>
 of the event, Timothy is quoted saying: “The free schools policy was never 
intended as a basic-need programme. But with the school age population 
projected to grow at such a fast rate, and with the fiscal squeeze [kicking in] 
it was inevitable that the policy would become dominated by this agenda.”

However, the policy needed to be brought back to its roots as a market 
mechanism, he said. “The government is trying to create a market in the 
education system. This … is the right track for reform but … there’s a lot that 
still needs to be done.”

Timothy was at the time director of the free schools support group the New 
Schools Network <http://www.newschoolsnetwork.org/>. Several other suggestions 
in this speech – opening up the admissions criteria for Roman Catholic schools, 
urging universities to sponsor free schools and, most controversially of 
course, the expansion of grammar schools – were published as draft government 
policy in this month’s green paper. This looks like an idea to follow closely, 
then.

Academy chain keeps up the head count


Parents at two schools run by the same academy chain are furious about what 
seems like a revolving-door scenario for headteachers.

Are England’s academies becoming a cash cow for business?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/jun/12/academy-schools-cash-cow-business>
Whitehaven academy, in Cumbria, is now on its fifth principal, including 
interim appointments, since it was taken over by the Bright Tribe chain in 
January 2014. Former principal Philip Grant was absent for the final days of 
the summer term, and his departure was announced to parents in August.

Meanwhile, the Oldham Chronicle 
<http://www.oldham-chronicle.co.uk/news-features/8/news-headlines/99716/primary-school-in-meltdown>
 has reported that the town’s Werneth primary has had five principals, 
including “interim” heads, since Bright Tribe took over in February 2014. These 
included Dr Mujahid Ali, who announced his departure two days before the end of 
the summer term. The Chronicle reported that dozens of parents were “gravely 
concerned”.

The news comes amid controversy 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/financial-investigation-into-bright-tribe-trust-remains-hidden-by-education-secretary/>
 over the government’s decision not to disclose a recent financial 
investigation into the trust by the Education Funding Agency.

Bright Tribe said it had held a number of meetings with parents at Whitehaven 
and that it had had an “overwhelmingly positive response from parents on the 
direction the school is taking”.

Bright Tribe said it recognised “the importance of stability and having a 
strong leadership team within the school”. “Although the trust has sometimes 
had to make some difficult decisions, everything is centred around improving 
our schools and providing the best opportunities for our young people. Our 
strategy works.”
 