
Theresa May’s task as prime minister is simple. The good ship Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum> has left harbour. Storms 
of unknown ferocity lie ahead. Hatches must be battened and crew encouraged. 
The Tory faithful, pro-Brexit but suspicious of endless backsliding by their 
leaders, need reassuring. Nothing else of substance matters, only reassurance.

Will Theresa May’s speech appeal beyond Tory conference? Our panel’s verdict | 
Jonathan Freedland, Polly Toynbee, Anne McElvoy, Joseph Harker, Giles Fraser
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-speech-tory-conference-panel-verdict>
May gave that reassurance on Wednesday. She is unscrutinised by the public and 
is the most opaque of politicians. She duly had to plead with her party to come 
with her on the “quiet revolution”, entrusted to her government by the voters, 
to fashion a new “global Britain”. She was unequivocal. They should “stop 
quibbling” and withdraw Britain from the European Union. It should become again 
a “fully sovereign and independent country”, outward-looking and embracing free 
trade. As for filling in the details, that was for the “give and take” and wait 
and see. It was hardly satisfactory, but it served its purpose.

May’s other ambition was harder to articulate. It was to carve out a Mayism 
distinct from a Cameronism 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/theresa-may-draws-line-under-cameron-era-with-return-to-small-c-conservatism>
, to put her own stamp on a government for which the electorate did not vote. 
Her desire for that most tedious of cliches, change, in “a country that works 
for everyone”, was beyond banality. It is one of those political phrases that 
reads the same in any word order. In comparison, Tony Blair’s“third way” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2003/feb/10/labour.uk1> and David 
Cameron’s“big society” <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-10680062> seem like white 
papers. May’s constant reference to “everyone … ordinary people … working 
people… working-class people” bordered on a speechwriter’s tic.

We know May wants to be cut from a different cloth from Cameron. We are told 
of her supposed puritanism. She is Thames Valley lowland, not Cotswolds upland. 
Thesofa has been removed 
<http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3715490/Now-Mrs-ditches-Dave-s-cosy-sofas-table-study-PM-fulfils-pledge-rid-sofa-government-swapping-furniture-No10.html>
 from her office and replaced with a table, politics as Ikea catalogue. May’s 
ruthless culling of the Cameroons was clearly an emotional release, but it 
suggests a lack of tolerant collectivism. One chumocracy has gone, but only to 
make way for new chums.

May claims to oppose privilege, and believes in fairness, justice, hard work 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
 and love of country. Who would not? There was certainly a mischievous, 
leftwing tinge to her remarks. She ridiculed Labour as the new “nasty party” 
and must be the first Tory in decades to demand we should “remember the good 
that government can do”. She is certainly the first to speak in favour of 
taxation, if only to threaten tax dodgers, multinationals and “citizens of the 
world and of nowhere” – a felicitous phrase. May attacked the “liberal elite”, 
people who “patronised the electorate” over immigration and Brexit. We might 
forget that she too voted for remain. She clearly has “remorse issues”.

Of all vacuities, Tory centrism is the most empty. May ruined her pitch by 
then advocating the brutal divisiveness ofselective schools at 11 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/07/thatcher-grammars-poison-theresa-may-tories>
. Her belief that this “gives every child access to a good school place” is 
bereft of intellectual coherence. She must also have approved home secretary 
Amber Rudd’s“naming and shaming” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/amber-rudd-defends-proposal-to-make-firms-reveal-foreign-staff-numbers>
 of foreigners in employment. What this odious idea has to do with fairness and 
openness to free trade is a mystery. These are presumably bones tossed to the
party faithful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/05/10-tory-voters-on-may-brexit-and-where-the-party-goes-from-here>
 on the spur of the moment, to be later forgotten. We must hope so.

The trouble here is that so many of the decisions taken by May and her 
colleagues over recent weeks belie the rhetoric of her speech. Yes, therelaxing 
of rules on disability benefits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/01/disability-and-illness-test-u-turn-is-a-small-victory-but-the-fight-goes-on>
 was kind. But onobesity policy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/19/theresa-may-climbdown-obesity-junk-food-industry-public-health>
, partyfundraising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/02/theresa-may-3150-lunch-democracy-for-sale-lobbyists>
,elected mayors 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/aug/23/conservative-party-politics-policy-devolution-mayors-theresa-may>
 andimmigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
, Downing Street has shown itself to be vulnerable to the same lobbyists and 
headline-seekers that dogged Cameron and George Osborne.

May made a weak, indeed catastrophic, decision on Hinkley Point 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/sep/15/theresa-may-accused-backing-down-hinkley-point-c-deal>
. She is capitulating to pressure for the pointlessHS2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/sep/19/hs2-rail-project-jobs-bonanza-high-speed-rail-industry-leaders>
, rather than pushing rail investment to the north. She seems likely to do the 
same on Heathrow. These hard choices mock her professed eagerness to boost 
under-privileged regions, the powerless and the poor. They suggest the Downing 
Street apparatchiks cannot tell good infrastructure from bad, or disentangle 
private gain from public interest. If this is the template for Brexit, it 
augurs chaos.

May is gambling. She feels she is on a roll. She shows no sign of humility 
towards her lack of a personal mandate. She is cruelly dismissive of the legacy 
of the man, David Cameron, who holds that mandate, and who put her where she 
is. She may regard the June referendum as trumping the 2015 election, but she 
too “lost” that referendum. And however it is spun, the referendum was on 
Brexit, not a government as a whole.

We are witnessing nothing less than a Tory reformation | Rafael Behr
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/oct/05/birmingham-witnessing-tory-reformation-conservative-conference-brexit>
May won a rousing conference reception. She had made friends. But a shrewd 
politician knows that more important is her choice of enemies. Hovering in the 
wings are those who, in Thatcher’s day, were the “wets”, the dispossessed 
ancients, the unrepentant remainers. May knows she has a small majority in 
parliament. She is defying constitutional propriety by trying to give MPs as 
little say in the Brexit process as possible. She must hope this show of 
constituency enthusiasm will scare remain MPs into obedience.

That may not work. The Cameroons and the remainers may be crushed and silent, 
but when the going gets tough, they may become what John Major called “the 
bastards”. May could yet find herself having more trouble with her own 
backbenchers than those opposite. She and Jeremy Corbyn may find they have 
something in common.

Brexit never merited the overarching importance it has acquired. The actual 
risk to trade in tariff-sensitive goods with Europe is minimal to the British 
economy – however much noise the manufacturers like to make. Markets are 
showing themselves masters of realpolitik. They are the true shock-absorbers of 
policy.

But EU withdrawal is iron in the soul of current British politics. Even if we 
spend a decade getting over it – and perhaps then half-reverse it – withdrawal 
there must be.

May was wise to leave no one in any doubt of this. But she must now be 
Brexit’s master mariner. She has taken control of the bridge and has calmed the 
nerves of the crew. So far so good. But as to what lies ahead, for the country 
or for her, all is unknown.
 