
In a period of political intimidation, time has been called on Nicola 
Sturgeon’s threat to hold asecond Scottish independence referendum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/20/second-scottish-independence-referendum-bill-published>
. Set aside the confusion between access to the single market and staying in 
parts of the custom union, as Theresa May called for inher speech on the UK’s 
Brexit aims 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/theresa-may-brexit-speech-prime-minister-britain>
, it is clear she intends to give up membership of the single market.

Related: Nicola Sturgeon has marched her party to the top of the hill. Where 
next? | Libby Brooks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/25/nicola-sturgeon-snp-referendum>

This triggers a threat by Scotland’s first minister made as recently as 10 
days agoon the Andrew Marr show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/sturgeon-reiterates-hard-brexit-threat-scottish-independence-vote-referendum>
 that in the event of UK departure from the single market, she would hold a 
second referendum. She told Marr she “wasn’t bluffing” over her threat, leaving 
her no choice in the light of May’s declaration.

However, in her first interview since the prime minister’s speech, Sturgeon 
seemed to step back from the threat. She told the BBC that a Scottish 
independence vote was“undoubtedly” closer 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-scotland-scotland-politics-38642213?intlink_from_url=http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/topics/8e6535d3-574d-4056-b578-555132b7ed69/nicola-sturgeon&link_location=live-reporting-story>
, and sources briefed newspapers that another referendum was “all but 
inevitable”.

This might best be read as buying some time while hoping that the global 
reaction to May’s speech also draws attention away from the Scottish question. 
The reason Sturgeon needs time to reflect is the awkwardness of the situation 
she has boxed herself into. Her mandate for resisting Brexit stems from the62% 
majority in Scotland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
 for staying in the EU in the June 2016 referendum.

Given Scotland <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/scotland> voted to remain a 
part of the UK in 2014, and the 2016 vote was UK-wide, her only leverage in the 
matter has been to hold another independence vote. Her problem is that various 
styles of attack on Brexit have not encouraged a rise in support for 
independence.

In the immediate aftermath of the Brexit referendum, she said another Scottish 
referendum was“on the table” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/nicola-sturgeon-second-scottish-independence-referendum-on-the-table-video>
, then her government argued the EU vote didn’t include a specific mandate for 
leaving the single market, and she appeared to bargain with the prime minister, 
suggesting a“soft” Brexit would delay a second independence vote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/16/nicola-sturgeon-second-scottish-referendum-likely-in-event-of-hard-brexit>
.

Just before Christmas the Scottish government issued the “Scotland’s place in 
Europe” <http://www.gov.scot/Publications/2016/12/9234> paper, which restated 
arguments about why Sturgeon would prefer to stay in the EU, but did not 
provide an irresistible reason for May to take heed of Sturgeon’s cry. Finally, 
the threat was restated in various broadcasting studios 10 days ago.

The SNP prefers to build support for independence by exploiting a sense of 
democratic deficit with the rest of the UK. In this instance it hasn’t yet 
worked –esteemed pollster John Curtice <http://whatscotlandthinks.org/> records 
support for another independence referendum within the next two years at under 
40%, while over 60% are against. Nationalists spin this as positive – support 
for independence is still around the level it was in the 2014 vote, higher 
consistently than at any previous time. However, it is evidently not high 
enough to win a second referendum, with observers reckoning Sturgeon would want 
a consistent 55%-and-above support before going to the country.

Further, at least some of the Scots who voted for Brexit are or were Scottish 
independence <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/scottish-independence> 
supporters. Their political instincts about “bringing power home” may have been 
met – indeed, may be actively challenged by Sturgeon’s insistence that Scotland 
is better off in the EU. The second big problem for Sturgeon is that the case 
for an independent Scotland within the EU, while the rest of the UK is outside, 
is much harder to make than previous versions. Where the SNP once claimed 
sterling as the future currency, that seems impossible if Scotland was in the 
EU and England out. Nationalists had always downplayed a hard border at Berwick 
and Carlisle, and spoken of the family of nations – again, this seems very 
difficult to achieve if London and Edinburgh are in different unions.

Meanwhile, Scotland’s economy has suffered since 2014, with oil revenues 
dramatically down 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/aug/24/scottish-finances-worsen-fall-oil-revenues-15bn-deficit>
 and a large bill for North Sea decommissioning looming. The SNP has never been 
strong on the policy benefit or practicalities of independence, so much so that 
a group of non-party nationalists met only last week to try to fill the 
intellectual void at an event calledBuild 
<https://www.eventbrite.com/e/scottish-independence-convention-presents-build-policy-strategy-movement-tickets-28451446041>
.

Related: The UK as we know it can’t survive Brexit and Trump | Gerry Hassan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/17/britain-brexit-trump-scotland-northern-ireland-wales>

Perhaps Sturgeon’s only break comes in the form of May’s own threatening 
behaviour. The prime minister’s tone towards the EU suggests she is engaged in 
some posturing and bluffing of her own, which could in time create the kind of 
political confusion that the SNP traditionally exploits well.

In the meantime, Scotland’s first minister appears to have run out of words 
and threats. She said she wasn’t bluffing, but now her bluff has been called, 
so she has to name a date for another independence referendum and/or reveal 
details on what an independent Scotland in Europe would look like. The longer 
both of those remain absent, the more her credibility is threatened.
 