
The shadow foreign secretary has compared the wave of popular support for 
Donald Trump’s anti-establishment message to the similarly unexpected rise of
Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, energised 
for similar reasons.

Emily Thornberry <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/emily-thornberry> said 
although the values of the Labour leader and the Republican president-elect 
were very different, both had a message about the political system that 
resonated.


But Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nicola-sturgeon>, warned that legitimate 
concerns about economic alienation must never be allowed to give a veneer of 
respect to racism, misogyny and intolerance.

Thornberry told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I think it’s right there are 
hundreds and thousands energised by Jeremy Corbyn being the leader of theLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party so there are some 
similarities.” She added that it was clear their principles did not align.

What do Jeremy Corbyn and Donald Trump have in common? | David Shariatmadari
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/18/authenticity-matters-politics-sturgeon-corbyn-trump>
Trump’s message on job creation and industry also resonated, Thornberry said. 
“To give him his credit, I never thought I’d say this, butDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> was talking about the 
importance of investing in jobs and infrastructure and in the economies across 
the country, not just the main cities, and that’s right.”

Corbyn has called Trump’s victory in the US an “unmistakable rejection of a 
political establishment and an economic system that simply isn’t working for 
most people”, while expressing unease at the divisive rhetoric of Trump’s 
campaign.

Thornberry said Corbyn’s statement should not be taken as any form of 
endorsement of Trump’s message. “I don’t think it would be right to say Jeremy 
welcomes it but I think he recognises what is happening,” she said.

“There are too many people, too many regions, who feel that politics at the 
moment doesn’t represent their interests. He’s right to say so. The system has 
to be shaken up.”

Thornberry said Labour had popular messages that could be delivered more 
deftly. “We are an alternative, we will be a good alternative and we have to 
find a way to express that clearly.

“Politics in Britain is going very fast indeed. I don’t bet but I think the 
wheel will turn.”

Addressing the Holyrood chamber at first minister’s question’s, Sturgeon went 
further than her initial statement on Trump’s shock victory on Wednesday – in 
which she urged the president-elect to prove that he could act for all US 
citizens regardless of race or background – declaring: “I’m not prepared to be 
a politician that maintains a diplomatic silence in the face of racism, 
misogyny or hatred of any kind.”

Describing some of the views expressed by Trump during his campaign as “deeply 
abhorrent”, she said there was more of an obligation than ever “for people of 
progressive opinion the world over to stand up and be counted”.

She added: “There is no doubt whatsoever that many people feel economically 
alienated, but we must never allow those legitimate concerns to give a veneer 
of respectability to racism, misogyny and intolerance.”

Responding to a series of questions from the Scottish Labour leader, Kezia 
Dugdale, who herself travelled to the United States last week to campaign for 
Hillary Clinton, she said that the Democratic candidate’s defeat “tells us we 
are not as far down road to gender equality as we hoped we were”.

Dugdale warned that Trump’s behaviour towards women sent “a dangerous signal 
across the world”.

But Sturgeon also insisted that, while she regretted the result, she respected 
the decision of the American people and wanted to engage “positively and 
constructively” with the next US administration.

May congratulates Trump on victory but Corbyn voices fears
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/09/theresa-may-congratulates-us-election-win>
Sturgeon stripped Trump of his honorary role as a Scottish business ambassador 
last year, after his attack on Mexicans and Muslims, describing his rhetoric as 
“obnoxious and offensive”.


The former work and pensions secretary Iain Duncan Smith wrote in a piece for 
ConservativeHome 
<http://www.conservativehome.com/platform/2016/11/iain-duncan-smith-trumps-election-gives-us-a-chance-to-rebuild-the-special-relationship.html>
 on Thursday that Trump’s US presidency could be a golden opportunity for 
British influence across the Atlantic because of the parallels with the popular 
movement to leave the EU.

Duncan Smith said there could be no more complacency about the challenge to 
the political establishment. “Whatever our own personal feelings about the 
winner, having gone through a similar shakeup here in the UK we are now 
uniquely placed to help shape the future,” he wrote.

The Tory MP had previously hinted at support for the Republican, telling LBC 
<http://www.mirror.co.uk/news/uk-news/iain-duncan-smith-backs-donald-8103691> 
radio he “wouldn’t be voting for Clinton, that’s for sure” and quoting the US 
House of Representatives speaker, Paul Ryan, as saying Trump was a “very decent 
man who said he’d be better”.

After it emerged during the campaign that Trump had spoken about molesting 
women being easier because of his fame 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/donald-trump-leaked-recording-women>
, Duncan Smith’s office said those comments should not be taken as an 
endorsement of Trump.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fsupport-donald-trump-similar-rise-jeremy-corbyn-emily-thornberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82e34082b99b4bb7a2d69f9d6920a6c2e5750e71%2F0_33_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There%20are%20similarities%20between%20Trump%20and%20Corbyn%2C%20says%20Thornberry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fsupport-donald-trump-similar-rise-jeremy-corbyn-emily-thornberry%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%20are%20similarities%20between%20Trump%20and%20Corbyn%2C%20says%20Thornberry&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fnov%2F10%2Fsupport-donald-trump-similar-rise-jeremy-corbyn-emily-thornberry%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F82e34082b99b4bb7a2d69f9d6920a6c2e5750e71%2F0_33_4087_2453%2F4087.jpg>
 Iain Duncan Smith said Theresa May was well placed to influence Donald Trump’s 
foreign policy. Photograph: James Gourley/Rex/Shutterstock 
In his piece on Thursday, Duncan Smith said Britain could “indulge ourselves 
in an orgy of complaint” about the US vote or choose to engage constructively. 
“After all, Trump has already indicated that he regards the UK as a close ally 
and friend of the United States, and that when ready the UK would be his first 
choice for initiating a new trade deal.”

Theresa May was well placed to influence Trump’s foreign policy, Duncan Smith 
said. Trump has previously suggested he woulderect more trade barriers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/trumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines>
 to protect US industry and consider withdrawing or minimisingAmerica’s Nato 
commitments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/21/donald-trump-america-automatically-nato-allies-under-attack>
.

“[May] has also made it clear that as we leave the EU we want to ensure we 
control migration and ensure the economy works for those in the bottom half of 
the income scale,” Duncan Smith said. “These were concerns held by many in the 
USA as well.

“We are, however, committed to do that through free trade and as we do so we 
can help the USA shape its own programme as the new American administration 
seeks to deliver to the same group of people.”

Downing Street confirmed that May was preparing for a phone call with Trump. 
Though the prime minister was at pains not to express any preference during the 
race for the White House, she described the president-elect’s call to ban 
Muslims from entering the US as “divisive, unhelpful and wrong” when she was 
home secretary.
 