
Philip Hammond <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/philip-hammond> took 
comfort from the latest GDP figures – and well he might. When the chancellor 
moved into No 11 there was still the possibility that doom-and-gloom forecasts 
by the International Monetary Fund and even the Treasury itself would come to 
pass.

That Britain has avoided a recession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/uk-economy-defies-brexit-slowdown-fears>
 and, more than that, maintained an annual growth rate of around 2% is a 
testament to the resilience of an economy that has grown solidly for the last 
three years and surpassed all other G7 countries this year.

Seeking further reassurance, Hammond need look no further than lobbyists for 
the manufacturing sector, who say the dip in factory output over the three 
months to the end of September was temporary and merely reflects a slowdown 
from a stellar performance earlier in the year. House builders, who almost 
downed tools in the first half of the year, claim the foundations are in place 
for a construction boom in 2017.

The building and manufacturing sectors were among the biggest drags on the 
economy’s recent performance, so these messages could act as a balm on Treasury 
thinking, encouraging Hammond to think that all he needs to say in next month’s 
autumn statement is “steady as she goes”.

That would be a mistake. And Hammond’s response shows he thinks so too.

In TV interviews he said 
<http://news.sky.com/video/we-negotiate-with-the-eu-from-a-position-of-strength-10633889>
 there is worse to come next year as the uncertainty grows over what kind of 
relationship we can secure with the European Union. Yes, the economy is 
resilient and, yes, the UK has a strong bargaining position. But he was clear 
it will be a rough ride and the economy will need government support.

The gloomiest economic forecasts earlier in the year were based on Britain 
filing for a quickie divorce immediately after a leave vote and then becoming 
trapped in a quagmire of political wrangling.

Hammond is concerned that the UK has merely delayed the date when the battle 
begins, possibly to next March when article 50 is triggered or when the EU’s 
response is published. At whichever point, the slugging match between London 
and Brussels could make the clash between West Ham and Chelsea fans this week 
look as tame as an afternoon tea dance. It follows that without a string of 
Treasury initiatives already in place, consumer confidence could evaporate more 
than it already has and the economy could tank.


However, the suspicion must be that he backs away from making significant 
gestures. For one thing, six years of austerity have left him with a string of 
public services crying out for more cash, and not just the NHS.

If he considers it more important to save some services from ruin, it could 
eat up much of the cash he has reclaimed after ditching George Osborne’s strict 
deficit reduction plans.

Of course, he could separate investment spending from the day-to-day demands 
of Whitehall departments, just as Strictly star and former shadow chancellor Ed 
Balls said he would before the 2015 election. It was an expansive stance that 
Balls has repeated on the dance floor. That’s not Hammond’s style and probably 
never will be.

Nissan calls May’s bluff

Nissan has played its hand early and won 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/nissan-to-make-new-qashqai-and-x-trail-models-in-britain>
. It called on Theresa May to show how much she supported manufacturing 
businesses within weeks of the Brexit vote knowing No10 was still picking a 
team to navigate the treacherous article 50 talks. The prime minister’s hand 
was weak.

Was the Japanese carmaker bluffing? What government can afford to find out. 
Not when a world-beating, export-oriented factory is at stake.

All we know is what Nissan’s chief executive, Carlos Ghosn, has said, which is 
that the promised support was sufficient for him to sanction building the 
Qashqai and X-Trail SUV at the Sunderland factory.

No 10 denies 'sweetheart deal' with Nissan
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/no-10-denies-sweetheart-deal-with-nissan>
So we don’t know very much. Yet the implications of any significant deal 
appear to be extremely dangerous for the government 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/27/no-10-denies-sweetheart-deal-with-nissan>
when it means that May could come under siege from other manufacturers and 
possibly all exporters in search of compensation for paying EU tariffs once the 
UK leaves the union.

May might intend to be selective. No 10 could signal that only systemically 
important businesses need apply. But any tariff subsidies are, on the face of 
it, in contravention of World Trade Organisation rules. And even if there is a 
way round theWTO <https://www.theguardian.com/world/wto>, the EU is hardly 
likely to welcome “artificially” cheap British goods. Brussels was quick to 
slap an anti-dumping tariff on Chinese steel. What’s to say it will take a 
kinder view of British-made cars.

Blank faces greet blank cheques

Barclays has set aside a further £600m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/27/barclays-ppi-costs-rise-with-600m-bill>
 to cover claims for mis-selling payment protection insurance (PPI) only a day 
after Lloyds admitted it needed to find another £1bn for the same reason.


The total PPI costs the industry will have to swallow now exceeds £40bn and 
can safely be said to rank as the greatest single compensation claim against 
the banking sector.

What customers will want to know now is whether the regulator can do a better 
job next time?That task falls to a former Bank of England lifer, Andrew Bailey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/25/financial-conduct-authority-andrew-bailey-new-city-agenda-report>
, who recently took control of the Financial Conduct Authority. This week he 
asked the public to help him define what the watchdog should do. If PPI tells 
him anything, it is that he must develop a sensitive nose for scandal.

His predecessors ignored PPI warnings for years, dismissing the idea that 
banks could possibly sell an insurance product that was hugely over-priced and 
virtually impossible to claim. Hopefully he will combine his extensive 
knowledge of the City with a healthy scepticism of its practices.
 