
Did I miss the moment – perhaps it happened over the summer – when Nigel 
Farage was installed as leader of the country? I ask because a man who has 
serially failed to get elected to the House of Commons seems to be running the 
show. Not only will parliament spend the next four years, at least, making real 
Farage’s dream of a British exit from the European Union, we now know it will 
also be consumed with another Farage obsession: the return of the grammar 
school. No doubt we should brace ourselves for legislation bringing back 
“proper dress” for the theatre, restoring imperial weights and measures, and 
making the London tube’s Circle line a circle again (to take three items that 
allappeared in Ukip’s 2010 manifesto 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/23/the-ukip-politices-disowned-by-nigel-farage>
).

May's grammar school plans 'put six years of educational progress at risk'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/mays-grammar-school-plans-put-six-years-of-educational-progress-at-risk>
The speech delivered by Theresa May today is the death certificate of the Tory 
modernisation project 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/sep/09/mays-grammar-school-plans-put-six-years-of-educational-progress-at-risk>
. It may behoodies and huskies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/21/how-steve-hilton-turned-on-his-friend-and-ex-boss-david-cameron>
 that we remember, but David Cameron defined himself early by forcing 
Conservatives to move on two emblematic questions. He insisted they stop 
“banging on about Europe” and abandon their nostalgic longing for grammar 
schools. His successor has now decreed her government will devote itself to 
little else.

For a while there was a school of optimistic, remain-voting thought that saw 
May as a secret ally. It held that she was delayingarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/25/article-50-brexit-debate-britain-eu>
 because she privately knows Brexit is bonkers; by appointing her three 
Brexiteers – Boris Johnson, David Davis and Liam Fox – she was setting them up 
to fail; she would eventually persuade her party and the country to see sense 
and accept a Brexit that didn’t quite mean Brexit. In this rose-coloured view, 
the grammar school promise was a lump of pre-emptive red meat, lobbed early to 
the Tory backbenches to placate them for the European disappointment to come.

But now that we’ve heard the speech, her first policy address as PM, we should 
junk that view. It’s time to accept that May means it, at least when it comes 
to education. She’s a believer. Note that back in 2000, when she was shadow 
education secretary, she wassticking up for grammars 
<https://twitter.com/rosschawkins/status/774150436399886336>, praising them for 
providing “opportunity irrespective of family means or background”. With May, 
we should probably get used to taking things at face value: there may be no 
hidden meanings.

Which is not to say that May’s move today was without politics. It had plenty 
and not all of it designed to tickle the tummy of Tory backwoodsmen. There was 
a renewed play for those Ed Miliband called thesqueezed middle 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2014/jan/14/ed-miliband-squeezed-middle-class>
, Britons not poor enough to get all-encompassing state help but “just 
managing” to get by, on a household income of between £16,000 and £21,000 a 
year. Strikingly, May referred nine times to “ordinary, working class people”, 
embracing an explicit language of class always avoided by Tony Blair and Gordon 
Brown (they preferred “hard-working families”.) And though the grammars 
proposal got all the attention, May announced other steps aimed at boosting 
meritocracy, including demands that private schools do more for the deprived if 
they are to keep their advantageous tax status – an idealifted directly from 
Miliband’s 2015 manifesto 
<http://blogs.spectator.co.uk/2016/09/theresa-may-makes-grammar-schools-pitch/?utm_source=Adestra&utm_medium=email&utm_campaign=Lunchtime_Espresso_09092016>
.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-education-shakeup-to-make-uk-a-great-meritocracy-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%3A%20education%20shakeup%20to%20make%20UK%20a%20'great%20meritocracy'%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-education-shakeup-to-make-uk-a-great-meritocracy-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%3A%20education%20shakeup%20to%20make%20UK%20a%20%27great%20meritocracy%27%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fsep%2F09%2Ftheresa-may-education-shakeup-to-make-uk-a-great-meritocracy-video&media=>
Theresa May: education shakeup to make UK a “great meritocracy” - video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/video/2016/sep/09/theresa-may-education-shakeup-to-make-uk-a-great-meritocracy-video>
Any defence of May would note all this and add that the Tory desire to revive 
grammar schools is usually well intentioned. It might rest on nostalgia, but 
it’s nostalgia for an era when social mobility was real, a period from the 
1940s to the 1960s when doors were opened to bright working-class children that 
had previously been closed. True, thismisreads the history somewhat: social 
mobility 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/08/the-guardian-view-on-grammar-schools-the-wrong-answer-but-the-right-question>
 was expanding for myriad reasons then, from the explosion in white-collar jobs 
to the equalising effect of the war. But to hanker for such an expansion in 
life chances is not, in itself, to be condemned.

So let’s assume that those who advocate the return of grammar schools do so in 
good faith. The argument rests on two questions. Is selection purely on 
academic merit desirable? And, if it is, is it even possible?

On the first, it’s always going to be hard for me to denounce selective 
education. It’s not the schooling my children are getting – as it happens, 
they’ve only ever gone to nonselective state schools – but it is the education 
I had, and benefited from, at a fee-paying school. Indeed, I am that rare 
creature in the London liberal commentariat: I send my kids to state schools 
but (occasionally) feel guilty about it – because I worry they might not be 
getting the opportunities I had. Paul Mason puts it well when, recalling his 
own experience in Bolton, he describes grammar schools as, at their best,
“intellectual hothouses bringing working-class kids to the world of ideas and 
debate”. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/grammar-schools-arent-fit-for-the-world-of-the-future>
 I went to a London public school so the composition was different, but the 
hothouse bit, the ideas and debate, I recognise – and to pretend that had 
nothing to do with academic selection is dishonest.

Grammar schools aren’t fit for the world of the future | Paul Mason
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/08/grammar-schools-arent-fit-for-the-world-of-the-future>
But the issue is not whether selection is good for those who get selected. The 
rawer problem is who gets chosen. If we could be confident that every place in 
one of May’s new grammars went to a kid whose parents could never afford to go 
private, or live near a top state school, that would be one thing. But we know 
it won’t be like that. We know it will be sharp-elbowed, affluent parents armed 
with cultural and social capital who will get their kids in. Experience tells 
us there’s no such thing as a“tutor-proof” admission test 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/14/fairer-school-admissions-scrap-selection>
, that prep schools will coach their pupils to pass, just as they’ve always 
done and do now. Note that in the grammar schools that exist today, just3% of 
pupils are on free school meals 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2013/nov/08/grammar-schools-admit-more-privately-educated-children>
, when the national average is 18%. They are enclaves of the successful middle 
class.

And this is not to condemn those parents, incidentally. One of the deformities 
of our education debate is that we conduct it as if it were a matter of 
personal morality, judging parents for the ethics of their choice. But most 
human beings will always seek the very best education for their children, and 
that’s perfectly natural. Rather than faulting and judging individual 
behaviour, we need to devise a system that works for the collective good.

Which brings us to the second key problem with selection. Even if May somehow 
did achieve the impossible, and ensured admission went only to the brightest 
and most needy, that would still leave the matter of all those who do not get 
in. She insists that there will be no return to the “binary” choice of old, but 
there is no way around it. Selection means some are selected and some are not.

Sure, she’ll ensure the non-grammars won’t be called secondary moderns. 
There’ll be some new, “inclusive” name for them. But everyone will know.

May says none of this will matter, because these days there’s such a range of 
schools, many of which are flourishing: faith schools, academies and the like. 
But those schools have done well, in London especially, partly because there is 
no stigma attached to them, no question that they are for “rejects”. The proof 
comes in the presence of a good number of bright, committed pupils. But if the 
clever kids in every town are creamed off, suddenly those other schools won’t 
look quite so shiny or appealing. There’ll be the grammar school and the rest, 
just as in the old days.

May is right to want a system where even the poorest child can get a 
world-class education. But no matter how rosy her memories, she’s looking in 
the wrong place.
 