
Theresa May’s two closest aides have visited Washington to pave the way for a 
meeting between the prime minister andDonald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> in the spring, No 10 has 
confirmed.

Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, May’s joint chiefs of staff, flew to the US 
capital last month to liaise with Trump’s advisers after the incoming president 
appeared to be more interested in meeting former Ukip leaderNigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> than the prime minister.

“The prime minister suggested it would be a good idea for key staff from both 
teams to meet. President-elect Trump agreed this would be useful,” Downing 
Streettold Bloomberg 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/politics/articles/2017-01-05/may-said-to-send-top-aides-to-u-s-to-build-bridges-with-trump>
. “We are pleased to have been able to make that happen and the prime minister 
looks forward to visiting the new president in the spring.”

Farage, who appeared at a rally during Trump’s campaign for the White House, 
was picturedgrinning triumphantly alongside the president-elect at Trump Tower 
just days after the result was announced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/12/nigel-farage-arrives-in-new-york-to-meet-president-elect>
.

Negotiating a favourable trade deal with the US will be crucial as Britain 
leaves the European Union and tries to forge a new place in the global economy. 
Barack Obama flew to London during the referendum campaign to warn that Britain 
would beat the “back of the queue” for trade talks after Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/apr/22/barack-obama-brexit-uk-back-of-queue-for-trade-talks>
.

Trump has struck a more positive note, although he has expressed scepticism 
about trade deals more generally, pledging to withdraw from the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership with Japan, for example, and to throw up new barriers against 
imports.

May, like her predecessor David Cameron, had previously expressed concern 
about Trump’s stance on immigration, saying in December 2015 that his 
suggestion that Muslims should not be allowed to enter the US was, “divisive, 
unhelpful and wrong”.

But she welcomed his election unreservedly, unlike German chancellor Angela 
Merkel, who issued a carefully-worded message, saying: “Germany and America are 
bound by common values — democracy, freedom, as well as respect for the rule of 
law and the dignity of each and every person, regardless of their origin, skin 
colour, creed, gender, sexual orientation, or political views. It is based on 
these values that I wish to offer close cooperation, both with me personally 
and between our countries’ governments.”

May took the unusual step last week of issuing a statement distancing Britain 
from a speech made by the outgoing US secretary of state, John Kerry, about 
Israel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/29/theresa-may-john-kerry-comments-israel-palestine-un-resolution>
, in a move widely seen as seeking to strengthen ties with Trump.
 