
Theresa May <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/theresamay> will use a major 
speech to stake her boldest claim yet to Labour’s mantle as the party for 
social justice, promising that the government will tackle “everyday injustices” 
affecting working-class Britons.

In an address to the Charity Commission on Monday, the prime minister will 
pledge to build “a shared society” that respects the “bonds of family, 
community, citizenship and strong institutions”.

Theresa May urged to get a grip on NHS as winter crisis spirals
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/07/theresa-may-urged-to-get-grip-on-nhs-winter-crisis>
The broad-ranging speech is likely to be seen as a bid to deflect allegations 
that May’s government is too distracted by Brexit to pursue a coherent domestic 
policy agenda, as well as a further pitch to voters who feel they are “just 
about managing”.

She is expected to say: “The shared society is one that doesn’t just value our 
individual rights but focuses rather more on the responsibilities we have to 
one another. It’s a society that respects the bonds that we share as a union of 
people and nations.

“The bonds of family, community, citizenship, strong institutions. And it’s a 
society that recognises the obligations we have as citizens – obligations that 
make our society work.”

Though May’s move to brand her social justice agenda as “the shared society” 
has obvious parallels with her predecessor David Cameron’s oft-derided “big 
society” initiative – envisioned as a way to put people in control of local 
services and generate social cohesion – the prime minister is expected to 
present her own agenda as a definitive break with past policy.

Criticising previous governments’ supposedly disproportionate focus on the 
poorest in society, she will say: “It means making a significant shift in the 
way that government works in Britain. Because government and politicians have 
for years talked the language of social justice – where we help the very 
poorest – and social mobility – where we help the brightest among the poor. But 
to deliver the change we need and build that shared society, we must move 
beyond this agenda and deliver real social reform across every layer of society 
so that those who feel the system is stacked against them – those just above 
the threshold that attracts the government’s focus today yet those who are by 
no means rich or well off – are also given the help they need.

“Because people who are just managing, just getting by, don’t need a 
government that will get out of the way, they need a government that will make 
the system work for them. An active government that will … allow them to share 
in the growing prosperity of post-Brexit Britain.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20'divisive'%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Theresa%20May%20addresses%20%27divisive%27%20Brexit%20in%20new%20year%20message%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Ftheresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video&media=>
Theresa May addresses ‘divisive’ Brexit in new year message 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/theresa-may-reassure-remainers-brexit-europe-new-year-message-video>
Her address represents an attempt to shift the political debate to relatively 
safe ground for the government, which has faced a week of intense criticism 
over its Brexit strategy and its response to theresignation of Sir Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
, the UK’s representative in Brussels.

In a sign that the government’s honeymoon has ended, May was called “Theresa 
Maybe” and compared to her predecessor Gordon Brown in the right-leaning
Economist magazine 
<http://www.economist.com/news/leaders/21713837-after-six-months-what-new-prime-minister-stands-still-unclearperhaps-even>
.

Her speech will revisit popular themes from her centrist pitch for the Tory 
leadership – such as reducing inequality and cracking down on tax avoidance and 
unscrupulous corporate practices – and will also reject “laissez-faire 
liberalism” and set out an interventionist strategy.

Outlining her plans for a “new philosophy that means that means government 
stepping up” above and beyond the remit of the traditional welfare state, May 
will signal her intent to divert government resources to helping families who 
are “just about managing”. She will tell the Charity Commission that her 
government will go “further to help those who have been ignored by government 
for too long because they don’t fall into the income bracket that makes them 
qualify for welfare support”.

The chancellor offered modest giveaways to such families in his autumn 
statement in November, including an increase in the tax-free personal allowance 
and a freeze on fuel duty.

The PM’s bid to renew her social reform agenda was immediately criticised by 
Tim Farron, the Liberal Democrat leader, as an attempt to distract from Tory 
struggles over Brexit. “This government is a complete and utter shambles and 
has no cohesive agenda. All it seems to do is jump from one Brexit crisis to 
the next”.
 