
Theresa May will lay out her plans for Britain’s exit from the European Union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/eu> on Tuesday, in a major speech that will 
be closely scrutinised in financial markets, and by other European leaders.


The prime minister has come under intense political pressure to reveal more 
details of her negotiating priorities before she triggersarticle 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
, the formal divorce process from the EU.

May promised senior MPs before Christmas that she would make a speech in the 
new year, “setting out more about our approach and about the opportunity I 
think we have as a country to use this process to forge a truly global Britain 
that embraces and trades with countries across the world”.

She has signalled some key principles, including taking control of immigration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/oct/02/brexit-theresa-may-prioritises-immigration-curbs-over-free-movement>
, and leaving the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice, which polices 
the single market.

May has also promised MPs she will publish a “plan” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/may-says-she-will-reveal-brexit-plan-before-triggering-article-50>
 but Downing Street would not say whether it would be produced alongside the 
speech. Some MPs hoped for a formal government white paper; but it is expected 
to be a slimmer document, setting out a menu of options.

The pound fell sharply on the foreign exchanges after she announced those 
priorities in her party conference speech, which traders interpreted as 
pointing to a so-called “hard Brexit”.

May has since pledged to deliver a “red, white and blue Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/06/theresa-may-calls-for-red-white-and-blue-brexit>
”, and stressed that she wants the best “trade deal” possible with the EU.

But she has offered few other clues about her stance – Ivan Rogers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/03/uk-ambassador-to-eu-quits-amid-brexit-row>
, the government’s most senior representative at the EU, abruptly resigned 
earlier this month warning against “muddled thinking”, amid aturf war between 
Whitehall departments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/06/dexeu-ivan-rogers-ukrep-oliver-robbins-sms4>
 about who will run the negotiations.

Keir Starmer, the shadow Brexit secretary, said: “The prime minister must take 
this opportunity to reassure the country that she has a plan for Brexit and 
that she will fight for a deal that prioritises jobs, the economy and delivers 
trading arrangements that are free of tariffs and bureaucratic impediments. 
With just 10 or 11 weeks to go before the triggering of article 50, time is 
running out.”

The speech will come as the government awaits the verdict in the supreme court 
appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/live/2016/dec/08/brexit-article-50-supreme-court-hearing-day-four-live-updates>
 that will determine whether it must consult parliament before pressing ahead 
with Brexit. Ministers have prepared more than one draft of a bill that could 
be tabled urgently if, as they expect, the government loses.

MPs have held a series of debates about Brexit, with another, about the impact 
on the rural economy, due to be held next week. But some, including many on the 
Conservative benches, are concerned about the lack of clarity on a series of 
questions, including whether the government hopes to remain within thecustoms 
union 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/dec/07/stand-ins-david-lidington-emily-thornberry-clash-over-brexit-at-pmqs>
.

Pro-EU Conservatives, including Anna Soubry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/aug/30/divisions-emerge-as-whitehall-draws-up-brexit-scenarios>
 and Ben Howlett, plan to band together with likeminded MPs from other parties 
to try to force a backbench debate specifically on the single market, perhaps 
as soon as next week.

Soubry said in the House of Commons on Thursday: “As we all know, our country 
is about to go into its most important negotiations in decades, with 
consequences for generations to come, yet the three big issues – these issues 
divide within parties, not just across the House – of the single market, free 
movement and the customs union have still not been debated in this place.”

Liberal Democrat leader Tim Farron said: “Theresa May must stop trying to duck 
accountability by repeating empty platitudes. We need clear answers in her 
speech over the government’s plans, including whether it will stand up for 
Britain’s membership of the single market.”

Nicky Morgan, the former education secretary, called on May to use the speech 
to resolve thestatus of EU citizens already living in the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/04/government-refuses-guarantee-eu-citizens-living-in-uk-can-stay>
, who fear they may lose their right to stay after Brexit. The government has 
said it would like the issue settled early in the negotiating process; but 
believes that must happen alongsidereassurances for UK citizens living 
elsewhere in the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/30/keir-starmer-uk-guarantee-eu-citizens-rights-talks-brexit>
.

Labour is deeply divided over the issue of freedom of movement, with Jeremy 
Corbyn saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/blog/live/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyns-morning-interviews-politics-live?page=with:block-5874bcf1e4b0ed5c379b0b5d>
 he does not object in principle to limits on immigration – but would be 
willing to accept the continuation of free movement as the price of continued 
membership of the single market.

Government will lose Brexit supreme court case, ministers believe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/government-brexit-supreme-court-theresa-may-article-50>
However, others in the shadow cabinet accept that single market membership 
will not be possible, and are starting to re-think how an immigration regime 
might look outside the EU.

In the House of Lords on Thursday, the Tory spokesperson, Lady Williams of 
Trafford 
<https://hansard.parliament.uk/search/MemberContributions?house=Lords&memberId=4311>
, sparked fresh speculation about whether the government could tighten 
immigration rules within the existing freedom of movement regime – by insisting 
that EU migrants leave if they cannot find work after three months, for example.

Pressed repeatedly on why the UK does not interpret the rules more strictly, 
as some member states do, she said: “It is not a failure to implement; it is a 
difference in each country’s implementation of its legislation. This country is 
more than generous in its implementation of that directive.”

Following the debate, Lord (Richard) Rosser, Labour’s home office minister in 
the House of Lords, told the Guardian: “The government now appears to be saying 
that it hasn’t applied the rules on free movement as tightly as it could have, 
which suggests the argument that Brexit is the only way of reducing numbers 
coming to the UK from the EU is based on a false assertion.

“But it also begs the question of what Mr Cameron and his then home secretary, 
Mrs May were up to before the referendum when seeking concessions from the EU 
on this issue.”


 