
1 Richard Ayoade used a ThunderCats duvet cover until he was in his late 20s

Where we learned it The Adam Buxton podcast 
<http://adam-buxton.co.uk/ad/category/adam-buxton-podcast/>

Adam Buxton’s life-affirming, jingle-packed “ramble chats” with his celebrity 
guests are a constant delight. Inthis two-parter 
<https://soundcloud.com/adam-buxton/ep-25-richard-ayoade-travel>, the 
multi-talented Ayoade went into everything from the height of pillows to the 
reaction to his notoriously awkward interview with Krishnan Guru-Murthy. As 
funny as the pod is, you will learn a lot, too – from Buxton’s honest 
discussions of grief when his dad died to how upsetting Sara Pascoe finds it 
when people make “clicky sticky” noises with their mouths.

Other lessons from this podcast Louis Theroux does a fine rendition of Yes 
Sir, I Can Boogie.Ellie Violet Bramley
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbbb08d3cf1ad769b688e056ce5b60a17c416cd%2F0_0_720_467%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8dbbb08d3cf1ad769b688e056ce5b60a17c416cd%2F0_0_720_467%2F720.jpg>
 Journalist and author Malcolm Gladwell. Photograph: Anne Bailey 
2 One of the biggest car recalls in history may have been caused by drivers 
pressing the wrong pedal


Where we learned it Malcolm Gladwell’s Revisionist History 
<http://revisionisthistory.com/about>

If you are familiar with Gladwell’s work <http://gladwell.com/>, then 
Revisionist History is both a treat and familiar territory.The New Yorker writer
 <http://www.newyorker.com/contributors/malcolm-gladwell> often takes 
assumptions and things we might think to be true and unravels them to end up in 
a different place altogether. In his bestseller Blink, he explained why it 
might not have been so unusual that anunarmed man was shot 41 times by New York 
police <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1MQav8p2fJA>. In the best episode of 
Revisionist History, Gladwell looked back at Toyota’s “sudden unintended 
acceleration” phenomenon, which ledto a gigantic fine for the car maker 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2010/dec/21/toyota-hit-fine-recalls-us-government>
. The conclusion – after we listen to a 911 call in which a man is driven to 
his death by a car that won’t slow down – was not that the car’s accelerators 
were sticking, but that drivers unfamiliar with certain cars were having a 
brain malfunction that meant they were physically unable to differentiate 
between the brake and the accelerator.

Other lessons from this podcast American colleges with the nicest canteens are 
the worst choices for poor students; if you want to score the most free-throws 
in basketball,do them underarm <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=V8fn1IaTMQM>. 
Will Dean





3 One day, everyone in Sweden switched to driving on the opposite side of the 
road

Where we learned it 99% Invisible <http://99percentinvisible.org/>

You needn’t be an architecture or design fanatic to enjoy Roman Mars’s gentle 
unpicking of how the world around us came to look and function as it does. As 
well as stories about the origins of theinflatable men they have outside car 
dealers <http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/inflatable-men/> in the US, and 
why they used to advertisemissing kids on milk cartons 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/milk-carton-kids/>, you can learn about 
Högertrafikomläggningen, or H-day – 3 September 1967 – when everyone in Sweden 
switched from driving on the left side of the road to the right.

Other lessons from this podcast California’s Salton Sea was formed by mistake 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/sea-worth-salt/>; 20 years ago, the 
world becameobsessed with a phone booth in the middle of the Mojave desert 
<http://99percentinvisible.org/episode/mojave-phone-booth/>. Leah Harper

4 Having your own podcast won’t win you an election

Where we learned it With Her <https://www.hillaryclinton.com/page/podcast/>

How do we know that Hillary Clinton enjoyed a Cuban sandwich 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cuban_sandwich> and a beer at the end of a day 
on the road? Well, she had her own campaign podcast, about the “little details” 
of being on the trail. Inthe first episode 
<https://cms.megaphone.fm/channel/PSM7954412883?selected=PSM7109246156>, Max 
Linsky, of the podcastLongform <https://longform.org/podcast>, talked to her in 
Miami about what she was going to have for dinner that evening. Asthe first 
presidential candidate to have a campaign podcast 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/12/hillary-clinton-campaign-podcast-with-her>
, Clinton tried to harness the power of the medium to show a more personable 
side of herself. Suffice to say, it didn’t have the desired effect.

Other lessons from this podcast Clinton is a TED talks fan and has to ration 
her Elena Ferrante novels.EVB
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd5e5442b335a75f7eece9298c8bb6c0f7c7b119%2F0_214_5554_3333%2F5554.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fcd5e5442b335a75f7eece9298c8bb6c0f7c7b119%2F0_214_5554_3333%2F5554.jpg>
 The hosts of My Dad Wrote a Porno. 
5 There’s more than one way of motivating your sales force

Where we learned it My Dad Wrote a Porno <http://www.mydadwroteaporno.com/>

Pots-and-pans sales supremo Belinda Blumenthal can find lust in any situation 
– even when she is lost in an ornamental maze. The star of the erotic fiction 
written by comedian Jamie Morton’s father has taught the world that a regional 
sales conference has just as much potential for naked fun as a business trip to 
Amsterdam. Other things she has appropriated into her libidinous realm include 
a charity tombola,Herb Alpert <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herb_Alpert>, a 
chalet, a pomegranate, a horsebox and any sentence involving the words “further 
access”. What she has taught listeners about her ridiculously sexy life may be 
unsavoury, but via Morton’s podcast it has brought a whole lot of mirth.

Other lessons from this podcast There is such a thing as a vaginal lid; never 
read erotic fiction written by your dad.Hannah Verdier

6 Sacha Baron Cohen has been known to use a getaway car

Where we learned it WTF <http://www.wtfpod.com/>

Marc Maron’s WTF can be off-putting: the host’s 15-minute opening monologue 
and guitar jams are often enough to deter new listeners. But when it comes to 
teasing out colourful details from the careers of some of Hollywood’s funniest 
and finest, Maron is the master.Grimsby may have bombed in the cinemas 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/feb/22/grimsby-review-sacha-baron-cohen-mark-strong>
, but it was worth it forthe interview Baron Cohen did with Maron 
<http://www.wtfpod.com/podcast/episodes/episode_683_-_sacha_baron_cohen> to 
promote the film. The best bits were the details of the logistical difficulties 
of making Brüno, from how a redneck fight crowd were duped intowatching a 
homoerotic romp <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nPnKxx8KXQw> to how Baron 
Cohen managed to escape Kansas police after being caught with, among other 
things, a pedal-powered sex machine in a hotel room. (He had a car waiting 
outside with the engine running.)

Other lessons from this podcast Asking what people’s parents were like rarely 
gets a dull answer; if you have theUS president over to record in your garage 
<http://www.wtfpod.com/podcast/episodes/episode_613_-_president_barack_obama>, 
you’d better have nice neighbours; William Friedkinis the best storyteller in 
Hollywood 
<http://www.wtfpod.com/podcast/episodes/episode_684_-_william_friedkin>. WD
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a54b7b9721862910d2384f4a82c9a1c590948ed%2F0_65_2710_1626%2F2710.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1a54b7b9721862910d2384f4a82c9a1c590948ed%2F0_65_2710_1626%2F2710.jpg>
 Alix Fox looks into people’s sex lives. Photograph: Ken McKay/Rex/Shutterstock 
7 Having two vaginas doesn’t mean you can have vaginal sex with two men at the 
same time

Where we learned it Close Encounters from the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/series/close-encounters>

Alix Fox pries into the complicated and fascinating lives of people for whom 
sex is not always entirely straightforward, from a polyamorous couple to a man 
paralysed from the waist down just before his honeymoon. An extraordinary 
interview with “double-barrelled” Hazel, who talked openly about the effect her 
condition has had on her – and may have on her if she wants to have children – 
is the standout so far.

Other lessons from this podcast Russian-doll-style dildos can cure vaginismus; 
having cold feet can help to delay an orgasm.LH







8 The search for a fifth meat continues

Where we learned it The Beef and Dairy Network podcast 
<http://www.beefanddairynetwork.com/>

The centuries-old assumption that there are only four meats – beef, lamb, pork 
and chicken – is crumbling after unconfirmed reports that the European Space 
Agency has identified a mysterious “fifth meat”. The Beef and Dairy Network 
podcast, produced bycomedian Ben Partridge <http://www.benjaminpartridge.com/>, 
is “the No 1 podcast for those involved – or just interested – in the 
production of beef animals and dairy herds”. Featuring guest appearances from 
“agricultural experts” such as Josie Long, and attracting fans including 
Miranda Sawyer, it is a surreal beefstravaganza.

Other lessons from this podcast According to Beef and Dairy Network sponsor 
Mitchell’s, 90% of cattle can kick through a ship’s hull after just one month 
of taking hoof-strengthening supplement Steel Hoof Deluxe.EVB


 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb833efddb7fff13daac1e98c12bb63558bb4c6f3%2F0_182_5194_3116%2F5194.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb833efddb7fff13daac1e98c12bb63558bb4c6f3%2F0_182_5194_3116%2F5194.jpg>
 Don’t put this cow in your ship’s hull. Photograph: Brian Brown/Getty Images 
9 John Oliver is not dead 


Where we learned it The Bugle <http://thebuglepodcast.com/>

For a decade, long-time comedy partners John Oliver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/john-oliver> and Andy Zaltzman put 
the world to rights via the medium of their “audio newspaper for a visual 
world”. Their riffs on anything from civil liberties (“Like dogs, John, we love 
our own, but we get really annoyed when other people’s civil liberties keep 
shitting on our lawns”) to Texas barbecues (“All I know is this, Andy: if I was 
a cow, and I knew that I could taste like that, I’d find it very hard to make a 
coherent case for not being immediately killed and slow-cooked”) often made the 
show the funniest thing you could get on Wi-Fi. With Oliver having left the 
Daily Show to front his own show on HBO, the Bugle went into satirical 
hibernation. It awoke in mid-October, just in time for a political event so 
ridiculous that even Zaltzman at his most surreal couldn’t have imagined it. 
The pod’s Have I Got News for You-style rotating guest co-hosts now include US 
comics Wyatt Cenac and Hari Kondabolu, as well as Brit Nish Kumar and brilliant 
Indian standup Anuvab Pal. They don’t know each other as well as best friends 
Zaltzman and Oliver, but perhaps the other co-host, Andy’s sister Helen, could 
claim an advantage on that front. The Bugle is dead, long live the Bugle.

Other lessons from this podcast Bashar al-Assad bought LMFAO’s I’m Sexy and I 
Know It <https://soundcloud.com/the-bugle/bugle-187-the-presidents> as the 
Syrian civil war raged.WD

10 A bloke running a driving school in Acton, west London, was also helping to 
prop up the death penalty in the US


Where we learned it More Perfect <http://www.wnyc.org/story/cruel-and-unusual/>

In a residential area of west London, inside a building with a banner that 
reads “Elgone Driving Academy”, is a guy in his 50s who looks a bit like 
William Hurt and who was theone-man operation helping to provide the drugs used 
for capital punishment in the US 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/jan/06/london-firm-drugs-us-lethal-injections>
. That was untila human rights charity <http://www.reprieve.org.uk/> alerted 
the UK government to his “pharmaceutical broom closet of death”. In the 
inaugural episode of More Perfect, a Radiolab spin-off looking at how US 
supreme court cases affect lives “miles away from the bench”, the presenters 
explored those three little words from the US constitution: “cruel and unusual”.

Other lessons from this podcast An unusual 911 call made in Houston, Texas, in 
1998, led to one of the most important LGBTQ rights decisions in the court’s 
history, effectively making homosexual relations a basic civil right.EVB

11 The political insiders’ term for people panicking about a Trump win was 
‘bedwetters’


Where we learned it Keepin’ it 1600 
<https://theringer.com/keepin-it-1600-podcast-politics-election-jon-favreau-dan-pfeiffer-220924af4c94?gi=64c06b9d08af>

A politics podcast hosted by Barack Obama’s former speechwriter and a senior 
communications adviser ought to scream wonkishness, but Jon Favreau and Dan 
Pfeiffer may be the two most engaging analysts of a bonkers election campaign. 
Having been at the heart of two US election storms, they – alongside other 
hosts Jon Lovett and Tommy Vietor know, inside-out, how this world works – and 
share it. Their near certainty about a Clinton win – up to the morning of the 
election – made 1600 one of the most reassuring political podcasts you could 
listen to … and made theirmorning-after mea culpa on 9 November 
<https://soundcloud.com/keepinit1600/ep-50-the-day-after> all the more 
extraordinary. Now it’s really time to wet the bed. 

Other lessons from this podcast The Obama team realised it was impossible to 
disprove crazy lies about its candidate after Fox News said in 2008 that the 
young Obama had been raised a Muslim –when the team complained, they were told 
that it was “an entertainment show” 
<https://soundcloud.com/keepinit1600/ep-26-bonus-episode-with-liz-meriwether-jon-lovett-and-tommy-vietor>
.WD


12 Billy Joel has really soft hands


Where we learned it Two Dope Queens 
<http://www.wnyc.org/story/2-dope-queens-podcast-episode-2-billy-joel/>

Comedians and co-podcast hosts Phoebe Robinson and Jessica Williams went 
“where two black women have never gone before … a Billy Joel concert”. They 
sneaked in their rosé – in suntan lotion bottles bought on Amazon – “the kind 
that get white girls, watching the Shins, through Coachella”. And, having been 
given front-row tickets because Billy likes to see “pretty women” up at the 
front, they got to shake his baby-soft hands. If that’s not informative enough 
for you, listen to the other episodes of this snort-out-loud-funny podcast from 
WNYC and hear some of New York’s best female comedians talking about sex, 
romance, race, hair journeys and living in the city.

Other lessons from this podcast Pierce Brosnan’s volcano thriller Dante’s Peak 
has a lot to tell us about how far we have come since the 90s; talcum powder is 
the best method to deal with “boob sweat”.EVB

13 Tar heroin smells just like capers


Where we learned it Guys We Fucked <https://soundcloud.com/guyswefucked>

Corinne Fisher and Krystyna Hutchinson host the “anti-slut-shaming podcast”, 
featuring interviews with everyone from Jon Ronson to Stoya (and, as the title 
gently suggests, people with whom they have had sex). Their interview with 
Wendi Kent – or, as they call her, “White Precious” – who photographs 
protesters outside abortion clinics, revealed the reason she can no longer eat 
capers and what it’s like to have sex when you’re homeless. But it’s not all 
heavy-going. The episode titles alone are a treat – good luck concealing“You 
didn’t go to France because you wanted to masturbate?” 
<https://soundcloud.com/guyswefucked/esther-ku>, “His pubes were haunted?” and 
“Period sex: thoughts?” from fellow commuters.

Other lessons from this podcast DIY HIV tests can be done at home (or on-air) 
with a mouth swab; comedians on the circuit all hook up with each other.LH
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5dae3cf07f0c92f7ac5aa47ced0d7d75a77261%2F0_103_3078_1847%2F3078.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=There's%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=There%27s%20a%20search%20for%20a%20fifth%20meat%20%E2%80%93%20and%2019%20other%20things%20podcasts%20taught%20us%20in%202016&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftv-and-radio%2F2016%2Fdec%2F27%2Ftheres-a-search-for-a-fifth-meat-and-19-other-things-podcasts-taught-us-in-2016%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3e5dae3cf07f0c92f7ac5aa47ced0d7d75a77261%2F0_103_3078_1847%2F3078.jpg>
 There is such a this as too much SatC2 … I mean, you knew that already, right? 
Photograph: Allstar/Warner/Sportsphoto Ltd 
14 You can watch Sex and the City 2 too many times


Where we learned it The Worst Idea of All Time 
<http://www.worstideaofalltime.com/>

“A lot of time, effort and money, especially money, went into making this 
film,” says Guy Montgomery. “We’ve just opened up the most disgusting can of 
worms.”There’s no need to watch SatC2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2010/may/26/sex-and-the-city-2-review> 
because he and Tim Batt have done it more than 50 times for the sake of their 
podcast (they did the same with Grown Ups 2 <http://www.worstideaofalltime.com/>
). Miranda’s nanny Magda is a spy who is gradually poisoning her, Charlotte is 
“the other one” and the whole thing is crying out for the kind of dialogue that 
made the TV series great.

Other lessons from this podcast We Are Your Friends is next on your hatewatch 
list.HV

15 You can have a podcast about a podcast


Where we learned it Slate’s Serial Spoiler Specials 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/slates-serial-spoiler-specials/id935063801?mt=2>

Slate’s week-by-week analysis of Serial, 2014’s podcast obsession 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2014/nov/07/serial-listeners-detectives-troubling-results>
, is perfect for when everyone you know is listening far too slowly – offering 
story recaps, whodunnit theories and critiques of the host, Sarah Koenig. Not 
to mention digging deep down into Reddit rabbit holes aboutthe two cases 
covered so far 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/apr/05/serial-season-two-bowe-bergdahl-podcast>
.

Other lessons from this podcast The cow birth in season two can be seen as an 
agricultural metaphor for the military’s response to Bowe Bergdahl’s 
disappearance; it’s almost impossible to map a timeline via audio.LH





The 50 best podcasts of 2016
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/2016/dec/21/the-50-best-podcasts-of-2016>
16 Moby is a CD thief 


Where we learned it Heavyweight <https://gimletmedia.com/heavyweight/>

Jonathan Goldstein’s Heavyweight aims to the tell the stories of people whose 
lives have taken a wrong turn somewhere. One of these was to reunite his 
80-year-old father with his elder brother before it was too late. Another was 
to reunite his friend Gregor who is haunted by the moment he loaned a box of 
CDs to a techno-producer friend. The friend, was, of course, Moby, who used 
many of them as the basis for his squillion-selling Play. Gregor doesn’t want 
royalties – he just wants his CDs back. And Goldstein helps him get them.

Other lessons from this podcast Tracking down your school bullies is an 
uncomfortable eye-opener (as demonstrated by Julia in episode seven).HV

17 You can have an A-list cast in a podcast drama 

Where we learned it Homecoming <http://podbay.fm/show/1170934381>

Although Serial <https://www.theguardian.com/tv-and-radio/serial> was 
essentially a piece of investigative journalism, its format proved that 
podcasting didn’t need to be limited in its form. Gimlet Media, a specialist 
podcasting company, emerged around the same time as that NPR hit and proved its 
ambitions in the field. Its scripted drama, Homecoming, aimed straight for the 
stars with a cast including Catherine Keener, Star Wars’ Oscar Isaac and David 
Schwimmer. The story flips between Keener’s character’s work at an experimental 
facility that helps soldiers integrate back into the community and her 
present-day life as a waitress. There are plenty of cliffhangers helping to 
tell the story of what happened in between.

Other lessons from this podcast You don’t mess with David Schwimmer. As Colin 
Belfast, he oozes rage and has the air of a man on the edge.HV

18, 19, 20 France buys in most of its frogs legs … only one person called 
Oscar has won an Oscar … Donald, Huey, Dewey and Louie Duck are the most 
reprinted comic book characters (that aren’t superheroes) of all time


Where we learned it Answer Me This! <http://answermethispodcast.com/>

Helen Zaltzman and Olly Mann (plus Martin the soundman) solve listeners’ 
queries on a fortnightly basis with questions ranging from the practical to the 
ethical to the ridiculous. Suffice to say, you will learn more listening to 
them while doing the washing up than from Heart FM. You will also learn that 
drunken voicemails are welcome, especially from Dave from Smethwick and Graham 
from Canada. (It’s Oscar Hammerstein II, by the way.)LH

The Guardian publishes a wide range of award-winning podcasts daily, from 
Football Weekly to the Guardian Books podcast, all of whichare available on our 
site <https://www.theguardian.com/audio>, iTunes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/artist/the-guardian/id136731196?mt=2> and other 
leading podcast platforms.
 