
The more urgent the environmental crisis becomes, the less we hear about it. 
It exposes the economic policies of all major parties – whetherneoliberal or 
Keynesian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2016/apr/15/neoliberalism-ideology-problem-george-monbiot>
 – as incompatible with the times in which we live. To remark on what we are 
doing to the living planet is to fall into cognitive dissonance. It is easier 
to ignore it.

This is the spirit in which our new prime minister has engaged with our 
greatest predicament. Climate change clashes with the economic model, solet’s 
scrub it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/15/decc-abolition-major-setback-for-uk-climate-change-efforts>
 from the departmental register. Wildlife is collapsing and, at current rates 
of soil erosion, Britain has just 100 harvests left 
<http://www.fwi.co.uk/news/only-100-harvests-left-in-uk-farm-soils-scientists-warn.htm>
. So let’s appoint an extreme neoliberal fiercely opposed to constraints on 
industry assecretary of state for the environment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
. When the model is wrong, adjust the real world to make it fit.

The fate of Britain's environment rests on a cabinet tug of war
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/damian-carrington-blog/2016/jul/15/the-fate-of-britains-environment-rests-on-a-cabinet-tug-of-war>
I do not see the European Union as a lost Avalon 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Avalon>. It brought us much that is good, such 
as directives that enable us to hold our governmentsto account 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/apr/29/supreme-court-orders-uk-to-draw-up-air-pollution-cleanup-plan>
 for their environmental failures. But the good things it has done for the 
living world are counteracted – perhaps much more than counteracted – by a few 
astonishing idiocies. They arise from remote, unresponsive authority that is 
accessible to corporate lobby groups but not to mere mortals. In some respects 
the Brexit campaigners were right – though generally for the wrong reasons.

One of these policies is the rule that only bare land is eligible for most 
farm subsidies. This perverse incentive for destruction hasobliterated wildlife 
and natural beauty 
<http://www.efncp.org/download/EFNCP_Permanent-Pastures-and-Meadows.pdf> across 
hundreds of thousands of hectares. It threatensmillions more 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/21/waste-cash-leavers-in-out-land-subsidie>
. The failure of politicians and environmental groups to campaign against this 
perversity – or even to mention it - is both mystifying and shameful.

Then there is the European insistence that much of our transport fuel be 
replaced by biodiesel. I’ve been inveighing against the manufacture 
of biodiesel from cropssince 2004 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2004/11/23/feeding-cars-not-people/>, and have often 
been mocked for it. Now we know not only that it causes muchgreater greenhouse 
gas emissions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/mar/14/eu-green-transport-target-may-have-increased-greenhouse-gas-emissions>
 than the fuel it replaces, but also that it’s a major cause of perhaps the 
greatest environmental disaster of the 21st century so far: themass obliteration
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/oct/30/indonesia-fires-disaster-21st-century-world-media>
 of the rainforests of Indonesia and Malaysia, driven in large part by palm 
oil production.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fbrexiters-make-britain-countryside-like-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c729904ecac1e1ecb6bec0e927909393a0c549%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=These%20Brexiters%20will%20grind%20our%20environment%20into%20the%20dust%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fbrexiters-make-britain-countryside-like-kansas%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=These%20Brexiters%20will%20grind%20our%20environment%20into%20the%20dust%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fjul%2F20%2Fbrexiters-make-britain-countryside-like-kansas%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F57c729904ecac1e1ecb6bec0e927909393a0c549%2F0_187_5616_3370%2F5616.jpg>
 ‘Now we know not only that palm oil causes much greater greenhouse gas 
emissions than the fuel it replaces, but also that it’s also a major cause of 
perhaps the greatest environmental disaster so far of the 21st century.’ 
Photograph: Alamy 
Leaked figures released in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/01/leaked-figures-show-spike-in-palm-oil-use-for-biodiesel-in-europe>
 suggest biodiesel now accounts for 45% of the palm oil used in Europe. With 
one thoughtless policy – which was designed, under a lobbying onslaught, to
avert the need 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2007/mar/27/comment.food> for 
tougher rules on car manufacturers – the European commission has annulled all 
the environmental good it has ever done.

So amid the multiple dangers of Brexit there are opportunities for a 
government that cares about the natural world. The obvious first step is 
fundamental reform of farm subsidies. At the moment, paid by the hectare, they 
transfer vast sums from the pockets of ordinary taxpayers into those ofdukes, 
sheikhs and bankers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2013/jul/01/farm-subsidies-blatant-transfer-of-cash-to-rich>
 while wiping the land clean of wildlife. For this service we pay £3bn in 
Britain:roughly the same 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/may/20/nhs-in-england-reveals-245bn-record-deficit>
 as the NHS deficit.

I can think of two legitimate purposes for subsidies. The first is a rural 
hardship fund. But there is no obvious reason why farmers should be the main 
recipients. In England theyaccount for 
<http://www.monbiot.com/2012/06/08/captive-animals/> 1.4% of the rural 
population. While many suffer from low incomes, they tend to have greater 
capital, skills and opportunities than most other people with small earnings. 
There is no more reason to favour their profession with public charity than 
there is to provide a fund for distressed solicitors or plumbers. Money should 
be disbursed according to need, not occupation.

Are the people of the lowlands to be surrounded by nothing but agricultural 
desert?

The second is an environmental protection fund that pays for wildlife and 
habitats to be restored,floods to be prevented 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/dec/29/deluge-farmers-flood-grouse-moor-drain-land>
 and children and adults to be brought back into contact with nature. I would 
have no objection to farmers living off such subsidies. We would be paying for 
public services rather than public harm.

Both the environment secretary, Andrea Leadsom, and the farming minister, 
George Eustice 
<https://www.fwi.co.uk/news/defra-minister-george-eustice-survives-reshuffle.htm>
, were members of theFresh Start <http://www.eufreshstart.co.uk/> project, 
which seeks reform of the EU’s common agricultural policy. It has some good 
ideas and some frightening ones – including a policy that would lead to the 
most productive areas of the country being, in effect, designated free from 
wildlife, while environmental subsidies are concentrated in other places. Both 
Leadsom and Eustice haveendorsed this 
<http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/politics/conservative/12195248/Government-minister-attacks-Prime-Ministers-EU-deal-in-referendum-debate.html>
 approach inpublic statements 
<http://www.georgeeustice.org.uk/news/time-transform-cap>.

Are the people of the lowlands (where almost all of us live) to be surrounded 
by nothing but agricultural desert, without trees, hedges, birds, mammals or 
insects? Are our children to encounter rich wildlife only on distant holidays – 
if at all?

It is also clear that they are inclined to torch 
<http://www.andrealeadsom.com/parliamentary/eu-referendum/fresh-start-rewards-of-leave-8-a-better-deal/917>
 environmental protections. With neither incentives nor rules constraining 
their behaviour, the least responsible farmers will thrive while the more 
careful will struggle to compete. These matters are not peripheral to our 
lives: without soil,there is nothing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2015/mar/25/treating-soil-like-dirt-fatal-mistake-human-life>
.

Who's who in Theresa May's new cabinet
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/13/who-theresa-may-cabinet-boris-hammond-rudd>
Leadsom’s leadership campaign was characterised by incompetence, grandstanding 
and vacuity 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/blog/2016/jul/07/andrea-leadsom-speech-verdict-buy-shares-in-michael-gove>
. Her record in government is dismal. One of her officials told the Financial 
Times she was “the worst minister we’ve ever had”. What does this say about the 
prime minister’s priorities? The living planet – the biggest and most important 
portfolio of all – is treated by May as the government’sCraggy Island 
<http://www.channel4.com/programmes/father-ted>.

So here is the fix we’re in. We have an environment secretary whose ideology 
urges her to see the environment as an impediment to profit, a communities 
secretary whose every fibrerebels against the planning system 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/getting-government-off-your-back-our-commitment-to-cutting-red-tape>
, and an international trade secretary who used his previous post in government 
toconnect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/oct/16/lessons-atlantic-bridge-questioning>
 with US corporate lobby groups. We no longer have a climate change secretary, 
of any description. We have a government that treats the Earth’s systems, upon 
which our survival depends, as an afterthought, or not a thought at all.

When these people say they are defending British sovereignty, what Britain do 
they have in mind? A country of famous and peculiar beauty, or the same bleak 
monoculture that you can see from Kansas to Kazakhstan? What lovers of the 
nation are these, who seem prepared to scrub its features from the map?

• A fully linked version of this article can be found at Monbiot.com 
<http://www.monbiot.com/>

Twitter: @georgemonbiot
 