
When I left the newsroom for the classroom, my farewell present, in keeping 
with journalistic tradition, was a personalised spoof front page. The gaggle of 
foreign correspondents had been Photoshopped into unruly students, graphics 
compared the holiday entitlement of teachers with reporters, and there were 
quips about a sudden dive in writing standards in south-east London. Some 
colleagues applauded me for “getting a proper job”; others clearly couldn’t 
fathom why I would leave a successful career and venture into the unknown.

Lucy Kellaway plans to lead the way to teaching for career changers
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/21/lucy-kellaway-plans-to-lead-the-way-to-teaching-for-career-changers>
Six years later, I am happy to report that my career change is proving as 
rewarding as I’d hoped. And I’m in good company, with several of the staff at 
my south London primary school having joined after working in other fields. So 
I’d be the first to encourage Lucy Kellaway – who hasannounced 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/21/lucy-kellaway-plans-to-lead-the-way-to-teaching-for-career-changers>
 that she isleaving the Financial Times to pursue teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2016/nov/20/lucy-kellaway-to-leave-the-financial-times-to-become-a-teacher>
 – and anyone else thinking about education, to make the leap. As long as 
you’ve done your homework.

Paramount before you jettison your current career is spending some time in 
schools. Whether you’re in the late professional demographic that Kellaway’s 
organisation,Now Teach <http://nowteach.org.uk/>, is targeting, or in your 30s 
as I was, it will probably have been a while since you set foot in a classroom 
– and teaching methods will bear little resemblance to your schooldays.

So first make sure that your noble ideals about teaching are grounded in 
reality. Then get as much training as you can: expert as you may be in your 
subject area, translating that expertise into effective teaching is a skill. 
Too many well-meaning visitors to schools fall into the trap of telling, not 
teaching. If you’re a high-flying executive used to colleagues hanging off your 
every word (or at least pretending to), it might come as a surprise when even 
your most diligent pupils start mucking about during your informative monologue 
about Roman banquets. But allow them to re-enact the historical feast and 
they’ll still be enthusiastically recounting facts weeks later.

Undoubtedly, you will bring skills from your previous field to the classroom, 
too. I joke with my colleague who used to work in theatre in London’s West End 
that only now does she have a performing job. If you’re having an off day in 
school, there’s no hiding behind a computer screen and nursing a coffee – the 
show must go on.

Experience of the world beyond the classroom can help to enrich the experience 
of those pupils in it

Less industry-specific skills, such as effective time management or 
prioritising your in-tray, may help experienced professionals avoid some of the 
common pitfalls ofnewly graduated teachers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/uk-schools-suffering-as-new-teachers-flock-abroad-warns-chief-inspector>
 in their first job. Similarly, finding yourself recast as a learner after a 
long interval can also be a useful tool in empathising with your pupils. Once, 
at an after-school ballroom dancing lesson, I was struggling; “concentrate” was 
the helpful advice from the teacher. But I was concentrating, I knew what to 
do, I just couldn’t do it, I said. The next morning, during a challenging maths 
lesson, a frustrated little boy echoed my very words. Sharing my dancing 
anecdote made him laugh and made me realise I needed to change tack.

Experience of the world beyond the classroom can help to enrich the experience 
of those pupils in it, as long as it’s woven into your teaching. Bonding with a 
taciturn pupil over the fact we had both been to Sierra Leone, or staging a 
portrait exhibition are just some of the ways my previous life as foreign 
correspondent and photographer has resurfaced.Teaching 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teaching> style is such a personal thing 
that your past experiences cannot help but emerge, no matter what your previous 
incarnation.

All this is not to say that a move into teaching is without its headaches; 
indeed, the schools minister Nick Gibbadmitted last month 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/education-37750489> that almost a third of new state 
school teachers starting in 2010 had quit within five years. The oft-heard 
complaint aboutteacher workload 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/teachersworkload> is a valid one; the 
lack of respect accorded the profession does sap morale.

Secret Teacher: schools are in crisis – parents, we need your help
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/teacher-network/2016/sep/03/secret-teacher-schools-are-in-crisis-parents-we-need-your-help>
The revolving door of new government initiatives, which I have witnessed first 
hand regularly in just six years, is irritating, as is Whitehall’s blinkered 
focus on data, when teachers deal with living and breathing children in all 
their complexity. It’s hard to assess a child, for example, using a test sat 
the day after they’ve been evicted.

Finally, no one should underestimate the hard work involved. As the daughter 
of two teachers, and the friend of many others, I knew teaching was not about 
four o’clock finishes andDead Poets’ Society style inspiration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/filmblog/2011/nov/21/favourite-film-dead-poets-society>
. I did do my homework. Yet nothing can really prepare you for doing the job, 
except doing the job – but what a great job it is.
 