
Play is what young children do, right? It’s not what we want students at 
university to be wasting their time doing. Or is it?

Snobbery is outdated – universities have to train students for jobs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2016/mar/31/snobbery-is-outdated-universities-have-to-train-students-for-jobs>
Play isn’t a waste of time. It delivers the same benefits for adults in higher 
education as it does for children: an opportunity to develop and practise 
skills, to reflect on things they have seen but not yet understood, and to 
deepen their learning, often constructing and developing mental models socially 
with their peers.

If lectures are where we try to transfer knowledge from the lecturer to the 
student, play is where students deepen shallow understanding into real 
knowledge.

In a workshop I do with education students, we cut up and rearrange parts of 
journal articles and book chapters, placing them in a framework that represents 
the different questions we should be asking of information sources. As they do 
this, I can see them starting to grasp theinformation literacy concept 
<http://www.ala.org/acrl/standards/ilframework> that information is constructed 
and contextual.

When we play, we step outside 
<http://www.scholarpedia.org/article/Definitions_of_Play> normal life, into a 
“magic circle”. The circle has its own rules that allow players to immerse 
themselves in an alternative world, form social groups, improvise, and test out 
ideas (see Huizinga’s classic book,Homo Ludens 
<https://www.amazon.co.uk/Homo-ludens-Johan-Huizinga/dp/880616287X>).

Risk is removed, so learners can practise the skills they need to develop, 
without worrying about failure. Play is “experience-based learning” at its 
best, with immediate feedback for students.

Go with the flow

Learners can practise skills and experiment with new knowledge, without 
worrying about failure

Designers of computer games spend a long time perfecting “flow”, where an 
activity is in that perfect zone between being too challenging and too easy. So 
as our skills grow, so does the challenge.

When we hit the zone of optimal flow, we lose track of time and want to 
continue as long as possible. We no longer worry about whether something is too 
hard and get discouraged, or too easy and get bored. Play can help students 
find this flow and persist much longer at the task in hand.

Good educational games allow this to happen, partly by adding in some random 
elements, but more importantly by appropriate levelling up. So players who 
aren’t challenged by an activity should have extra layers of stretch added in.

 People often assume that using play in education is just a bit of light 
relief. They understand that learners might be more engaged in a lesson that 
offers opportunities for fun. But engagement is not the most important benefit 
of play. Much more important are its other attributes: the opportunity to 
practice, to be creative, to get immediate feedback and to encourage focus.

Simple card games are cheap and easy to use, such as Seek! The search skills 
game <http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/19345/> or a reference sequencing 
<http://eprints.hud.ac.uk/25335/> game. 

More involved are the many simulation-type activities that are used in 
education, such as the virtual hospital wards in many medical schools. These 
allow medical students to act out scenarios with virtual patients without the 
fear of harming a real one. I’m experimenting with ideas fromescape rooms 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Escape_room>, where students solve puzzles 
requiring subject knowledge to win the game.

Universities don’t understand how international students learn
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/jul/03/universities-dont-understand-how-international-students-learn>
I’m also exploring ideas for games that can teach information skills and help 
others develop learning activities (I’ve given some examples in thisreport 
<https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/andrew_walsh_report.pdf> and 
on thislibrary site <http://innovativelibraries.org.uk/>). 

It can be hard to start playing as an adult, because of the connotations of 
childishness. But teaching staff are in a great position to give permission to 
play. Students are already in a environment at some distance from “the real 
world”. Through setting learning games, and encouraging creative activities 
within this space, we can encourage playful interactions with the subject 
matter.

Join the higher education network 
<http://preview.gutools.co.uk/higher-education-network#https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/?CMP=dis_57>
 for more comment, analysis and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow 
us on Twitter@gdnhighered <https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an 
idea for a story, please read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>

 