
Laura Kuenssberg, the BBC’s political editor, will spill the inside beans of 
Brexit <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b07nsx8g> on Monday: how was it 
possible for David Cameron to have entered this referendum so unprepared, so 
lukewarm, when it was his idea in the first place? Was Jeremy Corbyn 
ineffective because he was indifferent, or was he a perfectly effective 
campaigner, scuppered by a hostile media? How did Michael Gove make his peace 
with the epic public mendacity his case required? What happened to turn the 
Labour heartlands to Ukip?

The first three questions are fascinating at the level of character; the 
Brexit decision was so significant, and the human flaws and vanities that 
created the moment so petty, that it is impossible not to get drawn in. Yet 
that final question about Labour heartlands – a well-worn euphemism for 
“deprived north” – is everything. Already an orthodoxy and inevitability have 
shaped around it: if you take what was traditionally red, add a bolt of blue in 
the form of defensive nationalism, then of course you get purple – it has the 
solidity of a physical law.

How history judges Cameron – between hapless victim and appalling bungler – 
will not have a huge impact on our political landscape; the verdict on Gove, 
even less. There will be some lasting effect on Labour’s truths and confidence 
from an analysis of Corbyn, but we can’t hang anything off his performance 
during the referendum until we accept that both sides are right: he was beset 
by a hostile media and he was ambivalent.

The beauty beneath Brexit’s bedwetting | Irvine Welsh
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/06/beauty-beneath-brexit-bedwetting-leave-vote-diversity-genuine-change>
This story about the deprived north, however, will have lasting and profoundly 
misleading consequences for the political landscape, if we don’t think more 
deeply about it.

The prevailing assumption is that the vote was one in the eye for metropolitan 
elites, and that the white working classes, the disenfranchised and unheeded, 
the voters hidden on estates, had finally given a message to the Westminster 
bubble that knew nothing and cared less about their concerns. In fact, most
leave voters were in the south 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/ng-interactive/2016/jun/23/eu-referendum-live-results-and-analysis>
: the south-east, south-west – indeed the entire south apart from London voted 
leave.

They did so by slightly smaller margins – though it is interesting to note 
that Wales, apparently the hotbed of a self-sabotaging leave movement, driven 
by adeprivation that only the EU was interested in alleviating 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/27/wales-referendum-remain-leave-vote-uk-eu-membership>
,voted out by a smaller margin 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/24/eu-voting-map-lays-bare-depth-of-division-across-britain>
 than the south-west. Yetsoutherners voted in greater numbers 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-36616028>; their votes were decisive. 
Furthermore, most leave voters are middle class, or at least were of the 
generation whose housing and pension windfalls put them squarely in the 
category of wealth.

Analysing voting data by education 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/2016/jun/24/the-areas-and-demographics-where-the-brexit-vote-was-won>
 – where the more degrees you had, the more likely you were to want to remain – 
is misleading: it was much less common, beforeTony Blair’s 1999 pledge 
<http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk_politics/460009.stm> to provide tertiary 
education for 50% of the nation, to go to university, and a degree was by no 
means a prerequisite for membership of the middle classes.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=EU%20referendum%3A%20how%20Britain%20voted%20for%20Brexit%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F24%2Feu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video&media=>
EU referendum: how Britain voted for Brexit – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2016/jun/24/eu-referendum-how-britain-voted-for-brexit-video>
The more enlightening figures are those that plot voting against housing 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/25/brexit-vote-poor-elite>; 
yes, social and council tenants voted leave, but so did those who owned their 
houses outright, the people we might describe as society’s winners. By housing 
type, the only groups where remain prevailedwere private renters and people 
with mortgages 
<http://lordashcroftpolls.com/2016/06/how-the-united-kingdom-voted-and-why/>.

In other words, the very most we can say is that leave had some popularity 
with the disaffected and the disenfranchised; but it was not limited to that 
group, and the people who swung the vote were affluent, older southerners. 
Instead, we’ve taken it as a kicking-off point that the Brexit vote was won by 
a council estate in Bolton.

The result is, firstly, the othering of the north: people think differently up 
there, and nobody in London could possibly understand them. In the media and, 
to a lesser degree, parliament, this has turned into a performative defeatism 
belied by competitive authenticity: you’re more metropolitan elite than me, 
because I’ve done some polling in Rochdale; ah, but my grandmother is northern 
and I met someone once from Wirral South, and I can tell you, on the contrary, 
that you’re the one who will never understand.

Perhaps defeatism from the elite sounds like a good thing, not a moment too 
soon; except it carries an attendant assumption that poverty has an immovable 
set of opinions, which cannot be shifted and which it is disrespectful of the 
wealthy even to name, let alone discuss. Because we wouldn’t understand.

Our attitude towards wealth played a crucial role in Brexit. We need a rethink 
| Stephen Hawking
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/29/stephen-hawking-brexit-wealth-resources>
For every one person who voted leave because the global rat race had left them 
behind, there was more than one person pretty well served by the economy, who 
voted leave because they believed theline about sovereignty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/eu-referendum-five-questions-to-answer-before-you-vote>
, or because they were still huffy aboutthe European directive on clean beaches 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jun/09/what-has-the-eu-ever-done-for-my-beach>
, or because they simply associated the EU with faceless change and preferred 
things to stay the same. The picture cannot be drawn in simple, binary lines 
between rich and poor. The divisions are, like the crosscurrents in a family, 
much more layered; and, like a family, insoluble without the presumption of a 
fundamental ability and ardent desire to accommodate one another.

Secondly, of course, it has become the immigration election 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jun/14/eu-immigration-control-labour-supporters-voters-party>
, despite the fact that only a third of leave voters cited borders as their 
chief concern. And this brings with it a host of assumptions that we might 
loosely class as swallowing Nigel Farage whole: that people who oppose free 
movement will always oppose it; that it is pointless explaining thelump of 
labour fallacy <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lump_of_labour_fallacy>, because 
that is yet more elitist sneering; that public services are under pressure 
because of foreigners rather than underfunding; that housing is expensive 
because of demand rather than rent extraction by a capital class empowered by 
inequality; that the voters have spoken, and now our humanitarian duties to 
refugees must come second, to the point that we don’t even mention them; that 
the metropolitan elite must simply accept that it let immigration get out of 
control and must pay the price of a mistrust of unknowable proportions and 
unguessable length.

Remaking this picture, so that it resembles reality rather than regurgitates 
false absolutes, is far more important than any discussion about a second 
referendum, or a snap election, or a progressive alliance. It is more important 
even than the terms under which we exit the EU, if indeed we meaningfully do. 
At stake is our ability to cohere. For the sake of national unity, we must 
question, rather than merely accept, the new nationalism.
 