
The Football Supporters’ Federation has vowed to keep campaigning for lower 
ticket prices and has welcomed the findings of BBC Sport’s latest Price of 
Football study, which has indicated some prices have fallen.

Overall, 33% of ticket prices have been reduced across the Premier League 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/premierleague> in 2016‑17 – the first 
season of a record £5.3bn TV deal – with 53% frozen at previous levels.

The most notable drop was in ticket costs for away supporters. The average 
price is now £29.44, a reduction of 37%, thanks mostly to an agreement among 
clubs to impose a cap of £30.

But this has turned attention to the Championship 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/championship>, where the average cost to 
away fans has risen to £31.57, while the FSF is also unhappy with season-ticket 
prices.

The average cheapest season ticket in the Premier League is down 6.63% to 
£479.89 but while Hull’s lowest is only £252, Arsenal’s least expensive is 
£1,014. The Gunners’ top season ticket is also the most expensive at £2,013, 
followed by Tottenham (£1,895) and Chelsea (£1,250).

Malcolm Clarke, the chairman of the FSF, said: “We believe it’s a positive 
thing that almost three-quarters of ticket prices have been reduced or frozen. 
That’s thanks in no small part to pressure from football supporters up and down 
the country. Football fans have been arguing articulately and passionately for 
a reduction in ticket prices for several years now. This sustained effort from 
supporters has delivered real progress such as the £30 cap on away ticket 
prices in the Premier League.

“There is no room for complacency, however, with some Premier League clubs 
charging far too much for their season tickets and away ticket prices in the 
Championship being the most expensive in the country.

“We will remain vigilant and continue our campaigning to make football 
affordable for this generation of supporters and the next.”
 