
So now you might have to buy your own crutches, but you'll get your shotgun 
subsidised by the state. A few days after it was revealed that anNHS group is 
considering charging patients 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/apr/16/nhs-charges-crutches-neck-braces-proposal>
 for the crutches, walking sticks and neck braces it issues, we discovered that 
David Cameron has intervened to keep the cost of gun licences frozen at £50: a 
price that hasn't changed since 2001.

The police are furious: it costs them £196 to conduct the background checks 
required to ensure shotguns are issued only to the kind of dangerous lunatics 
who use them for mowing down pheasants, rather than to the common or garden 
variety. As a result they – sorry, we –lose £17m a year, by subsidising the 
pursuits of the exceedingly rich 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-coventry-warwickshire-27031957>.

The Country Land and Business Association <https://www.cla.org.uk/> – the 
armed wing of the Conservative party – complains that it's simply not fair to 
pass on the full cost of the licence to the owners of shotguns; unlike, say, 
the owners of passports or driving licences, who are charged on the basis of 
full cost recovery.

Three days later – on Friday – the government announced it would raise the 
subsidy it provides for grouse moors from £30 per hectare to £56 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/cap-boost-for-moorland>. Yes, you read that 
right: the British government subsidises grouse moors, which are owned by 1% of 
the 1% and used by people who are scarcely less rich.

While the poor are being forced out of their homes through government cuts, it 
is raising the payments – across hundreds of thousands of hectares – that some 
owners use to burn and cut the land (helping to cause floods downstream), shoot 
or poison hen harriers and other predators, and scar the hills with roads and 
shooting butts.

While the rest of us can go to the devil, the interests of the very rich are 
ringfenced.

Before examining the wider picture, let's stick with the shooting theme for a 
moment, and take a look at the remarkable shape-shifting properties of that 
emblem of Downton Abbey Britain: the pheasant. Through a series of magnificent 
legal manoeuvres it can become whatever the nation's wealthy want it to be.

When pheasants are reared, they are classed as livestock: that means the 
people who raise them are exempt from some payments of value added tax and 
certain forms of planning control, on the grounds that they are producing food.

But as soon as they're released they are classed as wild animals. Otherwise 
you wouldn't be allowed to shoot them. But if you want to re-capture the 
survivors at the end of the shooting season to use as breeding stock, they 
cease to be wild and become livestock again, because you aren't allowed to 
catch wild birds with nets.

If, however, pheasants cause damage to neighbouring gardens, or to cars, or to 
the people travelling in those cars, the person who released them bears no 
liability, because for this purpose they are classed as wild animals – even if, 
at the time, they are being rounded up as legal livestock.

The pheasant's properties of metamorphosis should be a rich field of study for 
biologists: even the Greek myths mentioned no animal that mutated so often. In 
the treatment of pheasant and grouse shoots we see in microcosm what is 
happening in the country as a whole. Legally, fiscally and politically, the 
very rich are protected from the forces afflicting everyone else.

For example, earlier this year Richard Murphy of Tax Research UK listed the 
ways in which the chancellor, George Osborne, had changed the tax regime for 
the largest corporations 
<http://www.taxresearch.org.uk/Blog/2014/01/30/george-osbornes-10-billion-a-year-tax-giveaway-to-big-companies/>
, and calculated that these concessions would cost the exchequer between £5bn 
and £10bn a year over the next six years.

At the higher end of his estimate, that money could have prevented all the 
benefit cuts overseen by the Department for Work and Pensions.

But to call on the government to make rational and progressive fiscal 
decisions, as many of us do, is to misunderstand what it is attempting. It is 
not seeking to save the country from fiscal ruin – there are many ways of doing 
that without cutting essential services. It is re-engineering the United 
Kingdom as a plutocrats' paradise, in which the rich are scarcely troubled by 
laws or taxes, while the poor are plunged into a brutal world of casual labour, 
insecurity and legal restraint.

There are a dozen ways in which it could have discharged the deficit without 
inflicting cuts in social security or other essential public services. It could 
have introduced land value taxation. Or it could have unlocked the deeply 
regressive banding of council tax which,as Ian Jack showed last month 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2014/mar/29/why-do-we-pay-more-council-tax-than-knightsbridge-oligarchs>
, ensures that the Ukrainian oligarch Rinat Akhmetov, whobought a double 
penthouse in One Hyde Park for £136m 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk/2011/apr/19/rinat-akhmetov-one-hyde-park>, pays 
less in tax for that property than do the owners of a £200,000 house in 
Blackburn.

If even a flat council tax were applied – in other words, if everyone paid tax 
at the same rate – Akhmetov might contribute around £2m a year to the 
exchequer, rather than £1,353. If council tax were progressive – in other words 
if those with the most expensive homes paid proportionately more – he might be 
charged £4m or £5m. Such taxes would also have the additional benefit of 
suppressing house prices.

Or the government could have levied a Robin Hood tax on financial transactions 
– which, according to theInstitute for Public Policy Research, would raise 
£20bn a year 
<http://www.ippr.org/news-and-media/press-releases/chancellor-should-introduce-a-financial-transaction-tax-to-fund-growth-strategy>
 at a rate of just 0.01%. Or, instead of bamboozling the public and 
surreptitiously turning the UK into a new tax haven, it could have taken real 
action to prevent tax avoidance, saving perhaps tens of billions.

But governments almost everywhere, beholden to donors and newspaper 
proprietors, unchallenged by either opposition parties or their cowed and 
passive electorates, are not seeking to prevent the resurgence of patrimonial 
capitalism,of which we have recently heard so much 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/archives/2014/may/08/thomas-piketty-new-gilded-age/>
, but to hasten it. They are creating a world in which the rich may live by 
their own rules.

So back we go to the hazy days of Edwardian England: a society dominated by 
rentiers, in which the city centres are set aside for those with tremendous 
wealth and the countryside is reserved for their bloodsports. As the queues 
lengthen at the foodbanks, our money is used to subsidise grouse and shotguns. 
That is all you need to know about how and by whom we are governed.
 