
The least likely of this January’s diets came, obliquely, from Kendall 
Jenner’s official app and was a colour rather than a book. In a post titled“The 
story behind my pink wall!” 
<https://www.kendallj.com/life/1385-kendall-jenner-instagram-pink-wall/> she 
explained the thinking behind the pink living room wall of her expensive Los 
Angeles home: “Baker-Miller Pink is the only color [sic] scientifically proven 
to calm youAND suppress your appetite. I was like, “I NEED this color [sic] in 
my house!”. I then found someone to paint the room and now I’m loving it!”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3759eab685d4711dbc5a34e141522b65b6746d8%2F0_0_720_897%2F720.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc3759eab685d4711dbc5a34e141522b65b6746d8%2F0_0_720_897%2F720.jpg>
 Kendall Jenner’s Baker-Miller Pink room. Photograph: kendalljenner/instagram 
It might seem a bonkers assertion, but it’s not the first time this particular 
shade of pink has been linked to a certain behaviours.Vollebak 
<https://www.vollebak.com/> recently created a hoodie in Baker-Miller Pink 
designed for warm-ups and warm-downs, which when zipped up purports to reduce 
the wearer’s heart rate and slow their breathing by reducing oxygen intake.

So, can looking at a colour really suppress your appetite and chill you out? 
Both Jenner’s wall and the hoodie are based ona series of experiments 
<https://www.naturesenergieshealth.com/natural-therapies/color-therapy/baker-miller-pink-color-therapy-glasses/>
 conducted in the 1970s by Alexander G Schauss, of the American Institute for 
Biosocial Research, involving this colour and its affect on mood and behaviour. 
Named after the commander (Baker) and a warden (Miller) at the Washington State 
Department of Corrections who agreed to paint the ceilings and walls this 
colour and observe its effect on inmates, the colour was found to cause a 
short-term decrease in aggression. Subsequent experiments also concluded this 
shade could also act as a natural appetite suppressant. Both assertions came 
from being exposed to the colour for about 15 minutes.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30772c5324dff02efc837fc6159159a0b7ce5d6b%2F0_0_3352_2252%2F3352.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F30772c5324dff02efc837fc6159159a0b7ce5d6b%2F0_0_3352_2252%2F3352.jpg>
 A Dallas County Jail cell in 2006. Photograph: Mark Schiefelbein/WireImage.com 
John Maule of the University of Sussex psychology faculty is part of the 
Sussex Colour Group <http://www.sussex.ac.uk/psychology/colour/>. Incidentally, 
he hadn’t heard of the colour “possibly because there isn’t a great deal of 
scientific literature on it – the evidence is anecdotal”. He seemed on the 
fence as to whether the findings were robust: “In terms of solid science 
experimentation, it also seems quite old: they don’t return striking results, 
and seemed to have a very small marginal effect.”

The invention of pink: how Labour's battle bus rolled into a minefield
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2015/feb/14/dont-think-pink-the-colour-that-makes-people-see-red>
Still, Maule says that colours can affect “aspects of behaviour and feelings”. 
He refers to the much-reported red effect, which suggests a woman wearing red 
appears more attractive to men (“We flush, we blush: it’s an evolutionary 
story”), and says exposure to the colour will improve sporting performances. 
Curiously, he says, red “has been linked with a tendency to consume less – 
research has found that we tend to eat less from red plates and cups”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74317e81bf6066ae6cf0192761f9e85c63806361%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20colour%20might%20change%20your%20life%3A%20Kendall%20Jenner%20and%20Baker-Miller%20Pink&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ffashion%2F2017%2Fjan%2F10%2Fthis-colour-might-change-your-life-kendall-jenner-and-baker-miller-pink%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F74317e81bf6066ae6cf0192761f9e85c63806361%2F0_0_1920_1280%2F1920.jpg>
 Vollebak Baker-Miller Pink hoodie. 
So perhaps that’s the key, that pink isn’t terribly distant to red. Working on 
the premise that red is also a warning or high-alert colour, you might be less 
inclined to eat. “You could think up a story linking the two,” Maule says. “If 
she [Jenner] feels less hungry within these walls, I wouldn’t deny her that.” 
Still, perhaps the most concrete assertion is that colours can work as 
reminders, like knotted hankies – and that’s all there is to it. By painting 
her wall this colour for this reason, she’d likely remember to eat less. 
“Theoretically, a colour is like any reminder. I’m not saying that’s what 
happened. People can construct these things. But if it works for her, then it 
works for her.”
 