
As his dismissive attitude to journalists at last week’s press conference 
showed, Donald Trump appears to believe that he can govern the United States 
without submitting to the scrutiny of the press. He may well be right. In an 
episode ofThe Documentary (Sunday 15 January, 2pm, BBC World Service) titled 
The President And The Press <http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p04nqhdd>, Jon 
Sopel traces the history of the fourth estate’s relationship with the US 
government’s chief executive, from president McKinley, who first opened up 
formal channels at the end of the 19th century, through Franklin Roosevelt, who 
had the press boys in the palm of his hand, to John F Kennedy, who decided the 
future was all about TV. Then on to the last president, who was the most 
polished media performer of all, and No 45, whose gnat-like attention span 
appears built for social media, which didn’t exist when Bill Clinton was 
elected.

Beginning on the day Donald Trump takes his oath of office, America Rewritten 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b08bl2hd> (Weekdays, 9.45am, Radio 4) sees 
Robert McCrum ask US writers how it felt to wake up on the day after the 
election, in a country that is apparently different from the one they thought 
they knew. Richard Ford (whose episode airs Friday 20 January) has decided the 
only response is to spend more time getting to know that country and its 
people. Marilynne Robinson (Monday 16 January) says: “We’re about to see how 
deep the cultural resources of America go.” No doubt Malcolm Gladwell (Tuesday 
17 January) has his own hypothesis.

Running against Washington is an eternally popular way to go for US 
politicians. InTrump: The Presidential Precedents 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b083vwp2> (Weekdays, 1.45pm, Radio 4) Adam 
Smith looks at the populists of earlier eras who set out to drain the swamp. He 
begins with Andrew Jackson, who invited anyone who fancied a cup of grog to 
drop by the White House, with predictably rowdy consequences.

Brian Cox and Robin Ince return for a new run of The Infinite Monkey Cage 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/b00snr0w> (Monday 16 January, 4.30pm, Radio 4) 
with a programme recorded at theManchester Museum Of Science And Industry 
<http://msimanchester.org.uk/>, featuring guests comedian Russell Kane 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/russell-kane>, physicist Helen Czerski and 
engineer Danielle George. This one focuses on what you can learn about physics 
by observing the objects and materials that surround you in everyday life. It 
starts with an explanation of the relationship between your walking pace and 
the likelihood of the tea you’re carrying from the kitchen sloshing over the 
rim of the cup, an explanation that I cannot do justice to here.

The most unlikely sound of the week is the grateful cooing of the three 
sisters in Rhiannon Tise’s dramatisation ofLouisa May Alcott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/booksblog/2016/nov/29/louisa-may-alcott-a-practical-utopian-from-a-divided-us>
’s novelLittle Women (Weekdays, 10.45am, Radio 4) when they wake on Christmas 
morn to find that mother has lovingly filled each of their stockings with their 
own personal copy of John Bunyan’s The Pilgrim’s Progress.
 