
Desperate times call for desperate measures, and for scientists, these are 
desperate measures.


Tuesday in San Francisco’s Jessie Square, approximately 500 people gathered 
for a ‘rally to stand up for science 
<https://www.facebook.com/events/310950549304143/>.’ Many of the attendees were 
scientists who had migrated to the rally from the nearby Moscone Center, where 
some 26,000 Earth scientists are attending the annualAmerican Geophysical Union 
(AGU) conference <https://agu.confex.com/agu/fm16/meetingapp.cgi/Session/15993> 
this week.

This was an unusual activity for scientists to participate in; after all, 
they’re often accused of remaining isolated in the ivory towers of academia. 
Scientists generally prefer to focus on their scientific research, use their 
findings to inform the public and policymakers, and leave it to us to decide 
what actions we should take in response. In fact, one of the keynote speakers 
at the rally, Harvard science historianNaomi Oreskes 
<http://www.merchantsofdoubt.org/> made that exact point:

We don’t want to be here. We want to be doing the work we were trained and 
educated to do, which is science ... but we are at a moment in history where we 
have to stand up.

As Georgia Tech climate scientist Kim Cobb noted, with the appointments made 
thus far by the incomingTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration>, science is under 
attack and scientists feel compelled to protect their research, and their 
ability to keep doing it. Cobb also called on more of her scientific colleagues 
to step outside their comfort zones and engage in activism:
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8A266h2LhNU&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8A266h2LhNU>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3D8A266h2LhNU&media=>
 Kim Cobb speaking at the rally to stand up for science. Video by Collin 
Maessen of Realskeptic.com. 
The rally followed other recent efforts by scientists to advise the Trump 
administration and reassure the public. For example,over 800 Earth scientists 
and energy experts signed a letter 
<https://blogs.scientificamerican.com/observations/an-open-letter-from-scientists-to-president-elect-trump-on-climate-change/>
 urging the President-elect to take six key steps to address climate change:

1) Make America a clean energy leader;

2) Reduce carbon pollution and America’s dependence on fossil fuels;

3) Enhance America’s climate preparedness and resilience;

4) Publicly acknowledge that climate change is a real, human-caused, and 
urgent threat;

5) Protect scientific integrity in policymaking; and

6) Uphold America’s commitment to the Paris Climate Agreement.

Over 11,000 women scientists also signed a pledge 
<https://500womenscientists.org/#our-pledge> committing “to build a more 
inclusive society and scientific enterprise.” The leaders of 29 scientific 
societies signeda letter encouraging Trump 
<https://mcmprodaaas.s3.amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/content_files/Multisociety%20CEO%20Transition%20Letter.pdf>
 to appoint a “nationally respected” science advisor with sufficient expertise.


And more than 2,300 scientists, including 22 Nobel Prize recipients, published 
an open letter 
<http://www.ucsusa.org/center-science-and-democracy/promoting-scientific-integrity/open-letter-president-elect-trump>
 with the Union of Concerned Scientists (UCS) urging the Trump administration 
and Congress to set a high bar for integrity, transparency, and independence in 
using science to inform federal policies. UCS plans to act as a watchdog 
protecting science and scientists during the Trump Administration, as it did 
during the Bush administration.


Scientists under attack, win the first battle


These scientists have been motivated by concern stemming from President-elect 
Trump’s decision to fill the key powerful positions in his administrationwith 
an oil industry dream team 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/12/on-climate-change-angels-and-demons-are-battling-over-trumps-soul>
 ofclimate deniers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/trump-cabinet-climate-change-deniers?CMP=twt_gu>
.

Some of those selections include individuals who have harassed and intimidated 
climate scientists <https://theintercept.com/2016/12/09/david-schnare-trump/>, 
like David Schnare and Chris Horner, whose tactics forced the creation ofthe 
Climate Science Legal Defense Fund <https://climatesciencedefensefund.org/> 
(CSLDF) five years ago. The CSLDF began in an effort to assist Michael Mann 
with the legal attacks documented in his bookThe Hockey Stick and the Climate 
Wars 
<https://www.amazon.com/Hockey-Stick-Climate-Wars-Dispatches-ebook/dp/B0072N4U6S/ref=tmm_kin_swatch_0?_encoding=UTF8&qid=&sr=>
 (Mann also has an excellent new book co-authored with cartoonist Tom Toles,The 
Madhouse Effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/sep/26/the-madhouse-effect-of-climate-denial>
).

Over the past five years, CSLDF has provided legal assistance to over 100 
scientists, and has helped coordinate counsel for approximately 20 scientists 
facing litigation. The Legal Defense Fund has had a significant presence at the 
AGU conference, assuring scientists that their organization can answer basic 
legal questions, or help with potentially costly legal attacks and litigation.

Adding to scientists’ alarm, the Trump Department of Energy transition team 
submitteda questionnaire that raised serious concerns 
<http://www.npr.org/sections/thetwo-way/2016/12/10/505105258/trump-questionnaire-raises-concerns-about-retaliation-against-energy-department>
 about the incoming administration’s plans to influence or curtail DOE’s 
research, potentially engage in a witch-hunt, and perhaps even tamper with or 
destroyscientific data 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/12/13/scientists-are-frantically-copying-u-s-climate-data-fearing-it-might-vanish-under-trump/?utm_term=.66bb6cbafd90>
.

After much public and media backlash, the Trump team now denies 
<http://edition.cnn.com/2016/12/14/politics/energy-department-litmus-test/> 
that the questionnaire was authorized. This retreat was the first victory for 
science in an impending battle with the incoming administration. Scientists 
also have any ally inCalifornia Governor Jerry Brown, who spoke at the AGU 
conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/15/climate-change-conference-agu-san-francisco-donald-trump?CMP=share_btn_tw>
andpromised 
<http://www.sacbee.com/news/politics-government/capitol-alert/article120924268.html>
:

If Trump turns off the satellites, California will launch its own damn 
satellite.

We’ve failed to hold up our end of the bargain

On the issue of climate change, it’s been decades since scientific research 
first identified the threats and dangers resulting from human-caused global 
warming. A growing number of climate scientists had already begun to speak out 
about the need for much more aggressive global efforts to cut carbon pollution 
if we’re to avoid its worst impacts.


Finally, nearly all of the world’s countries signed last year’s agreement in 
Paris 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/dec/14/the-paris-agreement-signals-that-deniers-have-lost-the-climate-wars>
, creating a framework to limit global warming belowthe dangerous level of 2°C 
<https://skepticalscience.com/monckton-myth-5-dangerous-warming.html> hotter 
than pre-industrial temperatures. Less than a year later, the world’s largest 
cumulative carbon polluter elected a president who promised to do what he can 
to reverse that landmark Paris agreement.
Graham Readfearn (@readfearn) 
Trump's 100-day action plan for energy #climate 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/climate?src=hash> #cop22 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/cop22?src=hash> "cancel Paris Climate Agreement" 
and stop payments "to U.N. global warming programs."pic.twitter.com/p0BvVXzyrf 
<https://t.co/p0BvVXzyrf>
 <https://twitter.com/readfearn/status/796243139015024641> November 9, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/readfearn/status/796243139015024641> 
Though he has since claimed he will keep an “open mind” 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/22/us/politics/donald-trump-visit.html?_r=0> 
about climate change and the Paris agreement, at every opportunity Trump has 
hired individuals who deny climate science, work for the oil industry, and/or 
have spent years harassing and attacking climate scientists. As authorRobert 
Fulghum once wrote 
<http://www.goodreads.com/quotes/127134-it-doesn-t-matter-what-you-say-you-believe---it>
:

It doesn’t matter what you say you believe - it only matters what you do.

Scientists have reached a breaking point

In the AGU conference, many scientists have voiced their grave concerns about 
these events, about the relevance of science ina post-truth world 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/dec/05/fake-news-tries-to-blame-human-caused-global-warming-on-el-nino>
, and about the attacks they seem to be facing from the incoming government. 
Scientists have expressed emotions ranging from bewilderment and fear, to the 
defiance exemplified in their rally.

In order to protect science, more such defiance will likely be needed, and 
scientists will also need public support to help protect their critically 
important research.
 