
This month, pupils across France will be able to use the first full-size 
anatomical model of a clitoris in their sex education classes. Considering all 
the technological, medical and scientific achievements humans have made, this 
seems to have taken a long time. The distribution of this model has been 
possible due to3D printing technology 
<http://www.ufunk.net/en/tech/imprimer-un-clitoris-en-3d/>; but even 
three-dimensional MRI scans, which previously produced the most accurate 
representations of the clitoris, only becameavailable in 2009 
<http://io9.gizmodo.com/5876335/until-2009-the-human-clitoris-was-an-absolute-mystery>
.

But it was worth the wait. The truth is, you might struggle to gain pleasure 
from a tool you don’t even know you have. In 2016, women finally know without 
speculation what the whole of their sexual organ looks like; and for many it 
won’t be quite whatthey imagined <https://vimeo.com/125283619>.

How a 3D clitoris will help teach French schoolchildren about sex
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/aug/15/french-schools-3d-model-clitoris-sex-education>
You may be wondering, what’s the big deal? Is the clitoris not the “small, 
sensitive, erectile part of the female genitals at the anterior end of the 
vulva”, asOxford Dictionaries 
<http://www.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/english/clitoris> defines it? And 
isn’t the real issue simply whether it brings a woman sexual gratification?

Well, decide for yourself. The popular opinion seems to be that the 3D printed 
clitoris resembles a wishbone. To my eyes, it also (fittingly) resembles a 
fleur-de-lys, or, to use a more contemporary example, atulip emoji 
<http://emojipedia.org/tulip/>.

But the important thing is that it debunks myths that have repressed female 
sexuality for centuries. For one, it refutes thedictionary/textbook 
<http://projects.huffingtonpost.com/projects/cliteracy/education> education 
that wrongly asserts the clitoris is the size of “a fingertip”, a “pea” or that 
it is small. We can now clearly see that the clitoris includes two shafts 
(crura) which are actually about 10cm long. Not only can we visualise that the 
clitoris is more than what the eye perceives; with the visual model we can also 
now get a mental image of how itencircles the vagina 
<http://amystenzel.wixsite.com/vulvacademy/the-clitoris>, making penetrative 
sex potentially orgasmic. This means that a demystified discussion about the
female orgasm 
<http://www.bbc.com/future/story/20150625-the-mystery-of-the-female-orgasm> is 
possible at long last.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2F3d-model-clitoris-sexual-revolution-sex-education-womens-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F862f0acd358598092bb11aab3c53f91900b0da99%2F0_337_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=This%20is%20a%203D%20model%20of%20a%20clitoris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20the%20start%20of%20a%20sexual%20revolution%20%7C%20Minna%20Salami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2F3d-model-clitoris-sexual-revolution-sex-education-womens-sexuality%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=This%20is%20a%203D%20model%20of%20a%20clitoris%20%E2%80%93%20and%20the%20start%20of%20a%20sexual%20revolution%20%7C%20Minna%20Salami&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F15%2F3d-model-clitoris-sexual-revolution-sex-education-womens-sexuality%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F862f0acd358598092bb11aab3c53f91900b0da99%2F0_337_2912_1747%2F2912.jpg>
 ‘Imagine how confident men too can be when freed from the epidemic deception 
that satisfying a woman is like winning in the lottery.’ Meg Ryan in When Harry 
Met Sally. Photograph: Everett/Rex Shutterstock 
Moreover, with the 3D model, the uninformed ways that women’s bodies are 
represented, whether through sex education, pop culture or pornography, now 
just seem silly. Another popular notion now proved to be false is that the 
vagina, rather than the clitoris, is thefemale equivalent of the penis 
<http://www.drmomma.org/2015/02/homologous-organs-clitoris-penis.html>.

I'll have what she's having: delving in to the theories behind the female 
orgasm | Hannah Jane Parkinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/01/theories-behind-female-orgasm-why-women-climax-evolution-mate>
I don’t mean to convey that clitoral anatomy has been obscure to everyone 
until now. Feminists have been insisting that there was a lot more to the 
clitoris than popularly believed – especially since urologist Helen O’Toole
mapped it out in 1998 
<http://www.skepticink.com/incredulous/2013/08/12/the-clitoris-revealed-and-how-io9-got-it-wrong/>
. Nonetheless, imagine a world where it is common knowledge what a woman’s 
primary anatomically sexual organ looks like. Imagine how sexually empowered 
women who can visualise their clits will be.

Imagine too how confident men can be when freed from the epidemic deception 
that satisfying a woman is like winning in the lottery. And lastly, imagine 
being able to respond to inquisitive children who want to know why Jane’s and 
John’s genitals are different, with a logical and factual answer – that a 
clitoris is like an internal penis and a penis like an external clitoris.

Well, thanks to the 3D model, such a world is not only possible but also 
unpreventable. In fact, though 3D printing has been heralded as athird 
industrial revolution <http://www.economist.com/node/21552901>, it’s set to 
usher – thank you – a sexual revolution too.
 