
On the rock-strewn road to Brexit 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/eu-referendum>, we seem to have reached a 
questionable consensus. Few can credibly believe that the appeal court judges 
usurped the constitution by asserting parliament’s role in deciding how Brexit 
proceeds. There is, however, the assumption that if and when parliamentgets to 
vote on article 50 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/03/high-court-brexit-ruling-what-does-it-all-mean>
, MPs will assent, as to do otherwise would be undemocratic and morally 
indefensible.

With Brexit we’re playing roulette with the UK’s future. But will we win? | 
George Walden
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/07/brexit-roulette-uk-future-referendum>
Mindful of the 52/48 referendum result, it is said, they would be obliged to 
mirror the views of those who yearn to leave – including a majority of 
constituents in most Labour seats. But is that a given? Interrogate for a 
moment the thinking behind this.

There will be some MPs who could have jumped either way on 23 June. But what 
are we asking of the others who felt strongly about remaining within the EU? 
Are we reasonably expecting them, in their possibly deepening belief that 
Brexit will be calamitous – transforming perhaps a first-ranked nation into a 
second- or third-ranked one – to actively assist in that process?

Who else would be expected to do that? Imagine an airline pilot instructed by 
unhappy passengers to crash the plane. Or a surgeon, convinced in a belief that 
an operation will kill the patient, being ordered to do it by family members. 
Which constructor would be told to erect a building they know will fall to 
earth? Which captain would be ordered to sea in a ship they feel sure will 
sink? It isn’t elitist to acknowledge that – for all the populist disdain of 
experts – we still expect those we rely on to deploy good judgment on our 
behalf.

This of course leads to the question posed by Edmund Burke 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Trustee_model_of_representation>: are MPs 
delegates, elected to gauge and reflect the popular view; or individuals 
selected for their intellect and good judgment? It’s a bit of both, for we know 
that parliament does act as a check on populist impulses. Without it – if one 
believes years of opinion polling –we would still be deploying the gallows 
<https://yougov.co.uk/news/2014/08/13/capital-punishment-50-years-favoured/>.

I cannot see that, with the elements of Project Fear 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/22/project-fear-how-hope-got-sidelined-in-eu-vote>
 still a long-term reality, and the chaos of the government’s Brexit operation 
unfolding before our eyes, it would be unreasonable or undemocratic for MPs to 
say this path was a ruinous one and that they refused, as individuals, to lead 
us down it. If ever there were an issue to be debated as a matter of 
conscience, this is it. One cannot argue that the risks of Brexit are 
existential and then insist that normal rules apply.

Of course a British people determined to invoke article 50 and achieve Brexit 
should be able to do so, and parliament as a body cannot ignore the electorate. 
But fearful MPs can and should use all means at their disposal to avert 
catastrophe, whether that entails diverting the nation away from the path of 
hard Brexit towards a softer alternative, or engendering a rethink of the whole 
thing.

That would be undemocratic, the Brexiters will say. But I don’t think it 
would. It is perfectly possible to accept the result of 23 June and at the same 
time use the democratic process to persuade the electorate that the decision it 
made was a mistake: to say that, while serious problems within the EU exist, 
this solution is the wrong one.

Is it not through a perennially accepted process of reflection and revision 
that parliament can repeal bad legislation it has previously enacted; how, 
every so often, we replace one government – previously and democratically 
mandated by the people – with another of different outlook?

Get over it, you lost, chant the Brexiters, but our democracy was never 
designed to be a sudden-death penalty shootout. Prior to 23 June,Ukip’s Nigel 
Farage said a close vote would not settle the matter 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-politics-eu-referendum-36306681>. On Sunday he 
conceded that the result is not legally binding. He can hardly complain now if 
remainers refuse to sit on their hands.

Ignore the leavers’ tantrums - it’s time for us to build Brexit Britain | Zoe 
Williams
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/06/ignore-leavers-tantrums-build-brexit-britain-eu>
Last week Stephen Phillips, Tory MP for the Lincolnshire Brexit stronghold of 
Sleaford and North Hykeham and a leaver himself,resigned his seat  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/04/stephen-phillips-resigns-over-undemocratic-brexit-process>
over the government’s attempt to keep parliament at arm’s length over the 
nature of Brexit. He did not say that Brexit should not happen. He said the way 
Brexit was being pursued was – in his judgment – wrong and that he could not be 
part of it.

What happened thereafter is instructive. “We look forward to campaigning to 
elect a new Conservative member of parliament,” saidlocal party chairman George 
Clark 
<http://lincolnshirereporter.co.uk/2016/11/shock-surprise-lincolnshire-resignation-sleaford-north-hykeham-mp-stephen-phillips/>
, to help Theresa May deliver on the “exciting” Brexit vision. So Phillips used 
his judgment, followed his conscience and helped in his own small way to shape 
this fundamental debate. His local party, meanwhile, exercised its right to 
pursue its own objectives. This may not on its own change the course of 
history, but at least in Sleaford and North Hykeham no one is now illogically 
conflicted.

In time we may say of Phillips that nothing in his Westminster life became him 
like his leaving it, for he now sets an example to colleagues. If I were an MP 
convinced that Brexit as envisaged was a momentous error, grievous to to the 
nation, I would be telling my constituency this was my considered position and 
that I would be doing everything democratically possible to soften or halt it. 
This might, after discussion, prompt a rethink, or it might prompt the local 
party to seek a replacement, as will happen in Sleaford, and that would be its 
right. But if all MPs who see calamity coming followed their consciences, they 
would be making a contribution commensurate with the gravity of this moment.

It would be a personal sacrifice for some, but it would also be a public 
service. A reminder that serving the public and ceding to its populists are 
often quite different things.

• Comments will be turned on later this morning
 