
Thousands of cash-strapped schools are set to lose further money from their 
budgets as a result of the government’s new funding formula unveiled by the 
education secretary,Justine Greening 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/justine-greening>.

Under the proposals announced on Wednesday, more than 9,000 schools in England 
will lose funding, with money moving from London and other urban centres that 
have been well funded in the past to schools in areas that receive less money.

Almost 11,000 schools will gain from the redrafted formula, of which 3,400 
will see increases of 5% to their funding. However, unions warned that even the 
so-called winners in the funding shakeup were likely to see their gains 
outweighed by real-terms cuts to their funding over the next three years.

The long-awaited new funding formula was announced on the same day that 
Whitehall’s spending watchdog, the National Audit Office, warned that schools 
in England were facing an8% real-terms cut 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
 in funding per pupil by 2019-20 as a result of £3bn worth of cuts. The changes 
outlined in the new funding formula will mean further cuts on top of this for 
some schools.

Ministers have failed to explain where schools will find savings, watchdog says
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/dec/14/ministers-have-failed-to-explain-where-schools-will-find-savings-watchdog-says>
Full details of which areas will win and lose were revealed in the Department 
for Education’s second consultation on its national funding formula, which aims 
to address historic gaps in funding between different areas that can amount to 
thousands of pounds per pupil.

More than 100 local authorities will see gains under the new formula – with 
the 10 lowest-funded local authorities gaining on average 3.6% – while almost 
50 will see cuts to their funding. In 2018-19, the first year of the revised 
funding, Derby, York and Plymouth are among the winners, while the top five 
losers are London boroughs.


Speaking to MPs in the Commons, Greening attempted to reassure London schools, 
which are likely to be among the worst affected by the shakeup, that they would 
continue to be well funded.

No school will lose more than 3% overall, with a maximum cut capped at 1.5% 
per year. Nevertheless the education secretary pointed out that the number of 
children on free schools meals in the capital – a measure of deprivation and 
therefore high need – had fallen from 28% to 17%.
Winners and losers under new school funding formula 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/dec/2016-12-14T17:19:26/embed.html>
“Our proposed reforms will mean an end to historical unfairness and 
underfunding for certain schools,” said Greening. “We need a system that funds 
schools according to the needs of their pupils rather than their postcode, 
levelling the playing field and giving parents the confidence that every child 
will have an equal opportunity to reach their full potential.”


According to the DfE document, regionally the greatest increases in funding 
will be seen in the East Midlands (up 2.5%) and the south-east (up 2.3%), with 
the greatest reductions in inner London (down 2.4%).

On a more local level, schools in Barnsley and Knowsley look set to gain, 
while Manchester and Liverpool will lose with per pupil funding down by 2.2% on 
average.

The government argues that despite the proposed cuts, schools in inner London 
will continue to be funded at the highest level to match need.Schools 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> in Manchester, Nottingham, 
Liverpool and Birmingham will be the highest funded areas outside the capital.

Adrian Prandle, director of economic strategy at the Association of Teachers 
and Lecturer, said that however the government dressed up its new funding 
formula, around 90% of schools would see a real-terms cut to their funding.

“The government has not put the needs of children first in failing to come up 
with any additional funding for schools. School budgets are already cut to the 
bone. Without additional funding, schools will struggle to recruit enough 
staff, many will have to cut staff, cut the subjects they teach, cut IT 
upgrades, increase class sizes, cut the maintenance of classrooms, cut 
extracurricular activities andcharge parents for school concerts and plays 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/nov/28/row-worcester-primary-school-st-josephs-nativity-play-charge>
.”

‘Stark choice’ as schools struggle to foot bill for poorer students
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/stark-choice-as-schools-struggle-to-foot-bill-for-poorer-students>
Peter John, deputy chair of London councils with responsibility for education, 
warned that a reduction in funding to the capital’s schools would undermine the 
country’s most successful education system. “London’s schools are currently the 
best performing in the country at GCSE level and around 80% are rated good or 
outstanding by Ofsted.

“Headteachers will be forced to make difficult decisions, including increasing 
class sizes, reducing curriculum choice and cutting down on extra support for 
all pupils,” John said. “These changes are likely to have a dramatic impact on 
school standards.”

Rural schools, in contrast, which suffer particular hardships because they are 
often small and isolated and therefore attract less funding and support, stand 
to gain from the new arrangements and a revised “sparsity measure” that will 
provide additional funding. A mobility factor will be taken into account for 
schools with a high turnover of pupils during the school year.

Paul Carter, chairman of the County Councils Network, many of whose members 
stand to gain from the changes, said: “Counties welcome the consultation on the 
new funding formula and look forward to engaging in the detail. We will work 
with the government to ensure that funding to schools in all four corners of 
the country are fair and allow us to build on our already high standards.”

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fengland-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee568951d4f29c63e6dc1a78cbeb8859425371a%2F502_573_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20schools%20stand%20to%20lose%20out%20under%20new%20funding%20formula&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fengland-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20schools%20stand%20to%20lose%20out%20under%20new%20funding%20formula&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2F2016%2Fdec%2F14%2Fengland-school-funding-formula-justine-greening-education-secretary%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F4ee568951d4f29c63e6dc1a78cbeb8859425371a%2F502_573_4474_2685%2F4474.jpg>
 Rural schools stand to gain from a revised ‘sparsity measure’ that will 
provide additional funding. Photograph: Photofusion/Rex/Shutterstock 
Russell Hobby, general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, 
said the new formula was a step in the right direction towards a fairer 
national distribution of school funding but added that it would only work if 
there were sufficient funds in the first place.

“The Institute for Fiscal Studies shows that school spending per pupil is 
likely to fall by around 8% in real terms by 2019-20, the first drop since the 
mid-1990s. Today’s National Audit Office report sets out that mainstream 
schools are expected to find £3bn in savings by 2019-20, echoing our own recent 
survey in which 69% of school leaders stated that they believe their deficits 
will be untenable by 2020.

“School funding is not sufficient. A change in how funding is distributed is 
important, but it will not solve this fundamental lack of investment.”

Kevin Courtney, general secretary at the National Union of Teachers, added: 
“Far from being the levelling up that some councils and heads have demanded, 
this is a levelling down. Even the schools currently worst funded will see 
real-terms cuts in this parliament.”

A 14-month consultation period now follows on the new formula, which will be 
introduced in 2018-19.
 