
When I was in Senegal in 2003, the few Chinese vessels fishing along the coast 
from Mauritania toLiberia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/liberia> were 
unseaworthy rust-buckets, existing off what licences they could cadge.

Then in the past five years shining new trawlers appeared on the horizon, 
churned out by subsidised Chinese shipyards, earning their owners handsome 
subsidies if they travel outsideChina <https://www.theguardian.com/world/china>
, where they run on subsidised fuel and exploit subsidised freight rates to get 
their frozen cargo back home. There seem to be unlimited funds available to buy 
licences to fish in ways that are far from transparent – and which have long 
been exploited by other Far East fleets and resourceful members of the European 
Union.

China’s distant water fleet is now the largest in the world, with about 3,400 
vessels fishing in the waters of nearly 100 countries. Researchers estimate that
nearly 75% of all the fish it caught came from African waters with almost 3m 
tonnes from west Africa 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/apr/03/chinese-fishing-fleet-african-catch>
.

And there is, as far as we can see, a problem. Scientists working for the 
University of British Columbia, using a new way of estimating the size and 
value of catches,reported this year 
<http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/faf.12032/abstract> that just 9% of 
the millions of tons of fish caught by the Chinese in African waters is 
officially reported to the UN. All nations have to report annual catches to the 
UN’s Food and Agriculture Organisation.

Once, if you wanted to understand how global trends in food consumption were 
affecting the health of the ocean, you would travel to different countries, 
stand on the fish dock and watch the boats come and go. Now you get a far 
better grasp of what is going on from a computer program that tracks fishing 
vessels by satellite. Focus in on westAfrica 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/africa> and you will notice the 
extraordinary upsurge in the number of Chinese trawlers fishing there in the 
past four years. The program displays the routes of more than 400 industrial 
vessels, 220 of them from China – more than any other nation.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46b94ff2779d2fd9ac9592415cafec18d5556eb9%2F0_0_3313_2205%2F3313.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F46b94ff2779d2fd9ac9592415cafec18d5556eb9%2F0_0_3313_2205%2F3313.jpg>
 Chinese fishermen unload chub mackerels at Qingdao port Photograph: Hong 
Wu/Getty Images 
Zoom in on the coast of mainland China itself and you will understand why the 
Chinese fleet ranges across the world from the south Pacific to the Caribbean 
to bring home the shrimp, sole and tuna for home consumption. Along the 
shoreline from Hong Kong to Shanghai no sea is visible beneath the blue 
triangles denoting fishing vessels with their automatic identification system 
(AIS) switched on. Scientists reported in 2013 that30% of China’s wild 
fisheries have collapsed and 20% were overfished 
<http://www.worldfishing.net/news101/regional-focus/is-china-really-a-land-of-promise>
.

No one can blame China for trying to feed its 1.35 billion people. But the way 
it does it is coming under scrutiny, for there are persistent allegations that 
its fleet is involved in illegal, under-reported or unregulated fishing. In 
west Africa, some 1.2m tons of fish are caught by 274,000 artisanal fishermen, 
often in direct competition with industrial vessels.

The result of this conflict is that stocks are in trouble all along the west 
African coast. Ghana recently had to propose aclosed season of several months 
<http://www.graphic.com.gh/news/general-news/government-introduces-closed-fishing-season.html>
 so fish could breed. The underlying problem is governance, or rather the lack 
of it. Under Ghanaian law, the beneficial owner of a fishing vessel is meant to 
be Ghanaian. The 60 licensed Chinese vessels in Ghanaian waters all fly the 
Ghanaian flag but the fish goes to China.

Stephen Akester, co-ordinator of a World Bank programme designed to improve 
governance and fish-stock management from Mauritania to Ghana, says the source 
of the problem lies in the custom of fishing companies buying licences through 
trawler agents who make payments to politicians that see this as their main 
source of income. The agency system means more fishing capacity gets licensed 
than stocks can stand, local fishermen lose out and, if landings are not 
measured properly, government loses tax revenue. When confronted for buying 
licences illegally, a Chinese diplomat told Akester, who is British, “You had 
your turn, this is ours.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffacbda2d7479937a2e192c740216ee0c08812a9e%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ffacbda2d7479937a2e192c740216ee0c08812a9e%2F0_0_5616_3744%2F5616.jpg>
 Fishing crew along Kokrobite beach Ghana. Photograph: Merten Snijders/Getty 
Images/Lonely Planet Images 
The west African example brings home some of the difficulties the world faces 
in meetingUN sustainable development goal target 14.2 
<http://indicators.report/targets/14-2/>, which aims by 2020 to “sustainably 
manage, and protect marine and coastal ecosystems to avoid significant adverse 
impacts, including by strengthening their resilience and take action for their 
restoration, to achieve healthy and productive oceans”. TheOverseas Development 
Institute has identified this target as one of the most difficult to achieve 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/05/sustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets>
, because it requires a complete about-turn of current trajectories. On the 
bright side, some 6% of the world’s oceans have now been proposed or designated 
as protected areas, mostly by developed nations in places far removed from 
large human populations.

How can we reach an SDG target when we're moving in the wrong direction?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/2016/oct/05/sustainable-development-goals-most-difficult-targets>
This target is a more challenging task on the west African coast, where it is 
often difficult to work out where bending the law ends and breaking it begins. 
Professor Percy Showers at the Institute of Marine Biology in Sierra Leone 
explains the impact of foreign fleets: “The stocks are being over-exploited and 
the situation is not getting better. There is a need for more caution in 
managing the stocks.” Some fish species, such as the sea breams, are still 
holding up, but other species have almost disappeared.

The enemy of both marine reserves and fish stocks is what is known as IUU, or 
“illegal, unreported and unrecorded” fishing. Global losses due to IUU fishing 
areestimated at between $10bn and $23.5bn (£8bn and £19bn) annually 
<http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article/asset?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0004570.PDF>
 [pdf] and represent between 11 and 26m tonnes of catch.

Steve Trent, executive director of the Environmental Justice Foundation 
<http://ejfoundation.org/>, which has worked against overfishing and IUU 
fishing in Thailand, Indonesia and west Africa, said: “In order to achieve SDG 
14, it is crucial that we put an end to IUU fishing. IUU fishing jeopardises 
the livelihoods and food security of some of the poorest communities in the 
world.”

Yet amid the gloom one example stands out and shows what can be done: Liberia. 
If you look at the computer program mentioned earlier, you will see that there 
are currently no industrial vessels currently at sea in Liberian waters. None 
at all. How can this be? Since it began working with the World Bank in 2011, 
Liberia has instituted a six-mile limit within which no industrial vessels may 
fish, along with fisheries monitoring that has reduced illegal fishing by 83% 
according to the ministry of agriculture and fisheries. The result has been 
that artisanal fishing communities have more than doubled their catch and some 
communities even report they are catching larger fish.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2edc027b23a7f4b805176860d9dc7a44479864%2F0_0_5184_3430%2F5184.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Thousands%20of%20Chinese%20ships%20trawl%20the%20world%2C%20so%20how%20can%20we%20stop%20overfishing%3F&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal-development-professionals-network%2F2016%2Fnov%2F15%2Fthousands-of-chinese-ships-trawl-the-world-so-how-can-we-stop-overfishing-un-goals%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F1b2edc027b23a7f4b805176860d9dc7a44479864%2F0_0_5184_3430%2F5184.jpg>
 Fishing boat in Monrovia, Liberia Photograph: John Moore/Getty Images 
This is a rare example of what Akester says should happen everywhere, the 
reallocation of natural assets to where they are needed most, in the artisanal 
fleet. The World Bank has worked with motivated politicians in Liberia and is 
helping to train a new generation of west African fishery managers who have not 
been contaminated by the agency system.

Liberian agriculture and fisheries minister Moses Zinnah says artisanal 
fishermen have praised the recovery in stocks

The Liberian agriculture and fisheries minister Moses Zinnah says artisanal 
fishermen have praised the tremendous recovery in stocks, which has put food on 
the table and increased income so they can afford to send their children to 
schools and hospitals.

Tougher fisheries regulations may be in place and actually being enforced, but 
Liberia still intends to earn foreign currency by selling licences to foreign 
fleets to catch fish that its own fleet is not equipped to catch, such as tuna. 
So a five-year partnership agreement has been adopted by Liberia and the EU 
that will allow 28 purse seiners and six support vessels into Liberian waters 
under a strict surveillance regime.

The e-waste mountains - in pictures
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global-development-professionals-network/gallery/2016/oct/18/the-e-waste-reduce-waste-old-technology-mountains-in-pictures>
Are there any plans to admit the Chinese, who are hard at work in the other 
seven west African countries in the World Bank fisheries project? Liberia, 
Zinnah says, has no policy in place for discriminating against fishing vessels 
based on nationality. Currently 12 Chinese vessels have requested licences to 
fish in Liberian waters and these are being considered, provided they fish 
according to the same rules as EU vessels. Negotiations continue. “The rules 
are tough and we are not breaking the rules. It has been a bit tough for both 
sides,” Zinnah observes.

So sustainable use of the sea again hangs in the balance. If the UN goal for 
sustainable use of the world’s oceans is to be achieved, examples like 
Liberia’s must not only succeed but multiply.

Charles Clover is a journalist and executive director of the Blue Marine 
Foundation <http://www.bluemarinefoundation.com/>.

Join our community <https://register.theguardian.com/global-development> of 
development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianGDP> on Twitter. Join the conversation with the 
hashtag#Dev2030 <https://twitter.com/search?q=%23Dev2030&src=typd>.
 