
Thousands of primary schools across England, along with local authorities, 
have seen their league table positions upended as a result of tough new exams 
last summer, with school leaders saying the volatile results have vindicated 
their concerns over rushed implementation.

The official statistics published on Thursday bear out predictions that the 
new standardised tests,Sats <https://www.theguardian.com/education/sats>, for 
11-year-olds at the end of primary school would be disruptive. Many schools 
stumbled while adjusting to the more challenging tests for reading, writing and 
maths but with many still managing to show good progress among their pupils.

At local authority level the new exams have shaken up positions compared with 
the previous system, with the distribution of results resulting in fewer areas 
receiving top results, and many more clustered around the national average.

Redcar and Cleveland’s position dropped from sixth in the country in 2015 to 
22nd this year, while Hounslow fell from 11th to 26th. St Helens tumbled from 
33rd to 84th, but Sunderland rose to 18th compared with 35th last year.
interactive 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/tools/tables/embed/index.html?spreadsheet=1MJNJfmLmQvGdcqqswrc0w3q_J-R6Gyc1nt_SYhL0Q_k>
Despite the tougher tests many headteachers will be relieved that fewer 
schools than feared have fallen below the government’s new two-pronged floor 
standard. Just 665 out of 13,000 eligible schools – 5% of the total - failed to 
meet the official benchmarks for results or progress, fewer than the 676 that 
failed to meet the previous standard in 2015.

Russell Hobby, the general secretary of the National Association of Head 
Teachers, bluntly dismissed the results: “This data is not worth the paper it 
is written on,” he said. “This year we saw the Sats system descend into chaos 
and confusion. Delayed and obscure guidance,papers leaked online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/10/fresh-humiliation-as-sats-answers-published-online-for-second-time>
, mistakes in test papers and inconsistent moderation made this year 
unmanageable for school leaders, teachers, parents and pupils.

“We warned the government that publishing this data in league tables could 
lead the public and parents to make poor judgments about a school’s performance 
but it has still chosen to do so.”

But Nick Gibb, the schools minister, defended the new system, based on the 
more demanding national curriculum introduced two years previously.

He said: “This year’s Sats are the first that test the new primary school 
curriculum in English and maths that we introduced in 2014. This new curriculum 
raises expectations and ensures pupils become more accomplished readers and are 
fluent in the basics of arithmetic.

“Many schools have responded well to this more rigorous curriculum, supporting 
their pupils to be leaving primary school better prepared for the demands of 
secondary school.”

The results from the Department for Education, which rank schools based on 
their key stage 2 results, show many previously high-performing schools falling 
below the government’s floor target of a 65% pass rate, while more than two out 
of three overall also failed to reach the exam floor standard.

In most cases the schools were saved from facing government sanctions, 
including academisation or management change, by the improvement in their 
pupils results compared with the same year group’s performance in earlier key 
stage one exams.

While many high-performing primary schools continued to do well, the new tests 
shuffled the order dramatically in some cases. Elham Church of England primary 
in Canterbury went from a perfect 100% in 2015 to a respectable 76% this year, 
and Whitefriars school in Harrow, north-west London, dipped from 98% under the 
old system to 77%.

In some cases, schools that had been well below the government’s 65% floor 
target last year rocketed up. Hill Avenue school in Wolverhampton went from 55% 
to 81%, and St Bartholomew’s primary in Stourport-on-Severn, Worcestershire, 
leapt from 40% to 78%.

Under the DfE’s new two-pronged assessment system, schools must either achieve 
65% or more in attainment in reading, writing and maths exams, or they must 
demonstrate a sufficient rate of progress in the results achieved by their 
pupils in the three subjects.

Hobby said: “Parents should not be distracted by the 65% attainment benchmark, 
which is based on badly designed and rapidly changing tests.” He called for the 
government do a better job at explaining the new assessment system.

Because of concerns before the exams, the DfE had already promised to limit 
the rise in the proportion of schools falling below the target to a 1% 
increase. But the results meant it was not required to use the cap.

One of the worst performing schools in the country, the Steiner academy in 
Frome, Somerset, was able to avoid the DfE’s sanctions despite just one of its 
27 pupils getting pass marks in the three tests.

Because the free school, which adheres to the unorthodox Steiner education 
principles 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2012/may/25/steiner-state-funded-free-schools>
 of not teaching pupils to read or write until the age of seven, did not take 
part in the earlier key stage 1 tests, it was not required to meet the floor 
standard.

Just 47 schools managed a perfect pass rate, including a number of small rural 
schools. Of those closer in size to the national average, Tennyson Road school 
in Luton got 100%, while Scotts school in Havering and Lower Kersal school in 
Salford got 100% pass rates and showed remarkable rates of progress in reading.

The 2016 key stage 2 tests also included a new exam on spelling and grammar, 
which wasexposed online by the DfE’s contractor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/10/fresh-humiliation-as-sats-answers-published-online-for-second-time>
. A similar test for key stage 1 pupils wasaccidentally posted online 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/apr/21/headteachers-urge-government-to-scrap-test-after-it-was-published-online>
 by the DfE.
 