
Three teenagers convicted of killing aspiring grime MC Myron Yarde 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/04/tributes-to-killed-rapper-myron-yarde-flood-social-media>
 in a row over a stolen bicycle have been sentenced to a total of 37 years in 
jail.

Fauz Richards, 19, and 16-year-olds Junior Lukelo-Mami and Lucus Risch – who 
can be named after the judge lifted reporting restrictions – were handed 
lengthy sentences for the manslaughter of the 17-year-old on a street in New 
Cross, south-eastLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london>, last April.

The court heard that the incident was a case of a punishment stabbing in the 
legs that had fatal consequences after Lukelo-Mami dealt a fatal wound that 
caused Myron to bleed to death.

“No sentence that I can pass can undo the wrong that you have done or bring 
back Myron Yarde,” judge Nicholas Cooke told the trio as he passed sentence at 
the Old Bailey. “All must understand that I’m not sentencing you for murder, 
but for manslaughter. The jury came to the understandable conclusion that an 
intention to kill or cause serious injury was not proven.

“Nonetheless, this is extremely serious offending. Gang-related homicide 
involving the carrying of knives is a dreadful problem and it needs to be 
strongly deterred.”
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthree-teenagers-get-37-years-in-jail-for-killing-aspiring-mc-myron-yarde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F114d266865bb31f197a3167465bb3792f0ffc422%2F0_40_1790_2236%2F1790.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Three%20teenagers%20get%2037%20years%20in%20jail%20for%20killing%20aspiring%20MC%20Myron%20Yarde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthree-teenagers-get-37-years-in-jail-for-killing-aspiring-mc-myron-yarde%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Three%20teenagers%20get%2037%20years%20in%20jail%20for%20killing%20aspiring%20MC%20Myron%20Yarde&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2F2017%2Fjan%2F13%2Fthree-teenagers-get-37-years-in-jail-for-killing-aspiring-mc-myron-yarde%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F114d266865bb31f197a3167465bb3792f0ffc422%2F0_40_1790_2236%2F1790.jpg>
 Fauz Richards has been found guilty of the manslaughter of Myron Yarde along 
with two 16-year-olds. Photograph: Metropolitan Police/PA 
Yarde, the court heard, had gone into a rival area armed with a machete or 
samurai sword in an attempt to recover his stolen bicycle, snatched as part of 
an ongoing feud, but had been disarmed by Risch before he was stabbed by 
Richards and Lukelo-Mami.

The court heard in mitigation that the three defendants had suffered from 
difficult circumstances that had led them intoinvolvement in gang culture 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/apr/14/myron-issac-yarde-and-the-community-grieving-a-lost-generation>
.

Valeria Swift, speaking for Lukelo-Mami, said he had had “the hardest of 
upbringings”, including the murder of his mother by his father while the pair 
were away on holiday together in Spain. He and his siblings had subsequently 
been taken in by an aunt before spending time in care. He was sentenced to 12 
years.

Fauz Richards had denied any involvement in the attack on Myron but was found 
by the jury to have stabbed the victim in the legs a number of times. 
Nonetheless, Stephen Akinsanya, his barrister, said his client was remorseful 
and, despite Richards’ self-admitted cannabis dealing, pointed to his lack of 
previous convictions as evidence of his relatively good character. He was 
sentenced to 13 years.

Lucus Risch, who was also convicted of perverting the course of justice for 
getting two women who bought drugs from him to dispose of a weapon, was said to 
have also expressed deep remorse over his role in the attack.

Since being held on remand last April he had engaged with educational 
opportunities, said Richard Hutchings, defending.

“Like the first two defendants, he said that were the opportunity to arise in 
the future to engage in whatever restorative justice then he would be willing 
to do so,” Hutchings added. Risch was sentenced to 12 years, plus another two 
years for perverting the course of justice, to run concurrently.

Charlotte Edmunds, 32, and Jamie Kennedy, 31, were each jailed for two years 
and three months for their part in concealing the weapon, which was never found.

Outside court, Myron’s sister Chantelle Gray said the family were happy with 
the sentences, and said she backed comments by the judge about the scourge of 
knife crime on London’s streets.

“This is something that’s playing on my heart too, that it’s happening a lot 
in London and across the country. It needs to be stopped and there needs to be 
more things done to help these young teenagers to get away from this sort of 
crime,” she said.

“I think a lot of these teenagers realising the fact that they are young, that 
they can get away with it or not be named and shamed. I think [the lifting of 
reporting restrictions] is a good thing and just to know that something needs 
to be done about this.”
 