
A government watchdog is to take steps against nuisance phonecalls and texts 
this week, issuing written warnings to more than 1,000 companies it believes 
are actively buying and selling lists of names and numbers used for cold 
calling and texts.

How to block nuisance calls – the fight starts here
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/07/how-to-block-nuisance-calls-phone>
The Information Commissioner’s Office 
<https://ico.org.uk/about-the-ico/news-and-events/news-and-blogs/2015/11/nuisance-call-crackdown-continues-with-letters-to-1-000-companies-trading-names-and-numbers/>
 will also announce fines totalling £250,000 for three perpetrators of nuisance 
calls. This will bring to a total of £1.25m thepenalties imposed over the past 
four months 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/10/nuisance-calls-debt-management-company-fined-ico>
.

 Christopher Graham, the information commissioner, said big breakthroughs had 
been made in the data gathered on the worst offenders, which would lead to 
further court appearances.

“We already know a lot about this sector,” he said. “ We know that it prompts 
180,000 complaints a year from consumers, who take the time to report to us the 
calls they’re getting. That information has helped us to make some big 
breakthroughs in the nuisance calls business, alongside the intelligence we 
build up from elsewhere, from whistleblowers or the network providers.”

Graham said the ICO had been able to see “clear patterns building up and can 
identify who would benefit from guidance, and who the truly bad actors are. 
This enables us to execute search warrants, to drag people before the courts 
and to issue fines”.

The first fine is understood to be for a business that sent more than 1m text 
messages inviting claims for PPI mis-selling. The other two are to companies 
marketing services to reduce nuisance calls – such as call blocker systems.

Changes to the law came into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/feb/24/companies-nuisance-calls-texts-fined-500000-ico-ofcom>
 in April relating to nuisance calls and texts. Previously the ICO had to prove 
that a company caused “substantial damage or substantial distress” in making 
such calls or sending spam text messages. Now it only has to prove the company 
was committing a serious breach of privacy and electronic communication 
regulations.
 