
“What is the riddle?” asked the young woman, doing a little writhing dance as 
she spoke. “The riddle is this, the riddle is that: what is the riddle?” Search 
me, I said.

Tino Sehgal: These Associations – review
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jul/29/tino-sehgal-these-associations-review>
We met just beyond the shimmering floor-to-ceiling glass-bead curtain – a 1991 
work by the lateFélix González-Torres 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/may/27/felix-gonzalez-torres-review-hauser-and-wirth-london>
 – that marks a transition from everyday encounters into the world ofTino 
Sehgal at the Palais de Tokyo 
<http://www.palaisdetokyo.com/en/event/tino-sehgal>, in Paris. Sehgal’s Carte 
Blanche, his largest show to date, fills the building with sounds and furies 
and manufactured encounters, with dancing, chanting, yelling, walking, running, 
talking and kissing. Sehgal has invited other artists to take part. The ground 
floor has a gorgeous false ceiling and mirrored walls byDaniel Buren 
<http://www.danielburen.com/images/exhibit/1266?&lang=fre> (a work Buren first 
showed here in 2004); in a chamber on the lower level the soundtrack of James 
Coleman’s 1977 film Box (Ahhareturnabout) emits an amplified heartbeat rhythm, 
synchronised to intermittent flashes of archive footage of the 1927 world
heavyweight return match between Jack Dempsey and Gene Tunney 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZkqAzjJqWpY>, that can be heard, almost 
subliminally, through the building.

Coleman’s voiceover is an almost hoarsely whispered interior monologue, a 
punishing bout of words. “Box!”, he says, “The fight is on! Deliver, deliver! 
Return, return!” This is what being inSehgal’s show 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/tino-sehgal-and-his-friends-take-over-the-palais-de-tokyo-in-paris-/>
 is like. It is relentless and seems without end. One minute you are 
buttonholed by a stranger with a story to tell inThese Associations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jul/23/tino-sehgal-these-associations-review>
 (Sehgal’s commission for Tate’s Turbine Hall in 2012), the next stumbling 
about in an utterly dark room inThis Variation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2012/jun/11/documenta-13-review>, 
which I first experienced at the most recent Documenta, surrounded by yelping 
head-bangers, people crawling around in the dark and singers keeping up a manic 
tempo of steam train hisses and piston rhythms.

These Associations works extremely well in the wide-open spaces of the Palais 
de Tokyo’s lower level. People are milling about, grouping and regrouping, 
jinking round the pillars, running together and drifting apart. A chant starts 
up, but the words are mostly lost in the echoing space. Something to do with 
elementary particles, but I don’t quite catch it. A tall, young man with pale 
eyes starts telling me some tangled story about his sister and a gone-wrong 
attempt to rent her flat on Airbnb that had precipitated some sort of 
psychological crisis. What am I supposed to do? Offer advice, sympathy? These 
people have already been at it, in shifts, for a month, and they’ll be here 
almost until Christmas. Later, a woman approaches to tell me about a sex game 
with her boyfriend and how he only wants her to get pregnant by accident. The 
more I delve, the more troubling her story gets. I have cast myself in the role 
of agony aunt, working my own shift among lost souls.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b06559e1e619cea37a96e6a20ec674a6a41bc6%2F0_285_5670_3401%2F5670.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal's%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal%27s%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F84b06559e1e619cea37a96e6a20ec674a6a41bc6%2F0_285_5670_3401%2F5670.jpg>
 Sehgal,who has filled the Palais de Tokyo with hundreds of performers 
<http://theartnewspaper.com/news/tino-sehgal-and-his-friends-take-over-the-palais-de-tokyo-in-paris-/>
, forbids photos or videos of his work. Photograph: Florent Michel 
Looking for respite, I came to a raw concrete area at the back of one of the 
Palais’s cavernous lower levels.Pierre Huyghe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/sep/17/pierre-huyghes-exhibition-hauser-and-wirth-encounters-review>
 has flooded the floor, and water gurgles through pipes and spurts from tall, 
sinister-looking columns. An empty lift wheezes up and down. Now I feel as if 
I’mHarry Dean Stanton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2013/nov/23/harry-dean-stanton-interview> 
searching for the lost cat in the firstAlien movie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/News_Story/Critic_Review/Guardian_Film_of_the_week/0,4267,1074029,00.html?gusrc=gpd?gusrc=gpd>
, just before the terrifying adult thing appears. Through a hole in the wall I 
find an untended computer and electronic gizmos winking away with red lights in 
an empty, wrecked room. There’s just enough space to squeeze through.

Huyghe’s contribution to the show exudes a sort of menace. Even the 
explanatory wall label hangs in the dark. This all has something to do with 
logarithms and in vitro cancer cells, which are being grown somewhere, and the 
interdependence of all the organisms, “real and symbolic” in the situation of 
the exhibition. I just want to run away.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4bd2625b6dba02428e9ff1bed25aab13350b6cd%2F1405_155_2782_3478%2F2782.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal's%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal%27s%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc4bd2625b6dba02428e9ff1bed25aab13350b6cd%2F1405_155_2782_3478%2F2782.jpg>
 Does Sehgal really invite our interaction? The artist himself. Photograph: 
Asad Raza 
The next day, beyond the bead curtain, I meet a young boy. We walk together 
through Buren’s brightly lit installation, to a break in the mirrored wall. He 
asks what progress means to me. I think global warming, Trump and Brexit, of 
progress and regression. The kid passes me on to a young woman, who inquires if 
I have achieved my ambitions. Am I happy? Not a moment too soon a woman in her 
40s has taken over, leading me on with another progressive gambit­. Quite how I 
found myself descending the stairs to a lower part of the building, with a guy 
from Berlin of about my own age in tow, I can’t recall. “This morning was dark 
and grey,” he observes, “But now it is getting brighter”. This could be the 
worst chat-up line I have ever heard – or the sort of thing secret agents are 
supposed to say to one another on first meeting. Give the wrong response and 
you are dead meat. We fall into discussing Trump and the just-announced death 
of Leonard Cohen. The world darkens. “Time to take to the barricades again!” he 
offers, cheerily, by way of a quick Brexit auf wiedersehen.

Walking into an empty room, a bunch of people are facing the wall. An Irish 
bloke at the threshold announces, to no one in particular: “The objective of 
this work is to be the object of a discussion.” Playing up my vanity, I say 
that to be the object of a discussion is the objective of my life, but it 
doesn’t go down too well, and there follows a long repartee about drunkards, 
for whom drunkenness may be an objective in itself, not merely an aid to 
countering sorrow. I need a drink.

One way or another, we are all interpreters. But there are no innocent 
bystanders.

Does Sehgal really invite our interaction? I enjoy the call and response of 
his work, the possibility, and perhaps the danger, of intrusion and 
entanglement. He makes us uncertain, as if a trap door has opened under our 
feet. One way or another, we are all interpreters, even when we regard 
ourselves as mere spectators. But there are no innocent bystanders. Here we all 
are, in the here and now.

Three years ago, I sat on the sloping floor of the subterranean theatre in the 
Palais de Tokyo, listening to a child acting the role of Annlee, the 
off-the-shelf manga characterPhilippe Parreno 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/oct/03/philippe-parreno-turbine-hall-anywhen-review-mesmerising-unmissable>
 and Huyghe had been developing since they bought her in 1999. The two artists 
passed the avatar on to a number of other artists, including Sehgal. First 
Annlee was a flat cartoon, then an animated video, now a three-dimensional 
living being, played by a child. She has progressed. Here I am with her again, 
in the same room she occupied inParreno’s 2013 show 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2013/oct/30/parreno-video-art-palais-tokyo-paris-monroe-zidane>
. It is as if I never left. She still asks the same questions of the audience 
she was asking then. Would you rather be too busy or not busy enough? What is 
the difference between a sign and melancholia?
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768a13e5eb423d8a365cc152b719ab0763e884fb%2F686_0_2821_1793%2F2821.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal's%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Through%20the%20trap%20door%3A%20Tino%20Sehgal%27s%20mesmerising%20mind%20maze&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fartanddesign%2F2016%2Fnov%2F16%2Ftino-sehgal-carte-blanche-mind-bending-exhibition-palais-de-tokyo-paris%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F768a13e5eb423d8a365cc152b719ab0763e884fb%2F686_0_2821_1793%2F2821.jpg>
 Another sketch of Sehgal’s Annlee by Philippe Parreno 
She has now been joined by a boy called Marcel; a child savant whose words are 
often taken from Marcel Duchamp. There is something extremely touching about 
their dialogue. Marcel is worldly, wise beyond his years. At a certain point, 
the boy drops to his knees, as if winded by knowing too much. I watched this 
eight or nine times over two days, with two different pairs of child 
interpreters. Each time it was the same, each time different, their 
conversations taking different forking paths. Annlee has never been outside an 
artwork. It is where she has her being. She barely knows how to breathe. “Have 
you ever been outside? Outside an exhibition space?” Marcel asks. “Never? I’ll 
take you.”

Eventually, Marcel leads her out of the theatre and into the world. Ten 
minutes later, she is back, starting all over again. Every time she goes, I 
fear for her. Watching Annlee’s slow progress into the world, one step forward 
and two steps back, is another riddle. I still haven’t got to the bottom of it, 
because there isn’t one. As much like a fairy story though this is, the world 
is never far away, separated from us by the thinnest membrane, 
González-Torres’s glittering curtain.

 * Carte Blanche to Tino Sehgal 
<http://www.palaisdetokyo.com/en/event/tino-sehgal> is at Palais de Tokyo, 
Paris, until 18 December.  