
StubHub and Ticketmaster have been accused of acting like “old-fashioned 
fences” as MPs investigate websites that allowtouts to make huge profits 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
from illegal ticket sales.

The ticketing industry also faces the prospect of being dragged into an HM 
Revenue & Customs inquiry, amid claims that some touts are not declaring all of 
the money they make via resale sites.

Representatives of StubHub and Ticketmaster faced an inquisition from MPs on 
the culture, media and sport select committee, who are looking into allegations 
that touts useunderhand methods to secure tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
 at the expense of fans.

How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
Touts are breaking the law if they masquerade as a consumer to buy tickets 
they intend to trade, or if they fail to reveal their business details when 
they eventually sell the ticket.

Ticketmaster and StubHub said they gave sellers the option to identify 
themselves voluntarily as businesses but did not take further steps to verify 
this.

StubHub said 98% of its sellers tick the box to declare they are genuine 
consumers but said it did not “police or monitor” the claims and was under no 
obligation to do so.

Ticketmaster UK’s chairman, Chris Edmonds, said touts, known as “power 
sellers” in the industry, were dissuaded from identifying themselves as traders 
because they feared a public backlash.

“We’re giving everyone the opportunity to register but we do have power 
sellers becoming the focus of high level media scrutiny. So there’s a 
disincentive to be 100% transparent.”

Anger against the industrial-scale harvesting of tickets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
 has grown, as fans find that dedicated touts are snapping up thousands of 
tickets for the most popular shows.

Tickets to see Phil Collins were recently reported to have sold out within 15 
seconds, while Radiohead fans were left disappointed after their first Dublin 
show since 2008 sold out in minutes, only for tickets to appear shortly 
afterwards on StubHub.

Campaigners say forcing touts to reveal their identity would allow artists to 
cancel tickets bought for the purpose of resale, freeing up room for genuine 
fans.

Ticketmaster and StubHub told the committee that forcing them to demand more 
details from touts would drive those people on to less well-regulated offshore 
websites such ascontroversial 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/26/tickets-trader-viagogo-slammed-for-callous-resale-profiteering>
 Switzerland-basedViagogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/what-we-know-about-ticket-reseller-viagogo>
.

Committee member Nigel Adams, the Conservative MP who recently proposed 
outlawing the use of automated software called “bots” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/19/touts-using-bots-buy-tickets-face-jail>
 to harvest tickets, said companies had no incentive to act.

“They’re quite happy to turn a blind eye to what could be criminality. Anyone 
watching the session would have been alarmed by what looks like abject 
complacency,” said Adams, speaking after the committee hearing. In some ways 
they are acting like-old fashioned fences and they need to clean their act up.”

Damian Collins, the Tory MP and committee chairman, said he was not satisfied 
with the companies’ response to allegations that they were not doing enough to 
crack down on touting.


Powerful software to assist ticket touts widely available online
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
“They never expressed any sense of sympathy or regret for the consumers,” 
Collins said. “It’s easy to identify people suspected of being in breach of 
consumer protection law but there seems to be little appetite for monitoring 
and policing this behaviour.

“It should be easy to do that and I think in their evidence they deliberately 
sought to obscure that.”

StubHub and Ticketmaster declined to comment on the select committe session.

Security consultant Reg Walker told the committee there was evidence that 
touts were hiding their income from the taxman because the value of tickets 
they sold through resale sites did not match up to the income declared in their 
company accounts.

Collins said this “very important” piece of evidence would inform the 
committee’s recommendations, which will be sent to the secretary of state for 
culture, media and sport Karen Bradley within weeks.

Walker, who has spent years investigating touting and ticket fraud, said the 
resale companies were more than just marketplaces with no control over how 
touts behave.

“These people [touts] are feted by ticketing companies because they have such 
value to secondary sites,” he added. “It goes beyond turning a blind eye.”

He said major touts often have longstanding relationships with ticket resale 
sites and sometimes receive preferential treatment.

The Guardian has previously published an account from a former secondary 
ticketing employee that the resale websitehelped the biggest touts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/bands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts>
 to get the best tickets.

Resale companies typically take a commission of 25% on the value of any ticket 
sold through their websites.

Music manager Ian McAndrew, at Wildlife Entertainment, told the committee some 
tickets end up on resale sites without fans ever having the chance to buy them 
at face value, because artists and managers occasionally pass tickets to 
resellers for a cut of the profit.

“I’ve been approached by one of the big four resale sites asking to give them 
inventory in return for participation in the profit,” he said.

• This story was amended on 16 November 2016 to correct Ian McAndrew’s job 
from promoter to music manager
 