
Ticket resale websites and the touts who use them could be fined after the 
competition watchdog launched an investigation into how the best seats are 
harvested and then sold on at huge mark-ups before fans can buy them at face 
value.

The Competition and Market Authority said it was examining suspected breaches 
of consumer law after reviewing the four secondary ticket companies – Viagogo, 
StubHub, GetMeIn and Seatwave – that sell on previously purchased tickets.


It will examine several areas of concern in the secondary ticketing market, 
including whether touts use “connections” at resale websites to gain an 
advantage over fans, such as information that helps them decide which tickets 
to market aggressively.

Ticketing websites 'acting like old-fashioned fences', say MPs
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
The probe follows increasing scrutiny of the sector by MPs concerned about the 
inflated prices at which tickets are being sold. Earlier this monthhundreds of 
tickets to see Adele next summer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/02/adele-tickets-appear-online-for-9000-despite-singers-efforts-to-stop-touts>
 appeared on resale websites for up to £9,000, the latest in a string of 
in-demand events seized on by theUK’s most successful touts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts>.

Andrea Coscelli, acting chief executive of the CMA, said: “A night out at a 
concert or a trip to a big match is something that millions of people look 
forward to. So it’s important they know who they are buying from and whether 
there are any restrictions that could stop them using the ticket.”


 “If we find breaches of consumer law, we will take enforcement action,” he 
added.

Rules introduced in 2015 require ticket resellers to provide details of the 
block, row and seat number, as well as the face value and information about any 
restrictions. Last year, the CMAsecured pledges from the main websites 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/mar/05/ticket-resale-websites-face-fresh-clampdown-end-profiteering>
 that they would improve the information provided to buyers.

The CMA said one site failed to comply with the demand to provide such 
information. GetMeIn, Seatwave and StubHub said they were not the site in 
question.Switzerland-based Viagogo 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/23/what-we-know-about-ticket-reseller-viagogo>
 did not return a request for comment.

The watchdog has powers to force firms which breach the law to provide 
undertakings to improve their behaviour, while the courts can impose fines on 
those who do not.


The CMA’s investigation will also turn the spotlight on the touts, who are 
already facing the prospect of atax investigation by HMRC 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/15/stubhub-ticketmaster-mps-touts-teckets>
. Those found to be concealing their identities or ticket details could face 
court-imposed fines.

A CMA presentation given recently to the Society of Ticket Agents and 
Retailers, seen by the Guardian, states that even the very act of bulk-buying 
tickets for resale is illegal. This is because anyone masquerading as a 
consumer for the purpose of business is in breach of theConsumer Protection 
from Unfair Trading Regulations 2008 
<http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2008/1277/schedule/1/made>.

The CMA’s probe will also examine whether major touts, some of whom were named 
in an investigation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
by the Observer, are exploiting “connections” at ticket websites.A 
whistleblower from one resale site 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jul/16/bands-fans-declare-war-online-ticket-touts>
 said touts are sometimes handed inside information to help them grab the best 
seats at must-have concerts.

Consumer body Which? urged the CMA to stake strong action. Vickie Sheriff, 
director of campaigns and communications at the consumer body, said: “On 
numerous occasions we have found tickets being sold unlawfully, so we welcome 
the competition authorities taking action to tackle this.”

Labour MP Sharon Hodgson, who chairs the All Party Parliamentary Group on 
Ticket Abuse, said it was “paramount that enforcement action is taken seriously 
and swiftly”. She also called on the government to tackle “bulk purchasing” by 
touts, amid calls tocriminalise the use of ‘bots’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/oct/19/touts-using-bots-buy-tickets-face-jail>
, automated software sometimes used to buy large numbers of tickets.

Despite the CMA’s probe, some ticketing experts expressed disappointment. 
Music industry group FanFairAlliance said: “UK audiences will continue to be 
frustrated that measures to genuinely fix ticket resale are not being taken 
sooner – and while other countries take swift and decisive actions, British 
fans continue to be ripped off by touts operating under cover on the Big Four 
resale sites.

“We call on the government to respond to recommendations made in the Waterson 
review on secondary ticketing, and welcome the potential of a full inquiry by 
the select committee in the new year.”

A government-commissioned review by Prof Michael Waterson  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
concluded this year that ticket resellers that do not comply with last year’s 
rule changes should be taken to court. The government has yet to respond to the 
review.

Security consultant Reg Walker, who recently testified to MPs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/16/mps-call-for-inquiry-into-ticket-touts-and-resale-websites>
 about “ticket abuse”, cast doubt on the CMA’s assertion that most ticket sites 
are now complying with consumer protection laws.

“Given the information in the public domain about all four websites, I fail to 
see how any are fully complying with the Consumer Rights Act, let alone just 
one.”


Walker called on the CMA to demand firms hand over records of the touts who 
use them, to establish whether they are breaking the law.
 