
Tiger Woods <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/tigerwoods> finished 15th at 
the Hero World Challenge, 14 shots behind the winner, Hideki Matsuyama, and 
said afterwards there had been “some pretty dire times” during his 15-month 
injury absence.

Woods, 40, who came through 72 holes unscathed in the 18-man event in the 
Bahamas, had three double bogeys, three bogeys and five birdies as he finished 
with a 76, his worst round of the week.

'I'm playing again': Tiger Woods just happy to be back after 15 months off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/nov/29/tiger-woods-hero-world-challenge-golf-comeback>
However, he was delighted to be competing again after two back operations, 
saying: “There were some pretty dire times when I couldn’t move. You just lay 
there and you can’t move – those are scary times. It’s great to be back playing 
against the best players in the world but unfortunately I made a lot of 
mistakes this week. I made some poor decisions.

“Getting my lights back and my body back and focusing for a long period of 
time - these are things I’ve missed for a year and a half. I made some birdies 
this week, which is nice. I always want to be aggressive but I made some bad 
mistakes. You can’t make two sevens. The pain and issues I’ve had... it was 
just rough.”

A second-round 65 had briefly thrust Woods, winner of 14 majors, into 
contention but there were signs of rust in the final round, with the American 
thinning a wedge over the back of the 6th green en route to his first double 
bogey of the day.

He reached the turn in level par after a run of three birdies, then dropped 
four shots in three holes, with his short game letting him down on the 11th 
with two poor chips.

Back-to-back gains on the 14th and 15th took Woods’ birdie count to 24 – the 
highest in the field this week – as he finished on four under par.

Japan’s Matsuyama shot a closing 73 to take the title on 18 under, two clear 
of the Open champion, Henrik Stenson.
 