
Two more public figures passed on last week: an impressive centenarian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2017/jan/04/oldest-known-orca-presumed-dead-endangered-whales>
 and community leader; and akiller serving life imprisonment 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/blackfish-killer-whale-tilikum-dies-seaworld-orcas-film>
. They taught us about one of the planet’s most intelligent creatures, and our 
own capacity for love and cruelty.

Granny, the matriarch of a wild orca population close to Vancouver 
<http://www.whaleresearch.com/orca-population> and Seattle, may have been as 
old as 105. She was studied for 40 years as researchers unravelled why orcas 
are one of only three mammals – with short-finned pilot whales and us – known 
to experience themenopause 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2013/oct/17/killer-whales-menopause>. 
Orca matriarchs, scientists learned, have a crucial role in guiding a pod, 
taking care of other females’ calves, and even feeding adult males.

Tilikum, SeaWorld killer whale shown in Blackfish documentary, dies after 
illness
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/blackfish-killer-whale-tilikum-dies-seaworld-orcas-film>
Granny was also a symbol of freedom during the most disastrous period of 
human-cetacean relations, dodging the “capture kings” of the1960s and 70s who 
grabbed hundreds of killer whales 
<http://us.whales.org/issues/penn-cove-orca-captures> and placed them in 
aquariums for our amusement.

Tilikum embodied this cruelty. Snatched from Icelandic waters aged two as 
recently as 1983, he was transported first to a Canadian marine park and then 
to SeaWorld in the US. One former trainer estimates this impressive alpha male 
was thelargest cetacean ever to be held in captivity 
<https://twitter.com/jeffrey_ventre>.

In one of the most carefully worded obituaries ever written, SeaWorld paid 
tribute <https://seaworldcares.com/tilikum> to 36-year-old Tilikum’s “long and 
enriching life”. It was “long” by the standards of captivity:analysis of 201 
captive orcas <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/mms.12225/abstract> 
found a median survival of just 6.1 years. And the “enrichment” must refer to 
the human pleasure taken from inspiring encounters with this caged beast.

For Tilikum felt and also inflicted great pain. While in captivity, he was 
implicated in the deaths of three humans, including his trainer, Dawn 
Brancheau, in 2010.

One hundred million people have watched Blackfish 
<http://www.blackfishmovie.com/>, the documentary about Tilikum that takes the 
basic premise that if you were taken from your mother and reduced to a life 
chewing a concrete cage, you might become slightly psychotic. The film sparked 
a boycott of SeaWorld, and last year the “theatrical killer whale experience” 
at its San Diego park closed. Orca entertainments continue at other SeaWorld 
parks, but the theme park operatorhas, crucially, ended its captive breeding 
programme 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/mar/17/seaworld-to-stop-breeding-killer-whales-orcas-blackfish>
. Animal welfare groups want to release its orcas into sea pens, but there’s no 
sign of that yet.

Granny’s group of wild orcas number just 71 now, depleted by the 
capture-kings, marine traffic and pollution. Britain’s resident orca clan hasn’t
sired a calf for 20 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jan/14/uks-last-resident-killer-whales-doomed-to-extinction>
: scientists blame pollution for this infertility. We are still far from making 
the wild a haven for these magnificent animals, as it should be.

Where whales envy insects 

Is France a utopia for citizens seeking a repaired relationship with nature? 
It hasbanned pesticides 
<http://www.mnn.com/your-home/organic-farming-gardening/blogs/french-parks-and-public-gardens-bid-adieu-pesticides>
 from gardens and parks to stop us poisoning the insects that support life; and
supermarket food waste is unlawful 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/feb/04/french-law-forbids-food-waste-by-supermarkets>
, as is fracking. But dystopian elements remain. France is home to Marineland, 
where captive orcas stillperform tricks 
<http://www.marineland.fr/en/activities/animal-shows/killer-whales> and two 
died in 2015 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/newsbeat/article/34515872/french-water-park-marineland-criticised-after-killer-whale-dies>
. If orcas were as slow to adapt as corporate marine parks, they would be 
extinct by now.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DND3TYnTVUQg&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DND3TYnTVUQg>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3DND3TYnTVUQg&media=>
 Vintage film from 1931 of Billy, the Wereham village pond seal. 
The Wally of Norfolk 

At least marine mammals are on the march near my home in Norfolk. Grey seals 
have bred at Horsey Gap <http://friendsofhorseyseals.co.uk/> in record numbers, 
and one was recently found in a garden in Blakeney – 2km from the sea – lost 
but healthy. Seals have long followed rivers to find fish:in 1931 Billy the 
seal took up residence in Wereham village pond 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ND3TYnTVUQg&feature=youtu.be>. In 1981 a 
garden near Downham Marketbecame home to a walrus 
<https://twitter.com/Mark_A_Eaton/status/817404410213056512> who swam up the 
river. Inevitably, it was named Wally.
 