
It is the subject guaranteed to send even mild-mannered golfing observers into 
a state of frenzy. Piece the words slow and play together before watching 
sparks fly; it can really be great fun. The only thing more consistent than 
slow play is the regularity with which people prattle on about it.

Muirfield members face their demons again: is it time to let the ladies in? | 
Marina Hyde
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/blog/2017/jan/04/muirfield-men-only-vote-the-open-golf-club>
The fact remains, one of the key elements that harms the game’s appeal is pace 
of play. It is unquestionable that time taken for a round offers a cause for 
people not to bother. Part of that, it has to be said, is societal rather than 
specific; everything is done quicker – or has to be seen to be done quicker – 
than ever before. The flip side? Hours spent on a course can be highly relaxing.

Step forward Jason Day <https://www.theguardian.com/sport/jason-day>, for whom 
sprinting when at work has never been a viable option. The Australian, the 
world No1 no less, used pre-tournament media duties in Hawaii on Tuesday to 
insist the fear of upsetting others by not playing quickly enough was 
detrimental to his progress during 2016.

“There were a couple things that I didn’t do as well the second half in the 
season,” he said. “I wasn’t as deliberate going into a shot. Gathering the 
information, I wasn’t as deliberate.”

What followed drew inevitable cross-reference to Rory McIlroy’s explosive 
comments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/jul/12/rory-mcilroy-i-will-not-watch-olympic-golf-because-it-does-not-matter-jordan-spieth-rio-games>
 relating to Olympic participation. It also centred social‑media rage around 
Day. “I cared about, you know, obviously everyone wants to speed up the game,” 
the Australian added. “That’s a big subject, to speed up the game.

“I don’t care so much about speeding up my game. I’ve got to get back to what 
makes me good. If that means I have to back off five times, then I’m going to 
back off five times before I have to hit the shot.

“For recreational golf, I understand. But for golfers that are trying to win 
and that one shot that could take you out of a play-off, that’s important, and 
you need to make sure that you get everything correct. We’re driven by results; 
we want to be the best and we want to do everything but the average Joe just 
doesn’t get it.

Sport calendar 2017: your essential guide to the next 12 months
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2017/jan/01/sport-calendar-2017-your-essential-guide-to-the-next-12-months>
“That was just one of the things I wasn’t as deliberate that I should have 
been and that’s what I’ve got to try and do a lot more, be a little bit more 
deliberate going into a shot and make sure I do everything correctly.”

The Day stigma itself is curious. For all there is no doubt he is deliberate 
to the point of slow at times, others apply the same approach without anything 
like the associated drama. Henrik Stenson and Sergio García spring immediately 
to mind. When Stenson railed against an over-zealous referee whom, the Swede 
believed, cost him the 2015 Arnold Palmer Invitational there was little in the 
way of comeback. “I thought we were here to play golf, not finish at 6pm,” 
Stenson said. Others are deliberately slow depending on circumstances.

The notion that Day must be wildly castigated for his sentiment is unfair and 
on quite a number of levels. Day, like McIlroy, will advance the sport by 
winning marquee tournaments. When the 29-year-oldannihilated the field 
<https://www.theguardian.com/sport/2016/may/15/jason-day-players-championship> 
at the Players Championship in May last year, nobody seriously insisted that 
shot time meant an asterisk be applied.

He is perfectly correct to point out the huge stakes being played for by a 
collection of players who are separated by very little at the summit of the 
game. They are doing this on courses that are brutally tough and require 
trickery because of how far equipment has advanced distance.

For Day to recognise what had propelled him to the top of his sport in the 
first place is also reasonable. He did this within the rules; if the PGA Tour 
has no inclination to punish Day for what others regard as excessively slow 
play, why should he feel the need to change approach?

The controversial element relates to Day’s average Joe analogy. Again, though, 
it actually has merit. If a 55-year-old, 12 handicap amateur playing for sweep 
money or less in a club medal believes an exaggerated pre‑shot routine and 
round of five hours is perfectly fine on the basis it applies to Jason Day, the 
problem is nothing to do with the former US PGA champion.

Amateur footballers don’t follow the diet or training regime of Lionel Messi. 
Club tennis players don’t participate in the length of warm-up or warm‑down 
session like Andy Murray, just as they don’t pack in work for a month of 
warm-weather training. Elite sport is different, common sense tells us that 
much.

Day’s goal for 2017 involves approaching the peak he probably scaled too early 
last year. Injury, so often a Day bedfellow, was significant as he could not 
make serious impact at the majors, a second at the US PGA aside.

If Day feels returning to earlier style should be the foundation to his 
pursuits, who are we to argue? Suddenly holding the top-ranked player on the 
planet to account for the sport’s ills is woeful exaggeration.
 