
“How can you work in a business school?” The question was put to me by a 
professor of politics. Her own background was at an elite US art college, and 
we shared similar political and intellectual persuasions. “The stereotype of 
someone working in a business school is of one who serves the 1%,” she told me.

Related: What will happen in higher education in 2017? 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2017/jan/05/what-will-happen-in-higher-education-in-2017>

She’s right, of course. Business schools are not perceived as intellectual 
hotbeds, and even less crucibles of critical and progressive thinking. They are 
often portrayed as universities’cash cows 
<https://www.ft.com/content/c42306b2-263e-11e5-bd83-71cb60e8f08c>. As my 
colleague said, they can also play a significant role in reproducing the 
values, skills and mindset of much of what is wrong with contemporary 
capitalism, such as opportunism, greed, a focus on shareholder maximisation, 
and economic short-termism.

In 2005, management guru Sumantra Ghoshal denounced business schools for 
perpetuating “the worst excesses” of management practices. Six years later, Mie 
Augier and James March criticised US business schools for forwarding “personal 
income, corporate profit or shareholder value as the highest social virtue for 
management”. It has even been suggested that business schools should be 
considered“academies of the apocalypse” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2009/apr/07/mba-business-schools-credit-crunch>
 for their role in the 2008 financial crisis.

Despite the fact that societies are becoming ever more unequal 
<http://www.oecd.org/social/inequality.htm>, business schools continue to 
perpetuate and even glorify the immoral and risky behaviours that help to 
generate such inequality.

The fact that a businessman, armed with “post-truth” 
<https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/word-of-the-year/word-of-the-year-2016> 
reasoning and mired by controversial business practices, has become 
president-elect of the US shows how dominant such values have become.

In the public interest

The debate about the “business of business schools” continues to rage in 
academic journals, but little of substance has changed.

There has been a positive development in management education, in the form of 
more business ethics teaching. But, asJudith Samuelson of the Aspen Institute 
explains 
<http://www.aspeninstitute.org/sites/default/files/content/upload/May-June%202013%20Putting%20Pinstripes%20in%20Perspective%20-%20BizEd%20Article.pdf>
 (pdf), this is too often presented through stand-alone modules with minimal 
influence on curricula, let alone broader business community and its practices.

In a post-truth era, critical thinking is vital and concerns for progressive 
values more urgent

But it’s imperative now that we embrace intellectual activism. We need 
substantial change in business schools so that they produce, and engage with, 
knowledge and practices that serve the public interest.

Intellectual activism, as theorised by Professor Patricia Hills Collins 
<http://www.temple.edu/tempress/titles/2243_reg.html>, describes the how the 
“power of ideas” can work for social justice. But how?

In teaching, we need to ensure that our students grasp how specific social 
institutions and rules have developed – and who they benefit. They should 
learn, for example, that current American corporate capitalism, with its 
powerful lobbies shaping public opinion, is not the only game in town – other 
arrangements are possible, with different outcomes.

Rather than focusing solely on the corporation, we can teach how value is 
produced in multiple organisational forms – for example, small and medium 
family enterprises, co-operatives and social enterprises. We can subvert the 
often-prescribed one-size-fits-all theory by paying close attention to 
differences of class, gender and race and looking at how colour-blindness 
affects people management.

In research and scholarship, we can shake off the tunnel vision that comes 
from concentrating on economic objectives at the expense of social ones. We 
must take responsibility for the theories we develop and the practices we 
sanction.

It’s also important that, as academic managers, we reflect on our own working 
practices. For example, how do we counter race and gender biases that research
shows 
<https://www.insidehighered.com/news/2016/01/11/new-analysis-offers-more-evidence-against-student-evaluations-teaching>
 are pervasive in teaching evaluations when we assess colleagues for promotion? 
How do we maintain a collegial environment in the face of the “publish or 
perish” ethos prevalent in business school culture?

Related: Brexit doesn't have to be a disaster for universities 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2017/jan/12/brexit-doesnt-have-to-be-a-disaster-for-universities>

Stupid leaders?

Do we facilitate open debate and collective deliberation, or are we content 
with being what Mats Alvesson and André Spicer call “stupid leaders 
<https://profilebooks.com/the-stupidity-paradox.html>”?

It’s true that intellectual activism is not easy. But in a post-truth era, 
critical thinking is vital and concerns for progressive values of freedom, 
equality and solidarity in our societies even more urgent.

Such activism is already manifest in some business schools. In my own 
workplace, it’s in the work our research group is doing with executive director 
Bob Massie in building theSustainable Solution Lab 
<https://www.umb.edu/ssl/about/people/robert_k._massie> to “develop, test, and 
implement interdisciplinary solutions that are environmentally sound, 
economically sustainable and socially just”.

It can also be seen in the Emerging Leader programme 
<https://www.umb.edu/leaders>, which develops Boston leaders “who reflect the 
changing demography of our region and who embrace a collaborative leadership 
model”, and in my colleague Prof Özkazanç-Pan’s research on the barriers 
affectingwomen and minority entrepreneurs. 
<https://www.umb.edu/news/detail/college_of_management_professor_resources_for_women_entrepreneneurs_boston>

No doubt, and perhaps justifiably, the stereotype of business school academics 
will remain for a while yet. But innovative change that unites the drive for 
efficiency and value creation with social and environmental justice is 
underway. I, for one, am happy to be part of that particular school of thought.

Join the higher education network 
<https://register.theguardian.com/higher-education/> for more comment, analysis 
and job opportunities, direct to your inbox. Follow us on Twitter@gdnhighered 
<https://twitter.com/GdnHigherEd>. And if you have an idea for a story, please 
read ourguidelines 
<https://www.theguardian.com/higher-education-network/2015/oct/16/share-your-ideas-how-to-write-for-the-higher-education-network>
 and email your pitch to us athighereducationnetwork@theguardian.com 
<mailto:highereducationnetwork@theguardian.com>
 