
With Brexit on the horizon, there are signs that we’re set for a renewed 
squeeze on our finances,as the weak pound drives inflation higher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/oct/24/brexit-economy-falling-pound-rising-inflation-fuel-fears-brexit-watch>
 and cautious businesses rein in wage growth.

But this weekend you do get something for nothing: as the clocks go back, 
everyone gets an extra hour for free. So why not spend it making yourself 
richer. It may be the end of daylight saving time, but it can be the start of 
some savings that will last the winter and beyond.

Energy bills

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5829080fd482d0dd2d95ac2b33368cdfe831ee5%2F0_480_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here's%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here%27s%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff5829080fd482d0dd2d95ac2b33368cdfe831ee5%2F0_480_3840_4800%2F3840.jpg>
 Photograph: Christopher Thomond for the Guardian 
You will need: Your postcode, latest bill (with the name of your supplier, the 
tariff and how much you spend), your bank detailsand a meter reading.

“It can be as simple as a couple of clicks to get the switching process 
started to change to a cheaper energy deal,” says Alex Neill, managing director 
of home and legal services at Which?. “Our research has shown many people could 
be saving up to £400 a year on their energy bill.”


It only takes about five minutes to swap provider (or deal). If you don’t 
switch, not only will you miss out on saving money, you may also see your 
current bills leap by £122.82 (13.65%) if you’re on one of the 14 fixed 
dual-fuel deals that expire on 31 October, according to Go Compare.

It points out that even if you are in debt to your energy company – its 
research shows 5% of homeowners owe their energy supplier money – you may still 
be able to change your energy tariff or supplier.

Where to start: Comparison sites allow you to enter your details and search 
for deals. There is a list atGoenergyshopping.co.uk 
<http://www.goenergyshopping.co.uk/>, which is run by the regulator Ofgem. 

Current accounts 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4701953b8f2b6023f0041718518f34214e7eafd%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here's%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here%27s%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd4701953b8f2b6023f0041718518f34214e7eafd%2F0_171_5120_3072%2F5120.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
You will need: Your bank account details (rate, balance) and access to online 
banking passwords.

You can earn free cash if you switch bank accounts. Cash incentives include 
£100 from First Direct and Halifax, and £150 from the Co-operative Bank when 
you transfer your current account using the official current account switch 
service.

The account to swap to depends on how you use your current account. If you 
don’t qualify for the cash incentives (for example, some accounts ask you to 
pay in a minimum amount each month) there are still ways to save.

“If you use an overdraft on a regular basis it’s possible to save £70 or £80 a 
year, not just now but for years to come,” says Andrew Hagger, personal finance 
expert at Moneycomms.co.uk.

For example, Hagger says that if you are overdrawn by £600 for seven days each 
month it would cost you £11.96 per year with First Direct, but with Halifax or 
Santander it would cost £84 per year, and £96.30 per year with TSB.

Where to start: The official switch service has a guide to moving your account 
and links to sites where you can shop around. Go toCurrentaccountswitch.co.uk 
<http://www.currentaccountswitch.co.uk/>.

Don’t want to switch? Spend 10 minutes flicking through your statements 
instead and check that there are no payments going out that you were unaware of 
or had failed to cancel. Also check that you know what perks your account has 
attached to it.


“Are you spending double on anything, by buying travel insurance when it’s 
already free with your account?” says Rachel Springall, spokesperson for 
Moneyfacts.co.uk.

To keep tabs on your spending download a free budgeting app to your phone, 
such asGoodbudget.com <https://goodbudget.com/> or Wally.me <http://wally.me/> 
to work out where your money goes.

Travel 
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e388b9953aec2cd0a8ba5ce2225dce95c1bcf2f%2F0_20_640_384%2F640.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here's%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here%27s%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F8e388b9953aec2cd0a8ba5ce2225dce95c1bcf2f%2F0_20_640_384%2F640.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
You will need: Your email address, your calendar and a camera.

With the pound weak against major currencies, a holiday in the sun can feel 
like an unaffordable luxury. However, in a few minutes, you can sign up to 
sites and alerts that make travelling cheaper, or join a site that allows you 
to stay in other people’s homes for free while they use yours.

If you join a home swap site, your accommodation costs drop to nearly nothing. 
You could be off to abeach house in British Columbia 
<https://www.guardianhomeexchange.co.uk/homeswap/35652> or a houseboat in 
Amsterdam 
<http://www.lovehomeswap.com/home-exchange/netherlands/centrum-amazing-new-architect-designed-houseboat>
 . Both these sites offer two-week free trials before you pay any fees. You 
will need to offer your home in exchange, so you will need to take and upload 
some photographs of it looking its best.

To get to your destination at the best price, look out for deals on flights. 
You can sign up to email alerts on cheap flights on websites such asSkyscanner 
<https://www.skyscanner.net/news/get-best-air-fares-skyscanner-price-alerts> and
Kayak <https://www.kayak.co.uk/alerts>. 


Savings

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb73fb84c92560a9bb4334217e4a726874c7bb9%2F0_325_3884_4853%2F3884.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here's%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here%27s%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-5%23img-5&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fbbb73fb84c92560a9bb4334217e4a726874c7bb9%2F0_325_3884_4853%2F3884.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
You will need: Online access to your savings accounts (such as Isas), 
statements and account balances.

Since the Bank of England base rate cut in August 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/04/bank-of-england-cuts-uk-interest-rates>
, savings rates have plummeted. “Some offer rates as miserable as 0.01%,” says 
Anna Bowes of Savingschampion.co.uk. “Most savers have suffered since the rate 
cut, so now is the time to ditch low-paying accounts and make the most of your 
money.”

Ditching an easy-access account that pays 0.01% on £10,000, for example, and 
switching to one that pays 1% means that instead of earning £1 a year in 
interest, you’ll get £100 a year.

“It’s free money when you look at it like that,” says Bowes. “You either let 
the banks effectively borrow your cash for free, paying you a dreadful rate, or 
you move your money to one that earns you interest.”

Decide how much you can afford to put into longer-term accounts (paying higher 
interest rates) and how much you need in an easy-access account.

Where to start: Go online or dig out the latest letter from your savings 
provider and find out how much you are being paid on your existing accounts. 
Then, use comparison sites such asMoneysupermarket.com 
<http://www.moneysupermarket.com/savings/> to find the best buys, or call your 
provider to discuss your options.

Remortgage

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F830c08cdcee5e51166968f1cf469711400eafbcd%2F717_383_3529_4412%2F3529.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here's%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Time%20is%20money%3A%20here%27s%20how%20to%20save%20some%20when%20the%20clocks%20go%20back%20this%20weekend&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fmoney%2F2016%2Foct%2F28%2Fsave-money-clocks-go-back-bills-mortgages-bank-accounts%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-6%23img-6&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F830c08cdcee5e51166968f1cf469711400eafbcd%2F717_383_3529_4412%2F3529.jpg>
 Photograph: Alamy 
You will need: Your last mortgage statement with the balance and rate, recent 
payslips, P60 and details of your expenditure (you can see this on your current 
account).

You can kick off the application process for a remortgage in just a few 
minutes, though you will then have to wait for a broker or lender to do their 
bit.

“Now is a good time to remortgage,” says Ray Boulger of broker John Charcol. 
“Even if there is a further cut to the Bank base rate, fixed-rate mortgages are 
unlikely to be cheaper than they are now. And if you’re on a standard variable 
rate (SVR), you should be able to save money by switching deals.”

Many lenders’ SVRs are around the 4.5% mark, says Peter Gettins, product 
manager at broker London & CountryMortgages 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/mortgages>, while two-year fixed rates can 
be as low as 0.99% (with arrangement fees of around £1,499). “Even fee-free 
loans are at 1.60%, so it’s entirely feasible that you could quickly cut your 
rate by 3%,” he adds.

For example, on a £150,000 mortgage, with 20 years of the term remaining, a 
4.5% loan means a monthly repayment of £949. Remortgage to a 1.69% deal with no 
fees to pay, and that drops to £737 a month. That’s a saving of £212 a month, 
and £5,088 in two years.

“Ten-year fixed deals are also cheap, with the lowest under 2.5%,” says 
Boulger. “And seven-year deals start with 1.99% (Coventry building society), 
which after three years charges an early redemption fee of only 1%, if you 
decide to move home or remortgage.”

Where to start: Check the rates available on best-buy tables 
<http://moneyfacts.co.uk/compare/mortgages/> and comparison sites, and put your 
details intomortgage calculators 
<http://www.moneysavingexpert.com/mortgages/mortgage-rate-calculator> to see 
how much better off you could be.
 