
You may be hanging on to your rumpled old fivers out of affection for a 
simpler time when you didn’t have to worry aboutthe meat content of your wallet 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/29/bank-of-england-urged-to-make-new-5-note-vegan-friendly>
. But that time is up, folks. You must spend those retro paper £5 notes now or, 
come May, face the kind of shame usually reserved for those who try to spend 
Scottish notes south of the border.

On Friday 5 May, your fiver collection won’t be worth the paper it is printed 
on, asthe notes will cease to be legal tender 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/withdrawn/default.aspx>. From 
then on, retailers and banks need only accept or swap old notes at their 
potentially sarcasm-heavy discretion.

But don’t panic if you are on holiday around the time of the big day or find a 
wad of old fivers down the back of the sofa next year because, according to the 
Bank of England, all withdrawn banknotes “remain payable at face value for all 
time”. To get your hands on a replacement, you can either pop into the mother 
of all bank branches on Threadneedle Street, in the City of London – where 
apparently there is a counter, although it is unlikely you’ll be served by the 
governorMark Carney <https://www.theguardian.com/business/mark-carney> – or 
post them back.

By May, you will have had seven months to get used to the new washing 
machine-friendly fiver 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/12/first-polymer-fivers-notes-to-enter-circulation-on-tuesday>
 but, if you still think that is a bit quick, spare a thought for Indian 
consumers. They were given just a few days notice that 500- and 1,000-rupee 
notes (worth about £6 and £12)were being withdrawn, leaving many without cash 
for day-to-day expenses 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/10/rupee-note-cancellation-panic-in-india-banks-500-1000>
. The UK’s so-called plastic revolution will continue in the summer with the 
arrival of the polymer £10 note emblazoned with a picture of Jane Austen.

So, what happens to all the old washed-up fivers? Until 1990, notes were 
incinerated, withthe energy used to heat the Bank 
<http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/banknotes/Pages/lifecycle/destruction.aspx> 
but, in the early noughties, farmers were given shredded old notes to use as 
compost. Where there’s muck, there’s brass.
 