
Donald Trump should not have been named Time magazine’s Person of the Year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-named-as-time-magazines-person-of-the-year>
. That’s not to make the schoolboy error of presuming the award to be a badge 
of moral approval: I know it merely recognises the individual who has dominated 
the previous 12 months, for good or ill. (It’s why Time has no reason to regret
handing the 1938 accolade to Adolf Hitler 
<http://content.time.com/time/magazine/article/0,9171,760539,00.html>.)

Donald Trump named as Time magazine's person of the year
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-named-as-time-magazines-person-of-the-year>
Even so, and even though Trump was clearly the biggest news story of 2016, he 
still should not have won. For there is another figure who looms larger over 
this annus horribilis, albeit from the shadows. He ends this year with a 
wolfish grin, content that almost all his dreams have come true. That man is
Vladimir Putin <https://www.theguardian.com/world/vladimir-putin>.

He surveys the global landscape and sees almost every sign pointing his way. 
From Aleppo to the White House, from post-truth to Brexit, this is the year the 
world was reshaped in his image. He may not have been the guiding hand behind 
every shift, though he certainly gave several of them a nudge, but together 
they made him 2016’s biggest winner.

Start with Syria, which even in this year of horrors surely merits a special 
infamy of its own. The leaders of western nations ritually condemn the 
catastrophe that has been visited upon the people of Aleppo, eloquently 
denouncing the bombing of hospitals, including makeshift clinics hidden in 
basements, the flattening of civilian areas, the killing of children, the 
denial of food and medicine. And yet Putin knows he need not listen. Because 
the important fact is the one on the ground: no one has stopped him or his 
Syrian vassal, Bashar al-Assad, from continuing the slaughter.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f2025c8e13606ea0910458eaf7bb099acf275d%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Person%20of%20the%20year%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20be%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20clearly%20Putin%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Person%20of%20the%20year%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20be%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20clearly%20Putin%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F79f2025c8e13606ea0910458eaf7bb099acf275d%2F0_100_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 Syrian pro-government forces in Aleppo’s Jdeideh neighbourhood. ‘Putin has 
proved that it is possible to kill or dispossess millions of civilians with 
impunity.’ Photograph: George Ourfalian/AFP/Getty Images 
Plenty have warned that Aleppo will be the Guernica of our generation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/jonathanjonesblog/2016/oct/12/picasso-guernica-aleppo-syria>
, remembered among the greatest crimes against humanity. Future historians will 
ask all the same shaming questions. Why was there not more outrage? Did people 
not know – or just not care? Why did they not act? But there is another 
comparison. For Aleppo has received the treatment Putin once meted out to 
Grozny, when Chechnya dared rebel against Moscow. In 1999 it too was bombed into
what the UN called 
<http://www.wsj.com/articles/how-russia-responds-to-cities-that-rebel-1478811150>
 a “devastated wasteland”, an act of destruction tolerated because it was 
deemed to be taking place on Russia’s turf.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Peter%20Tatchell%20Syria%20protest%20disrupts%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Peter%20Tatchell%20Syria%20protest%20disrupts%20Jeremy%20Corbyn%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fuk-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fdec%2F10%2Fpeter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video&media=>
Peter Tatchell Syria protest disrupts Jeremy Corbyn speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/video/2016/dec/10/peter-tatchell-syria-protest-disrupts-jeremy-corbyn-speech-video>
But the de facto permission granted to Putin’s smashing of Syria counts as an 
even greater victory for the Russian dictator. Not only has he advanced his 
narrow, strategic interests, maintaining a presence in the Middle East and, in
Tartus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/oct/04/russians-heroes-syrians-assad-heartland>
, a deep-water port with access to the Mediterranean. He has won a less 
tangible but more valuable prize. He has proved that it is possible to kill or 
dispossess millions of civilians with impunity.

Of course, some will say George W Bush proved that with his invasion of Iraq 
in 2003. But until now, Moscow might have felt constrained by the precedent of 
Slobodan Milošević, fearing that there were limits to how much blood you could 
shed before, eventually, the west or the US or Nato would act. Now Putin has 
established beyond doubt that there are no limits. Partly because of Iraq, and 
the fatigue it left behind, he has seen that once-serious international talk of 
a “responsibility to protect” endangered civilians is a dead letter. You can 
kill hundreds of thousands and no one will do a thing.

But 2016 has provided Putin with other reasons to be cheerful. He now has 
friends in high places, or in places about to get higher. The most obvious is 
Trump, but there are others, both near and far. Indeed,November was a banner 
month for the Russian leader 
<http://www.politico.eu/article/the-new-vladimir-putin-coalition-russia-donald-trump-francois-fillon-juri-ratas-rumen-radev-igor-dodon-geert-wilders-alexis-tsipras-viktor-orban/>
, bringing pro-Putin candidates to power in Moldova, Bulgaria and Estonia, as 
well as teeing up a win-win French presidential contest in 2017. There is a 
good chance the final round will pit two Putin fans against each other:François 
Fillon v Marine Le Pen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/live/2016/nov/27/french-elections-voting-ends-in-poll-for-rights-presidential-candidate-live>
.

Like most on the European far right, Le Pen has long revered Putin as a 
nationalist strongman and was happy to take a €9m (£8m) loan from a 
Russian-backed bank. Less predictably Fillon, who will be the standard bearer 
of the centre-right, also gazes moon-eyed at Putin. Fillon wants to see the 
lifting of sanctions imposed on Moscow over Ukraine and believes Putin, the 
conqueror of Crimea, is the injured party, since it was all the western powers’ 
fault thatRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> invaded in the 
first place.

Wherever he looks, Putin can see allies – whether it’s Nigel Farage on the 
right or US Green party presidential candidate Jill Stein on the left. (Stein
boasted during the campaign 
<http://www.jill2016.com/stein_in_russia_calls_for_principled_collaboration> 
that she had dined with Russia’s leader, even sitting at the same table.) 
Indeed, given the regimes now ruling Hungary and Poland, Putin can smile at the 
emergence of what political scientistYascha Mounk calls 
<https://twitter.com/Yascha_Mounk/status/796237963160092672> “the illiberal 
international”, an arc of states led by people who, like him, regard the free 
press or an independent judiciary as unnecessary irritants.

Yet democratic votes have been good to Putin this year. Brexit was an early 
gift to a man who has long seen the weakening of the European Union as a 
strategic goal. Ideally, he’d like to see the EU break up: then he could make a 
series of bilateral deals with Europe’s nations, picking them off one by one. 
That’s the long game; but just to have the EU weakened, distracted and 
destabilised will do for now. And with Britain’s departure, the EU will lose 
one of its loudest Putin-wary voices.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f80d7ca2d18d55e7f2aeaa7f06236d6efc94d6b%2F0_157_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Person%20of%20the%20year%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20be%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20clearly%20Putin%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Person%20of%20the%20year%20shouldn%E2%80%99t%20be%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20it%E2%80%99s%20clearly%20Putin%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fdec%2F09%2Fperson-of-the-year-trump-putin-dreams-brexit-us-election-aleppo-post-truth%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F9f80d7ca2d18d55e7f2aeaa7f06236d6efc94d6b%2F0_157_3600_2160%2F3600.jpg>
 ‘Wherever he looks, Putin can see allies – whether it’s Nigel Farage 
(pictured) on the right or US Green party presidential candidate Jill Stein on 
the left.’ Photograph: Yui Mok/PA 
But of course the sweetest victory came on 8 November. Donald Trump veered 
wildly during the campaign, but one of the few stances he maintained with iron 
consistency was his admiration for Putin. The autocrat certainly did all he 
could to return the favour. As one Kremlin ally puts it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/putin-applauds-trump-win-and-hails-new-era-of-positive-ties-with-us?CMP=share_btn_tw>
, “Maybe we helped a bit with WikiLeaks.” They certainly did.

Few credible sources doubt that Russia was behind the hacking of internal 
Democratic party emails, whose release by Julian Assange was timed to cause 
maximum pain to Hillary Clinton and pleasure for Trump. As a former KGB man, 
Putin must be proud of what is surely the most successful espionage operation 
in history, one that succeeded beyond even Moscow’s expectations – installing 
an admirer and sycophant in the White House.

As a former KGB man, he must be proud of what is surely the most successful 
espionage operation in history

The benefits are obvious. Given Trump’s lukewarm commitment to Nato and the 
defence of its members, Putin will now have all but a free hand. Asone Russia 
expert observes 
<http://www.nybooks.com/articles/2016/12/22/russia-nato-trump-the-shadow-world/>
: “Seen from Moscow, the west has not been in such inviting disarray since the 
Suez crisis of 1956. Whatever constraints Putin may now feel upon his 
land-grabbing instincts, Nato is no longer one of them.”

As the year closes, each day brings new delights for the master of the 
Kremlin. The US is about to be led by a serial, if not compulsive liar; the 
public conversation of the west is polluted by fake news. This new, post-truth 
world is pure Putinism. For years his propaganda effort, typified by his TV 
channel Russia Today, has been aimed not so much at pushing a single message as 
sowing confusion, making even solid facts seem unsteady. As a mission, it once 
seemed futile when pitted against the solid framework of fact and reason, 
carefully constructed during the two centuries since the enlightenment. But 
those timbers have proved alarmingly easy to rot.

He may not have done all this himself. But it counts as a historic achievement 
nonetheless. If 2016 has been an awful year, and it has, then its true face 
belongs to Vladimir Putin.
 