
It is one of the best-known academy chains in England. It has a 
super-high-profile leader and reportedly one of the highest numbers of 
applications per place in London. But now even West London Free School Academy 
Trust (WLFSAT) is feeling the chill from icy financial winds buffeting schools, 
its recent governing body minutes reveal.

The minutes, shown to Education Guardian, record that Toby Young 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/may/17/toby-young-education-secretary-powers-free-school>
, WLFSAT’s chief executive, was asked by a trustee earlier this year to phone 
other schools to ask whether they would like to join the trust as it sought 
economies of scale.

The minutes also reveal that, as of 2015, 60% of parents at the secondary 
school were paying £35 a month towards extracurricular activities. This helped 
generate a £100,000 school fund, which helped meet a £44,000 deficit on a 
hockey trip to South Africa.

The four-school trust (three primaries and a secondary) also considered but 
backed away from a merger with another high-profile chain:Future Academies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/nov/11/academies-minister-lord-nash-breaching-governance-guidelines>
, chaired by the academies minister, Lord Nash.

Minutes of a trust meeting last December say WLFSAT needs nine schools to be 
“sustainable in the long term”. In the March minutes, Hywel Jones, the 
secondary school’s head warns of “12% cuts in funding (in real terms) going 
forward”, partly owing to the end of the five-year “startup” funding the 
secondary school had received under the free schools programme, which stopped 
in August.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftoby-young-free-school-trust-warwick-mansell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62454c23dab50c69ff919383c75b964881a48d78%2F298_1269_2124_2124%2F2124.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Toby%20Young%E2%80%99s%20flagship%20free%20school%20trust%20woos%20other%20schools%20amid%20financial%20chill%20%7C%20Warwick%20Mansell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftoby-young-free-school-trust-warwick-mansell%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Toby%20Young%E2%80%99s%20flagship%20free%20school%20trust%20woos%20other%20schools%20amid%20financial%20chill%20%7C%20Warwick%20Mansell&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Feducation%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Ftoby-young-free-school-trust-warwick-mansell%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F62454c23dab50c69ff919383c75b964881a48d78%2F298_1269_2124_2124%2F2124.jpg>
 Toby Young: ‘As for sponsorship … we’re certainly not intending to become the 
Kentucky Fried Chicken free school any time soon.’ Photograph: Martin Godwin 
for the Guardian 
Jones suggested the trust approach schools in the east of England that Ofsted 
had rated as “requires improvement” to join WLFSAT. “The geography is not ideal 
but the schools would give us financial stability,” he said.

In July, Young reported having approached 16 schools “with two replies 
received so far”, and with a “pitch” being made to another institution with 
close links to the government:Greenwich free school 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/apr/24/greenwich-free-school-ofsted-inspection>
.

Businessman Justin Tooth, a trustee, then suggested Young phone the “top five 
schools on the list” and follow up in writing.

Minutes for the latest trust meeting, in July, state that its three primaries 
were likely to report a deficit budget for 2015-16, with the secondary 
predicting a small surplus of £4,831. In response Young, who highlights the 
schools’ good academic records, tells Education Guardian that final accounts 
for the year will actually report a surplus of £217,897, meaning the trust has 
reserves of £865,311.

He says: “The trust is certainly looking at ways to grow. However, that’s 
because we want to make the trust sustainable over the long term, not because 
we are in any financial difficulty. It’s no secret that schools are facing some 
budget cuts in the coming years and we’ve been looking at different ways to 
cope with that. As for ‘sponsorship’ … we’re certainly not intending to become 
the Kentucky Fried Chicken free school any time soon.”

Young says he tried to phone the five schools but did not get through.

He is still WLFSAT’s chief executive, but works only one day a week, combining 
the job with being “director designate” at the national free schools support 
group, the NewSchools <https://www.theguardian.com/education/schools> Network. 
A new WLFSAT chief executive will start in the new year.

Pupils and staff square up to academy trust


Staff at Whitehaven academy in Cumbria calling for an academy trust to go have 
been joined by students. More than 120 pupils, including most of the sixth 
form, have signed a petition backing staff who plan to strike if the Bright 
Tribe trust, which runs the school, does not leave by Tuesday, theWhitehaven 
News 
<http://www.whitehavennews.co.uk/news/Whitehaven-Academy-students-back-teachers-threatening-strike-action-6bb0a878-0921-471c-ae3d-7975e1b7bef2-ds>
 reports.

Unions are balloting on strike action over the state of the buildings.

Last week, Bright Tribe pulled out 
<http://schoolsweek.co.uk/bright-tribe-walks-away-from-struggling-schools-in-north/>
 of plans to take over two schools in Durham over reported financial issues, 
including difficulties with private finance initiative arrangements. It told us 
long-running plans to take on three more schools in the north-east of England 
are on track but offered no further comment.
 