
Tom Watson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tom-watson>, Labour’s deputy 
leader, has effectively admitted that the party does not have a clear 
immigration policy, saying it was “unfair” to expect the party to have one when 
the government’s own position on the issue was so vague.

In an interview with Sophy Ridge on Sunday  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/08/how-sophy-ridge-got-her-money-shot-from-the-maybot>
on Sky News, he indicated his own personal support for abandoning the 
commitment to free movement for EU citizens, arguing: “For the Labour party 
what we can’t support is the status quo.”

But, despite being asked five times, he refused to confirm that the party as a 
whole had given up defending EU free movement. When pushed, he told Ridge: 
“It’s unfair of you to ask what Labour’s notional position is when we don’t 
even know what Theresa May’s negotiating position is on free movement.

“The future is very uncertain. Let’s see what Theresa May comes up with.”

May has said she is committed to taking back control of immigration as part of 
the Brexit negotiation, and by implication ending free movement, but she has 
said nothing more about what a new immigration system might entail.

Leaving the EU would mean the UK no longer being automatically bound by free 
movement rules, but some pro-Europeans want Britain to commit to keeping free 
movement so that it can retain single market membership after Brexit, and 
Watson’s interview illustrated how this remains a quandary for the party.

Jeremy Corbyn <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn>, the Labour 
leader, has strongly defended free movement. But Sir Keir Starmer, the shadow 
Brexit secretary, has said immigration is too high and that the free movement 
rules must change, a view increasingly being backed by leading party figures.

Explaining his views, Watson said: “I want to be able to say that this country 
will have control over its own borders, that we’ll be able to count the number 
of people in and count the number of people out, [and] make sure that people 
have convincing, fair solutions so people’s genuine concerns about immigration 
are addressed.

“That is one of the challenges that Labour will have in its manifesto, 
whenever that election comes, and if we don’t address that issue, thenLabour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> won’t win that election.”

In the interview, Watson admitted he did not have a “great relationship” with 
some of the members of Corbyn’s team, but he said his relationship with Corbyn 
himself was “very strong”. They communicated on the phone or by text almost 
every day, he said.

Watson also said he disagreed with those such as Len McCluskey, the Unite 
general secretary, who have suggested Corbyn should resign if Labour’s poll 
ratings do not improve before the general election.

“[Corbyn] will lead us into a general election. It will be his manifesto,” 
said Watson, adding that Corbyn should be left “unencumbered by those kind of 
false tests”.
 