
I had a really happy childhood. My dad worked 12-hour shifts in the Kodak 
factory – I remember creeping about when he was on nights – but he was also 
lead singer in a band playing in British Legion andworking men’s clubs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2000/oct/04/guardiansocietysupplement>. My 
earliest memories are of being sat at the back of a pub, falling asleep on the 
bench while my dad played. He used to get me up on stage to sing with him from 
when I was only three or four. I get my music from my dad.

I wanted to play the guitar like him. Now my son, Buzz, is doing the same with 
me. He is only two but he’s obsessed with guitars, especially mine. He sits 
there with it upside down and singsMcFly songs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/mcfly>. It’s really sweet and he’s got 
amazing rhythm. I did a McFly tour recently and he came to a sound check. We 
gave him a ukulele so he could join in and he didn’t want to leave the stage. I 
can see now how it naturally passes from father to son.

My mum isn’t a performer but she is creative. She was a dinner lady at the 
school I was at until I was nine, when I went to stage school. She did various 
courses and ended up teaching children with learning difficulties and autism. 
She wrote poems and stories. I get my writing from my mum.

Carrie Hope Fletcher: 'I'm human and I screw up but I'm willing to be told I'm 
wrong'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/30/carrie-hope-fletcher-im-human-and-i-screw-up-but-im-willing-to-be-told-im-wrong>
My nan loved musical theatre. She used to tell me how she performed at the 
pictures. Before the Saturday morning movie, she’d get up and do a song or a 
tap dance. She and my mum showed me all the old musical movies. By the time I 
went to stage school, I loved musical theatre.

My nan and grandad were really important. They took me to school every day. I 
couldn’t have gone to theatre school without them because my parents had to 
work – there wasn’t much money. Nan and Grandad took me on the train every day 
until I was about 15, when they reluctantly agreed I could go on my own. I 
sometimes caught Nan secretly following a few carriages back to make sure I was 
OK.

My younger sister [Carrie Hope Fletcher 
<https://www.theguardian.com/childrens-books-site/2015/jul/30/carrie-hope-fletcher-im-human-and-i-screw-up-but-im-willing-to-be-told-im-wrong>
] was a massive influence on me. She is insanely talented and was very 
confident as a kid – much more than I was. We shared all the same interests. 
She played Jemima Potts in Chitty Chitty Bang Bang when she was nine or 10 and 
has just finished touring as Truly Scrumptious. And she writes books. My 
parents taught us that if you are going to do something, give it your all. But 
we were never pushed into anything. They gave us everything and now I have 
children, I understand that that is what you do for your kids.

I met my wife [Giovanna Falcone <http://www.imdb.com/name/nm2676854/>] at 
school when I was 13. We’d been dating since before McFly, so she has been with 
me – keeping me on my toes – through the whole rollercoaster. The arrival of 
Buzz had a major impact on my mental health. Depression and anxiety runs in the 
family. Both my parents have had moments with it. For years, I couldn’t sleep. 
I can’t say it without laughing now, but whenever I got into bed my mind would 
go off on these crazy stories about aliens and I would terrify myself – even in 
my 20s. Then I sawStephen Fry on TV talking about being bipolar 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2006/jul/21/mentalhealth.broadcasting> and 
he was describing my life. I cried. And that week I went to get help.

I love being a dad. I’ve won awards for it twice now [Celebrity Dad of the 
Year awards in 2014 and 2016]. When the kids are naughty, I tell them they have 
to behave because I have an award for being a dad!

It was really tough for my dad, looking back. He didn’t want to work in a 
factory. He wanted to be in a band. I’m living my dad’s dream. I am so 
amazingly lucky to be able to do what I love and support my family doing it.

Tom Fletcher’s latest children’s book, The Christmasaurus, 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/christmasaurus.html> (for 7-12-year-olds) is 
published by Puffin.
 