
The former independent MP Tony Windsor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/tony-windsor> says any attempt to 
reform Australia’s political process must include the use of associated 
entities by major political parties.

Windor used an ABC interview to call for further reform of the democratic 
process, saying theCoalition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> and Labor used 
associated entities to hide the source of their political donations and the 
practice was eroding trust in the system.

“You’ve only got to look at recent events, you’ve only got to look at the way 
in which political donations are working now, how they can be hidden, how the 
lobbying process has in my view been corrupted over the years,” Windsor said on 
Monday.

Lurks, perks and entitlements: how MPs consolidate themselves as a distinctive 
caste | Jeff Sparrow
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/16/lurks-perks-and-entitlements-how-mps-consolidate-themselves-as-a-distinctive-caste>
“The use of what’s called associated entities to, in effect, ‘launder’ 
donations so that the general public, and the political process to a certain 
extent as well, doesn’t know where the money is coming from that donors give to 
political parties.


“Some wealthy person can go to a fundraiser for a particular party or a 
candidate, and there can be a chook raffle on, and some person can pay $50,000 
in raffle tickets. Well the $50,000, the person who paid the $50,000, doesn’t 
show up in terms of a donation to a political party or a candidate. All it 
shows is there was a function held and the function raised $50,000 for a chook.

“There’s these sorts of things that lead to a distrust of the system.”

The political role of associated entities came under heavy scrutiny last year 
when focus turned on the Liberal party-owned software company, Parakeelia.

Last year it was revealed 
<http://www.smh.com.au/federal-politics/federal-election-2016/election-2016-mps-directing-taxpayer-funds-towards-liberal-partylinked-company-and-donor-20160608-gpe87q.html>
 Liberal MPs and senators paid $2,550 from their taxpayer-funded office 
allowance to Liberal-owned Parakeelia Pty Ltd to provide software services.

Parakeelia remitted $1m back to the Liberal party over three years, including 
$500,000 in the one financial year 
<http://periodicdisclosures.aec.gov.au/Returns/56/TQEZ0.pdf>, designated as 
“other receipts” in party accounts, making it the Liberal party’s 
second-largest source of income in 2014-15.

The revelations led Bill Shorten to demand answers from Malcolm Turnbull 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull>, claiming the 
set-up looked “like a Liberal party washing machine turning taxpayer dollars 
into Liberal party profits”.

But the treasurer, Scott Morrison, claimed Labor was engaged in a “desperate 
witch hunt” and the Coalitionaccused Labor of directly providing software 
services to its own MPs and senators as recently as 2014 
<http://www.finance.gov.au/sites/default/files/FOI14-11-document.pdf>.

In September last year the auditor general, Grant Hehir, said after a limited 
reviewhe found no evidence of contravention of electoral laws by Parakeelia 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/live/2016/sep/12/malcolm-turnbull-under-pressure-to-fund-both-sides-on-marriage-equality-live?page=with:block-57d6011de4b013613fffc4f2#block-57d6011de4b013613fffc4f2>
.

On Monday Shorten agreed more needed to be done to improve people’s confidence 
in politics, including a serious discussion about whether Australia needed an 
independent commission against corruption.

“No discussion about electoral reform and rebuilding the confidence of 
Australians in the political process can take place without having an open and 
honest discussion about a federal Icac,” he said.

Tony Windsor top of individual political donations list for 2016 election
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2016/dec/19/tony-windsor-top-of-individual-political-donations-list-for-2016-election>
“Before the last election there was a Senate committee set up to examine the 
existing capacities of the anti-corruption regime in the Australian federal 
sphere of government.


“We need to get that Senate committee back going again. We need to demonstrate 
to Australians that we’re working for them, not just for ourselves.”

He said the political donations system also needed to be reformed.

“It is not right that we have a regime where, currently, anonymous donors can 
give $10,000 plus to political parties and we can’t find out their identity,” 
he said.

“It is not right that we still have foreign interests investing in Australian 
elections in the way they do. It is not right we don’t have real-time 
reporting.”

Windsor signed an open letter 
<http://nb.tai.org.au/federal-anticorruption-watchdog> last week calling for an 
independent anti-corruption watchdog to investigate and expose corruption and 
serious misconduct at the federal level, including among federal 
parliamentarians.

Other signatories included former Western Australian premier Geoff Gallop, 
former New South Wales director of public prosecutions Nicholas Cowdery and 
former president of the Australian Senate Michael Beahan.
 