
I became a language addict way back in the early noughties thanks to Shakira 
<http://www.shakira.com/home>. Since then I’ve gone on to pursue a degree in 
French and Spanish with the Open University, and I’ve also studied Mandarin, 
Italian, German and various other languages along the way. With formal studying 
never quite being enough, I’m always looking for other methods to engage my 
language learning brain, podcasts being one of them. Here’s a few of my 
favourites:

1. Creative Language Learning Podcast with Kerstin Hammes 
<https://itunes.apple.com/gb/podcast/creative-language-learning/id780485096?mt=2>

Kerstin, a German language tutor, brings a mix of wonderful and inspiring 
guests on to her podcast, including popular language learning bloggers Benny 
Lewis and Olly Richards. She discusses current language news and offers up 
three varied tips at the end of each episode asking the guest to pick their 
favourite. The episode ‘I’m Not Dead Yet, So I’d Like to Keep Learning’ is 
particularly great because the guest, Randy Glover, was 57 when he began 
language learning, which goes to show you’re never too old to start.


2. The Actual Fluency Podcast with Chris Broholm 
<http://actualfluency.com/actual-fluency-language-learning-podcast/>

In a similar format to the Creative Language Learning Podcast, this one 
features brilliant guests and gives you the chance to feel like you’re having a 
bit of a natter with them. As well as a variety of language learning topics – 
such as minority languages, constructed languages, and the link between 
languages and travel – Chris Broholm also talks a lot about goal setting. 
Focusing some attention on podcasts about language in general can help to keep 
you motivated. You never know, it may well inspire you to keep going for longer 
or even pick up another language by exposing you to concepts and languages that 
might be completely new to you.


Learning a language – 10 things you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/oct/30/learning-another-language-ten-tips>
3. 101 Series – Innovative Language <http://languagepod101.com/>

You may have already come across [insert language here]pod101 if you’ve 
searched for podcasts in your target language. This series is always my first 
port of call when starting a new language. The podcasts cover a huge range of 
languages and the discussions are followed by in depth breakdowns of the 
individual elements of the specific language. Rather than translating whole 
phrases for you, you gain an understanding of each word and how it can be used 
in other contexts.


4. News in Slow... <http://www.linguistica360.com/>

Offered in French, Italian and Spanish the weekly News in Slow episodes can 
prove useful for learners of all levels. Not only is the delivery perfectly 
timed (it’s slow, but not too slow) but being current news, chances are you’ll 
at least have an idea of what they’re talking about. Listening to news in a 
foreign language is great for increasing your vocabulary on current topics, 
which comes in handy if you’ll be chatting to some natives soon.

5. Talk in French Podcast with Frédéric Bibard 
<https://www.talkinfrench.com/podcast-category/>

Talk in French offers loads of cultural information about France and the 
French language, including topics such as verlan (a form of French slang) and 
how the French celebrate birthdays and Christmas. The topics are interesting 
and diverse making it a great supplement to your French studies. There’s also 
plenty of information – including vocabulary and expressions – on the website 
to complement each episode. The website generally is pretty much indispensable 
if you’re studying French.


6. 30 Minute Italian Podcast with Cher Hale 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/30-minute-italian/id677568406?mt=2>

If Italian is your language, then Cher Hale is your girl. The podcasts vary 
from discussing culture, vocab and grammar tips, to interviews in Italian. It’s 
not just about language though, there’s also the odd motivational episode to 
keep you going. With episodes such as 13 Expressions to Keep Conversation 
Flowing in Italian When You Forget a Word, Hale really knows what you need. 
Full of encouraging advice and little nuggets of language gold for Italian 
learners, this one is well worth subscribing to.

7. Yes Japan 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/learn-japanese-yesjapan!/id388093830?mt=2>

The Yes Japan podcast series provides bitesize bits of grammar, vocabulary and 
culture – all in video format. George Trombley, author of theJapanese From Zero!
 
<http://www.amazon.co.uk/s/ref=nb_sb_noss?url=search-alias%3Dstripbooks&field-keywords=Japanese+from+Zero%21>
 series, explains everything with the Japanese examples displayed on the screen 
in the background. This podcast is an ideal addition for upper beginner to 
intermediate learners studying independently as it’s like having your own 
personal tutor clearing up the tricky grammar. The video complements the audio 
and not the other way around, which means you can just listen if you’re on the 
go. The videos are also available on the website.


What happens in the brain when you learn a language?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2014/sep/04/what-happens-to-the-brain-language-learning>
8. Spanish Obsessed with Rob and Liz <http://spanishobsessed.com/audio/>

One of my favourites for Spanish listening practice, Spanish Obsessed features 
Rob and Liz from the UK and Colombia. The advanced series is exactly what I 
spent too long looking for – natural and relaxed Spanish conversation to listen 
to anywhere. Rob and Liz produce podcasts for all levels of Spanish knowledge 
and even offer transcripts on the website with a free registration.

9. Slow Chinese 
<https://itunes.apple.com/us/podcast/man-su-zhong-wen-slow-chinese/id321733935?mt=2>

Another one that takes things slowly, Slow Chinese is great for beginner to 
intermediate learners of Chinese. Being a tonal language, listening slowly in 
the early stages can help to get to grips with the difference tones can make, 
which, of course, is great for listening skills and pronunciation. The podcasts 
are normally under 10 minutes long, meaning you can really focus (everyone has 
10 minutes, right?). There’s also free transcripts on the website available in 
English and Chinese characters.

10. Deutsche Welle <http://www.dw.de/media-center/podcasts/s-100976>

Offering brilliant language learning podcasts in German, Deutsche Welle is a 
little pocket of the internet packed full of resources for German learners. 
From news to motoring, fitness to football, there is something to suit 
everyone. If you’re a beginner, try the Warum Nicht? or Radio D series to get 
you started. If you’re more advanced Kultur.21 is worth checking out for its 
range of international topics, and is often presented in video format. The 
Deutsch Lernen section of the website is also worth a look for its huge range 
of materials for all levels.

 