
The two leading executives at Sky will share a payout of almost £40m if a 
proposed takeover by Rupert Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/21st-century-fox> goes ahead.

Jeremy Darroch, chief executive, and Andrew Griffith, the finance director and 
chief operating officer, own shares in Sky and would also be entitled to 
lucrative share awards.

Fox has approached Sky about a deal worth £10.75 a share, or £18.5bn, which 
has been recommended by the UK company’s independent directors. Fox already 
owns 39% of Sky. Murdoch is the executive chairman of Fox, as his is son 
Lachlan. James Murdoch, his other son, is chief executive of Fox and the 
chairman of Sky.

However, some smaller shareholders criticised Sky over the weekend for 
agreeing a price with Fox so quickly.

Fox and Sky will hold further discussions about the deal this week, with 
“certain material offer terms” still to be agreed according to the companies. 
Sky representatives are also likely to hold talks with its largest shareholders 
about the tie-up.

If a formal agreement is announced between Fox and Sky then Karen Bradley, the 
culture, media and sport secretary, must decide whether to refer the deal to 
Ofcom, the industry regulator, through a public interest intervention notice.
Ofcom <https://www.theguardian.com/media/ofcom> will make recommendations to 
the government about whether it should be allowed to go ahead and under what 
conditions.

The European commission is also likely to investigate the deal given that Sky 
owns Sky Deutschland and Sky Italia. The deal would give Fox control of a 
pay-TV network spanning 22m households in Britain, Ireland, Austria, Germany 
and Italy.


City fund managers Royal London and Jupiter Asset Management have spoken out 
about the terms of the offer and expressed their disappointment at Sky’s 
independent directors for not pushing for a higher price.

Alastair Gunn, a fund manager at Jupiter, a top 50 shareholder in Sky, told 
the Sunday Telegraph the agreement “ought to be the start of the process, not 
the conclusion”.

Another top 50 shareholder, which declined to be named, told Reuters that the 
bid was far too low and said they had told Sky that they will vote against it 
in its current form. “The independent directors have absolutely failed minority 
shareholders,” the investor added.

Murdoch was forced to abandon an attempt to take full control of Sky in 2011 
amid a public outcry over the phone-hacking scandal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2014/jun/24/phone-hacking-scandal-timeline-trial>
.


Since then, Murdoch’s empire has been split in two, with Fox having the TV and 
film businesses, and News Corp the newspapers and book publishing interests.


Vince Cable, the Liberal Democrat who was business secretary in 2011, has 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-sky-m-a-twenty-first-fox-minister-idUKKBN13Z07X>
 called for an investigation 
<http://uk.reuters.com/article/uk-sky-m-a-twenty-first-fox-minister-idUKKBN13Z07X>
 amid concerns about “media plurality”.

The former BBC chairman Sir Michael Lyons told the Observer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/dec/10/theresa-may-murdoch-sky-bid> 
that the government should apply the “fit and proper person” test to the 
proposed deal and challenged Theresa May to “resist the further growth in the 
Murdochs’ grip on news and media”.

 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsky-executives-share-bonanza-rupert-murdoch-21st-century-fox-buyout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411822af55815ffc5db507a92489512e50aa6f12%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Top%20Sky%20executives%20stand%20to%20make%20%C2%A340m%20in%20Murdoch%20buyout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsky-executives-share-bonanza-rupert-murdoch-21st-century-fox-buyout%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Top%20Sky%20executives%20stand%20to%20make%20%C2%A340m%20in%20Murdoch%20buyout&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fsky-executives-share-bonanza-rupert-murdoch-21st-century-fox-buyout%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F411822af55815ffc5db507a92489512e50aa6f12%2F0_146_4368_2621%2F4368.jpg>
 Sky’s CEO, Jeremy Darroch, pictured in 2009. Photograph: Eamonn McCabe for the 
Guardian 
James Murdoch stood down as chairman of Sky in 2012 in the aftermath of the 
hacking scandal. However, he was reappointed in April, leading to speculation 
of another offer being made.


Experts believe Fox pounced after Britain’s vote to leave the EU in June 
dragged the pound down about 14% against the US dollar. Sky’s share price had 
also fallen by roughly a third in 2016 before the approach from Fox was 
revealed on Friday.

Nonetheless, Sky’s chief executive and finance director will be in line for 
lucrative rewards if the deal goes ahead.

Darroch has rights to just over 2.2m shares in Sky under long-term bonus 
agreements while Griffith has rights to 1.3m. This means Darroch could secure 
an award of £24.5m, while Griffith’s would be worth £13.7m, less tax and other 
deductions. In addition, Darroch owns 689,871 shares worth £7.4m and Griffith 
holds 172,445 shares worth more than £1.9m.

Darroch, 54, has earned £68m in pay and other benefits since he took up the 
position of chief executive in 2007, when he replaced James Murdoch.

Analysts at Royal Bank of Canada said the only rival bidder for Sky could be 
Vodafone. The analysts said: “Vodafone has substantial businesses in all three 
of Sky’s countries and would be keen to add content. However we believe it is 
highly unlikely that Vodafone would bid.”
 