
Every book has its own texture, materiality, and topography. This is not only 
metaphorical; the process of creating a novel produces all sorts of 
flotsam–notes, sketches, research, drafts–and sifting through this detritus can 
provide insight both into the architecture of a work and into the practice of 
writing.Blunderbuss is excited to run this series 
<http://www.blunderbussmag.com/tag/topography-of/>, in which we ask writers to 
select and assemble the artifacts of a book in a way that they find meaningful 
and revealing.In this installment, our own fiction editor Sara Nović tells the 
story behind the story of her debut novelGirl at War 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/11/girl-at-war-sara-novic-review>, 
out in 24 March in paperback 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/374935/> in the UK.


What it's like to be a deaf novelist
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/23/what-its-like-to-be-a-deaf-novelist>
Girl at War tells the story of Ana Jurić, a ten-year-old girl whose life and 
nation are upended by civil war. Moving through time and space – from 1991 to 
2001, from Croatia to the US and back again – the novel artfully renders the 
weight of war and the persistence of memory. It is at once harrowing and 
intimate, unrelenting and understated. Through Ana, we see history not as 
textbook abstraction or as intrigue in the halls of power, but as a fact seared 
onto the hearts of real people.


–The Editors at Blunderbuss Magazine

---

I write by hand, so pieces of Girl at War live in all these notebooks.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e8a74181a41096fad60af71ca4040514469732%2F0_0_895_659%2F895.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc6e8a74181a41096fad60af71ca4040514469732%2F0_0_895_659%2F895.jpg>
I think this is the first appearance of what would become the novel’s 
characters, in a notebook from 2005. The project was a short story first, in 
the third person, about a young boy’s traumatic past and his inability to deal 
with it in America years later. The character, Damir, eventually became Ana, 
the protagonist of the novel, and the point-of-view switched from third to 
first person, but much of the original description from this story remains the 
same, and serves as the basis of the climactic scene in the end of the book’s 
first section.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cbcdeaafcc6861183287ffc68864efeb72f42e%2F0_0_975_881%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F26cbcdeaafcc6861183287ffc68864efeb72f42e%2F0_0_975_881%2F975.jpg>
Road and highway construction were big points of contention in Yugoslavia in 
the period leading up to the war. Those in power, in Belgrade, were keen to 
build roads horizontally across the country to provide Serbian access to the 
Adriatic Sea, leaving Croatia largely unconnected with itself from the north to 
south. Because this was arguably a factor in inciting the conflict, and because 
certain roads facilitate key plot points in the novel, I did a lot of research 
on which roads did and didn’t exist in 1991, and have a few maps in which I 
tried to work out Ana’s family’s journey from Zagreb to Sarajevo.
 A diagram of the UN headquarters in New York City. 



Ana is very much in love with Zagreb as a child, and one of the ways she 
escapes the pressures of war and family life is to go out on the balcony and 
look at her city. I wanted to paint an authentic balcony view for the reader 
from the neighborhood in which Ana lives, so while visiting Zagreb, I drew out 
an accurate panorama and worked my descriptions off this picture.

Additionally, the page on the left shows what became the opening scene of the 
novel (though I didn’t know it then).
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dapiwbm1aFTI&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dapiwbm1aFTI>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dapiwbm1aFTI&media=>
The novel’s working title for a long time was “Oba su Pala” or “They Both 
Fell.” (It’s now the title of the first section of the novel.) The phrase comes 
from some of the most famous footage of the war, what which was played on the 
news on a loop as a sign of Croatia’s victory despite limited resources. In the 
novel Ana happens to watch it on TV with her mother, and I watched it on 
YouTube about fifty times to write the description of it.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc067825ebee9c2ed6c74cf04ccbab511c9704b5e%2F0_0_975_658%2F975.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Topography%20of%20a%20novel%3A%20Sara%20Novic%20on%20how%20she%20wrote%20Girl%20at%20War&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbooks%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-by-blunderbuss-magazine%2F2016%2Fmar%2F23%2Ftopography-of-a-novel-sara-novic-on-how-she-wrote-girl-at-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-4%23img-4&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc067825ebee9c2ed6c74cf04ccbab511c9704b5e%2F0_0_975_658%2F975.jpg>
 ‘I should’ve known it would take a semi-illegible map to sort [the story 
structure] out.’ 
One of the things I struggled with while writing this novel was the structure. 
Because of the nature of trauma and memory, I knew I didn’t want the narrative 
to be chronological; however, I was having trouble finding the right place to 
start the story. The big break came when, during the MFA, I expressed my 
organizational frustrations in a meeting with Sam Lipsyte. Sam hadn’t read the 
novel, but he graciously let me talk at him about it for a while, and he drew 
this picture as I did. When he handed it back to me, I realized what I had to 
do; the four humps became the four sections of the novel as they are now. I 
should’ve known it would take a semi-illegible map to sort it out, given how 
many I’d drawn over the course of writing the book!

 * Girl at War is out in the US from Random House 
<http://www.penguinrandomhouse.com/books/237988/girl-at-war-by-sara-novic/9780812986396/>
 and in the UK from Little Brown. Get it at theGuardian Bookshop 
<https://bookshop.theguardian.com/catalog/product/view/id/374935/>. 
Sign up to our Bookmarks newsletter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/feb/03/sign-up-to-our-bookmarks-email> 
 * Sara Nović is the fiction editor of Blunderbuss. You can also find her at 
sara-novic.com <http://sara-novic.com/>, @novicsara 
<https://twitter.com/NovicSara>, and Redeafined <http://www.redeafined.com/>. 
She is a writing instructor at Columbia University and with Words After War. 
Further reading

 * What it’s like to be a deaf novelist 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/may/23/what-its-like-to-be-a-deaf-novelist>
, by Sara Novic 
 * “When childhood lurches into nightmare” – Girl at War review 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2015/jun/11/girl-at-war-sara-novic-review>  