
Conservative backbenchers have not given up the battle to force the government 
to publish a white paper spelling out its priorities for Brexit, despite No 10 
making clearTheresa May’s speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 is the only plan they intend to produce.

With the government awaiting the verdict in the supreme court appeal 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/government-brexit-supreme-court-theresa-may-article-50>
 over whether it must give parliament a vote on triggering Brexit, MPs said 
they could seek to amend any bill that comes to parliament to force the 
government to table a formal white paper. Labour and Liberal Democrat MPs would 
be likely to back such a move and plan to coordinate their approach with 
moderate Conservatives.

The call for a white paper to be published – rather than the broad principles 
set out in the prime minister’s Lancaster House speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/prime-minister-vows-to-put-final-brexit-deal-before-parliament>
 – was endorsed by the cross-party Brexit committee at the weekend.

But Downing Street believes May has satisfied demands, set out in a motion 
passed by the House of Commons and backed by the government last year, to 
reveal its plan.


The Guardian view on Theresa May and Brexit: a reality check tinged with 
fantasy | Editorial
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/17/the-guardian-view-on-theresa-may-and-brexit-a-reality-check-tinged-with-fantasy>
Anna Soubry, the de facto leader of the group of Conservatives 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/conservatives> seeking to retain the 
closest possible relationship with the EU, urged the Brexit secretary, David 
Davis, to “commit to putting those 12 objectives into a white paper and 
bringing it to this house so that we can finally debate the single market, the 
customs union and the free movement of people. So far, we have not, and many of 
us feel that parliament has been deliberately precluded from all this.”


May’s speech, which set out a vision of a “global Britain”, was widely 
regarded at Westminster as politically shrewd. One senior Brexit strategist 
said the Vote Leave campaign could have written much of it and wouldn’t have 
disagreed with a word.

The prominent leave campaigner Dominic Raab, MP for Esher and Walton, said: 
“This is a detailed and positive plan for an ambitious post-Brexit Britain. As 
an independent, self-governing democracy, we want to be a firm friend to Europe 
but a global player with the broadest horizons. It’s time to turn the page from 
the referendum and unite as a country, so Britain can go from strength to 
strength.”

Boris Johnson <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, the foreign 
secretary, who led the leave campaign, praised a “fantastic speech” on 
Facebook. He has been keen for the prime minister to make a clean break with 
the EU rather than seeking to remain inside the single market.

The former Ukip leader Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/nigel-farage> said: “I can hardly believe 
that the PM is now using the phrases and words that I’ve been mocked for using 
for years. Real progress.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Key%20points%20from%20Theresa%20May%E2%80%99s%20Brexit%20speech%20%E2%80%93%20video%20analysis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fpolitics%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F17%2Fkey-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis&media=>
Key points from Theresa May’s Brexit speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/video/2017/jan/17/key-points-from-theresa-mays-brexit-speech-video-analysis>
That could make it hard for Ukip to compete with the Conservatives in the 
forthcoming byelections in Copeland and Stoke on Trent Central by claiming May 
was backsliding on Brexit.

But pro-remain Tory backbenchers also welcomed the speech, believing that 
while May had conceded Britain wouldn’t remain a formal member of the EU single 
market, her pledge to seek a “bold and ambitious” free trade deal – to “allow 
for the freest possible trade in goods and services between Britain and the 
EU’s member states” – could allow her to replicate many of the key elements of 
the single market without the name.

Diplomats see reasons to be cheerful and fearful in May's Brexit speech
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/17/eu-diplomats-see-reasons-to-be-cheerful-and-fearful-in-mays-brexit-speech>
Ben Howlett, the MP for Bath, said: “I’m pleased the prime minister has 
listened to Conservative backbenchers who have called for a vote on the final 
deal in parliament. I still want to see Britain retain all the benefits of a 
single market, and call on the government to hold a full debate.”

Labour’s shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer 
<https://www.theguardian.com/law/keir-starmer>, went further, suggesting the 
prime minister was “ruling out a hard Brexit at this stage” and had caved in to 
Labour demands to seek tariff-free access to the single market.

“For many months, we in Labour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> 
have been demanding fullest possible access to the single market, emphasising 
the risks of leaving the customs union, arguing for a collaborative 
relationship with our EU partners, emphasising the need for transitional 
arrangements and the entrenchment of workers’ rights. Today the prime minister 
has rightly accepted these in her plan and I acknowledge that.”

Labour’s shadow cabinet has accepted that it is not practical to continue to 
argue for full membership of the single market, which Starmer said would 
formally lapse when Britain left the EU anyway.

But the Liberal Democrats 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/liberaldemocrats>, who still hope Brexit 
can be averted, accused Labour of falling in line behind the government. 
Alistair Carmichael, the MP for Orkney and Shetland, said: “The government has 
identified two mutually exclusive objectives. On the one hand they want to 
leave the customs union and the single market while at the same time they say 
they want to maintain tariff-free access to the single market. Any opposition 
worth their name would point out that these goals are mutually exclusive.”

The shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/diane-abbott>, who has suggested that 
Labour should be willing to accept continued free movement as the price of a 
good deal on single market access, struck a markedly different tone to Starmer, 
saying May was “putting controls on immigration above any anything else, 
including the health of the economy and the British people’s living standards”.
 