
The Conservative chair of the health select committee has defended the NHS 
England chief executive,Simon Stevens 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/simon-stevens>, in his dispute with 
Theresa May over health service funding.

Dr Sarah Wollaston said she agreed with Stevens’ contradiction of May’s claim 
last Sunday that theNHS <https://www.theguardian.com/society/nhs> had been 
given more funding than it required up to 2020.

Stevens repeatedly dismissed May’s comments to Sky News 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/12/nhs-england-simon-stevens-refuses-to-buckle-theresa-may>
 when he appeared before thepublic accounts committee on Wednesday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-england-chief-executive-simon-stevens-funding-theresa-may-public-accounts-committee>
, showing the extent of the divisions between himself and the prime minister.

Asked on Sky News’ Sophy Ridge on Sunday programme if the NHS had been 
allocated more cash than it needed, Wollaston replied: “I don’t think that is 
strictly true.”

She said the government’s £10bn figure 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/11/nhs-boss-simon-stevens-defended-by-mps-health-funding-row>
 included transfers from other healthcare budgets. “So, you can see how the 
government has reached that figure. But the committee felt that a fairer 
figure, if we’re using the usual measure, was £4.5bn, which is a very different 
number,” she said.


Health had to be considered with social care 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/14/jeremy-corbyn-labour-decries-social-care-crisis-made-in-downing-street>
 “and what Simon Stevens was very clear when he spoke to the committee about, 
was if you have cuts to social care, that has an enormous impact on the NHS. So 
that is why he doesn’t agree,” she said.

“And I would agree with him that the NHS hasn’t been given everything it asked 
for, because it doesn’t actually consider social care, and it doesn’t consider 
the cuts to public health budgets, the kind of prevention work that we know is 
essential if we’re going to reduce demand on the NHS.”

Responding to claims that Stevens was not doing enough 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/12/nhs-winter-crisis-simon-stevens-stephen-dorrell-health>
 to alleviate the NHS crisis, Wollaston said “Personally, I think that is 
unreasonable. I think as a public servant and somebody who heads the NHS, the 
government needs to give him their unequivocal support in the very hard job he 
is undertaking to try to get this whole system to work.”

Wollaston, a former GP, also criticised the scapegoating of family doctors and 
thethreat to withdraw funding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/13/theresa-may-nhs-crisis-doctor-surgeries>
 unless they agreed to work longer hours.

GPs working longer hours won’t ease the pressure on the NHS | Letters
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/15/gps-working-longer-hours-wont-ease-the-pressure-on-the-nhs>
She said it was entirely wrong to blame one section of the workforce, when 
administrative work, home visits and chasing test results had to be done when 
surgeries were closed.

GPs were “extraordinarily stretched and working under relentless pressure as 
bed numbers [in hospitals] are being cut,” she said.

“We now have the lowest number of beds per head in Europe. What we are finding 
is more and more complex conditions are coming back to primary care, so the 
work of the GP is changing and the pressures on them are relentless.

“The workforce simply isn’t there in many parts of the country, So I think to 
then be suggesting that all of this problem is due to GPs not seeing people is 
really stretching it,” Wollaston said.

“It’s just not the case and wrong to scapegoat them, in my view.” 
 