
On 28 April 1975, Newsweek ran a story on page 64 that became one of its most 
popular.

Under the headline, “The Cooling World 
<https://www.scribd.com/doc/225798861/Newsweek-s-Global-Cooling-Article-From-April-28-1975>
”, the story ran for just nine paragraphs but suggested the world could be 
heading for a major cooling phase, putting food production at risk.

The story is one of Newsweek’s most cited 
<http://www.newsweek.com/editors-desk-98979> not because it was right, nor 
because it was a glowing example of great science journalism, but because it 
has been used so often by climate science deniers.

In short, their argument goes: “Hey, look … experts were wrong before and they 
might be wrong now about all this global warming alarmism.”

Queensland’s One Nation senator Malcolm Roberts 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-roberts> quoted the 
Newsweek story in his 42-page climate science denial tome launched at 
Parliament House this week.

Debunking Malcolm Roberts: the case against a climate science denier
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/14/debunking-malcolm-roberts-the-case-against-a-climate-science-denier>
The journalist who wrote the article, Peter Gwynne, reflected a couple of 
years ago on how climate science deniers had used his story 
<https://www.insidescience.org/news/my-1975-cooling-world-story-doesnt-make-todays-climate-scientists-wrong>
. He wrote:

I accept that I didn’t tell the full story back then. Indeed, the issue raises 
questions about the relationship between science writers and scientists as well 
as the attitudes toward science of individuals with political agendas.

Roberts’ press conference sparked a discussion on social media 
<https://twitter.com/readfearn/status/795420331640881152> that raised just the 
sort of questions Gwynne has talked about.


Should people like Roberts be ignored? Even if they are a senator, does that 
mean journalists have a duty to report what they say? If they do cover the 
story, how should it be done?

Journalists have a tendency to look for stories that are out of the ordinary 
and search out views that are different. This is exactly what happened in the 
1970s.

But even then, most scientists publishing research on the future of the 
climate thought it was going to get warmer.

Researchers looked at scientific papers published between 1965 and 1979. 
Across all the relevant papers, only seven predicted global cooling. Some 20 
papers took a neutral stance on future temperatures, with 44 predicting 
temperatures would rise.

This research is well known. It was published in 2008. Anyone seeking an 
honest conversation would refer to it.


Tired claims in the the Roberts report

The document Roberts brought to parliament was well stocked with his usual 
claims and covered much of the ground he previously trampled in his maiden 
speech 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/aug/09/why-one-nation-senator-malcolm-roberts-demand-for-empirical-evidence-on-climate-change-is-misleading-bunk>
.

Roberts was flanked by the Canadian geology professor Tim Ball 
<http://www.desmogblog.com/timothy-f-ball-tim-ball>, who also rejects the 
thesis that humans cause climate change, and the US-based bloggerTony Heller 
<http://www.desmogblog.com/steven-goddard>. Both helped him write the report.

The report cites a 2009 study by three contrarian scientists that claimed most 
of the recent warming (which elsewhere the report argues isn’t real) was down 
to natural fluctuations of the El Niño/La Niña climate phenomenon.

But Roberts does not mention the follow-up research by a more experienced team 
of scientists <http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/2009JD012960/abstract>
 which found that the original study’s conclusion was “not supported by their 
analysis or any physical theory presented in their paper, especially as the 
analysis method itself eliminates the influence of trends on the purported 
correlations”. Why cite one study but not the other?

Roberts claims the UN’s intergovernmental panel on climate change specifically 
“ignore[s] natural drivers” of the climate system. This is entirely false.

The IPCC collates scientific research that looks at human drivers of climate 
change (the release of greenhouse gases from fossil fuel burning being a main 
one) in the context of natural fluctuations.

Roberts’ report says the natural and seasonal fluctuations in the levels of 
CO2 recorded in the atmosphere “clearly overrides human production”.

Yet his chart shows CO2 peaking higher each year. What is causing the rapidly 
rising background trend?

Why only show four years of data when there are more than 50 years of data 
available?

Michael Brown (@MJIBrown) 
50+ years data show CO2 steadily rising due to human emissions, so Malcolm 
Roberts uses just 4 years to bogusly claim opposite.#auspol 
<https://twitter.com/hashtag/auspol?src=hash> pic.twitter.com/0EuB7d0Hqg 
<https://t.co/0EuB7d0Hqg>
 <https://twitter.com/MJIBrown/status/795423206018424832> November 7, 2016 
<https://twitter.com/MJIBrown/status/795423206018424832> 
Roberts claims the natural fluctuation in the atmospheric levels of CO2 shows 
that “carbon dioxide cannot drive temperature”.

But the reason that CO2 levels in the atmosphere change seasonally is mostly 
down to the photosynthesis of plants 
<https://scripps.ucsd.edu/programs/keelingcurve/2013/05/07/why-are-seasonal-co2-fluctuations-strongest-in-northern-latitudes/>
 (uptake and respiration). The variations also depend on where you take your 
measurements.

Roberts’s report implies the rise in CO2 in the atmosphere might not be from 
fossil fuels but instead could be from volcanoes because they carry the same 
chemical signature.

Pew survey: Republicans are rejecting reality on climate change | Dana 
Nuccitelli
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/06/pew-survey-republicans-are-rejecting-reality-on-climate-change>
But various studies have shown that humans emit about 50 or 60 times more CO2 
annually than volcanoes 
<https://www.climate.gov/news-features/climate-qa/which-emits-more-carbon-dioxide-volcanoes-or-human-activities>
.

Roberts’ arguments are all over the place. At times the report argues against 
itself.

The Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> senator 
has said he has asked the government’s scientific agencies for “empirical 
evidence” that CO2 is causing climate change – evidence he claims does not 
exist.

When he has been shown the real-world evidence, he either ignores it, 
constructs faulty arguments to discount it or comes up with a one-size-fits-all 
conspiracy theory to explain why we’re all being conned.

Responsibility of the media

Roberts tends to attack journalists he doesn’t like. 

In his report he list journalists he says “show the courage to research the 
evidence”, naming the likes of Alan Jones, News Corp and Sky News commentator 
Andrew Bolt, and Graham Lloyd and Chris Kenny of the Australian.

In the US, where much of the climate science denial machinery has its base, 
the same groups who have funded organisations pushing climate science denial 
have started to pour money into journalism. There is now a network of outlets 
stridently pro-climate science denial.

So how should we all deal with this? 

The Guardian writer George Monbiot has written 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/03/climate-crisis-media-relegates-greatest-challenge-hurtle-us-collapse-planet>
 that if “humanity fails to prevent climate breakdown” then much fault should 
lie at the feet of the media.

If journalists aspire to protect the public, then producing stories that allow 
debunked climate science denial talking points to hang in the air like a bad 
smell is not going to cut it.

What happens if journalists fail to give context, fail to expose potential 
vested interests or fail to distinguish between genuine expertise and fringe 
beliefs?

The impact is not benign. Instead of protecting the public interest, we can 
end up doing harm.
 