
Touts who use computer software to buy concert tickets for resale at inflated 
prices 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
could face a prison term, under proposals to be considered by the government.

How the ticket touts get away with bleeding fans dry
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/15/shady-world-of-the-ticket-touts> 
The proposal was made as Theresa May, the prime minister, said she was looking 
at ways to address the use of ticket-resale websites by professional touts at 
the expense of fans.

Pressure on the government to get tough on touting has been building amid 
outrage from the music industry 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/10/pixies-lead-battle-against-ticket-touts>
 and growing evidence thatconsumer rights law is being routinely flouted 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/13/government-urged-help-music-industry-tackle-ticket-touts>
.

Tickets for gigs and the theatre frequently appear on resale websites within 
minutes of going on sale, often athuge markups 
<https://www.theguardian.com/stage/2016/aug/13/harry-potter-cursed-child-ticket-resale-prices>
.

Nigel Adams MP, a Conservative, has tabled an amendment 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/bills/cbill/2016-2017/0045/amend/digital_rm_pbc_1018.pdf>
 to the digital economy bill that would address part of the problem by 
criminalising the use ofsoftware known as “bots 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/21/ticket-touts-powerful-software-assist-widely-available>
” to buy tickets for resale. The offence, based onlegislation introduced in New 
York 
<http://www.cbsnews.com/news/ny-ticket-bots-illegal-scalpers-could-face-jail-time/>
, would carry a maximum prison sentence of 51 weeks, a fine of up to £5,000 or 
both.

“It’s not a silver bullet but it will go a long way and act as some 
deterrent,” said Adams, who was inspired to address touting after missing out 
on tickets to see a US rock band, Green Day. “If there’s no punishment for this 
sort of rip-off behaviour it will continue to happen.”

Adams said he had a “good feeling” about the amendment’s prospects but 
admitted he was likely to face opposition from free market advocates in his own 
party. “I believe in the free market but I don’t believe in a crooked market. 
When that happens politicians need to act, irrespective of political dogma,” he 
said. “I don’t see [opposition to the amendment] chiming with Theresa May’s 
commitment to make sure we have a government that works for everyone not just a 
privileged few.”

Speaking at prime minister’s questions on Wednesday, Adams asked May what 
progress had been made on responding to a report on ticket resellingpublished 
by Professor Michael Waterson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/may/26/ticket-touts-review-licensing-enforcement>
 five months ago. Waterson called for an investigation about whether secondary 
ticketing websites such as Viagogo, GetMeIn, Seatwave and StubHub are breaching 
consumer rights law.

The prime minister said the government “will be looking at the recommendations 
very carefully to see what can be done to address the very issue that he talks 
about”.

FanFair Alliance <http://fanfairalliance.org/>, which campaigns against 
“industrial-scale” ticket touting, welcomed political steps towards tackling 
professional touts, who make vast profits at the expense of fans. 
“Instinctively I suspect most people would feel that hacking into a ticket sale 
with the sole intention of hoovering up huge volumes of inventory to then 
resell at a profit would be illegal,” said spokesman Adam Webb. “Along with 
enforcement of existing consumer legislation – something that is urgently 
needed – if this amendment is made law then it would help turn the tide and 
ensure that the ticketing market works in favour of fans, rather than touts and 
the under-regulated secondary platforms that they operate from.”

The Competition and Market Authority is expected to publish a review before 
the end of the year of whether the secondary ticketing industry, estimated to 
be worth £1bn, is complying with the law. The Consumer Rights Act demands that 
ticket resellers publish information including the face value of the ticket and 
the seat number. But Waterson has said enforcement of the rules is patchy.

Annabella Coldrick, chief executive of the Music Managers’ Forum, said 
tackling bots would be a welcome boost to theindustry’s efforts to solve the 
problem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/10/pixies-lead-battle-against-ticket-touts>
 but warned that more needed to be done. “The fact that secondary companies are 
welcoming outlawing bots tells you how effective doing that on its own [would 
be],” she said. “If you look on Viagogo or StubHub, trying to find out who 
you’re buying from is nigh-on impossible. They’re also supposed to show seat 
row and ticket number but they don’t because artists could cancel those 
tickets.”

She added that outlawing bots would not tackle touts who pay people based 
abroad to buy tickets, or use multiple credit cards to circumvent ticket 
purchase limits.

Earlier this year the state of New York made the use of bots a criminal 
offence after a report by the attorney general found that touts using a single 
bot had bought 1,000 tickets in one minute for aU2 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/u2> concert at Madison Square Gardens.







 