
Pressure is mounting on transport providers and other companies to improve 
access for people with disabilities after the Paralympian Anne Wafula Strike 
revealed in the Guardian thatshe had been forced to wet herself on a train 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/02/paralympian-anne-wafula-strike-wet-herself-train-no-accessible-toilet>
 because the accessible toilet was out of order.

Wafula Strike, a British wheelchair racer and a board member of UK Athletics, 
has called for companies to be fined if they don’t provide the facilities for 
disabled people that legislation requires.

Fellow Paralympic athletes, including the TV presenter and wheelchair 
basketball player Ade Adepitan, backed her call for change.

Adepitan told the Guardian that he too had been forced to urinate in a train 
carriage when the disabled toilet was not working. He acknowledged that it was 
slightly easier for men to improvise than women.

“I have had to pee into a bottle in the past when the accessible toilet wasn’t 
working,” he said. “I would carefully arrange a coat over my knees under the 
train table and pee into a bottle held underneath my coat.”

'As the train empties, I worry I'll be forgotten': UK disability facilities
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2017/jan/03/as-the-train-empties-i-worry-ill-be-forgotten-uk-disability-facilities>
He said that he endured one particularly agonising train journey after 
returning from filming in India in 1999 suffering from a stomach upset only to 
discover there was no working disabled toilet. “Having to hold on until I got 
off the train was just terrible,” he said. “Not having accessible toilets 
available has happened to me more times than is tolerable.

“A lot of these companies are just paying lip service. Really they are just 
taking the mickey. It’s a standing joke with me and my friends who are also 
wheelchair users when we go to a restaurant or bar and see that the disabled 
toilet isn’t usable because it is being used as a storeroom. There was one 
place we used to go to in Chiswick where they used to store bicycles in the 
disabled toilet.”

He supported Wafula Strike’s call for fines to be imposed on organisations 
failing to provide suitable accessible facilities.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fb547e6af9744034494742627cf80f6a306ea6c%2F0_51_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transport%20providers%20come%20under%20pressure%20to%20improve%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transport%20providers%20come%20under%20pressure%20to%20improve%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F3fb547e6af9744034494742627cf80f6a306ea6c%2F0_51_5760_3456%2F5760.jpg>
 Ade Adepitan: ‘I have had to pee into a bottle in the past when the accessible 
toilet wasn’t working.’ Photograph: Graeme Robertson for the Guardian 
“If there is no punishment and no fines nothing will change. The biggest 
problem is the people who are enforcing the rules who don’t do enough to 
enforce them, and the able-bodied public who use disabled toilets and park in 
disabled parking bays. Companies need to be attacked in their pockets and by 
naming and shaming them if they don’t provide the right facilities.”

Adepitan said that the whole issue of travelling with a disability was a 
minefield.

“When I was about 15 there were no accessible buses for me and my mates who 
also used wheelchairs to travel on,” he said. “So we went to High Street North 
in East Ham and blockaded the road with our wheelchairs for several hours, 
demanding accessible buses. It worked and a few months later the 101 bus was 
introduced which was an accessible bus.

“I think what Anne has done should be like a beacon and a message to other 
disabled people not to be afraid to speak out. She’s right that we don’t speak 
out enough. We are entitled to everything that everyone else is entitled to.”

The Paralympic athlete and wheelchair user Dzaier Neil also supported Wafula 
Strike’s call for sanctions for companies and organisations that fail to 
provide equality of access to people with disabilities.

“I think things are just getting worse,” she said. “Getting round at all as a 
disabled person is a challenge. Getting on a bus is very difficult and some 
London boroughs have their own disabled badge systems so that the universal 
blue badges can’t be used in those areas if you’re not a resident in the 
borough.”

Wafula Strike said she had been overwhelmed by tweets of support since going 
public.

“The sad thing is the number of people who have contacted me since I went 
public and said that what happened to me on the train also happened to them,” 
she said. “One woman whose job is a psychologist said that she gets dehydrated 
when she travels by train because she is scared to drink anything at all in 
case there is no toilet available on the train.

“I’ve learnt that if you speak up, the world does listen. As disabled people 
our voices can be weak, but I’m optimistic that now our voices are being heard 
and we will see change.”

Her MP, Robert Halfon, described her treatment as a “totally unacceptable set 
of events for the 21st century”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73eeae0348c4d63a320d767d5197d85c10a63bf3%2F0_247_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Transport%20providers%20come%20under%20pressure%20to%20improve%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Transport%20providers%20come%20under%20pressure%20to%20improve%20disabled%20access&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fsociety%2F2017%2Fjan%2F03%2Ftransport-providers-come-under-pressure-improve-disabled-access-anne-wafula-strike-ade-adepitan%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F73eeae0348c4d63a320d767d5197d85c10a63bf3%2F0_247_6016_3608%2F6016.jpg>
 Signs indicating disabled access at Green Park underground station in London. 
Photograph: P.D Amedzro / Alamy/Alamy 
Sarah Evans, and employment lawyer at Slater and Gordon, said: “It would be 
interesting to see if the fines that Anne has proposed would encourage 
compliance among organisations.

“Disability discrimination is not just against people with physical 
disabilities but also those who suffer from mental illness. As practitioners we 
are aware that disability legislation doesn’t always work.

“The onus in legislation is on the disabled person getting their rights 
enforced rather than the employer. In the workplace it is more difficult for 
employees to bring disability discrimination cases now than it used to be 
because of the fees regime introduced into the employment tribunal. This makes 
it less likely that individuals will pursue their rights.”

She said that while things were better for people with disabilities than they 
were 20 years ago there was still a way to go before equality was achieved.

“The obligations on employers are quite low – all they have to do is make 
reasonable adjustments for people with disabilities.”

Faryal Velmi, director Transport <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/transport> 
for All, an organisation that provides advice for disabled travellers in 
London, said: “The humiliation that Anne went through is unfortunately a 
regular occurrence for disabled and older people travelling on our railways.

“Transport for All has heard of many scandalous stories similar to hers and we 
know of people who have stopped travelling by train altogether after losing 
their confidence.

“Anne’s case is another example of how we are treated as second-class citizens 
when travelling 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/sep/27/disabled-people-second-class-citizens-public-transport>
. Train companies that make handsome profits for their shareholders need to 
invest resources in ensuring that accessible toilets – and indeed all toilets 
facilities – are kept open and maintained for all customers.”
 