
Will the extra investment in transport be enough to save some local 
authorities from oblivion when much central government funding is replaced by 
business rates?

The cost of Brexit will be many times the additional investment in passenger 
transport announced in the Autumn statement. Robert Pestonputs the cost to the 
economy at £220bn 
<http://www.itv.com/news/2016-11-23/the-220-billion-cost-of-brexit/>, while the 
hole in public finances is put at £59bn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/nov/23/brexit-will-blow-59bn-hole-in-public-finances-admits-hammond>
.

In contrast, the extra funding made available for road and rail infrastructure 
is just £3.72bn, including £450m for digital signalling on the railways. Will 
this be enough to solve the long-term problems faced by the UK economy? CityWire
reports 
<http://citywire.co.uk/money/government-pumps-23bn-into-infrastructure-to-plug-productivity-gap/a973320>
that Lucy O’Connell, the chief economist of Aberdeen Asset management, thinks 
not.

Don't mistake autumn statement for infrastructure splurge | Nils Pratley
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/nils-pratley-on-finance/2016/nov/23/dont-mistake-autumn-statement-for-infrastructure-splurge>
Some local authorities will do better than others, such as those along the new 
Oxford to Cambridge expressway 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/oxford-to-cambridge-expressway-strategic-study-interim-report>
, which is designed to create a new belt of high-tech industries.

But for many local authorities, particularly in the north of England, 
transport links will remain dire and business creation and possibly retention 
will be difficult. This could make it impossible for some to provide decent 
public services.

For many local authorities, particularly in the north of England, transport 
links will remain dire

Despite the northern powerhouse concept, inadequate road links between the 
north and other parts of the country will continue to hold back economic 
development and, hence, wealth creation. Oncurrent plans 
<http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-16473296>, HS2 will only reach Birmingham in 2026 
and won’t get to Manchester until 2032.

UK rail: leader to laggard?

Leader to laggard summarises the history of the UK’s rail network. In 1825 the 
UK led the world with the opening of the first passenger railway between 
Stockton and Darlington. But by 1964, when Japan introduced itsfirst bullet 
train 
<https://nextcity.org/daily/entry/japans-bullet-train-the-worlds-first-and-still-best-high-speed-rail-network>
, with speeds of up to 200mph, 5,000 miles of the nationalised UK railways were 
being closed in the Beeching cuts.

Other nations are now racing ahead of the UK 
<https://www.theguardian.com/public-leaders-network/2016/may/17/roads-railways-south-east-asia-britain-investment-infrastructure>
. By 2020, in time for the2020Expo <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=tzwAy0lMkNs>
 the journey time between Dubai and Abu Dhabi – a distance of nearly 100 miles 
– could be cut to 12 minutes with the train running at speeds of up to 760 
miles an hour.

China has 12,000 miles of high-speed railways and is discussing with India the 
building of high-speed lines up to 1,400 miles long. Switzerland’s35-mile rail 
tunnel <http://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-europe-36423250>under the Alps to Italy 
opened in June this year.

Meanwhile, in the UK, the planned electrification of the railway between 
London and Bristolhas been cancelled 
<http://www.bristolpost.co.uk/reaction-anger-as-government-indefinitely-delays-rail-electrification-at-bristol-temple-meads/story-29877251-detail/story.html>
, which will have a big impact on the number of jobs en route and in Bristol 
and a knock on effect in south Wales.

Good transport creates jobs and wealth. It also creates national cohesion. 
Would Scotland feel so distant from Westminster and other parts of the UK if 
there were high-speed links? Would the north-south divide be so evident had 
communications been better?

The chancellor’s announcements in the autumn statement are welcome. However, 
they are a drop in the ocean compared to what is needed to compensate for 100 
years of relative neglect and to compete with other countries.

The billions being spent on Brexit is resulting in a massive wasted 
opportunity to transform the UK economy and public services.

Talk to us on Twitter via @Guardianpublic <https://twitter.com/guardianpublic> 
andsign up <https://register.theguardian.com/public-leaders/> for your free 
weekly Guardian Public Leaders newsletter with news and analysis sent direct to 
you every Thursday.
 