
More strikes are looming across a range of British transport services, with 
fresh action announced onBritish Airways 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/britishairways> and Southern rail, and an 
ultimatum issued for another tube strike next month.

Up to 2,900 cabin crew from BA’s “mixed fleet” branch at Heathrow will strike 
again 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/british-airways-cabin-crew-to-go-on-strike-next-week-in-pay-dispute>
 for three days next week in a row over pay, whileconductors on Southern 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/southern-rail-conductors-strike-to-compound-drivers-walkout>
 will walk out for 24 hours on Monday 23 January, just ahead of three more days 
of strikes by drivers that will completely halt its trains. The RMT has saidit 
will escalate action 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/12/tube-strikes-tfl-unions> on 
the London Underground from 6 February if its demands are not met in talks 
starting next week.

Virtually all of Southern’s 2,242 daily services will be cancelled again on 
Friday, asdrivers in Aslef strike 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/10/strike-southern-rail-commuters-british-airways>
 for the third day this week in the long-running dispute over the roles and 
responsibilities of onboard crew.

Although Southern’s conductors have now accepted new contracts redesignating 
them as onboard supervisors, the move by theRMT 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/rmt> to strike underlines that the 
dispute, and commuter misery, is unlikely to end soon.

The RMT general secretary, Mick Cash, hit out at the chief executive of 
Southern’s operating company, Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), saying he had 
failed to honour a televised pledge to ensure a second member of staff on all 
trains.

A Southern <https://www.theguardian.com/business/southern> spokesperson said: 
“We remain ready to meet the RMT leadership, as we do Aslef, any time, any 
place, anywhere to find a way to end their disputes.”

But the prospect of talks appears to have receded, after GTR announced on 
Wednesday it was againpursuing legal action against Aslef 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/southern-train-operator-appeals-to-supreme-court-to-block-drivers-strikes>
 to halt the strikes, going to the supreme court after losing a court case and 
an appeal last year.

The union insists it has genuine safety concerns over the further 
implementation of driver-only operation on Southern services. The same row 
could soon extend north, with the RMT now having given ultimatums to both 
Arriva Rail North, which runs Northern, and Merseyrail tocommit to keeping 
guards on trains 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/jul/04/southern-railway-passenger-protest-industrial-action>
 or face industrial action. The union warned that the taxpayer would be liable 
for losses to train companies in the event of similar strikes, with the 
government having inserted clauses in new franchise agreements to allow firms 
to claim for lost revenue.

In a separate dispute, the RMT said more tube strikes would start from 6 
February if London Underground did not produce “serious proposals” for extra 
station staff. The union represents about 80% of the 3,700 station staff who 
wenton strike on Monday, closing most tube stations 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2017/jan/09/tube-strike-brings-manic-monday-for-commuters-in-gridlocked-london>
 in central London and leaving roads gridlocked.

However, there are strong hopes that negotiations will avert a strike, with 
talks starting next week. All parties have indicated that the job cuts that 
ensued whenticket offices were closed in early 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2016/jun/03/tfl-managers-disgusting-celebrating-london-underground-tube-ticket-office-closures-rmt>
 have left stations understaffed.

Steve Griffiths, London <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> Underground’s 
chief operating officer, said: “We look forward to resuming talks at Acas on 
Monday in order to make progress towards resolving this dispute.”

Meanwhile, British Airways crew will walk out for three days 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/12/british-airways-cabin-crew-further-three-day-strike-poverty-pay>
 from next Thursday, following a 48-hour strike this week which led to around 
100 flights being cancelled or merged.

The Unite <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/unite> union says pay at the 
national carrier is so low that crew are taking second jobs or working while 
sick. It called on BA to raise pay, which starts at £12,192 basic, although the 
airline says most crew earn at least £21,000 with flying allowances.

Unite’s national officer Oliver Richardson said: “British Airways should be 
under no illusion about our members’ determination to secure a settlement.”

But the airline described the move as “bizarre and regrettable”. BA said that 
the first strike had failed to disrupt its customers, who all reached their 
destinations, and it would set out new contingency plans to ensure all booked 
passengers could travel again next week.
 