
Take me there: Deauville, France

Why go?
With its Belle Epoque hotels, bathing huts and air of faded grandeur, the 
seaside town of Deauville is the French answer to Brighton. But instead of 
beach volleyball you’ll find boules, and instead of fish and chip shops, chic 
brasseries serving oysters and langoustines. Fashionable Deauville was once a 
favourite haunt of Napoleon and Coco Chanel, and a busy calendar of horseracing 
events, polo matches and the annual Deauville American Film Festival ensure 
that it’s still on the circuit for high society. New flights being launched 
this year byRyanair <http://www.ryanair.com/> (from 3 April) and Flybe 
<http://www.flybe.com/> (from 22 June) will make it easier than ever for us to 
join them.

What to do
Take in the sea air on the Promenade des Planches – the famous boardwalk – or 
go window-shopping in the ritzy boutiques around Place Morny. Catch a ferry 
across the River Touques to the jolly resort ofTrouville 
<http://en.normandie-tourisme.fr/articles/trouville-390-2.html>, which has a 
daily fish market, beachfront casino and regular exhibitions at theVilla 
Montebello 
<http://en.normandie-tourisme.fr/pcu/musee-villa-montebello/trouville-sur-mer/fiche-PCUNOR014FS00096-2.html>
, former summer residence of Napoleon. The D-Day beaches and attractive port of
Honfleur <http://en.normandie-tourisme.fr/articles/honfleur-278-2.html> are 
within easy striking distance.

Where to eat
No visit to this stretch of coast is complete without a bowl of moules 
marinière in the quintessentially French Les Vapeurs, a seafood brasserie in 
Trouville (lesvapeurs.fr <http://lesvapeurs.fr/>).

Where to stay
La Cerisée is a charming little B&B in the centre of town with just two guest 
rooms, including a self-contained cottage with its own kitchen (from €130,
chambre-hotes-deauville.com <http://chambre-hotes-deauville.com/en>). Les 
Manoirs de Tourgeville is a cosseting hotel set in beautiful parkland a few 
miles inland (from €170,lesmanoirstourgeville.com 
<http://lesmanoirstourgeville.com/>).

Insider tip
The best place to pick up specialities, such as camembert and cider, is at the 
food market on Place du Marché, says Yves-Marie Guguen of Les Manoirs de 
Tourgeville: “Traditional markets are held on Tuesday, Friday and Saturday and 
they sell local produce as well as arts and crafts.”

Give me a break
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427221775664%2F11e76852-0243-4422-8f9c-1be86453a4a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20Deauville%2C%20France%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20Deauville%2C%20France%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427221775664%2F11e76852-0243-4422-8f9c-1be86453a4a4-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Try your hand at rock climbing. Photograph: Diana Jarvis/PR 
HOME Peak District adventure weekend: Lost Earth Adventures is holding two 
activity weekends in the Peak District in May, which will give families the 
chance to try their hand at rock climbing, gorge scrambling and mountain 
biking. The weekends, on 2-4 May and 22-24 May, cost £249pp and include all 
activities, some meals, plus three nights’ accommodation (
lostearthadventures.co.uk <http://www.lostearthadventures.co.uk/>).
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427222070973%2F34780b9e-985c-46e0-a244-6b86c7ba47cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Travel%20tips%3A%20Deauville%2C%20France%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Travel%20tips%3A%20Deauville%2C%20France%2C%20and%20the%20week%E2%80%99s%20best%20deals&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Ftravel%2F2015%2Fmar%2F29%2Ftravel-tips-deauville-france-peak-district-brussels%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fstatic.guim.co.uk%2Fsys-images%2FGuardian%2FPix%2Fpictures%2F2015%2F3%2F24%2F1427222070973%2F34780b9e-985c-46e0-a244-6b86c7ba47cf-2060x1236.jpeg>
 Stay at Hougoumont in Belgium. Photograph: PR 
AWAY Living history in Brussels: Celebrate the bicentenary of Wellington’s 
victory at the Battle of Waterloo this year with a stay at Hougoumont in 
Belgium – the site of Napoleon’s final defeat. The Landmark Trust has restored 
a former gardener’s house situated on this historic estate near Brussels and is 
offering stays in a two-bedroom apartment from £482 for four nights (
landmarktrust.org.uk <http://www.landmarktrust.org.uk/>).

Follow the Observer Magazine on Twitter @ObsMagazine 
<https://twitter.com/obsmagazine>
 