
If all goes according to others’ plans, Marie will be made redundant at the 
end of this school term. Then she’ll be invited to reapply for her job – with a 
pay cut of 23%. That’s a life-changing drop: the kind that might mean missing 
mortgage payments, or losing her house. What sort of meaningless work does she 
do to warrant such disregard? She helps schoolchildren to learn.

Marie is a teaching assistant 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2016/feb/26/teaching-assistants-improve-pupils-results-studies-show>
, one of2,700 TAs across County Durham in line for the chop and drop 
<https://www.theguardian.com/education/2015/dec/01/academy-chain-takes-slice-premium-pupil-fund>
. I met her and three colleagues (none wanted their real names used) last week, 
at Marie’s house. In one small room there was about 70 years of classroom 
experience.

These are women who teach algebra and French, who look after the coach trips 
and the school play. The difficult kids spit, swear, even kick them. One 
morning a mum asked the school if Marie could come round. She was about to kill 
herself and there was only one woman she wanted to see.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dif-sM1Gl-dY&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dif-sM1Gl-dY>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.youtube.com%2Fwatch%3Fv%3Dif-sM1Gl-dY&media=>
 Teaching assistants in County Durham pack out another protest – video 
For all this, these women are paid about £20,000 a year – well below the 
average British salary 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/18/uk-workers-pay-rises-biggest-annual-increase-since-financial-crash-ons>
. They routinely work early mornings, evenings and weekends – without ever 
claiming overtime. And at the end of the week they may have to take home 
memories of kids with cigarette burns inflicted by their parents, or reports of 
sexual abuse.

“You’re a teacher, a social worker, a nurse,” said Marie. “You’re a 
policewoman. You can be a cook, a cleaner, a friend, a playmate, you can be an 
ear, you can be a bloody joiner, a decorator.” A couple of months back, a 
dyslexic boy read in class the words “I, Me, Mine”. Then he turned to her. “I 
never liked reading before, but I’ve just done reading, haven’t I? I’ve done 
good for you, haven’t I?”

When it comes to TAs or nurses or carers, the British have an iron-clad rule: 
the people who look after the people we love the most can be treated like dirt. 
The week Marie celebrated the 25th year of working at the same school, she and 
her colleagues received the letter explaining how all their living standards 
were to be ripped to shreds.

Some of the TAs stand to lose nearly £5,000 a year. Some are considering other 
jobs, swapping the education of children for call centres. Jan told me how her 
daughter, also a teaching assistant, would no longer be able to afford her 
mortgage, so “in a panic” had sold her starter home.

Then Marie said she might have to do the same, while I avoided her eye and 
studied the family photos. Durham county council’s biggest concession is that 
it will cut pay by only 10% for any assistant who can work more hours. Such 
largesse isn’t worth much to Marie, who is wondering how she’ll send her 
daughter off to university.

This is the same council that only three years ago was ridiculed by David 
Cameron for paying senior councillors thousands in aspecial clothing allowance 
<http://www.thenorthernecho.co.uk/news/council/durhamcountycouncil/10368747.Cameron_attacks_Durham_County_Council_over__Geordie_Armani__clothing_payments/?ref=arc>
. The same council has been slammed for renting unaffordably flash office 
blocks; and itsplan for growth 
<http://www.chroniclelive.co.uk/news/north-east-news/durham-right-big-ambitions---8763202>
 was last year dismissed as “unrealistic” and “excessively optimistic” by 
planning inspectors.

The mining villages and factory towns of County Durham have faced four decades 
of being either impoverished or ignored by Westminster. Now it’s the suits at 
the local county hall attacking their own. Their claim is that the swingeing 
cuts are simply the result of rejigging the contracts of school support staff 
to bring them in line with other council employees. This follows on from the
last restructuring in 2012 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/19/what-would-you-cut-durham-council-asks-residents-find-savings>
, which left many TAs worse off.

What would you cut? Durham council asks residents to find £100m savings
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2014/oct/19/what-would-you-cut-durham-council-asks-residents-find-savings>
Observers I’ve spoken to reckon the TAs of County Durham already rank among 
the lowest paid in Britain. If a restructuring is essential, neither they nor I 
can see any reason why Marie and her colleagues shouldn’t have their jobs 
regraded and their pay preserved. And I can’t help but wonder if the council 
would have been so cavalier with a workforce that wasn’t predominantly female.

Sold out by a Labour council, the TAs have also been badly let down by their 
union. The officials ofUnison have been painfully slow to organise serious 
action 
<https://www.unison.org.uk/news/press-release/2015/11/unison-condemns-cuts-to-pay-for-teaching-assistants/>
. In all the months since the pay cut was announced last winter, they have 
failed so far even to ballot for any kind of industrial action. They now 
promise to hold one this month – which might yield a strike in October, just 
two months before the members are all laid off.

Aghast at such spinelessness, some councillors have shown the TAs 
correspondence from paid union representatives. One email suggests a one-off 
compensation payment that, it promises, would “gain overwhelming support” from 
the membership. That pledge was made without either the knowledge or the 
agreement of the TAs I’ve spoken to.

At the very point when Unison bureaucrats should have been digging in for the 
fight of their lives, they have instead spent months drawing up the terms of 
defeat. Marie’s dad was a union steward for decades, and “he can’t understand 
it”.

The TAs have been forced to fight for themselves. While they may not be 
militant, they do of course have decades of experience in organising and making 
something out of nothing. So they hold meetings, at which outside sympathisers 
expect a few handfuls to turn up. The women pack the halls full.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fteaching-assistants-durham-pay-slashed-women-lions-of-durham-grunwick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F609ab257ae0a09238f845b432b5c1c9b8a0fbfbc%2F0_27_3474_2085%2F3474.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Treated%20like%20dirt%2C%20these%20teaching%20assistants%20have%20become%20the%20lions%20of%20Durham%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fteaching-assistants-durham-pay-slashed-women-lions-of-durham-grunwick%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Treated%20like%20dirt%2C%20these%20teaching%20assistants%20have%20become%20the%20lions%20of%20Durham%20%7C%20Aditya%20Chakrabortty&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fsep%2F06%2Fteaching-assistants-durham-pay-slashed-women-lions-of-durham-grunwick%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F609ab257ae0a09238f845b432b5c1c9b8a0fbfbc%2F0_27_3474_2085%2F3474.jpg>
 Jayaben Desai, whose leadership of the Grunwick dispute ‘changed the face of 
trade unionism in this country’. Photograph: Graham Wood/Getty Images 
They mount demos outside the council offices, and what should be dull, 
sparsely attended affairs turn into something more like a sports day, with 
hundreds of women dancing about. They post songson YouTube 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=if-sM1Gl-dY>, produce merchandise, collect 
testimonies from members, and email assistants across the county. In short, 
they are doing what their union should be doing.

This is ingenuity – and huge sacrifice. The women I met last week had been 
slogging away all summer. They’d been warned repeatedly, both at school and in 
meetings with the union, to watch themselves – hence the worry about being 
named in this article. And after spending 40 hours a week organising, Jane had 
her partner walk out: “He said, ‘You don’t even speak to me any more. You 
wouldn’t notice if I was here.’ So off he went.”

All this reminds me of a famous strike that happened 40 years ago, at Grunwick 
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/gallery/2010/jan/20/grunwick-strike-women>
, north-west London. Back then it was Asian women at a photo-processing plant, 
who were thought too lowly to treat well and too meek to protest. First six 
workers walked out, then it was 137. Over two years, under the leadership of
Jayaben Desai 
<https://www.theguardian.com/theobserver/2003/may/04/features.magazine67>, they 
mustered 20,000 supporters – and changed the face of trade unionism in this 
country.

Although she always worried about her English, Desai gave her boss one of the 
all-time great parting shots: “What you are running here is not a factory, it 
is a zoo. But in a zoo there are many types of animals. Some are monkeys who 
can dance on your fingertips, others are lions who can bite your head off. We 
are those lions, Mr Manager.” Forty years on, here are those lions again.

• Contributions to the strike fund can be made here 
<https://www.justgiving.com/crowdfunding/countydurhamteachingassistants>
 