
Tristram Hunt <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/tristram-hunt> is to 
resign as a Labour MP to take up the job of director of the Victoria and Albert 
Museum, triggering a byelection in his vulnerable constituency in Stoke.

Why Stoke-on-Trent is a microcosm of the battle for Labour's soul
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jan/15/stoke-on-trent-microcosm-labour-soul-jeremy-corbyn>
The former shadow education secretary, who hoped to succeed Ed Miliband 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2015/may/19/labour-too-timid-under-ed-miliband-tristram-hunt-leadership-welfare-childcare-devolution>
 as leader in 2015, has been fiercely critical of Jeremy Corbyn and the 
direction in which he has taken the party.

MPs close to Hunt confirmed he had decided to pursue a career outside 
politics, and had landed the plum post at one of London’s most prestigious 
cultural institutions, where his predecessor Martin Roth was paid a salary of 
more than £145,000 as part of a total package worth at least £225,000.

Hunt insisted his departure was not intended to “rock the boat”. But he had 
been unhappy for some time, and his departure will add to the woes of Corbyn,
who had a spat with his shadow defence secretary, Nia Griffith 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/11/labour-in-turmoil-as-corbyn-briefing-clashes-with-defence-position>
, over Britain’s role in Nato earlier this week. The two men met to discuss 
Hunt’s decision and sources close to the Labour leader said that they had “a 
good conversation about the V&A and culture”.

Labour’s deputy leader, Tom Watson, said: “I am disappointed to see a talented 
MP like Tristram step down. His departure will be keenly felt by parliament and 
by theLabour <https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> party but I know he 
will continue to champion Stoke-on-Trent’s proud industrial heritage in his new 
role at the Victoria and Albert Museum.


“The Labour party will move swiftly to ensure Stoke-on-Trent 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/stoke-on-trent> Central continues to be 
represented by a strong and capable Labour MP.”

Privately, Labour MPs expressed disappointment. One said: “This is a massive 
blow. Tristram was a friend and it’s depressing he wants to leave.”


Corbyn said: “I would like to thank Tristram Hunt for his service to the 
people of Stoke-on-Trent Central and to the Labour party. I wish him well in 
his future role at the V&A.”



The central Stoke constituency, where Hunt won with a majority of 5,179 in 
2015, is one of those where Ukip polled strongly, taking 22.7% of the vote to 
finish second. Ukip’s new leader, Paul Nuttall, has stressed his determination 
to take on Labour in its former heartlands and could even stand himself in the 
byelection.
Stoke election results 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/charts/embed/jan/2017-01-13T10:02:46/embed.html>
As well as the V&A post being his “dream job”, Hunt may have been swayed by 
the fact that his constituency is set to disappear entirely under the initial 
draft of boundary changes which will see the number of Commons seats fall from 
650 to 600.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=The%20Labour%20supporters%20backing%20Brexit%20in%20Stoke-on-Trent%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=The%20Labour%20supporters%20backing%20Brexit%20in%20Stoke-on-Trent%20heartland%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjun%2F14%2Flabour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video&media=>
The Labour supporters backing Brexit in Stoke-on-Trent heartland 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/video/2016/jun/14/labour-supporters-brexit-stoke-on-trent-eu-referendum-video>
The constituency would be split between the seats of Stoke-on-Trent North and 
South, among a series of proposed changes in the area. When the changes were 
announced, Hunt said they were based on outdated electoral data and were 
“effectively gerrymandering” by the Conservatives.

Labour’s ruling national executive committee will decide when the byelection 
will be held, but senior party insiders said it could be on the same day as the 
tough electoral test in Copeland, Cumbria, for the seat vacated by Jamie Reed, 
another Corbyn critic who resigned recently.

Labour was pushed into irrelevance in the two most recent byelections. In 
Richmond Park, the Liberal Democrats won by attracting disgruntled remain 
voters; in Sleaford and North Hykeham, Labour slipped from second in the 2015 
general election to fourth.


But neither of those constituencies is in Labour’s traditional heartlands. The 
Stoke contest is likely to offer the clearest barometer since the referendum of 
whether leave-voting Labour supporters still trust the party. Another will come 
in Leigh, Greater Manchester, if, as expected, Andy Burnham wins the Manchester 
mayoral race in May.

The byelection could also create a fierce battle over selection, with Labour’s 
deputy leader Watson and the GMB union, which represents many local ceramics 
workers, expected to take a keen interest. Corbyn’s allies dominated the 
shortlisting committee for Copeland and have ruffled the feathers of some in 
the party by pushing for their preferred candidate, local campaigner Rachel 
Holliday, a relative newcomer to Labour.

Hunt is far from alone among Labour MPs in being frustrated by the party’s 
electoral prospects. Some insiders suggested more could follow his lead. But 
one backbencher close to him said most of his colleagues had dug in for the 
long haul. “I think there are still flickers of hope; there’s still a chance of 
this thing shifting and the cycle coming around,” he said.

Peter Mandelson, who was instrumental in helping Hunt to be selected for the 
seat before the 2010 general election, said: “It’s great for him, but the rest 
of us have to stay and fight, fight and fight again to save the party we love.”

Hunt’s appointment at the V&A – which was confirmed by the prime minister and 
the secretary of state for culture, media and sport, Karen Bradley – was a 
genuine surprise. His name did not crop up in any of the art world gossip which 
generally precedes big appointments in the sector.
Instead, the most regularly heard tips had been Luke Syson, the former 
National Gallery curator who is now in charge of European sculpture and 
decorative arts at the Met in New York; Tim Knox, formerly at Sir John Soane’s 
Museum inLondon <https://www.theguardian.com/uk/london> and now in charge of 
the Fitzwilliam in Cambridge; and Tim Reeve, the extremely able deputy director 
of the V&A who has been acting director since Martin Roth’s departure.


There were warm words from senior figures in the art world at Hunt’s 
appointment. The Art Fund’s director, Stephen Deuchar, called Hunt’s 
appointment “a very clever choice”.


He said: “I think it is an inspired choice, I really do. He is a great 
communicator and he is really committed to the social purposes and potential of 
museums and visual culture more generally.”

Hunt may not have run a museum before but Deuchar, who once ran Tate Britain, 
said that was not essential: “He knows the UK museum scene better than a lot of 
museum professionals, I dare say. It looks as if he has the perfect range of 
experience to apply to this really important job.”

Sandy Nairne, the former director of the National Portrait Gallery, said: “I 
don’t know Tristram closely but I have known his work in and around the 
cultural sector and he has been a very strong voice. You think, for example, of 
his voice in arts and education, his voice in the Wedgwood campaign.


“I have always felt that we should think very openly about the range of 
talented people who could lead our institutions. It doesn’t do us well to have 
narrow precepts about who should be doing these things. Leadership can come 
from many different places so this is a really interesting appointment.”

 Tristram Hunt’s resignation letter 
One of the first questions for Hunt to answer is on his view of the future of 
free entry to the V&A. Ina 2010 piece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2011/mar/06/tristram-hunt-entrance-fees-museums>
 for the Guardian, he complained that despite charges for entry to the 
Potteries Museum in Stoke, “the teeming London museums continue to enjoy a 
state subsidy to retain free admission” and said that it was time “to think 
about reintroducing charges for our national museums”. The V&A says that 
despite that piece he is “fully committed to free museum entrance”.

In his resignation letter to Corbyn, Hunt said life as an MP had been “both 
deeply rewarding and intensely frustrating” and referred to his dissatisfaction 
with the Labour party’s response to “the social, cultural and economic forces 
which have rocked mainstream social democratic and socialist parties” across 
the world.


“I am sorry to put the party and the people of Stoke-on-Trent through a 
byelection,” he added. “I have no desire to rock the boat now and anyone who 
interprets my decision to leave in that way is just plain wrong.” He said he 
would be impartial in his new position.

In a statement released by the V&A, Hunt said he was “delighted and honoured” 
by the appointment. “I have loved the V&A since I was a boy, and today it is a 
global leader in its unrivalled collections, special exhibitions, academic 
research and visitor experience.”

The V&A chairman, Nicholas Coleridge, said Hunt had “a highly compelling 
mixture of experience across public life, the arts, history, education and 
academia, and knows our collections well from his writing and broadcasting.”

He added: “He is an informed and articulate leader and communicator on 
numerous facets of culture, both historic and contemporary, and I greatly look 
forward to working with him at the V&A.”


Bradley congratulated Hunt and said: “I look forward to working alongside him.”


The V&A moved quickly to look for a new director after Roth announced his 
resignation in September, a decision hastened by hisdisillusionment over the 
British vote to leave the EU 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/sep/12/revolutionary-1960s-dark-times-technology>
.


In interviews with the German broadcaster DW 
<http://www.dw.com/en/martin-roth-on-brexit-me-first-mentality-spreading-through-europe-is-brutal/a-19352465>
, Roth said the Brexit vote felt like a personal defeat and he had been 
particularly upset to hear aggressive “war rhetoric” during the referendum 
campaign.

Roth was appointed in 2011, becoming the first foreign director of the V&A 
since it was founded in 1852.
 