
Tristram Hunt’s resignation letter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/13/tristram-hunt-to-quit-as-mp-to-become-va-director>
 reads like the kind of fantasy epistle people dream of sending the boss on a 
Friday morning after another awful week at the office. He doesn’t have to 
strain himself to sound like he’s got a new life planned out, starting with a 
journey to find himself in Anglesey. Instead he calmly explains he has just 
been appointed director of the V&A.

 So farewell Jeremy, as he has no need to say. Nor does he have to boast about 
the salary and sneer “cap that”. For the message is clear enough that he is 
leaving Corbyn’s ghost train for a glamorous top job at one of the best museums 
in the world. He’ll be musing over which William Morris wallpaper to choose for 
his office while former comrades are reading their latest batch of Twitter 
abuse and awaiting the reselection meeting. Nice for him.

 The question is – what does the V&A get in return? In recent years it has had 
a spectacular run of hit exhibitions that unashamedly celebrated fashion and 
pop, subjects not usually associated with Hunt, who probably knows more about 
the Levellers in the English civil war (the theme of a2002 BBC series that made 
his name 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2002/jan/08/firstnight.broadcasting1>) than 
he does aboutAlexander McQueen 
<https://www.theguardian.com/fashion/2015/mar/15/alexander-mcqueen-savage-beauty-v-and-a-review-observer-awe-and-unease>
. He was not, apparently, one of the millions who tweeted their sorrow when 
David Bowie, hero of a hugely popular V&A exhibition, died. Is Hunt going to 
drag the V&A back into the 19th century?

Great exhibitions: 2017's best art, photography, architecture and design
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/07/best-art-photography-architecture-design-exhibitions-2017>
 That seems a very real possibility. Hunt is a historian of the Victorian age. 
He did a PhD at Cambridge on civic thought in Britain, 1820–1860, which he 
later turned into a mainstream book calledBuilding Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2004/jun/12/featuresreviews.guardianreview6>
. As the industrial revolution created cities of mass poverty and grotesque 
inequality unlike any ever seen, he argues in this book, Victorians used the 
arts and education to try to create cohesive communities, with intellectuals 
such as John Ruskin and William Morris preaching bold visions of a world saved 
by art.

 The most spectacular surviving result of the Victorian aesthetic idealism 
Hunt so admires is the Victoria and Albert Museum, founded in 1852 with a 
revolutionary mission to collect not just the traditional arts but craft and 
industrial design too. You can see why Hunt, one of today’s most enthusiastic 
champions of the energy of the Victorian age, is in heaven here. And in 
appointing him the V&A is returning very explicitly to its own roots. Does this 
reflect a desire by its trustees to make a break with Hunt’spredecessor Martin 
Roth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/05/german-v-and-a-director-martin-roth-quits-brexit-vote>
? Do they want to rein back the popular culture?

 I could easily handle a few more exhibitions about Ruskin’s theory of 
architecture and a few less about Pink Floyd. I had to apologise to Guardian 
readers who came to aMasterclass 
<https://www.theguardian.com/guardian-masterclasses> event at the V&A recently 
because psychedelic music was being played loudly right next to the Renaissance 
galleries, making it hard for us to analyse the art. In their desperation to 
get a bigBotticelli exhibition 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/mar/02/botticelli-reimagined-review-vanda-venus>
 on last year, the museum’s curators of proper art had to load it with Dolce & 
Gabbana dresses and Warhols. So if Hunt brings a more sombre tone to this great 
museum and gives its unrivalled collections of European and global art the 
attentionstolen from them by Kylie 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2007/feb/07/kylieminogue>, then good. 

V&A's choice of Tristram Hunt seems less risky after a look at his CV
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2017/jan/13/v-and-a-museum-tristram-hunt-risky-cv-skilful-communicator>
 Hunt is easily the most high-profile leader the V&A has had since Sir Roy 
Strong left in 1987. Strong was and is a flamboyant public character but since 
then this museum’s directors have tended to vanish within the vastness of its 
infinite halls and corridors. Hunt is not much like the dandy Strong but bears 
more resemblance to theserious and idealistic Neil MacGregor 
<https://www.theguardian.com/culture/2016/apr/17/neil-macgregor-britain-germany-humboldt-forum-berlin>
, who until recently led the British Museum. Is it too much to hope that Hunt 
can emulate MacGregor and put big ideas about art and history into British 
public life?

 If he gives the V&A a strong public voice, that will be good for all 
Britain’s museums. This appointment comes as some of the most influential 
museum directors in British history leave that stage.Sir Nicholas Serota’s 
departure this year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2016/sep/08/sir-nicholas-serota-appointed-chairman-arts-council-england-tate>
 after those of MacGregor and theNational Portrait Gallery’s Sandy Nairne 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/jun/12/national-portrait-gallery-director-sandy-nairne-leave-early-2015>
 risk leaving our museums in the hands of cultural bureaucrats, educated and 
trained in the museum world, with nothing much to say beyond it. How 
imaginative of the V&A to bring in an outsider who manifestly cares about its 
collections –Hunt helped save the great Enlightenment creations of Josiah 
Wedgwood for the nation 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2014/oct/03/wedgwood-collection-saved-nation-3m-public-donations>
 – yet also obviously cares about the world outside those abundant galleries.

 In his resignation letter Hunt says he “will work impartially as a museum 
director”. Let’s hope not. If he lets rip with passionate ideas and grand 
ambitions this could be a second great Victorian age for the V&A.
 