
China’s chief climate negotiator has attempted to calm fears that Donald 
Trump’s arrival in the White House will spell disaster for the fight against 
climate change.


Trump, who has dismissed climate change as “bullshit” 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/418542137899491328> and a Chinese 
hoax 
<http://www.politifact.com/truth-o-meter/statements/2016/jun/03/hillary-clinton/yes-donald-trump-did-call-climate-change-chinese-h/>
, will become the first climate sceptic to occupy the highest office in the US 
when he is sworn in on Friday.

Climate scientists and campaigners have expressed alarm 
<https://www.theguardian.com/science/2017/jan/16/leading-scientists-urge-may-to-pressure-trump-over-climate-change>
 at the impact the presence ofso many climate deniers and environmental enemies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/28/donald-trump-cabinet-climate-deniers-conspiracy-wealth>
 in Trump’s cabinet could have on efforts to prevent catastrophic and 
irreversible global warming.

But speaking to the government-run China Daily newspaper 
<http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/world/cn_eu/2017-01/17/content_27971833.htm>, 
China’s special representative for climate change, Xie Zhenhua, played down 
such concerns.


Xie reaffirmed Beijing’s “firm attitude” towards fighting global warming and 
noted that the incoming US president had “softened his tone on whether climate 
change is real” following his election in November.

In an interview with the New York Times 
<https://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/23/us/politics/trump-new-york-times-interview-transcript.html>
 after his shock victory Trump said he had an “open mind” about how he would 
approach the issue and conceded there was “some connectivity” between global 
warming and human activity.

Xie, a Communist party veteran who spent more than a decade at the helm of 
China’s environmental agency, told theChina 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/china> Daily the global momentum behind the 
push towards a low carbon future was now such that no one person was capable of 
halting progress.

“Industrial upgrades aiming for more sustainable growth is a global trend … It 
is not something that can be reversed by a single political leader,” he was 
quoted as saying.

The newspaper said Xie believed “the international community and US citizens 
will pressure theTrump administration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> to continue clean 
energy policies”.

Weeks of tension 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/we-will-walk-on-international-stage-taiwanese-president-insists>
 between Trump’s team and Beijing have sparked fears that collaboration on 
climate change – one of the few bright spots of US-China relations under Barack 
Obama – may be at risk.

In September 2016 Obama and the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, earned global 
plaudits when theyjointly announced their decision to ratify the Paris climate 
accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/sep/03/breakthrough-us-china-agree-ratify-paris-climate-change-deal>
.

Two years earlier, in November 2014, Obama and Xi unveiled a historic secretly 
negotiated deal to tackle climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2014/nov/12/china-and-us-make-carbon-pledge>
, including China’s first commitment to cap its greenhouse gas emissions.

“This is a major milestone in US-China relations and shows what is possible 
when we work together on an urgent global challenge,” Obama said at the time.

Xie played down the suggestion that frictions between Trump and Xi might 
thwart joint efforts by the world’s top two emitters to fight global warming. 
“Collaboration on climate change has never ceased amid the political tensions,” 
he said.

Xie was speaking on the eve of a major speech that Xi Jinping is due to 
deliver at the World Economic Forum (WEF) in Davos on Tuesday.

Environmentalists and some foreign policy experts hope Xi, the first Chinese 
president to attend the forum 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/11/china-xi-jinping-world-economic-forum-davos-donald-trump>
, will use part of his opening address to restate Beijing’s determination to 
fighting climate change amid fears over the future role of the US.


“I think it is absolutely brilliant that he is going to Davos. I think that is 
a very smart move on his part. I’m in favour of a China that becomes a global 
leader doing good things and behaving responsibly,” said Susan Shirk, the chair 
of the 21st Century China Centre at the University of California San Diego, who 
expects Xi’s speech to touch on China’s climate leadership.


“Frankly if the US is going to abdicate leadership then it is good to have 
somebody step forwards and defend positions which I can identify with,” Shirk 
added.


“But let’s remember, China can’t do this stuff alone … [Taking greater 
leadership on climate] will enhance China’s reputation as a responsible global 
leader … but it’s not going save the planet.

“If the US is pulling in the opposite direction, we are not going to be able 
to make the progress on climate change the way we should, or could, if we were 
working together.”
 