
Donald Trump has chosen former Marine Corps Gen John Kelly to be his homeland 
security secretary, according to multiple reports.


Several news organizations reported on Wednesday that the president-elect is 
to nominate the former four-star general to run the cabinet department 
responsible for enforcing US immigration laws, as well as a number of important 
agencies including the coast guard, the Secret Service, and the Federal 
Emergency Management Agency (Fema). They cited unnamed sources familiar with 
the Trump transition process.

“I can’t confirm or deny just because it’s the president-elect’s decision to 
reveal his picks,” Trump aide Kellyanne Conway told reporters. “They had a very 
productive and exciting meeting recently and obviously General Kelly is 
qualified for that job.”


Trump's billionaire cabinet could be the wealthiest administration ever
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/trumps-rich-pickings-president-elects-team-could-be-wealthiest-ever>
Kelly, who stepped down in 2016 as commander of the US Southern Command, is 
the most senior US officer to have lost a child in the war on terror. His son 
Robert, a first lieutenant in the marines, was killed in combat in Afghanistan 
in 2010.

Kelly, 66, is the third general sought for a high-level job in the new 
administration.

Trump, who has no military experience, also plans to nominate retired Gen 
James Mattis tolead the Department of Defense 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/04/james-mattis-defense-secretary-nuclear-missiles-trump>
 and picked retired Lt Gen Michael Flynn to behis national security adviser 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-profile>
.

Kelly differed with Barack Obama on key issues and has warned of 
vulnerabilities along the United States’ southern border with Mexico.

As head of the Southern Command, his final leadership post in a 45-year 
military career, Kelly was responsible forUS military 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/us-military> activities and relationships 
in Latin America and the Caribbean, including the controversial detention 
facility at Guantánamo Bay. He retired in January.

Even before Trump formally announced Kelly’s nomination, the top Democrat on 
the Senate homeland security committee indicated his approval.

“General Kelly is a man of steady leadership who has years of experience 
working with our neighbors in Latin America as commander of US Southern 
Command. Having worked with General Kelly personally on efforts to address the 
root causes of the surge in migration of children and families to our southern 
border, I am encouraged by his ability to build relationships with our partners 
in the region,” Senator Tom Carper of Delaware said in a statement.

Some at the Department of Homeland Security see Kelly, with his military 
background, as a blank slate on a host of issues the department deals with, 
from immigration to airport security to addressing natural disasters. But there 
is a sense of relief that Kelly is not as hardline as some of Trump’s other 
potential choices, like Kris Kobach, the Kansas secretary of state, or Rudy 
Giuliani, the former New York mayor.

“The consensus is he’s someone people can work with, but he’s an unknown 
entity,” said a knowledgeable US official who spoke on condition of anonymity.

Kelly is a renowned marine with extensive experience in western Iraq during 
the darkest days of the US occupation, first as assistant commander of the 1st 
marine division in 2004 and later in 2008, as commander of I Marine 
Expeditionary Force. His leadership experience prompted defense secretary 
Robert Gates to make him Gates’ senior military assistant, a perch from which 
Kelly became the leader of US Southern Command in 2013..


Kelly is personally close to his fellow marine and chairman of the joint 
chiefs of staff, General Joe Dunford, whose tenure as the senior US military 
officer runs through 2017. Dunford reportedly delivered Kelly the news of his 
son 1st Lt Robert Kelly’s death.

At Southcom, Kelly quickly developed a reputation for opposition to Obama’s 
intended closure of Guantánamo Bay. Kelly confronted a widespread hunger strike 
by the detainees, protesting the limbo of their treatment and the physical pain 
of being forcibly tube fed, which had prompted international attention.

Kelly’s response was a press blackout. Guantánamo and Southcom officials 
stopped providing updates to reporters on the detainees participating in the 
protest, either on the number of striking detainees or their conditions. To 
avoid discussing the hunger strike and its rationale, they introduced a 
euphemism when asked about it: “long-term non-religious fasting”.

The official military guidance document on the subject, the Miami Herald 
reported 
<http://www.miamiherald.com/news/nation-world/world/americas/guantanamo/article1961235.html>
, was titled “Medical Management of Detainees With Weight Loss”, replacing an 
earlier version titled “Medical Management of Detainees on Hunger Strike”.

Several US officials involved in Guantánamo issues saw Kelly’s hand in 
Pentagon obstinacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/aug/13/pentagon-blocking-guantanamo-transfer-shaker-aamer>
 toward Obama’s plan to close the detention facility.Asked in 2015 
<http://www.defense.gov/News/Transcripts/Transcript-View/Article/607023/department-of-defense-press-briefing-by-gen-kelly-in-the-pentagon-briefing-room>
 whether Guantanamo would in fact close, Kelly said: “If you’re talking about 
Guantánamo in terms of detention ops, I don’t know. Certainly, the president 
wants to close it. And until that happens, I will take care of those prisoners 
in a dignified way that sees to their every need.”

Kelly’s Guantánamo experience has created a deep well of suspicion among human 
rights campaigners, who are nervously watching DHS in the Trump era for 
discrimination against Muslims and a new wave of forcible deportations for 
undocumented immigrants.


“The Department of Homeland Security was created to work to keep the US safe. 
But Kelly’s support of policies and practices at Guantánamo have done nothing 
of the sort, they have made the US less safe. Senators definitely need ask him 
questions and challenge his record on that as part of the confirmation 
process,” said Human Rights Watch’s Laura Pitter.


In 2010, weeks after his son’s death, Kelly delivered a caustic speech 
<http://www.moaablogs.org/battleofthebilge/2010/11/honor-and-sacrifice-ltgen-john-f-kelly/>
 in St Louis that hit many notes Trump would later use to successful political 
effect.


Kelly savaged the “media elite” for “set[ting] up the ‘know it all’ chattering 
class to offer their endless criticism” of the Iraq and Afghanistan wars. He 
questioned the patriotism of unnamed elites and rejected the support of anyone 
who did not back the wars themselves, saying veterans “hold in disdain those 
who claim to support them but not the cause that takes their innocence, their 
limbs, and even their lives”.


He continued: “Yes, we are at war, and we are winning, but you wouldn’t know 
it because successes go unreported.”


Kelly has not always been consistent on that score. In the preface to a 2009 
marine history document, Kelly wrote: “Words like ‘won’ or ‘victory’ really do 
not apply when speaking about counterinsurgency operations.” In Iraq, Kelly 
wrote, “to a very large degree, we – the US military and civilians – were the 
source of the insurgency. Honest men and women can argue the whys, what-ifs, 
and what-might-have-beens, but ultimately, it was mostly about unfulfilled 
promises and the heavy-handed military approach taken by some that caused 
events to spiral out of control.”


While Kelly’s 2010 speech did not blame Islam for terrorism, a conflation made 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/18/michael-flynn-national-security-adviser-profile>
 by Trump national security adviser-designate Mike Flynn, it took an expansive 
view of the terrorist threat, oneObama rejected  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/06/barack-obama-national-security-donald-trump-overreach>
in his final national security speech on Wednesday.


“Our enemy is savage, offers absolutely no quarter and has a single focus – 
and that is either kill every one of us here at home, or enslave us with a sick 
form of extremism that serves no God or purpose that decent men and women could 
ever grasp,” Kelly said in 2010.

In the context of remarking upon the bonds between marines, Kelly disparaged 
“worshipping at the altar of diversity” and an America as an “unruly gaggle of 
‘hyphenated’ or ‘multi-cultural’ individuals”, in lieu of a “melting pot that 
stitches and strengthens by a sense of shared history, values, customs, hopes 
and dreams”.

Reuters contributed to this report
 