
In the annals of media cliche, manipulators are always “masterful”. On 
occasion, manipulators are even “genius”. And no one is more inherently 
masterful than a manipulator of the media. How could they be anything else? 
This isthe media we’re talking about.

Face it: you have to get up pret-ty darn early to get wall-to-wall coverage 
from an august news-spewing body.

You can’t just give humble urchin Kanye West a ticket to ride in your great 
gold elevator 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/dec/13/kanye-west-donald-trump-meeting-trump-tower>
 and have everyone write and broadcast about that at the expense of probing 
your conflicts of interest. Come to think of it, you can’t just be that urchin 
stalking into the secretive Wonka news factory lobby and have everyone stop 
talking about your recent hospitalisation and reportedly troubled 
marito-business empire. No, literally the only person who could pull that stuff 
off is a Master Manipulator of the Media.

Donald Trump treats the press like an authoritarian thug | Suzanne Nossel
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/donald-trump-press-conference-cnn-journalist-acosta>
It’s like the old saying goes: fool me once, shame on you. Fool me every time, 
you’re a fricking genius. Consider how many times you’ve read something in the 
media along the lines of “Kim Kardashian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/lostinshowbiz/2016/dec/15/kim-kardashian-on-instagram-one-old-acquaintance-that-should-not-be-forgot>
, a masterful manipulator of the media …” or “José Mourinho 
<https://www.theguardian.com/football/blog/2015/dec/16/chelsea-jose-mourinho-stamford-bridge-shakespearean>
, a master manipulator of the media …”. Again, what that tells you is that the 
press don’t go nuts for just any old rubbish. The guys they do it for are 
state-of-the-art. Kim Kardashian is the Lex Luthor of greased butt-shots, 
Mourinho the Magneto of slagging off refereeing decisions. They are master 
manipulators of the media. Furthermore, if a journalist unleashes that epithet 
at the top of whatever they’re writing or broadcasting, then they can be 
totally forgiven for turning whatever follows into an ironic comment on their 
own professional shortcomings.

The most masterful media manipulator of them all – the current undisputed 
genius – is just days out from downsizing into the White House. Think of it as 
Megatron disguising himself as a hatchback. Love him or loathe him, you cannot 
dispute Donald Trump’s dastardly brilliance/genius/mastery. Or rather, you 
still can, but it’s expected be outlawed very shortly.

And yet, if I may speak for the Toto in all of us, it feels time to hear a 
little less about the Wizard of Oz, and a little more about the man behind the 
curtain. The brilliant Jay Rosen questioned the above version of mastery, 
pointing out (rather Totoishly) that in order to manipulate our press, “a 
simple off-the-record briefing works every time”. “What’s more likely,”he then 
asked <https://twitter.com/i/moments/819786803221626881>, “that an American 
journalist will write a column about media manipulation, or try to rally 
colleagues to prevent it?”

This is certainly something I was wondering on Wednesday, watching Trump’s 
malarial press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>
. One of the things that immediately struck me was the way the reporters asked 
questions. I am given to understand Trump last gifted the world a press 
conference circa 1983, and I didn’t study that one very closely, so forgive me 
if it’s always been this way. But the journalists seemed to be indulging – 
maybe unwittingly – in a sort of mirroring behaviour, frequently asking 
questions so Trumpishly unfocused they could only reasonably be read as a form 
of grandstanding.

Were they trying to stand out from the pack? It had the flavour of a scene 
from a wildlife documentary, where weaker animals ape the alpha as a means of 
preferment. Maybe an animal behaviourist could get in touch and say whether 
there are any creatures in the natural world other than journalists who act 
like this. They don’t have to be vertebrates or anything.

By the time Trump was yelping, “You are fake news!” at CNN 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-attacks-cnn-buzzfeed-at-press-conference>
, only for other organisations to push themselves forward instead, I could 
imagine the spectacle glossed in the familiar, dispassionate tones of David 
Attenborough. “The alpha is deploying a simple but highly effective strategy of 
divide and conquer with the pack. They judge cooperative hunting as a luxury 
they can no longer afford. The realities are cold, and brutal. At this rate, 
none of them will survive the winter …” Yup, not even the cute baby ones.

Hang on, where was I? Ah, yes, survival. Whatever you think of BuzzFeed’s 
decision to publish unverified intelligence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2017/jan/10/buzzfeed-publishes-donald-trump-russia-documents-ethics-questions>
, you’ll have noticed other news organisations tipping all over them for it, 
despite clearly welcoming the opportunity to point towards said unverified 
intelligence themselves. It has long been thus. What was striking about the 
press conference was that many of the same news organisations that were 
scrupulous in criticising and condemning BuzzFeed were effectively silent as 
Trump shut down CNN. They simply slid in and took CNN’s spot themselves.

If Trump’s personality caught them on the hop, my commiserations. Let’s write 
off Wednesday as a learning experience. But as we go on, the press pack should 
think more collectively and deeply about various of their number being picked 
off by the president, what it will mean down the line, and what action they 
should take to best serve their readers and viewers.

Trump's trainwreck press conference ushers in a shambolic presidency | Richard 
Wolffe
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>
They already know that Trump’s transition cabal includes Peter Thiel 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/jul/21/peter-thiel-republican-convention-speech>
, the anti-democracy billionaire whose covert campaign to shut down Gawker was 
not the species win many seem to think it was. It will surely have served as an 
inspiration to the president-elect himself. Either reporters can watch Trump 
effectively banish CNN, and be glad he is currently not doing it to them, or 
they can trial braver strategies. How about one we’ll call the “I’m Spartacus”? 
If he doesn’t like the question from CNN, perhaps he’d like it from the next 
organisation he calls, or the next, or the next, or the next?

It’s difficult to hold out a whole lot of hope. On our own shores, the 
football press is a case in point. From time to time, various clubs will ban 
one paper or another from attending their press conferences because they don’t 
like a particular story.

Depressingly, the others stay and dutifully transcribe the managerial 
platitudes ready for transmission to the wider world. Why don’t they walk in 
solidarity, and force more principled interaction? I know it seems crazy, but 
some beliefs should be more important than who’s picked up a groin strain this 
week.

And so, a million times more vitally, with news. It may be an industry 
hardwired for commercial competition, but occasionally some kind of collective 
strategy is a public service imperative. If not, presidential press conferences 
will continue to be something that doesn’t separate us from the animals.
 