
Alarm over the rise of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> reached a new pitch early 
this week as officials in Washington worried that the United States has elected 
a leader who may be uniquely blind to threats posed by Russia, may be confused 
about US national interests, or who may, in his own largely invisible layers of 
business and personal interests, have conflicting loyalties.

Trump has stoked those concerns, in part, by repeatedly dismissing outright 
reports of Russian malfeasance, particularly in the US presidential election. 
“I think it’s ridiculous,” Trump said on Sunday ofa newly leaked CIA report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 concluding that Russia had sought to tip the presidential election his way. “I 
think it’s just another excuse [for the Democratic loss]. I don’t believe it.”

Such are Trump’s perceived sympathies for Moscow that members of the 
intelligence communitytold the Guardian on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
 that they feared reprisals from the incoming president overtheir assessments 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/fbi-russia-trump-election-harry-reid-james-comey-wikileaks>
 of Russia’s hostile conduct.

Now it appears that those concerns are on track for a public airing in the 
earliest days of the Trump administration, with the Senate majority leader, 
Mitch McConnell, on Mondaybacking calls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/us-election-russia-mitch-mcconnell-donald-trump>
 for a congressional review of Russia’s alleged meddling, and otherswarning 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-trump>
 thatTrump’s secretary of state, the ExxonMobil CEO, Rex Tillerson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/13/rex-tillerson-named-as-donald-trumps-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-chief-putin>
, an associate of the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, would face a tough 
confirmation grilling.

“I don’t know what Mr Tillerson’s relationship with Vladimir Putin was, but 
I’ll tell you it is a matter of concern to me,” Senator John McCaintold Fox News
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-exxon-mobil-trump>
 over the weekend.

From Russia’s interference in the US election to fears in the intelligence 
community to the role of the Senate to the president-elect’s reaction, here are 
key figures and questions in play:

Did Russia ‘hack’ the US election?

Russia has been accused of interfering with the US election, including by 
attempting to tamper 
<http://www.chicagotribune.com/news/nationworld/ct-hackers-target-election-systems-20160930-story.html>
 with voter registration rolls, by hacking Democratic National Committee 
emails, and by hacking the emails of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman, John 
Podesta. In recent days, secret intelligence community assessments have been 
leaked to the media,concluding 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/donald-trump-cia-russia-election-ridiculous>
 that Russia sought to tip the election in favor of Trump. The assessments do 
not go so far as to say that Russian intervention was decisive to Trump’s 
victory, as far as is publicly known.

CIA concludes Russia interfered to help Trump win election, say reports
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
On 8 October, the US government formally accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 Russia of hacking the Democratic party’s computer networks and said that 
Moscow was attempting to “interfere” with the US presidential election. On 9 
December,Barack Obama <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/barack-obama> 
ordered US intelligence to review evidence of Russian interference in the 
election. A day later, the Senate minority leader, Harry Reid,accused 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/fbi-russia-trump-election-harry-reid-james-comey-wikileaks>
 the FBI of covering up information about Russia, seeking to tip the election 
in Trump’s favor. On 10 December, the Washington Postreported 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/10/cia-concludes-russia-interfered-to-help-trump-win-election-report>
 that a secret CIA assessment had found that Russian operatives covertly 
interfered in the election in an attempt to ensure the Republican candidate’s 
victory. A separate report in the New York Timessaid 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/09/us/obama-russia-election-hack.html> 
intelligence officials had a “high confidence” that Russia was involved in 
hacking related to the election.

What is Rex Tillerson’s role?

As head of the world’s largest non-state energy company, Tillerson has had 
extensive dealings withRussia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> and 
with Putin and could have potential conflicts of interest tied to ongoing 
ExxonMobil projects, even if he was personally divested from the company, where 
he has worked for 40 years. In 2011, Tillerson signed a deal with Putin to 
partner with Russian oil giant Rosneft to explore and drill for oil in the 
Arctic, a project that outran native Russian technological capabilities. In 
2013, Putin presented Tillerson with the Order of Friendship, a top decoration 
from the Russian state for foreign nationals. Supporters argue that Tillerson 
could be a strong secretary of state owing to his experience at securing 
contracts and business interests around the world. Critics question whether he 
could separate US interests from ExxonMobil interests.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66f0415681d1b889defbe2793ee2eed511629789%2F0_168_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20relationship%20with%20Russia%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20know%20and%20what%20comes%20next&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20relationship%20with%20Russia%20%E2%80%93%20what%20we%20know%20and%20what%20comes%20next&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F13%2Fdonald-trump-russia-vladimir-putin-us-election-hack%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F66f0415681d1b889defbe2793ee2eed511629789%2F0_168_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 As head of ExxonMobil, Rex Tillerson has had extensive dealings with Russia 
and with Vladimir Putin and could have potential conflicts of interest. 
Photograph: Daniel Kramer/Reuters 
Can the Senate stop Tillerson?

It’s the Senate’s job to approve or nix executive and judicial appointments 
made by the president. Apart from a supreme court nominee, anyone nominated by 
the president who retains the support of Republicans in the incoming Congress 
is likely to be confirmed on the strength of a roughly party-line vote. That’s 
thanks to a November 2013 rules change at the hands of Democrats eliminating 
the need for a 60-vote majority to confirm significant nominees. Under current 
rules, 51 votes would be required to confirm a cabinet nominee and 60 votes to 
confirm a supreme court nominee. Republicans will enjoy a 52-48 majority in the 
next Senate. It is highlyunusual 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/the-fix/wp/2016/11/18/can-democrats-stop-jeff-sessions-or-any-trump-nominee-it-would-be-almost-unprecedented/?utm_term=.d2ece745f82f>
 for members of the president’s party to abandon a nominee.

Where do Senate leaders stand?

The reservations of top Republican senators about Russian conduct in general 
and Tillerson in particular appear to be significant – but Trump hascalled the 
party to heel before 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/ng-interactive/2016/may/14/who-supports-donald-trump-the-new-republican-center-of-gravity>
. “The Russians are not our friends,” McConnell said on Monday. But the scope 
of congressional inquiry on offer appeared to fall short of the aggressive 
investigation Democrats favor. McConnell said the Senate intelligence committee 
was “more than capable of conducting a complete review” of the issue of Russian 
electoral sabotage, but the chairman of that committee, Richard Burr, a 
Republican from North Carolina and a vocal supporter of Trump, did not commit 
to an actual investigation.

Where does the intelligence community stand?

Some members of the intelligence community feel they may face a situation in 
which defending the national interest runs counter to their career interests. 
It is not possible to gauge precisely how deeply fears of retaliation from a 
President Trump run within the intelligence world, Guardian US national 
security editor Spencer Ackermanwrote 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
 on Sunday. Two currently serving intelligence officers told the Guardian over 
the weekend weekend they had not heard their colleagues express such concerns:

Intelligence figures fear Trump reprisals over assessment of Russia election 
role
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/intelligence-agencies-cia-donald-trump-russia>
One noted that civil-service laws prevented Trump from launching a purge, but 
also called attention to a report that Trump is combing through the energy 
department bureaucracy to identify people “who have attendedclimate change 
policy conferences 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/12/09/us/politics/climate-change-energy-department-donald-trump-transition.html?_r=0>
”.

Former intelligence officers told the Guardian they considered retaliation by 
Trump to be all but a certainty after he is sworn into office next month. Trump 
still has several appointments to make at the highest levels of the 
intelligence apparatus, picks which are likely to be bellwethers for the new 
president’s attitudes toward the agencies.

“There is not just smoke here. There is a blazing 10-alarm fire, the sirens 
are wailing, the Russians provided the lighter fluid, and Trump is standing 
half-burnt and holding a match,” said Glenn Carle, a retiredCIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> officer and interrogator. “The facts 
hurt, Trump won’t like the truth, and he will without question seek to destroy 
those individuals or organizations that say or do anything that he thinks harm 
his precious grandiosity.”

What has Trump’s reaction been?

Trump asked Russia last July to use hacking to find emails he said had been 
deleted from a Clinton server, but he has also consistently denied Russian 
hacking. On Monday, he suggested that intelligence analysts were dabbling in 
conspiracy theory: “Can you imagine if the election results were the opposite 
and WE tried to play the Russia/CIA card. It would be called conspiracy 
theory!” Trumpwrote 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/808300706914594816>. “Unless you 
catch ‘hackers’ in the act, it is very hard to determine who was doing the 
hacking. Why wasn’t this brought up before election?”

It was 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
.

On 8 October, one month before the election, the office of the director of 
national intelligence and the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) releaseda 
joint statement 
<https://www.dni.gov/index.php/newsroom/press-releases/215-press-releases-2016/1423-joint-dhs-odni-election-security-statement>
 formally accusing Russia of hacking the Democratic party’s computer networks 
and saying that Moscow was attempting to “interfere” with the US presidential 
election. “We believe, based on the scope and sensitivity of these efforts, 
that only Russia’s senior-most officials could have authorized these 
activities,” the letter said in part.

On Monday, Carter Page, a former adviser to the president-elect, dismissed CIA 
assertions that Russia was behind the hacking during the election, saying it 
was a “lot of speculation but nothing there”. His words were echoed by John 
Bolton, a former US ambassador to the United Nations who has been floated as a 
possible pick to run Trump’s state department, whoquestioned the allegations of 
Russian interference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/us-election-russia-interference-donald-trump-loyalists>
.

Russia interfering in US election is just 'conspiracy theory', Trump loyalists 
say
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/us-election-russia-interference-donald-trump-loyalists>
What has the Russian reaction been?


The Russian reaction has closely paralleled Trump’s: ridicule and denial. 

Putin assigned 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/oct/07/us-russia-dnc-hack-interfering-presidential-election>
 the October accusation of election tampering to “hysteria”. “They started this 
hysteria, saying that [hacking] is in Russia’s interests,” Putin told a 
business forum in Moscow. “But this has nothing to do with Russia’s interests.”

“Everyone is talking about who did it. But is it that important? The most 
important thing is what is inside this information.”

The Russian foreign minister, Sergey Lavrov, told CNN’s Christiane Amanpour 
the allegations were “flattering” – “But it has nothing to be explained by the 
facts; we have not seen a single proof.”


After the election, Putin called for a new era of “fully fledged relations” 
between Russia and the United States. “We understand that it will not be an 
easy path given the current state of degradation in the relations,” Putin said 
at the Kremlin. “And as I have repeatedly said, it’s not our fault that 
Russian-American relations are in such a poor state. But Russia wants and is 
ready to restore fully fledged relations with the United States.”
 