
Last week, Donald Trump’s space policy advisor Bob Walker made headlines by 
suggesting thatthe incoming administration might slash Nasa’s climate and earth 
science research 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
 to focus the agency on deep space exploration. This causedgreat concern in the 
scientific community 
<https://theconversation.com/please-donald-trump-dont-send-climate-science-back-to-the-pre-satellite-era-69358>
, because Nasa does some of the best climate research in the world, and its
Earth science program <https://www.nasa.gov/topics/earth/index.html> does much 
more 
<http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/11/23/13730540/trump-nasa-climate-change-earth>
. Walker suggested the earth science research could be shifted to other 
agencies, but climate scientistMichael Mann explained what would result 
<http://www.kcrw.com/news-culture/shows/press-play-with-madeleine-brand/is-an-election-recount-a-good-idea#seg-what-happens-if-nasa-stops-climate-science-research>
:

 It’s difficult enough for us to build and maintain the platforms that are 
necessary for measuring how the oceans are changing, how the atmosphere is 
changing, with the infrastructure that we have when we total up the 
contributions from all of the agencies ... we [could] lose forever the 
possibility of the continuous records that we need so that we can monitor this 
planet.


Walker’s comments set off alarm bells for another reason. Were it simply a 
matter of transferring Nasa’s climate and earth science programs to other 
agencies, what would be the point? Such a transfer would be logistically 
difficult, and if the research funding weren’t cut, it wouldn’t save any 
taxpayer money. And it’s not as though the branches doing Nasa’s climate 
research are distracting other branches of the agency fromconducting deep space 
exploration <https://www.nasa.gov/about/whats_next.html>.

The suggestion does however look a lot like a Trojan horse whose true purpose 
is to cut government-funded climate research, perhaps transferring some of 
Nasa’s programs and budget to other agencies and simply scrapping the rest.

Bob Walker’s politicized science

In an interview with The Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
, Walker accused Nasa of “politically correct environmental monitoring” and 
“politicized science.” Carol Off from CBC’s program As It Happens conducteda 
follow-up interview with Walker 
<http://www.cbc.ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-wednesday-edition-1.3864045/trump-advisor-wants-to-cut-nasa-climate-change-research-calls-it-politicized-science-1.3864051>
 and asked for examples to support his accusations. Walker cited the example of 
Nasa’s announcement that2014 was the hottest year on record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jan/16/global-warming-made-2014-record-hot-year>
, claiming:


The fact that they have reported temperature that they said was the highest 
temperatures...in history...it turned out that they were only 39% sure of that 
figure. Well that’s a press release, not a scientific kind of statement. I’m 
interested in scientific integrity. I’m interested not in scientific analysis 
that goes to a politically correct outcome.

The reason Walker knew that Nasa estimates gave 2014 a 38% (not 39%) chance of 
being the hottest year on record (Noaa put its odds at 48%) is thatNasa and 
Noaa included this information in their announcement 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2015/01/23/sorry-skeptics-nasa-and-noaa-were-right-about-the-2014-temperature-record/?utm_term=.c68ffdf1f65d>
. There is uncertainty in every scientific measurement. That’s why scientific 
theories and conclusions aren’t proven; they’re only supported or disproved by 
the available evidence.

Nasa and Noaa concluded that 2014 was about twice as likely to be the hottest 
year on record than the second-most likely year (2010). Thus they decided that 
they could announce that 2014 was likely the hottest year on record, but they 
also included the uncertainty in that conclusion, as good scientists do. For 
that, Walker wrongly accused them of “politicizing science.” Coincidentally,
2015 broke the 2014 record 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jan/25/record-hot-2015-gave-us-a-glimpse-at-the-future-of-global-warming>
, and2016 is about to shatter the record for hottest year 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/oct/21/global-warming-continues-2016-will-be-the-hottest-year-ever-recorded>
 once again.

Bob Walker’s characteristics of climate denial

In the CBC interview, Walker also claimed: “the models that the scientists 
have used on global warming have been extremely flawed.” In reality,as 
documented in my book 
<https://www.amazon.com/Climatology-Versus-Pseudoscience-Exposing-Predictions-ebook/dp/B00TIXVLZS/ref=mt_kindle?_encoding=UTF8&me=>
,climate models have been incredibly accurate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/jul/31/climate-models-are-even-more-accurate-than-you-thought>
 at predicting global warming. But Walker’s most glaring red flags were raised 
when he was asked aboutthe 97% expert consensus on human-caused global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/apr/13/its-settled-90100-of-climate-experts-agree-on-human-caused-global-warming>
, to which he replied:

I don’t think it’s the vast majority of climatologists who believe that 
[global warming is happening and man-made] ... among climatologists there is 
still a debate about the causes of the global warming. And so I think that 
debate is healthy, and I am entirely concerned about the fact that some of the 
climatologists that do not buy into the orthodoxy are being prevented from even 
having their works published.


Walker followed up to the interview with three sources 
<http://www.cbc.ca/radio/asithappens/as-it-happens-wednesday-edition-1.3864045/trump-advisor-wants-to-cut-nasa-climate-change-research-calls-it-politicized-science-1.3864051>
 he claimed supported his rejection of the 97% expert climate consensus. In 
this answer, Walker checked off three ofthe five characteristics of science 
denial 
<http://www.cnn.com/2015/07/22/opinions/cook-techniques-climate-change-denial/index.html>
.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftrump-and-the-gop-may-be-trying-to-kneecap-climate-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8a312de8222a287947bc90ac69ff6fca17523a%2F0_0_800_418%2F800.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20and%20the%20GOP%20may%20be%20trying%20to%20kneecap%20climate%20research%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftrump-and-the-gop-may-be-trying-to-kneecap-climate-research%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20and%20the%20GOP%20may%20be%20trying%20to%20kneecap%20climate%20research%20%7C%20Dana%20Nuccitelli&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fenvironment%2Fclimate-consensus-97-per-cent%2F2016%2Fnov%2F30%2Ftrump-and-the-gop-may-be-trying-to-kneecap-climate-research%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fac8a312de8222a287947bc90ac69ff6fca17523a%2F0_0_800_418%2F800.jpg>
 Summary of the fallacies commonly found in climate myths and misinformation, 
and the techniques used to distort climate science. Illustration: John Cook, 
SkepticalScience.com. 
First, he engaged in conspiratorial thinking by accusing the climate science 
community of blocking contrarian research. In reality, the 3% of climate 
scientists who dispute the expert consensus on human-caused global warming are 
able to publish their work in scientific journals. It’s just that thecontrarian 
research tends to be flawed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/apr/11/climate-change-research-quality-imbalance>
 andfalls apart under scientific scrutiny 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2015/aug/25/heres-what-happens-when-you-try-to-replicate-climate-contrarian-papers>
, so it doesn’t get much attention outside ofcertain biased media outlets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2013/oct/23/climate-change-climate-change-scepticism>
.

Second, in denying the 97% expert consensus, Walker instead appealed to fake 
experts. He cited three sources to dispute the consensus, one of which was the 
National Association of Scholars; but digging deeper, the source was actuallya 
2011 interview 
<https://www.nas.org/articles/Estimated_40_Percent_of_Scientists_Doubt_Manmade_Global_Warming>
 the association did with Fred Singer. Singer is atobacco and fossil fuel 
industry-funded <https://www.desmogblog.com/s-fred-singer> scientist, who 
claimed in the interview:

the number of skeptical qualified scientists has been growing steadily; I 
would guess it is about 40% now.

In short, one of the sources Walker cited to dispute the 97% expert consensus 
on human-caused global warming is the unsubstantiated guess of a fossil 
fuel-funded fake expert. Walker also referenced the Open Source Systems, 
Science, and Solutions Foundation (OSS),which says 
<http://ossfoundation.us/projects/environment/global-warming/myths/31000-scientists-say-no-convincing-evidence>
:

97% of working climate scientists say the temperature is rising, and human 
activity is a significant contributing factor.

On the same page OSS does mention that 31,000 scientists signed the Oregon 
Petition disputing the consensus, but onlyto debunk this particular myth 
<https://www.skepticalscience.com/OISM-Petition-Project.htm>. Strike two for 
Walker.


His third source was “The Center for Climate Research,” which most likely 
refers to a paper published byDavid Legates 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/david-legates>, who used to head the University of 
Delaware’s so-named center. While Legates’ paper was published in a scientific 
journal,it badly misrepresented the expert consensus 
<http://blog.hotwhopper.com/2016/04/the-illogic-of-deniers-david-legates-on.html>
 on climate change by focusing on the papers that didn’t explicitly quantify 
how much global warming humans are responsible for. By that logic, there’s no 
expert consensus on evolution, or the Earth not being flat, or on any 
scientific question, because in every scientific field most papers don’t focus 
on answering the most basic, settled questions.

Trump is getting bad advice

The problem is that Walker is getting his climate information from inaccurate, 
biased sources, and he’s an advisor to the president-elect. It’s possible that 
the incoming administration won’t follow his dangerous, biased advice. The 
issue will predominantly be in the hands of Congress in any case, but
Republicans in Congress have been trying to slash Nasa’s earth science budget 
for years 
<http://www.vox.com/science-and-health/2016/11/23/13730540/trump-nasa-climate-change-earth>
. Now they have an ally in the White House.

Additionally, Trump has surrounded himself with advisors and cabinet members 
who likely don’t view climate research favorably.The head of his EPA transition 
team 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/16112016/myron-ebell-climate-denier-epa-donald-trump>
 denies climate science and opposes efforts to cut carbon pollution. For EPA 
head,he’s considering 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/us-usa-trump-meetings-idUSKBN13K1U7> Scott 
Pruitt and Kathleen Hartnett White. Pruitt is among the attorneys general 
attacking the Clean Power Plan in court, andhis arguments have been delivered 
directly by the oil industry 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2014/12/07/us/politics/energy-firms-in-secretive-alliance-with-attorneys-general.html?_r=0>
. Hartnett White hasworked for several fossil fuel-funded think tanks 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/kathleen-hartnett-white> and has compared expert 
scientific conclusions to religious dogma. Trump will likely select an Interior 
Secretaryin favor of opening public lands to oil drilling 
<https://www.adn.com/nation-world/2016/11/21/trumps-interior-department-shortlist-vexes-employees-and-green-groups/>
.


While Trump himself has claimed to have an open mind about climate change, 
he’s also displayeda lack of basic knowledge about the subject 
<http://nymag.com/daily/intelligencer/2016/11/trumps-climate-change-answer-dumber-than-you-could-imagine.html>
, to put it mildly. Trump will be forced to rely on his advisors, but he’s 
surrounded himself withBig Oil cronies 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/planet-oz/2016/jul/12/us-senators-detail-a-climate-science-web-of-denial-but-the-impacts-go-well-beyond-their-borders>
, and his chief of staff has said thatTrump’s default position on climate 
science is that “most of it is a bunch of bunk.” 
<https://thinkprogress.org/trump-climate-change-bunk-28c5c44cee#.dyvpwscud> 

It’s very possible that Congress will send Trump a budget that slashes Nasa 
climate research, and it’s also possible that his oil-allied team will advise 
him to sign it. Doing so would be a terrible mistake that would cripple the 
scientific community’s ability to monitor how rapidly we’re changing the 
Earth’s climate.

We can’t simply bury our heads in the sand and hope the problem goes away. If 
our political leaders try to kneecap our climate monitoring, citizens must make 
them aware that this is an unacceptably irresponsible action that will not be 
tolerated.
 