
Donald Trump’s nominee for secretary of interior, Ryan Zinke, distanced 
himself from the president-elect on Tuesday, saying “the climate is changing. 
The debate is what is that influence and what can we do”.


Zinke, a two-term congressman for Montana, had been asked by Bernie Sanders 
about Trump’sinfamous 2012 tweet 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en> where 
the real estate developer described climate change as “created by and for the 
Chinese in order to make US manufacturing non-competitive”.

Related: Trump's transition: sceptics guide every agency dealing with climate 
change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>

Zinke, a former navy Seal, responded by stating matter of factly, “I don’t 
believe it’s a hoax.”

The statement came in a hearing on his nomination held by the Senate energy 
and natural resources committee on Tuesday.

However, the Trump cabinet nominee insisted he wasn’t “a climate science 
expert” and stated his belief in “being prudent” towards what he characterized 
as “a lot of debate on both sides of the aisle”.

Zinke also differed from many in his own party by insisting: “I’m absolutely 
against transfer or sale of public lands.” ManyRepublicans 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/republicans> have long pushed for the 
federal government to transfer ownership of public lands to the states, and 
this was included as a plank in the party’s platform. However, the Montana 
Republican still made clear his support for fossil fuel drilling on federal 
lands, saying “We have to have an economy.”

Zinke is expected to sail through the Senate with bipartisan support. He was 
introduced by both of his state’s senators, Democrat Jon Tester and Republican 
Steve Daines, before the hearing on Tuesday. Zinke had long been considered the 
strongest general election opponent to Tester in 2018 but his appointment 
likely prevents him from seeking a Senate bid and boosts Democratic chances of 
holding onto Tester’s seat in the midterms.
 