
Facts have never got in the way of Donald Trump’s particularly pernicious form 
of populism andtoday’s interview in the Times 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/15/trumps-first-uk-post-election-interview-brexit-a-great-thing>
 is no exception.

When it comes to all matters migration, Trump’s grasp of independently sourced 
data is particularly shaky. Not that that bothers him one jot. He knows that 
those voters who lap up his inflammatory rhetoric care little for objective 
truth.

In the interview with Michael Gove, Trump makes sweeping statements about both 
the UK and Germany and their policies towards refugees. On Germany and Angela 
Merkel he says: “I think she made one very catastrophic mistake and that was 
taking all of these illegals, you know taking all of the people from wherever 
they come from. And nobody even knows where they come from.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=UK%20is%20'smart'%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=UK%20is%20%27smart%27%20to%20leave%20EU%2C%20Trump%20tells%20Gove%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fuk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video&media=>
UK is ‘smart’ to leave EU, Trump tells Gove 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/16/uk-leave-eu-brexit-donald-trump-michael-gove-times-video>
He clearly hasn’t bothered to read the 1951 Refugee convention, which is 
enshrined in international law. This piece of legislation, pivotal to the way 
the second half of the 20th century and the first part of the 21st century has 
responded to desperate human beings caught up in conflicts around the globe, 
states clearly that it is not illegal to flee persecution and seek sanctuary. 
It is a basic and precious human right. Trump’s factually inaccurate 
description of refugees as “illegals” is likely to be wishful thinking on his 
part. There is no end to the list of groups he has publicly fantasised about 
banning – from Mexicans to Muslims, Syrians to Sudanese.

He is right about one thing – Germany has welcomed large numbers of refugees. 
But he is absolutely wrong to declare that the UK has done the same thing. In 
another sweeping, fact-starved statement Trump says: “Countries want their own 
identity and the UK wanted its own identity, but I do think if they hadn’t been 
forced to take in all of the refugees than you wouldn’t have a Brexit.”

Germany hits back at Trump criticism of refugee policy and BMW tariff threat
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/16/germany-hits-back-at-trump-criticism-of-refugee-policy-and-bmw-tariff-threat>
So, Mr President-elect, here are some “inconvenient” facts from the Office of 
National Statistics 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-october-to-december-2015/asylum#key-facts>
. In 2015total migration to the UK was 631,000 
<http://researchbriefings.parliament.uk/ResearchBriefing/Summary/SN06077>. 
Asylum applications were 32,733 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/immigration-statistics-april-to-june-2016/asylum>
 – just 5.3% of the overall numbers entering the UK.

In 2015 the UK received just 3% of the asylum applications made across Europe 
<http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/documents/2995521/7203832/3-04032016-AP-EN.pdf/>. 
During the worst refugee crisis since the second world war, the UK has “got 
away with” taking in abreathtakingly low number of people 
<http://www.migrationobservatory.ox.ac.uk/resources/briefings/immigration-by-category-workers-students-family-members-asylum-applicants/>
 who are running for their lives.

The largest number of people migrating to the UK come here to work, and apply 
for work visas in order to do so. The next largest group is students. They too 
apply for a visa in order to gain entry to the UK. The third group are people 
joining family members who have proved to the Home Office that they can support 
their incoming relatives. And the final tiny group at the bottom of the 
immigration pile are the asylum seekers who have suffered the most, but get the 
worst deal. They’re banned from working in all but exceptional cases, are not 
eligible for council accommodation and several thousand of them are forcibly 
removed from the UK every year because the Home Office has deemed their cases 
to be without merit.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-immigration-fake-news-us-president-elect-asylum-seekers-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc935237d57e0da51be63bde9a73ad379bec3ffef%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20let%20facts%20get%20in%20the%20way%20of%20immigration%20scare%20stories.%20He%E2%80%99s%20not%20alone%20%7C%20Diane%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-immigration-fake-news-us-president-elect-asylum-seekers-europe%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20doesn%E2%80%99t%20let%20facts%20get%20in%20the%20way%20of%20immigration%20scare%20stories.%20He%E2%80%99s%20not%20alone%20%7C%20Diane%20Taylor&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F16%2Fdonald-trump-immigration-fake-news-us-president-elect-asylum-seekers-europe%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fc935237d57e0da51be63bde9a73ad379bec3ffef%2F0_117_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 ‘Nigel Farage’s ‘breaking point’ poster in the run-up to the referendum vote 
is a classic example of this insidiously misleading technique.’ Photograph: 
Stefan Wermuth/Reuters 
The UK government is not content to contextualise the low numbers of asylum 
seekers coming here and wants to drive the numbers down even further to pick up 
more of those populist votes. The UK is signatory to a variety of deals that 
enhance Fortress UK and prevent those running for their lives from getting here 
in the first place, or ensuring that those who do reach these shores can be 
booted out more easily. Battening down the humanitarian hatches against asylum 
seekers includes theEU deal with Turkey 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/mar/08/eu-turkey-refugee-deal-qa> to 
prevent Syrians reaching Europe, a deal with Afghanistan to increase theremoval 
of failed Afghani asylum seekers 
<https://www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2015/aug/26/afghan-asylum-seekers-saved-deportation-legal-battle>
 back home andthe Khartoum Process 
<http://www.iom.int/eu-horn-africa-migration-route-initiative-khartoum-process> 
to deter people from Horn of Africa countries from seeking sanctuary in the UK.

Trump isn’t the only politician to conflate asylum and immigration. The 
“breaking point” poster 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jun/16/nigel-farage-defends-ukip-breaking-point-poster-queue-of-migrants>
in the run-up to the referendum vote is a classic example of this insidiously 
misleading technique. Asylum seekers and refugees are not only at the bottom of 
the statistical pile but also endure the worst treatment here.

Where are the stories of American bankers working in the city having eggs 
thrown at them because they’re not British? The racists pick on the soft 
targets – those whose skin is a healthier shade of brown than Trump’s fake 
orange complexion, those who speak imperfect English or dress differently.

Hitler’s comment that “the great masses of people will more easily fall victim 
to a big lie than a small one” appears to be a view Trump has taken to heart. 
He was quick to lambast“fake news” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/trump-attacks-cnn-buzzfeed-at-press-conference>
 on Twitter about the intelligence dossier containing compromising claims about 
his personal life while blithely disseminating damaging untruths about refugees 
in order to whip up hatred against them. It is no wonder that not only Trump’s 
detractors in the United States but also millions of the most vulnerable people 
around the world are quaking with fear about what lies ahead once he steps into 
the White House.
 