
The solar industry is wary. US president-elect Donald Trump has picked climate 
sceptics and oil industry executives forkey positions 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/12/donald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics>
 in his administration, promising toscrap 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2016/11/11/trump-has-vowed-to-kill-the-clean-power-plan-heres-how-he-might-and-might-not-succeed/>
 President Obama’s clean power plan andwithdraw 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
 from the Paris climate agreement.


Underlying these concerns is a gnawing fear that the rapid expansion of solar 
energy generation overseen by Obama could soon be undermined.

The US installed a record 4.1GW of solar power in 2016’s third quarter, 191% 
up on thesame period last year 
<https://electrek.co/2016/12/14/usa-installs-record-amount-of-solar-power-191-growth-ignoring-trumps-chinese-hoax/>
, in a boomfuelled <http://fortune.com/2016/02/24/solar-tax-credit-influence/> 
by investment tax credits (ITCs) that offer solar and wind firms a 30% tax 
rebate.

Industry leaders fear the tax credits may not survive a Trump administration 
which has vowed tocut $100bn <https://www.bna.com/trump-says-plan-n57982082131/>
 (£80bn) of climate spending, and will need to find more savings to fund$6.2tn 
<http://www.washingtonexaminer.com/new-studies-trump-promising-6.2-trillion-tax-cut-clinton-1.4-trillion-hike/article/2604239>
 (£5tn) of tax cuts.

“The tax credit will cost around $50bn in the period to 2022 and might be an 
easy choice for Trump,” said James Watson, the CEO of SolarPower Europe. “He’s 
got a very sceptical climate team around him who would not be too worried about 
cutting back the ITCs.”

Solar employs more than oil and gas extraction

Any moves in this direction could increase US emissions and have a toxic 
effect internationally, just as the budding solar industry is nearing cost 
parity with fossil fuels such as coal and gas.

Renewable energy companies have already been battered by Trump’s victory, with 
shares in one US solar giant, SunPower Corp,plummeting 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-09/sunrun-among-solar-energy-providers-plunging-on-trump-concerns>
 14% the day after the election.

However, Trump has not yet commented on the future of the ITCs and some 
analysts say he may be loathe to go up against Republicans in Congress who 
recently voted toextend the scheme 
<http://fortune.com/2015/12/17/solar-wind-tax-credit/> until 2022.

Taylor Dimsdale, the head of the E3G thinktank in Washington, said that while 
signals from the Trump team had so far been mixed “to put it mildly”, its 
planned fossil fuel renaissance could be met without axing renewable subsidies.

“There’s pretty strong bipartisan support for renewable energy,” he said. “A 
republican-controlled Congress just extended solar tax credits after a not 
particularly gruelling battle, because the solar industry is important in many 
states that are controlled by Republican legislatures and governors.”

More Americans are now employed in the solar industry than on oil rigs or gas 
fields 
<http://www.rechargenews.com/solar/868020/us-solar-industry-bigger-employer-than-oil-and-gas-extraction>
 so cutbacks would face resistance.

Even so, Dimsdale warned that if Trump makes good on a promise to cut 
corporation tax <https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/tax-plan> to 15%, “the 
ITC could be one of the first things to go”.

Trump won’t derail solar growth

Not all solar companies are so pessimistic. Milan Nitzschke, the vice 
president of SolarWorld, the largest solar panel manufacturer in the EU and US, 
said:


What will happen if world's biggest companies don't take water seriously?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/apr/13/worlds-biggest-companies-water-drought-shortages>
“I have no concerns that the US market will not grow in the next years, as it 
did before. Mr Trump is a businessman and will already know that solar is one 
of cheapest sources of electricity. In the end, we should not forget that the 
sun is a great American energy source.”

Few analysts foresee a contraction of the US solar industry even under a Trump 
presidency, but many expect growth to slow. Watson said that without the clean 
energy plan, “at best we will be looking at maintaining installation levels of 
around 8-10GW a year”.

Trump’s outspoken stand 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-11-15/how-trump-s-china-trade-war-could-play-out-quicktake-q-a>
 against Chinese trade practices could even benefit the US and European 
markets, by restricting cheap solar panel imports, according to Nitzschke.

SolarWorld has been an outlier in the solar industry, pushing strongly for 
anti-dumping measures 
<https://www.greentechmedia.com/articles/read/SolarWorld-Wins-Again-Big-Anti-Dumping-Tariffs-in-US-China-Solar-Panel-Tra>
 against China. While Nitzschke is also president of theEU ProSun 
<http://www.prosun.org/> anti-dumping lobby group. 

He said: “If the US and its president-elect take concrete actions against 
China’s breaking of WTO trade rules and destruction of manufacturing jobs, it 
can grow its solar market and domestic solar industry.”

Most European solar firms view the current tariffs on Chinese solar panels as 
an unnecessary tax on the industry that constrains expansion, and postpones the 
day that subsidies can be dispensed with altogether.

SolarPower Europe, however, expects the Obama administration’s tariffs on 
Chinese solar panels to be continued without change. “Trump is talking about a 
50% tax on all Chinese goods entering the US but solar duties are already much 
higher than that,” Watson said.

Sign up to be a Guardian Sustainable Business 
<https://register.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/> member and get more 
stories like this direct to your inbox every week. You can alsof 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>ollow us on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/GuardianSustBiz>.
 