
Despite the hyperbole and drama that surrounded the US presidential race, it 
is my opinion that President-elect Donald Trump’s foreign policy is one of 
much-needed hope and optimism (Trump: ‘We will stop racing to topple foreign 
regimes’ 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-we-will-stop-racing-to-topple-foreign-regimes>
, theguardian.com, 7 December). The notion of the US acting as the world’s 
police has got out of hand. With troops stationed in countries across the 
world, and military spending totalling more than the next 16 countries’ 
combined, the overreach of the US military is staggering, and yielding terrible 
results. It doesn’t take much research beyond the mainstream media to realise 
the intervention in Libya was a disaster, bringing massive destabilisation to 
the region and creating a power vacuum for terrorist groups like Isis. The Iraq 
war was predicated on bad intelligence and the false claim that there were 
weapons of mass destruction under Saddam Hussein. The sheer recklessness of 
such interventionist policies has resulted in massive loss of life and 
destabilisation.

In 2008, Americans were sold by anti-war promises of Barack Obama. Instead, 
they merely saw the continuation of establishment interventionist policies of 
past administrations. Grassroots support for a non-interventionist policy and 
the end to irresponsible and misguided regime change in other countries was 
evident in the Tea Party movement and Congressman Ron Paul’s presidential runs. 
Finally, inDonald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump>, 
these voices have been recognised and voted into the White House.

Detractors will be quick to call Mr Trump’s policies reckless and primitive. 
But non-interventionism is not isolationism and, despite the mainstream media 
pushing a narrative that suggests otherwise, Mr Trump’s positions on foreign 
policy have been clear and consistent far before his foray into politics. With 
an ever increasing national debt of almost $20tn, and a status quo foreign 
policy that has time and again failed, it is time for Americans to be open to 
real change from outside of the establishment.
Clive Ng
Hong Kong

• Would it not have been discourteous if President-elect Trump had failed to 
respond to a congratulatory call from the elected president of Taiwan (Report 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/05/a-storm-is-gathering-on-the-horizon-chinese-scholars-fret-about-trump>
, 6 December)? Those who disagree should bear in mind that Taiwan’s president 
came to power after a democratic election and, unlike mainland China, is not 
occupying another country (Tibet), is not building up an aggressive military 
force in the South China Sea, allows press freedom and religious freedom, and 
generally respects human rights.
John Wainwright
Potters Bar, Hertfordshire

• US trade unions were promised hundreds of thousands of jobs to gain their 
support for Nafta. But, according tothe Economic Policy Institute’s study of 
Nafta’s first 12 years <http://www.epi.org/publication/bp173/>, it caused the 
net loss of over 1m US jobs and a significant decline in the value of wages for 
millions more workers. So by “striking down” Nafta, but clearly dependent on 
creating replacement jobs (No country with a McDonald’s can remain a democracy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/dec/06/mcdonalds-democracy-corporate-globalisation-trump-le-pen-farage>
, George Monbiot, 7 December), Trump could repay one risk his voters took.
David Murray
Wallington, Surrey 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 