
President-elect Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
 returned to Twitter on Sunday morning, to attack a familiar target: the New 
York Times.


My journeys in Trumpland
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/donald-trump-president-rust-belt-white-house>
Trump, who has spent the weekend at Trump Tower in New York forming his 
transition plans and considering possible administration appointments,tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797805407179866112>: “Wow, the [New 
York Times] is losing thousands of subscribers because of their very poor and 
highly inaccurate coverage of the ‘Trump phenomena’.”

He continued <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797812048805695488>: 
Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) 
The @nytimes <https://twitter.com/nytimes> sent a letter to their subscribers 
apologizing for their BAD coverage of me. I wonder if it will change - doubt it?
 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797812048805695488> November 13, 
2016 <https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797812048805695488> 
The letter to which Trump referred was sent by Times publisher Arthur 
Sulzberger Jr and executive editor Dean Baquet to subscribers after Tuesday’s 
election.They wrote 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/11/13/us/elections/to-our-readers-from-the-publisher-and-executive-editor.html?_r=0>
: “Did Donald Trump’s sheer unconventionality lead us and other news outlets to 
underestimate his support among American voters?”

Later on Sunday, Trump also said on Twitter 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/797832229800050688>: “The [Times] 
states today that DJT believes ‘more countries should acquire nuclear weapons’. 
How dishonest are they. I never said this!”

In a discussion with the Times 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/03/27/us/politics/donald-trump-transcript.html?_r=1>
 on foreign policy and ata CNN town hall event 
<http://cnnpressroom.blogs.cnn.com/2016/03/29/full-rush-transcript-donald-trump-cnn-milwaukee-republican-presidential-town-hall/>
, Trump said that some countries, such as Japan, South Korea and Saudi Arabia, 
might be better off if they did acquire nuclear weapons.

Trump’s tweets were a reversion by the president-elect to the freewheeling use 
of social media which marked much of his campaign before lessening in the final 
weeks, at the instigation of campaign staff. It also signaled a willingness to 
continue to use the press as a whipping boy.

The president-elect has long gone after the press and, in particular, the 
Times. In October, campaign manager Kellyanne Conwaytold the Guardian 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/12/donald-trump-women-new-sexual-harassment-stories>
 Trump would file a lawsuit against the newspaper after it published stories 
about women who alleged that he sexually assaulted them. That suit has yet to 
be filed.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Why%20America%20elected%20Trump%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fhow-donald-trump-became-president-video&media=>
Why America elected Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/nov/11/how-donald-trump-became-president-video>
In September, the Republican nominee tweeted 
<https://twitter.com/realDonaldTrump/status/777280259875975169>: “My lawyers 
want to sue the failing [Times] so badly for irresponsible intent. I said no 
(for now), but they are watching. Really disgusting.”

Donald Trump threatens to sue New York Times over 'irresponsible intent'
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/donald-trump-threatens-to-sue-new-york-times-over-irresponsible-intent>
“Irresponsible intent” does not exist under any standard or doctrine 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/18/donald-trump-threatens-to-sue-new-york-times-over-irresponsible-intent?CMP=share_btn_tw>
 found under US law.

Trump’s adversarial relationship with the press has gone beyond Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter>. As a presidential candidate, 
he long kept a blacklist of outlets like the Washington Post which were 
prohibited from being credentialed for events.

He also made attacks on the media a standard part of his stump speech and 
urged crowds at his events to boo and heckle reporters.

In February, Trump pledged 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/feb/26/trump-pledges-curb-press-freedom-libel-laws-first-amendment>
 to “open up the libel laws” so that “when [newspapers] write purposely 
negative stories … we can sue them and make lots of money”.

The Times reported extensively on Trump’s background, in October revealing 
that hemay not have paid federal income tax for 18 years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-federal-income-tax-new-york-times>
; investigating multiple allegations ofinappropriate sexual behaviour and 
assault <http://www.nytimes.com/2016/05/15/us/politics/donald-trump-women.html>
; and compiling an exhaustive list of “the 282 people, places and things 
<http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2016/01/28/upshot/donald-trump-twitter-insults.html>
” he had insulted on Twitter during his campaign.
 