
A pumped-up Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> 
strutted in front of a crowd of diehard supporters in Pennsylvania on Monday 
night, throwing aside a spiraling disaster of the groping tape, Republican 
defections and his plummeting poll ratings.


The Republican presidential nominee made no reference at a rally in the old 
coalmining town of Wilkes-Barre to the catastrophic 72 hours his campaign had 
endured since an11-year old recording 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/donald-trump-forced-into-apology-as-sex-boast-tape-horrifies-republicans>
 was released in which he bragged about using his celebrity status to sexually 
assault women.

Nor did he refer to the many members of his party who abandoned him 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2016/10/10/us/politics/republicans-trump.html> publicly 
over the weekend in protest at his offensive comments, or to thedramatic 
headway made by his Democratic rival in the polls 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/clinton-trump-second-debate-leaked-tape-apology-excuse>
.

Is grabbing women's genitals sexual assault? Trump backers suggest it's not
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/sexual-assault-definition-trump-comments>
Instead, he fired up his loyal army of followers by repeating the threat he 
made directly to Hillary Clinton’s face at the second presidential debate on 
Sunday night that once ensconced in the White House he would appoint a special 
prosecutor to investigate her alleged crimes.

When the baying crowd at Mohegan Sun Arena shouted “Lock her up!”, Trump shot 
back at them: “Lock her up is right!”

But in his effervescent post-debate mood he merely succeeded in generating 
further controversy. He praised the group that acted as conduit for one of the
biggest leaks of US government secrets 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2010/nov/29/wikileaks-embassy-cables-key-points>
 in history: “WikiLeaks, I love WikiLeaks,” he said.

And he also managed to adopt an erroneous report by a Russian 
government-sponsored news agency relating to a recentWikiLeaks stash of 
documents 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/07/wikileaks-hillary-clinton-paid-wall-street-speeches>
 hacked from the emails of Clinton’s campaign chairman, John Podesta.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fhighlights-second-presidential-debate-trump-clinton-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Highlights%20from%20the%20second%20presidential%20debate%3A%20Trump%20fights%20dirty%20against%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fhighlights-second-presidential-debate-trump-clinton-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Highlights%20from%20the%20second%20presidential%20debate%3A%20Trump%20fights%20dirty%20against%20Clinton%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fhighlights-second-presidential-debate-trump-clinton-video&media=>
Highlights from the second presidential debate: Trump fights dirty against 
Clinton 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/10/highlights-second-presidential-debate-trump-clinton-video>
Trump, reading from an account of the document dump, told his supporters at 
the Wilkes-Barre rally that Clinton’s longtime adviser Sidney Blumenthal – 
“Sleazy Sidney” as he called him – had sent an email to Podesta in which 
Blumenthal said it was legitimate to question whether Clinton had failed to 
protect American personnel inBenghazi, Libya 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/house-benghazi-report-clinton-attack-military>
, in 2012, when she was US secretary of state.

“In other words, [Blumenthal’s] now admitting they could have done something 
about Benghazi,” Trump said, prompting loud reproaches from the crowd.

Donald Trump and Russia: a web that grows more tangled all the time
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jul/30/donald-trump-paul-manafort-ukraine-russia-putin-ties>
In fact, the claim that Clinton had something to answer for over the death of 
the US ambassador in Benghazi was made by a Newsweek journalist in an article 
that Blumenthal had emailed to Podesta, as the author of the magazine piece 
promptlypointed out 
<http://www.newsweek.com/vladimir-putin-sidney-blumenthal-hillary-clinton-donald-trump-benghazi-sputnik-508635>
. The conflation of the Newsweek quotes and Blumenthal appears to have been 
extracted by Trump from aninaccurate account of the WikiLeaks documents 
<https://twitter.com/wikileaks/status/785686449865707520> reported by the 
Russian online news outlet Sputnik.

The botched attack on Clinton and Blumenthal could backfire for Trump given 
that he has already been accused by his Democratic rival of being overly 
complimentary about the Russian leader Vladimir Putin. Last Friday theObama 
administration claimed 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/10/obama-administration-accuses-russian-government-of-election-year-hacking-229296>
 that the WikiLeaks documents had been hacked from Democrats’ email accounts by 
the Russian government in an attempt to sway the US presidential election.

Though Trump avoided talking about the groping tape in Wilkes-Barre, at an 
earlier rally in Ambridge, Pennsylvania, he did renew his line of defence that 
his 2005 bragging about being able to kiss and grab the genitals of women was 
only “locker room talk”. One of his leading surrogates, the former New York 
mayor Rudy Giuliani, went further by turning the issue into a joke.

During a warm-up speech at the Wilkes-Barre rally, Giuliani made a quip about 
it during an attack on Clinton. He said: “Boy, she is as phony as … I better 
not say, as I have to be nice. I might say it back in the locker room.”

In his Wilkes-Barre speech, Trump pressed all the familiar buttons that have 
by now become a mainstay of his insurrectionary campaign. He promised to build 
a wall along the southern border and have the Mexicans pay for it, to bring 
jobs back to America from overseas, and to cut taxes and government regulation.

The candidate’s braggadocio was clearly tailored to suit the tastes of his 
hardcore supporters, most of whom dismissed concern about the NBC tape as so 
much political correctness. The Republican candidate also appeared to believe 
that his openly hostile stance towards Clinton in the presidential debate – in 
which he threatened her with jail, interrupted her and jabbed his fingers at 
her multiple times, and stood ominously behind her when she was talking – had 
put the calamity of the groping scandal behind him.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20'prowls'%20behind%20Clinton%20during%20presidential%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20%27prowls%27%20behind%20Clinton%20during%20presidential%20debate%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Foct%2F10%2Fdonald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video&media=>
Trump ‘prowls’ behind Clinton during presidential debate 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2016/oct/10/donald-trump-behind-hillary-clinton-debate-video>
So ebullient did he appear on stage on Monday night that he even took a 
toddler from his parents’ arms and carried him on to the stage. The crowd 
erupted in riotous cheering when the billionaire asked the child: “Do you want 
to go back to [your parents] or stay with Donald Trump?” The toddler replied: 
“Trump.”

But no matter how much he succeeded in firing up his base of dedicated 
Trumpistas, the reality TV star could not erase the fact that outside the 
hothouse atmosphere of the Mohegan Sun Arena, his campaign remains in 
considerable trouble. As a signal of the profound unease that his candidacy has 
generated among senior Republicans, the speaker of the House, Paul Ryan, 
effectivelydumped Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/paul-ryan-ends-support-trump-campaign-endorsement-republicans>
, telling congressional colleagues that he would neither defend his party’s 
nominee nor campaign with him.

One of the first opinion polls to have been conducted since the groping 
bombshell gave Clinton an 11-point lead nationally over her rival. TheNBC News 
/ Wall Street Journal 
<http://www.nbcnews.com/politics/first-read/poll-after-trump-tape-revelation-clinton-s-lead-double-digits-n663691>
 survey put Clinton on 46% to Trump’s 35%.

Clinton slams Trump's 'weak excuse for mistreating people' after second debate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/10/clinton-trump-second-debate-leaked-tape-apology-excuse>
There was also evidence that Clinton is solidifying her lead in key swing 
states such as Ohio, which has voted for the winning candidate in every 
presidential race since 1964. Clinton travelled to Ohio on Monday to press home 
that advantage, and later this week President Obama will wade in on her behalf 
in Cleveland and the state capital, Columbus.

It came as John McCain, the 2008 Republican nominee for US president, was 
forced to publicly account forthe decision to abandon Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/john-mccain-donald-trump-sex-boast-tape>
.

“Why now?” the Arizona senator was asked during a debate with his Democratic 
challenger, with the moderator noting the litany of incendiary remarks Trump 
has made against Mexicans, Muslims, prisoners of war, a disabled journalist, a 
Gold Star military family and a Hispanic judge, alongside a decades-long record 
of offensive comments about women.

Earlier in his campaign, Trump also taunted McCain for having been a prisoner 
of war 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jul/18/donald-trump-john-mccain-vietnam-iowa-republicans>
, telling an audience he preferred “people that weren’t captured”.

“If someone wants to say something disparaging of me, I understand that,” 
McCain said during Arizona’s Senate debate. “I spoke out strongly on several 
other issues where I thought Mr Trump was absolutely wrong. I’ve not been shy 
about it.

“When Mr Trump attacks women and demeans the women in our nation and our 
society, that is a point where I just have to part company. It’s not pleasant 
for me to renounce the nominee of my party.”

Over the weekend, McCain released a statement declaring it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/08/john-mccain-donald-trump-sex-boast-tape>
 “impossible to continue to offer even conditional support” to Trump and said 
he and his wife, Cindy McCain, will instead write in the name of “some good 
conservative Republican who is qualified to be president”. On Monday night, 
McCain said this was likely to be the South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, who
dropped out of the presidential race 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/dec/21/lindsey-graham-drops-out-republican-presidential-race>
 in December last year: “He’s an old, good friend of mine and a lot of people 
like him.”
 