
The heads of Donald Trump’s transition teams for Nasa, the Environmental 
Protection Agency, the Department of the Interior and the Department ofEnergy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/energy>, as well as his nominees to 
lead the EPA and the Department of the Interior, all question the science of 
human-caused climate change, in a signal of the president-elect’s determination 
to embark upon an aggressively pro-fossil fuels agenda.

Trump has assembled a transition team in which at least nine senior members 
deny basic scientific understanding that the planet is warming due to the 
burning of carbon and other human activity. These include the transition heads 
of all the key agencies responsible for either monitoring or dealing with 
climate change. None of these transition heads have any background in climate 
science.


Trump has also nominated Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
 to lead the EPA and is expected to pick congresswoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers 
to head the interior department. Pruitt has claimed that scientists “continue 
to disagree” about the causes and extent of global warming while McMorris 
Rodgers has said that former vice-president Al Gore, who has championed climate 
action, “deserves an ‘F’ in science.”

EPA fears 'unprecedented disaster' for environment over Scott Pruitt pick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
The president-elect has vowed to pursue an “America first” energy policy 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/policies/energy> that will open up a new frontier 
in domestic coal, oil and gas extraction while eviscerating the effort to 
combat climate change, which Trump has previously called a “hoax 
<https://twitter.com/realdonaldtrump/status/265895292191248385?lang=en>”.

Trump is personally invested in this agenda. According to his latest financial 
disclosure records, Trump held investments in the fossil fuel companies Shell, 
Halliburton, Total and Chevron. His largest energy investment was in BHP 
Billiton, with the documents showing a stake worth up to $1.015m.

Trump also had interests in Energy Transfer Partners and Phillips 66, which 
are behind the controversial Dakota Access pipeline that Trumpwants to see 
completed 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/02/donald-trump-dakota-access-pipeline-support-investment>
. Jason Miller, a Trump spokesman,has said that Trump sold all of his shares in 
June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/06/donald-trump-sold-shares-stocks-apple-boeing>
 but has produced no evidence to prove this.

Michael Brune, executive director of the Sierra Club, said of Trump’s choices: 
“These are people that had slipped out of the conversation, we haven’t been 
even debating them in years because they were so out of step with where the 
American public and business is going on climate change.

“Now they’ve leapfrogged into the White House. The world has been turned 
upside down and it feels like basic science is up for debate. Will we now have 
to debate whether gravity exists too?”

EPA

Myron Ebell, head of the EPA transition team, is director of energy and 
environment at the libertarian thinktank theCompetitive Enterprise Institute 
<https://cei.org/> and chairman of the Cooler Heads Coalition 
<http://www.globalwarming.org/about/>, a group that opposes “global warming 
alarmism”.

Ebell has said <https://www.desmogblog.com/myron-ebell> that the scientific 
consensus on climate change is “phoney” and that scientists are part of an 
effort to spread falsehoods that will result in millions of people being 
“further impoverished by the higher energy prices resulting from the alarmists’ 
policy agenda”.

He has suggested that “alarmists could also be prosecuted for denying or 
grossly underestimating the deleterious effects of their energy-rationing 
policies on human flourishing”.

 Other members of the EPA transition team have been plucked from rightwing 
thinktanks with fossil fuel funding. Amy Oliver Cooke, of theIndependence 
Institute <https://www.i2i.org/>, has said she is an “energy feminist because 
I’m pro-choice in energy sources”. She has lashed out at “global warming 
alarmism” on Twitter and claimed falsely in 2014 that there had been 16 years 
without any global warming.

 David Kruetzer, of the conservative Heritage Foundation 
<http://www.heritage.org/>, has erroneously claimed there has been “global 
cooling” in recent years while David Schnare, a former EPA lawyer,said last year
 <https://www.desmogblog.com/david-schnare> that “for the last 18 years, the 
global temperature has been level”. Schnare’s statementis incorrect 
<http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/global-temperature/>.

Department of the Interior

 Doug Domenech, head of the interior department transition team, has said 
carbon dioxide is a “trace greenhouse gas” andhas railed against 
<http://www.nationalreview.com/article/434086/climate-alarmists-do-violence-earth-day>
 “climate alarmists”.

 Domenech is a former Virginia secretary of resources and is now part of the 
Texas Public Policy Foundation, which states the “forgotten moral case for 
fossil fuels” as its mission. Trump’s plan to open up more land for drilling 
will “reinvigorate communities across the nation, especially those most 
seriously impacted by the current restrictive energy policies”, Domenechwrote 
in November 
<http://www.realclearenergy.org/articles/2016/11/16/whats_next_for_energy_and_climate_policy_110118.html>
.

 Nasa

Chris Shank, deputy chief of staff to the Republican congressman Lamar Smith, 
is leading Trump’s landing team at Nasa. Last year, Shanksaid 
<http://cspo.org/event/diversifying-the-climate-dialogue/>: “The rhetoric 
that’s coming out, the hottest year in history, actually is not backed up by 
the science – or that the droughts, the fires, the hurricanes, etc, are caused 
by climate change, but it’s just weather.”

 Nasa has an internationally venerated climate research operation that may be 
winnowed away under a Trump administration. Bob Walker, a Trump adviser and 
climate sceptic,has suggested 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/nasa-earth-donald-trump-eliminate-climate-change-research>
 completely removing Nasa’s $1.9bn Earth sciences budget and focusing instead 
on deep space exploration.

 Department of Energy

 Thomas Pyle, who is leading the Department of Energy transition team, is 
president of the American Energy Alliance, a group that advocates for fossil 
fuel development. Pyle, a former lobbyist for Koch Industries, has opposed the 
deployment of electric vehicles andsaid 
<https://web.archive.org/web/20150828221232/http://instituteforenergyresearch.org/climate-change/climate-change-overview/1/>
 that human influence on the climate has “yet to be determined”.

 Trump’s shortlist for cabinet positions also contains climate change deniers 
and pro-drilling advocates.

Rick Perry, the former Texas governor and climate sceptic, is being considered 
for secretary of energy,reports say 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rick-perry-donald-trump-energy-department>
. He would lead a department he was unable to name in a 2011 presidential 
debate when listing government bodies he would scrap.

Kevin Cramer, a congressman and potential energy secretary, said 
<http://www.slate.com/blogs/bad_astronomy/2016/05/20/trump_picks_climate_change_denier_as_energy_advisor.html>
 in 2012 that “we know the global climate is cooling. Number one, we know that. 
So the idea that CO2 is somehow causing global warming is on its face 
fraudulent.”

Other positions
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5037ebb6b9ff8a897d2162b3010bbe8adb7d0a17%2F0_213_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20transition%3A%20sceptics%20guide%20every%20agency%20dealing%20with%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20transition%3A%20sceptics%20guide%20every%20agency%20dealing%20with%20climate%20change&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-environment-climate-change-skeptics%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F5037ebb6b9ff8a897d2162b3010bbe8adb7d0a17%2F0_213_3200_1920%2F3200.jpg>
 Exxon Mobil CEO Rex Tillerson is reportedly a top contender for secretary of 
state. Photograph: Jessica Rinaldi/Reuters 
 Rex Tillerson, chief executive of Exxon Mobil, is reportedly a top contender 
for secretary of state 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/11/rex-tillerson-secretary-of-state-trump-russia-putin>
, a year after it emerged that Exxon spent years covering up and denying 
climate sciencedespite being well aware of the science of global warming 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2015/jul/08/exxon-climate-change-1981-climate-denier-funding>
.

Steve Bannon, who will be one of Trump’s closest advisers in the White House, 
hasgiven a platform, via his rightwing website Breitbart, 
<https://insideclimatenews.org/news/16112016/steve-bannon-trump-white-house-climate-conspiracy?utm_source=Inside+Climate+News&utm_campaign=24c2534e45-Weekly_Newsletter_week_of_9_189_23_2016&utm_medium=email&utm_term=0_29c928ffb5-24c2534e45-327786905>
 to climate change conspiracy theorists such as the British writer James 
Delingpole, who has called climate activists “scum” guilty of trying to 
“advance the cause of global governance”.

 Bannon also has a little-known link to environmental work via his involvement 
in Biosphere 2, a $200m research facility in the mountains outside Tucson, 
Arizona. As chief executive of the project in the early 1990s, Bannon oversaw 
experiments that attempted to simulate how the world, represented by thousands 
of plants and animals housed within a giant glass dome, would cope with air 
pollution and climate change.

 Two disgruntled colleagues, Abigail Alling and Mark Van Thillo, were fired in 
1994 after breaking into Biosphere 2 to warn other members of Bannon’s 
management style. During court proceedings against the duo, Bannonadmitted 
<http://tucsoncitizen.com/morgue2/1996/05/24/147580-manager-vowed-revenge-on-alling-her-lawyer-says/>
 to calling Alling a “bimbo” and threatening to kick her “ass”. He managed the 
project until it was transferred to Columbia University in 1996.

 Trump has threatened to withdraw the US from international climate 
agreements, cut clean energy spending and loosen regulations for fossil fuel 
companies. Hereceived $700,000 
<https://www.opensecrets.org/pres16/select-industries?ind=E01> from oil and gas 
interests during his election campaign – a sizable amount but still $100,000 
less than Hillary Clinton and nowhere near the $10.4m raised by Trump’s 
Republican primary opponent Jeb Bush.

 Robert and Rebekah Mercer, two prominent Republican donors 
<http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2016/11/05/donald-trump-s-billionaire-backed-super-pac-also-paying-rudy-giuliani-s-law-firms.html>
, supported Trump and their financing of climate science denial will likely 
reverberate at the White House.

 The Mercers have backed the Heartland Institute and Heritage Foundation, 
conservative groups that have tried to discredit climate scientists, and via 
their foundation bankrolled initiatives such as the Berkeley Earth and Oregon 
Petition projects. Both endeavors attempted to reveal flaws in mainstream 
climate science, only tovalidate scientists’ findings 
<http://berkeleyearth.org/> and mislead the public 
<https://www.desmogblog.com/2016/11/29/revealed-most-popular-climate-story-social-media-told-half-million-people-science-was-hoax>
, respectively.

 The Koch brothers, who have previously bankrolled candidates who promised to 
water down environmental protections, largely sat out of the 2016 presidential 
election but theirinfluence on Trump is now coming to bear through the many 
groups they fund 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/07/donald-trump-koch-brothers-cabinet-transition-power>
.

 Koch-backed groups supply a number of advisers and transition staff that 
Trump now relies upon and the conservative network is now sounding upbeat about 
the new president. Green groups, which were briefly cheered when they saw Al 
Gore march into Trump Towerfor a meeting on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/05/al-gore-climate-change-threat-leaves-no-time-to-despair-over-trump-victory>
, now bitterly complain that this was a smokescreen for Trump’s nakedly 
anti-environment agenda.

“We are seeing the wholesale move of people associated with climate 
misinformation campaigns into Trump’s administration in a big way,” said Robert 
Brulle, a sociology and environmental scientist at Drexel University. “Myron 
Ebell, for example, is the leader of the climate counter-movement that opposes 
any restrictions on greenhouse gas emissions.

 “Trump is getting two pushes – one from the conservative movement and another 
from fossil fuel interests. If it was one or the other, it wouldn’t be so 
strong, but they are combined. It’s pretty clear that his administration will 
be sympathetic to fossil fuel interests. Whether they achieve that is another 
matter because there will be stiff resistance from the environmental movement 
and also there will be international concern. We’ll soon see how influential 
that concern is.”

EPA fears 'unprecedented disaster' for environment over Scott Pruitt pick
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/dec/08/epa-scott-pruitt-disaster-environment-senate-democrats>
 While Trump can certainly hamper the effort to avoid dangerous climate 
change, there will be limits to his reach. Theplummeting 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2016-04-06/wind-and-solar-are-crushing-fossil-fuels>
 cost of solar and wind energy and thewoes 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/news/energy-environment/wp/2015/04/01/the-decline-in-coal-jobs-in-one-chart/?utm_term=.5c13069d697a>
 of the coal industry can’t be reversed by a president. Cities and certain 
states, most notably New York and California, have vowed to forge ahead with 
emission cuts, vehicle electrification and energy efficiency measures.

Federal agencies do have undeniable clout. The EPA oversees clean air and 
water standards, the Department of the Interior is responsible for millions of 
acres of public land, including prized sites such as Yellowstone national park 
and the Everglades. Fossil fuel interests may have deep roots in theTrump 
administration <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/trump-administration> but 
it’s unlikely that the American public will tolerate the dissolution of popular 
protections that have been in place for the past 40 years.

 “I think it’s likely there will be a quick failure followed by a correction,” 
said Bob Inglis, a former Republican congressman for South Carolina. “You get 
found out at the EPA pretty quickly. It’s not like Fema, where there is a 
hurricane only once in a while. There will be plenty of opportunities to 
display incompetence and there won’t be the scapegoat of Barack Obama to blame 
anymore.

 “Donald Trump has made promises to coal and also to natural gas. The problem 
is that these promises are inconsistent with each other and that will be 
revealed. The question is how quickly coal miners, and others, will realize 
that they have been had.”
 