
Two years ago, Jonathan Clark was sending his four school-age kids to four 
different schools in Detroit.

“We were driving 200 miles a week just to and from school,” he said. His three 
oldest – all girls, ages 14 to 16 – were enrolled at charters, privately run 
schools funded by the government that promise better educational outcomes.

Clark was able to send his kids to schools all over the city because of school 
choice, the policy that allows kids to get educated outside their home 
district. But Clark said the conditions at these charter schools were no 
different from what’s typical of a public school in Detroit: a lack of 
resources needed to educate students, high teacher turnover, and low test 
scores.

“These are all things they give bad marks to DPS [Detroit public schools] on,” 
he said, “but charters are doing the same.”

Trump's cabinet looks increasingly conventional but far from moderate
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/09/donald-trump-cabinet-republican-appointments-campaign>
That’s why Clark is alarmed by Donald Trump’s nomination of Betsy DeVos to 
lead the US Department of Education.

DeVos, a billionaire and conservative activist from the state, has been one of 
the strongest defenders inMichigan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/michigan> of expanding charter schools and 
choice.

DeVos and her husband, Dick, have long been a force in education policy 
efforts in Michigan, as well as other sensitive political issues – such as the 
Michigan legislature’s 2012decision to pass right-to-work legislation 
<http://www.motherjones.com/politics/2014/01/devos-michigan-labor-politics-gop>
. The DeVoses have contributedat least $7m to state lawmakers and Michigan’s 
GOP party <http://mcfn.org/node/14> – including support for a failed $5m effort 
to pass a pro-school-voucher voter referendum in 2000.

Public education advocates who oppose DeVos’s nomination point to Michigan’s 
education record – particularly in Detroit, where nearly half of students 
attend charters.

Since a quarter-century ago, charter advocates have pursued an agenda that has 
included a lift on the cap for how many can open in the state, as well as an 
expansion of school choice. Along the way, the state’s academic performancehas 
dropped 
<http://www.mlive.com/politics/index.ssf/2016/12/betsy_devoss_michigan_legacy.html>
, and Detroit has probably felt the biggest impact.

Though charter advocates point to studies that suggest student gains have been 
made at charters, the city’s disconnected array of schools has developed into a 
frenetic status quo. Just this year, the district has teetered on the edge of 
bankruptcy, prompting teachers facing potential payless work days to stage mass 
protests, and a federal lawsuit is now attempting toassert a constitutional 
right to literacy 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/sep/14/detroit-civil-rights-lawsuit-constitutional-literacy-education>
 – an argument couched in the dismal performance scores of Detroit students.

What’s more, the state’s policies and regulation of charters has been so lax, 
critics routinely refer to the city’s educational landscape as the “wild west”. 
Indeed, a federal audit this yearnoted 
<http://www2.ed.gov/about/offices/list/oig/auditreports/fy2016/a02m0012.pdf> 
Michigan’s charter school law does not include provisions for regulating 
conflict-of-interest issues. The state also allows for-profit charters to be 
established, a practice prohibited elsewhere.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbetsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F839b50431b477b70c4659bad826d597e405f56de%2F0_10_1813_1088%2F1813.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20choice%20for%20education%20secretary%20raises%20fears%20in%20Detroit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbetsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20choice%20for%20education%20secretary%20raises%20fears%20in%20Detroit&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fdec%2F11%2Fbetsy-devos-trump-education-secretary-michigan-charter-schools%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F839b50431b477b70c4659bad826d597e405f56de%2F0_10_1813_1088%2F1813.jpg>
 Trump stands with Betsy DeVos after their meeting at the main clubhouse at 
Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster, New Jersey. Photograph: Mike 
Segar/Reuters 
Since 1990, Detroit’s population has dropped nearly 35%, while its school 
district’s attendancehas plummeted nearly 75% 
<http://www.crcmich.org/PUBLICAT/2010s/2016/enrollment_trends_in_detroit-2016.pdf>
 – a signal of the proliferation of charters and use of choice in the city.

The situation in Michigan is such that even charter advocates criticize the 
state’s approach – and DeVos’s devotion to maintaining it.

“It doesn’t matter that charter schools aren’t giving any of the things they 
promised 22 years ago,” said Stephen Henderson, a Detroit native and editorial 
page editor of the Detroit Free Press, who, along with his two children, 
attended charters. “She ... and her family funds any effort to block any 
changes or accountability or standards that would perhaps produce better 
results for us.”

But the pick underscored the polarizing views of DeVos. In her home state, 
Michigan’s governor and attorney general echoed Trump’s remarks about her 
qualifications.

Dan Quisenberry, president of the Michigan Association of Public School 
Academies, downplayed criticisms of her background, saying her business 
experience and previous role as the Michigan GOP chairwoman showed she could 
lead a large organization and handle political issues.

“Betsy is a person who will put kids before adults,” he said. “She’s going to 
put students and parents ahead of politics.”

Michigan indeed has some high-performing charter schools, including in 
Detroit. Many supporters point toa 2013 Stanford study 
<https://credo.stanford.edu/pdfs/MI_report_2012_FINAL_1_11_2013_no_watermark.pdf>
 that found charter students in the state learned at a faster rate than those 
in public schools, with two months of gains, or three months in Detroit. Still, 
the study found that slightly more than half of Detroit charter schools failed 
to perform “significantly better” in math and reading than counterparts, some 
even worse.

This summer, charter school advocates – including DeVos’s group, the Great 
Lakes Education Project – agreed to some additional accountability measures as 
part of a $617m investment to overhaul the governance of Detroit public 
schools. Schools must now be assessed regularly, and new schools accredited.

But a provision to create a commission overseeing Detroit schools was stripped 
from the legislation after intense lobbying by charter advocates and DeVos.

“What they feared was the accountability,” Henderson, 46, said.

DeVos – whose father-in-law founded Amway, a marketing company that previously 
settledtax fraud accusations for $25m 
<http://www.nytimes.com/1983/11/11/business/amway-admits-fraud.html> – has long 
leveraged her wealth to target Republicans who have not boosted her education 
agenda. After the commission was derailed, DeVosdonated $1.45m to state 
Republican lawmakers 
<http://www.freep.com/story/opinion/columnists/stephen-henderson/2016/09/03/charter-devos-money-michigan/89774760/>
 over a two month period.

Henderson said GOP lawmakers had told him that in the runup to the decision to 
axe the Detroit commission, DeVos explicitly stated that she wouldn’t donate to 
their campaign efforts if they didn’t flip their votes on the issue.

Trump’s transition team declined to make DeVos available for an interview and 
did not provide comment for this story.

Public schools may not survive Trump's billionaire wrecking crew | Nikhil Goyal
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/30/public-school-system-trump-administration-betsy-devos>
Quisenberry said critics – namely, teachers’ unions – who point to DeVos’ 
political influence usually “are involved very much in the same influence on 
the other side”

“What the [Detroit commission] was about was whose political influence was 
going to win out,” he said. “The teachers’ union was very involved.”

Clark believes the commission would have addressed the distribution and 
quality of of schools in the city - in his neighborhood, there is just one 
operational school for 3,000 kids.

“If schools in our neighborhood were open, and up to standards, and producing 
a quality educational experience, then we wouldn’t have had to go to four 
different schools all over the city,” Clark said.

Clark now sends his three older kids to private school. But he knows that is 
off the table for many other parents in the city, where 40% of residents live 
below the poverty line.

“What about the parents who aren’t in that position?”



 