
As the world struggles to absorb the implications of Donald Trump’s unexpected 
victory in the US general election, no one is facing the future with more 
trepidation than those working on clean energy, clean transportation, climate 
and the environment. Hillary Clinton had promised to build on Obama’s 
substantial progress in this area; now they worry that it may be reversed, and 
then some.

What does the future hold, under a Trump government, and how worried should we 
be?

Businesses have seen the light with solar energy and it's finally paying off
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/jun/17/solar-energy-fortune-500-apple-bloomberg-business>
The first thing to note is that Trump’s comments on energy 
<https://www.donaldjtrump.com/press-releases/an-america-first-energy-plan> 
during his campaign do not add up to a coherent policy. He promised that if he 
were elected, “the shale energy revolution will unleash massive wealth for 
America, and we will end the war on coal and the war on miners” – even though 
the two energy sources are in fact in competition. He dismissed wind and solar 
as expensive, ignoring all evidence that this is no longer the case. He is 
pro-nuclear. And, like almost every president since Richard Nixon, he promised 
US energy independence.

On climate change, Trump famously claimed that “the concept of global warming 
was created by and for the Chinese in order to make US manufacturing 
non-competitive”. He pledged to “cancel” the Paris climate agreement and to 
rescind Obama’s Clean Power Plan. Trump resolutelyopposed the wind farms 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/jul/22/trump-resumes-fight-against-windfarm-near-his-golf-course>
 that can be seen from his golf courses (though he has also acknowledged the 
threat of rising sea levelsto those same golf courses 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/05/donald-trump-climate-change-golf-course-223436>
). During his campaign, he promised to abolish the Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA), whose responsibility for regulating CO2 emissions was confirmed 
by the US Supreme Court a decade ago.

Overall, on the environment, he said: “We’ll be fine, we can leave a little 
bit, but you can’t destroy businesses.”

There is no question, then, that we are entering a time of potentially grave 
peril for the planet and for many of the industries that promise a sustainable 
long term future. But, just as the election of Obama did not mark “the moment 
when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal”, as he 
claimed when he was first elected president, nor will Trump’s election mark the 
opposite.

For all the “war on coal” rhetoric, US coal’s biggest problem was never Obama, 
nor would it have been Hillary Clinton. It is cheap natural gas first, cheap 
renewable power second and flat electricity demand third. With endless shale 
gas and aging plants, the economics of US coal will continue to worsen, and 
individual states will continue to pursue action on reducing emissions.

In oil and gas, removing regulations on fracking and opening up US national 
parks and federal lands to exploration might reduce costs, but not by much. The 
real threat to US domestic production is low global oil and gas prices, which 
look like they will be with us for some extended time.

Although he portrays himself as a master dealmaker, Trump is a political 
novice and a divisive one. To abolish the EPA he would need the support of 
Congress. While both houses are controlled by Republicans, they do not have the 
60 votes in the Senate needed to avoid a Democrat filibuster and act 
unilaterally. When it comes to the trillion dollars Trump promised to spend on 
roads and other infrastructure, he will face stiff opposition from fiscally 
conservative Republicans.

Is using less water the secret to cutting our greenhouse gas emissions?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2016/oct/11/greenhouse-gas-water-use-emissions>
Trump claims the Paris climate agreement 
<https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/international/negotiations/paris/index_en.htm>
 will “give foreign bureaucrats control over how much energy [is used] right 
here in America”. That’s simply not true. Retreating from it would not result 
in a US energy or industrial renaissance – in fact, the opposite: the agreement 
is set to create global markets for exactly those clean energy and 
transportation technologies in which the US leads the world.

Whatever happens in the US over the next four years, technologies such as wind 
and solar willcontinue getting cheaper 
<https://www.bloomberg.com/company/new-energy-outlook/> until they beat out 
fossil fuels; battery and fuel-cell electric vehicles will keep getting better 
until they render internal combustion engines old fashioned. So the world will 
continue its inevitable transition to clean energy and transportation, just at 
a slower rate than if the US were fully committed to leading the process.

Does that matter? I’ll leave the last words to President-elect Trump.

In 2009, ahead of the Copenhagen Climate Summit, he was a co-signatory to a 
letter to Obama which pointed out that clean energy technologies would “spur 
economic growth, create new energy jobs and increase our energy security”. The 
letter concluded by saying: “If we fail to act now, it is scientifically 
irrefutable that there will be catastrophic and irreversible consequences for 
humanity and our planet.”

A lot of people will be hoping he remembers those words when he takes office 
on 20 January next year.
 