
They said he wrote music to slit your wrists to, which in this week of all 
weeks feels timely. As it happens, I never felt that barb was fair to Leonard 
Cohen. True, his songs often told of gloom and defeat and darkness, but his 
voice was one of consolation – of sharing the loss by finding another who felt 
it too, of discovering the glimmer of love or light that might get you through.

My word, do we need that now. Cohen died on Monday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/music/2016/nov/11/leonard-cohen-obituary>, 
slipping out before he had to glimpse the news that has convulsed the world. He 
saw a lot in his 82 years, but he never had to see the words President-elect 
Trump. With his impeccable timing, Cohen spared himself that ordeal. But his 
songs anticipated how the rest of us would feel.Looked through the paper. 
Makes you wanna cry 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/leonardcohen/inmysecretlife.html>.

Trump and Obama put differences aside in first White House meeting
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/10/barack-obama-donald-trump-white-house-meeting-transition>
The Trumpists and their sycophants outside the US taunt those of us who 
are fearful. Boris Johnson says we need to get over our collective 
“whinge-orama” 
<http://news.sky.com/story/snap-out-of-donald-trump-doom-and-gloom-says-boris-johnson-10652841>
and embrace the new reality. Iain Duncan Smith says Barack Obama was a cold 
fish anyway, and he’s glad to see the back of him. Nigel Farage chooses to 
describe America’s first black president as a “creature”. Why, Trump’s arrival 
could even be a good thing, they say: he might offer the UK a decent 
post-Brexit trade deal.

This is not only pathetic in its cravenness, grovelling to a bigot when the 
moment demanded some of the moral steel shown by Angela Merkel – who extended 
her hand to Trump, but only on condition that he accept basic human values 
including respect for the minorities he had so copiously insulted – it is also 
unforgivably myopic. It fails to see there is a much larger picture here. It is 
not hysterical to suspect that the world we have known, the postwar order that 
provided relative peace and prosperity for seven decades – spanning the 
lifetime of Leonard Cohen’s generation – is unravelling. Oras France’s 
ambassador to the US put it 
<http://www.spiegel.de/international/europe/european-leaders-and-politicians-react-to-trump-victory-a-1120478.html>
, in a tweet later deleted: “This is the end of an epoch … The world is 
crumbling before our eyes.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Protests%20against%20Donald%20Trump%20continue%20across%20US%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F11%2Fprotests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video&media=>
Protests against Donald Trump continue across US – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/nov/11/protests-against-donald-trump-continue-across-us-video>
What those who share his anxiety have in mind is the rules-based system that 
has allowed us to take international stability for granted, to regard it as the 
natural way of things, since 1945.

Central to that order has been free trade, broadly defined, along with a 
sturdy international architecture, designed to allow nations that once fought 
each other to resolve their differences diplomatically instead. It has 
consisted of an alphabet soup ranging from the UN and EU to the IMF and G20, 
and myriad others. And – not that it’s popular to say so – underpinning it all, 
down to patrolling the shipping lanes that make global trade possible, has been 
the leadership of the US.

For the last decade, foreign policy types have fretted that this set-up was 
under threat. Their worry was that a rising China, as it grew more assertive, 
would overtake the US – but that it would refuse to take on the obligations 
attached to being the world’s leading power. What few envisaged was that the 
threat to American leadership would come from the US itself, in the form of a 
president eager to shake off the duties shouldered by his country since 1945.

Yet that is what a Trump presidency augurs. He is opposed to free trade; a 
protectionist bent only on transactional deals in which America wins and the 
other side loses. Trump has no interest in spending US capital – diplomatic or 
financial – on upholding a global system that is, heaven knows, imperfect but 
at least aims to benefit everybody.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fleonard-cohen-trump-world-too-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743cd82279044d2f071575d9dab64ac8fc085c9e%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20world%20is%20too%20dark%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0even%20for%20Leonard%20Cohen%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fleonard-cohen-trump-world-too-dark%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20world%20is%20too%20dark%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0even%20for%20Leonard%20Cohen%20%7C%20Jonathan%20Freedland&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F12%2Fleonard-cohen-trump-world-too-dark%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F743cd82279044d2f071575d9dab64ac8fc085c9e%2F0_99_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 An estimated 10,000 protesters gathered outside Trump Tower in New York on 10 
November. Photograph: Erik/Pacific/Barcroft Images 
A paramount example: Trump’s team have signalled that one of his first acts in 
office will be tocancel the Paris accord 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty>
 on climate change. To reach that agreement with Beijing took years of effort 
by the Obama administration, and would soon have started reducing the carbon 
emissions that are choking our planet. It will take just a second, a stroke of 
the pen, for Trump to destroy it. He has threatened to do the same with the 
painstakingly brokereddeal on Iranian nuclear weapons 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/the-guardian-view-on-trumps-foreign-policy-a-threat-to-peace>
.Get ready for the future: it is murder.  
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/leonardcohen/thefuture.html>

But what I detect in those distressed by Trump’s election are more intimate 
concerns. How, so many have asked, do we explain this to our children? How do 
you raise a child to believe that lying is wrong, when a compulsive liar has 
been rewarded with the biggest prize on Earth? (The very first words Trump 
uttered in the Oval Office, during thatThursday encounter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/live/2016/nov/10/donald-trump-barack-obama-white-house-us-election-live-updates>
 with Obama that was almost too painful to watch, were a lie.“This was a 
meeting that was going to last 10 or 15 minutes,” 
<http://www.politico.com/story/2016/11/obama-meets-trump-nemesis-231200> he 
said, boasting that the session had overrun. In fact, the meeting was scheduled 
to last an hour.)

We say that “cheats never prosper”, but Trump did not pay income tax for two 
decades – he cheated his fellow citizens, depriving them of the money needed to 
pay for the basic fabric of society – and he has prospered. What do you say to 
the child who says, “Mr Trump was right. Not paying taxes is smart.”

Parents of daughters were looking forward to pointing at President Hillary 
Clinton as proof that there was no goal beyond their reach. Now they can only 
look bitterly at that photo ofNew York Times journalists preparing the front 
page <https://twitter.com/malonebarry/status/796422269908054016>that was never 
published. Its planned headline: Madam President.

They will somehow have to explain, as my colleague Hadley Freeman 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/nov/10/misogyny-us-election-voters>
 has pointed out, how one of the most qualified people ever to run for 
president lost out to the least qualified. And they will have to tell their 
sons that no, it is never acceptable to grab women that way, even though Trump 
did it and bragged about it and was rewarded with the votes of tens of millions 
of Americans.

We tell our children that ‘cheats never prosper', but Trump did not pay income 
tax for two decades

They will have to find a new way to explain why casual, racially charged 
insult is wrong, even though it has been practised and endorsed from on high. 
Already non-white Americans are reporting incidents of abuse they’d never 
experienced before, just as ethnic minority Britons did after the Brexit 
referendum.Witness the man told to “fuck off”  
<https://twitter.com/michaelluo/status/796908568574382080>simply because he was 
overheard talking to his daughter in Spanish.

We tell ourselves, in the stories we read and the movies we watch, that in the 
end good triumphs over evil. To see Obama, a man whose moral integrity is not 
doubted, be replaced by a liar and a bigot is to confound that hope. To see 
Trump set about dismantling the Obama legacy, as if erasing his presidency, is 
to see that good is sometimes crushed.Everybody knows that the war is over. 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/leonardcohen/everybodyknows.html> Everybody 
knows the good guys lost.

Yet somehow we will have to get through this darkness. Cohen’s preferred 
method was to count on love –“the only engine of survival” 
<http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/leonardcohen/thefuture.html> – and to see that 
sometimes a setback, even a disaster, can lead to something better. It is such 
small consolation, but right now I cling to it. As the old poet said,There is a 
crack in everything. <http://www.azlyrics.com/lyrics/leonardcohen/anthem.html> 
That’s how the light gets in.
 