
After a long and bitter campaign for the US presidency, Donald Trump has 
triumphed over Hillary Clinton and theworld’s financial markets have been rocked
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/financial-markets-set-for-record-falls-after-asian-shares-battered-by-trump-surge>
.

For Trump’s supporters he represents a chance to shake up a system that many 
Americans feel has increased inequality and squeezed living standards. For less 
complacent investors, there are worries Trump’s anti-globalisation mantra will 
spread protectionism around the world, put up trade barriers and curb global 
economic growth. Furthermore, markets do not like unknowns and with Trump going 
to the White House they are dealing with a complete newcomer to politics. His 
administration is widely expected to mark a departure from the policies of his 
own Republican party as well as the outgoing Democrats.

So what do we know about Trump’s economic policies? We look at the key areas:

Trade

Tapping into economic discontent Trump has argued for protectionism and 
asserted that decades of free-trade policies were responsible for the collapse 
of the American manufacturing industry. He has been feeding on theperception 
among many Americans that globalisation has brought more pain than gain 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/05/swing-state-voters-donald-trump-youngstown-ohio>
, for example, by bringing cheap consumer goods into the country, costing 
domestic jobs and depressing wages. Outsourcing of jobs to cheaper markets has 
also been a concern. Against that backdrop, Trump’s stance on trade is perhaps 
the clearest of his economic policies.

The billionaire Republican wants to renegotiate, or possibly even scrap, the 
North American Free Trade Agreement. Nafta lowers trade barriers between the 
US, Canada and Mexico and was negotiated by George HW Bush and enacted in the 
1990s by Bill Clinton. The incoming president wants Nafta to offer a better 
deal for Americans and has rejected claims by his opponents that the deal has 
helped the US economy by opening up export markets.

The protectionism with regard to Mexico does not stop there. One of Trump’s 
most notorious pledges in the presidential campaign was to build a 
multibillion-dollar wall along the US southern border andforce Mexico to pay 
for it 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/apr/05/donald-trump-mexico-border-wall-plan-remittances>
. On the markets on Wednesday fears over the blow to Mthe Mexican economy from 
Trump’s victory havesent the peso plummeting 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/09/financial-markets-set-for-record-falls-after-asian-shares-battered-by-trump-surge>
.

Other global trade deals are also now very much in doubt, notably the Trans 
Pacific Partnership (TPP), between 12 countries around the Pacific rim, 
excluding China, and the agreement being negotiated between the US and Europe, 
known as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).

In terms of trade deals, both TTIP and the TPP now look dead in the water

Philip Shaw, an economist at the bank Investec, says: “While we are minded to 
disregard some of Mr Trump’s wilder pre-election rhetoric, we consider that 
there is a tangible risk that a Trump presidency could fuel anti-globalisation 
momentum and spark a wave of protectionist policies around the globe. In terms 
of trade deals, both TTIP and the TPP now look dead in the water.”

Trump has also made his anger with China over trade well known 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/28/donald-trump-foreign-policy-speech-tpp-china-free-trade>
, arguing that since China joined the World Trade Organisation, Americans have 
witnessed the closure of more than 50,000 factories and the loss of tens of 
millions of jobs. He wants the US government to label China a “currency 
manipulator” and has lambasted the rapidly growing Asian economy for “unfair 
subsidy behaviour”.

Taxes 

Here again, Trump has played into frustrations among many Americans over their 
sense of financial insecurity, inequality and squeezed incomes. Trump, who has 
faced fierce criticism forappearing to escape paying income tax himself for 
almost two decades 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/oct/02/donald-trump-income-tax-returns-published>
, promised tax cuts for all income groups.


He has pledged “a massive tax reduction” for working and middle-income 
Americans and has vowed to eliminate income taxes for individuals who earn less 
than $25,000 annually, or $50,000 for a married couple. He has also said he 
would “ensure the rich pay their fair share”. But analysis by theconservative 
Tax Foundation 
<http://taxfoundation.org/article/details-and-analysis-donald-trump-tax-reform-plan-september-2016>
 has found Trump’s tax plan would disproportionately help the richest 
Americans, saving them millions.

Trump has also supported lower corporate taxes, proposing to cut the business 
tax rate from 35% to 15%. He wants to close special interest tax loopholes and 
to restrict companies from moving money out of the country. He has also 
proposed a corporate tax repatriation plan – to encourage US companies which 
hoard cash overseas to avoid paying the 35% tax to bring that cash back to the 
US. According to CapitalEconomics 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/economics> this cash hoard is now $2.5tn. 
A tax holiday – so the tax due would be only 10% for a period – could encourage 
corporations to bring back cash to invest or distribute to shareholders

Public finances

All those tax cuts mean less coming in to government coffers, at least in the 
near-term. There is an argument that the potential boost to businesses and to 
household spending power would lift the economy enough to improve government 
finances. But, for now, economists expect that Trump’s plans for tax cuts 
across the board will mean the US taking on more debt as its deficit – the gap 
between spending and income – swells.

Kevin Logan, the chief US economist at the bank HSBC, says: “Reducing the 
budget deficits, while cutting tax rates at the same time, will be difficult 
without sizable cutbacks in federal spending. If a Trump administration manages 
to push through tax cuts with matching spending cuts, federal budget deficits, 
which are already trending higher, will probably increase substantially, in our 
view.”

Obamacare
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F735b5bf429ebfbedb82609b0ae6c64278292c9da%2F0_26_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20economic%20policies%3A%20protectionism%2C%20low%20taxes%20and%20coal%20mines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20economic%20policies%3A%20protectionism%2C%20low%20taxes%20and%20coal%20mines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F735b5bf429ebfbedb82609b0ae6c64278292c9da%2F0_26_3500_2100%2F3500.jpg>
 Trump called Obamacare an expensive ‘disaster’. Photograph: Jonathan 
Bachman/Reuters 
Trump wants to repeal and replace president Barack Obama’s healthcare plan 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/jun/09/trump-clinton-economy-immigration-gun-control-environment>
, introduced under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), with his own, cheaper plan 
for tax-free health savings accounts (HSAs). On the campaign trail, Trump 
called Obamacare an expensive “disaster”.

About 20 million more people 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2015/jun/23/americans-without-health-insurance-drops>
 have insurance thanks to the ACA butthe scheme has struggled to run efficiently
 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/03/obamacare-marketplaces-exchanges-insurers-subscribers-competition>
 because it relies on competition between insurers to provide affordable 
coverage, and that competition has dwindled.


Immigration

The most high-profile Trump plan on immigration is for a wall along the 
Mexican border. He also said he would deport 11 million undocumented migrants, 
something opponents say is physically impossible. He wants immigrants to be 
selected on the basis of “their likelihood of success in the US and their 
ability to be financially self-sufficient”.

Jobs and growth

Unemployment <https://www.theguardian.com/society/unemployment> in the US has 
dropped below 5%, a good record on the surface for Obama. But during his 
campaign, Trump has focused on those parts of the economy and country where the 
recovery since the financial crash has not being felt, gaining traction with 
those Americans who have seen their industries diminish and their wages 
stagnate.

On the campaign trail, Trump chose the once booming industrial centre of 
Detroit to set out his economic plan.He cited the motor city’s 
higher-than-average unemployment rate and crime levels 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/aug/08/donald-trump-tax-plan-business-income-middle-class>
 in a speech that played on widespread worries about the decline of US 
manufacturing.

Trump has said his protectionist policies will keep “jobs and wealth inside 
the United States” . He has promised to increase employment, saying his plans 
for lower taxes, trade barriers and tighter immigration rules would lead to 
stronger economic growth. As with the deficit, many economists warn his plans 
could make things worse not better, hindering economic growth and thereby 
employers’ ability to create new jobs.

Trump has bemoaned the deteriorating conditions of American infrastructure but 
has provided little detail on what big spending projects he would undertake. In 
his victory speech he said: “We are going to fix our inner cities, and rebuild 
our highways, bridges, tunnels, airports, schools, hospitals. We’re going to 
rebuild our infrastructure ... and we will put millions of our people to work 
as we rebuild it.”

Interest rates

This is not strictly an area for the government, given interest rates are set 
by the US central bank, the Federal Reserve, widely referred to as the Fed. But 
there wereworries during the presidential race that a win for Trump would 
undermine its independence 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/trump-us-federal-reserve-false-economy-interest-rates>
 and the position of its chairwoman, Janet Yellen.

The president-elect has previously accused the Fed of keeping borrowing costs 
low to help president Obama and has said the central bank’s policies have
created a “false economy” 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/06/trump-us-federal-reserve-false-economy-interest-rates>
.

In April he said he would be inclined to replace Yellen 
<http://www.reuters.com/article/usa-election-trump-yellen-idUSL2N17N0T8>. In an 
interview with Fortune magazine, Trump also said he “absolutely” backed efforts 
to diminish the Fed’s power. Yellen began a four-year term as Fed chairwoman 
under Obama in February 2014.

Fed policymakers had hinted at another rate rise in December, part of the slow 
process of bringing policy back to more normal levels after drastic measures to 
shore up the US economy during the global financial crisis. But investors now 
think a move next month is off the table given the shock to markets from 
Trump’s victory and the economic uncertainty that lies ahead.


In the longer-term, more spending and tax cuts from the government – in other 
words looser fiscal policy – could usher in tighter monetary policy with a more 
interest rate hikes from the Fed.

Climate change
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104975f6115404b848c9603d2c3855cdcf27b177%2F0_0_5362_3562%2F5362.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump's%20economic%20policies%3A%20protectionism%2C%20low%20taxes%20and%20coal%20mines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%27s%20economic%20policies%3A%20protectionism%2C%20low%20taxes%20and%20coal%20mines&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2F2016%2Fnov%2F09%2Ftrumps-economic-policies-protectionism-low-taxes-and-coal-mines%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F104975f6115404b848c9603d2c3855cdcf27b177%2F0_0_5362_3562%2F5362.jpg>
 Trump’s victory has sparked alarm and dismay among environmentalists. 
Photograph: Alamy 
Trump’s victory has sparked alarm and dismay among environmentalists fearful 
he will reverse many of the green measures introduced under Obama. Caroline 
Lucas, the co-leader of the UK’s Green party, described the Republican’s win as 
“a hammer blow for the fight against climate change”.

In the past the real estate mogul has dismissed global warming as an 
“expensive hoax”. Now his election to the US presidency hasthrown the historic 
Paris agreement into uncertainty 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/09/us-election-result-throws-paris-climate-deal-into-uncertainty>
 just days after itofficially came into force 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/04/paris-climate-change-agreement-enters-into-force>
. Trump has threatened to to withdraw the US from the deal to cut greenhouse 
gases, which took 20 years to negotiate.

By contrast, Trump has indicated he would promote coal, shale gas and oil and 
there are worries he will curb investment into renewable energy sources as well 
as funding for the Environmental Protection Agency. He has pledged to scrap 
regulations for America’s coal industry, a stance that won him the beleaguered 
sector’s support. It gave around $223,000 in support of Trump, compared with 
none for his Democratic rival, Hillary Clinton, according to a Reuters analysis.
 