
Wave the magic wand and the problem goes away. Those pesky pollution laws, 
carbon caps and clean-power plans: swish them away and the golden age of 
blue-collar employment will return. This is Donald Trump’s promise, in hisvideo 
message on Monday <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=7xX_KaStFT8&feature=share>, 
in which the US president-elect claimed that unleashing coal and fracking would 
create “many millions of high-paid jobs”. He will tear down everything to make 
it come true.

But it won’t come true. Even if we ripped the world to pieces in the search 
for full employment, leaving no mountain unturned, we would not find it. 
Instead, we would merely jeopardise the prosperity – and the lives – of people 
everywhere. However slavishly governments grovel to corporate Luddism, they 
will not bring the smog economy back.
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Donald%20Trump%20outlines%20job%20plan%20in%20YouTube%20clip%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Donald%20Trump%20outlines%20job%20plan%20in%20YouTube%20clip%20-%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fnov%2F22%2Fa-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video&media=>
Donald Trump outlines job plan in YouTube clip 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2016/nov/22/a-potential-disaster-trump-dumps-the-trans-pacific-partnership-video>
No one can deny the problem Trump claims to be addressing. The old mining and 
industrial areas are in crisis throughout the rich world. And we have seen 
nothing yet. I have just reread thestudy published by the Oxford Martin School 
in 2013 
<http://www.oxfordmartin.ox.ac.uk/downloads/academic/The_Future_of_Employment.pdf>
 on the impacts of computerisation. What jumps out, to put it crudely, is that 
jobs in the rust belts and rural towns that voted for Trump are at high risk of 
automation, while the professions of many Hillary Clinton supporters are at low 
risk.

The jobs most likely to be destroyed are in mining, raw materials, 
manufacturing, transport and logistics, cargo handling, warehousing and 
retailing, construction (prefabricated buildings will be assembled by robots in 
factories), office support, administration and telemarketing. So what, in the 
areas that voted for Trump, will be left?

Farm jobs have mostly gone already. Service and care work, where hope for some 
appeared to lie, will be threatened by a further wave of automation, as service 
robots – commercial and domestic – take over.

Yes, there will be jobs in the green economy: more and better than any that 
could be revived in the fossil economy. But they won’t be enough to fill the 
gaps, and many will be in the wrong places for those losing their professions.

At lower risk is work that requires negotiation, persuasion, originality and 
creativity. The management and business jobs that demand these skills are 
comparatively safe from automation; so are those of lawyers, teachers, 
researchers, doctors, journalists, actors and artists. The jobs that demand the 
highest educational attainment are the least susceptible to computerisation. 
The divisions tearing America apart will only widen.

Even this bleak analysis does not capture in full the underlying reasons why 
good, abundant jobs will not return to the places that need them most. AsPaul 
Mason argues in PostCapitalism 
<https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/188551/postcapitalism/>, the impacts of 
information technology go way beyond simple automation: they are likely to 
destroy the very basis of the market economy, and the relationship between work 
and wages.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb49a2823e2553d5c10eae2d05220f2ab22ccd684%2F0_39_5268_3162%2F5268.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%E2%80%99s%20climate%20denial%20is%20just%20one%20of%20the%20forces%20that%20point%20towards%20war%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-war%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%E2%80%99s%20climate%20denial%20is%20just%20one%20of%20the%20forces%20that%20point%20towards%20war%20%7C%20George%20Monbiot&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2016%2Fnov%2F23%2Fdonald-trump-climate-change-war%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fb49a2823e2553d5c10eae2d05220f2ab22ccd684%2F0_39_5268_3162%2F5268.jpg>
 An open-cast mine in Jaenschwalde, eastern Germany. Photograph: Michael Sohn/AP
And, as the French writer Paul Arbair notes in the most interesting essay I 
have read this year, 
<https://paularbair.wordpress.com/2016/07/05/brexit-the-populist-surge-and-the-crisis-of-complexity/>
 beyond a certain level of complexity economies become harder to sustain. 
There’s a point at which further complexity delivers diminishing returns; 
society is then overwhelmed by its demands, and breaks down. He argues that the 
political crisis in western countries suggests we may have reached this point.

Trump has also announced that on his first day in office he will withdraw 
America from theTrans-Pacific Partnership 
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2016/nov/22/trans-pacific-partnership-guardian-briefing-tpp>
 (TPP). He is right to do so, but for the wrong reasons. LikeTTIP 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip> and Ceta, the TPP is a fake trade 
treaty whose primary impact is toextend corporate property rights 
<http://www.truthdig.com/report/item/the_most_brazen_corporate_power_grab_in_american_history_20151106>
 at the expense of both competition and democracy. But withdrawal will not, as 
he claims, “bring jobs and industry back to American shores”. The work in 
Mexico and China that Trump wants to reclaim will evaporate long before it can 
be repatriated.

As for the high-quality, high-waged working-class jobs he promised, these are 
never handed down from on high. They are secured through the organisation of 
labour. But the unions were smashed by Ronald Reagan, and collective bargaining 
has been suppressed ever since by casualisation and fragmentation. So how is 
this going to happen? Out of the kindness of Trump’s heart? Kindness, Trump, 
heart?

But it’s not just Trump. Clinton and Bernie Sanders also made impossible 
promises to bring back jobs. Half the platform of each party was based on a 
delusion. The social, environmental and economic crises we face require a 
complete reappraisal of the way we live and work. The failure by mainstream 
political parties to produce a new and persuasive economic narrative, which 
does not rely on sustaining impossible levels of growth and generating illusory 
jobs, provides a marvellous opening for demagogues everywhere.

'Extraordinarily hot' Arctic temperatures alarm scientists
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
Governments across the world are making promises they cannot keep. In the 
absence of a new vision, their failure to materialise will mean only one thing: 
something or someone must be found to blame. As people become angrier and more 
alienated, as the complexity and connectivity of global systems becomes ever 
harder to manage, as institutions such as the European Union collapse and as 
climate change renders parts of the world uninhabitable, forcing hundreds of 
millions of people from their homes, the net of blame will be cast ever wider.

Eventually the anger that cannot be assuaged through policy will be turned 
outwards, towards other nations. Faced with a choice between hard truths and 
easy lies, politicians and their supporters in the media will discover that 
foreign aggression is among the few options for political survival. I now 
believe that we will see war between the major powers within my lifetime. Which 
ones it will involve, and on what apparent cause, remains far from clear. But 
something that once seemed remote now looks probable.

A complete reframing of economic life is needed not just to suppress the 
existential risk that climate change presents (a risk marked by a20°C anomaly 
reported in the Arctic Ocean 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2016/nov/22/extraordinarily-hot-arctic-temperatures-alarm-scientists>
 while I was writing this article), but other existential threats as well – 
including war. Today’s governments, whether they are run by Trump or Obama or 
May or Merkel, lack the courage and imagination even to open this conversation. 
It is left to others to conceive of a more plausible vision than trying to 
magic back the good old days. The task for all those who love this world and 
fear for our children is to imagine a different future rather than another past.

Even if we ripped the world apart in the search for full employment, leaving 
no mountain unturned, we wouldn't find it
 