
Come on, you can admit it. I admit it. I admit that after Trump’s election 
victory, I secretly hoped and even though that his rhetoric was worse than its 
bite. He only said those crazy things during the campaign to get elected. He 
wouldn’t really follow through on his plans to completely gut the US commitment 
to keeping the Earth habitable. Oh how naive we were. Trump’s plan to fill 
positions in his administration shows things are worse than we could have ever 
feared.

According to recent reports 
<https://www.scientificamerican.com/article/trump-picks-top-climate-skeptic-to-lead-epa-transition/>
, Trump has picked long-time climate denier and spokesperson for the fossil 
fuel industry Myron Ebell to head the Environmental Protection Agency 
transition. This basically means the EPA will either cease to function or cease 
to exist. It also appears that the US willpull out of any agreements 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/13/trump-looking-at-quickest-way-to-quit-paris-climate-agreement-says-report>
 to limit greenhouse emissions.


It means we have missed our last off-ramp on the road to catastrophic climate 
change. That may sound hyperbolic, but I study the rate that climate change is 
happening –the amount of heat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2016/jul/27/climate-models-are-accurately-predicting-ocean-and-global-warming>
 accumulating in the Earth’s system. We didn’t have any time to waste in 
implementing Obama’s aggressive plans, and Trump will result in a decade of 
time lost.

So who is Myron Ebell <http://www.desmogblog.com/myron-ebell>? He is a 
director at the Competitive Enterprise Institute and chair of the Cooler Heads 
Coalition. Where did he get his PhD in science? Nowhere. In fact, he isn’t a 
scientist at all, but he does have a degree in economics. Yeah!

Is there any conflict that Ebell’s Competitive Enterprise Institute is funded 
by 
<http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/11/president-trump-global-climate-change-denial-environment/>
 companies such as ExxonMobil and groups such as the Charles Koch Charitable 
Foundation? Surely not.

Myron Ebell is not new to obstructing action on climate change. Years ago, it 
was reported 
<http://www.physics.rutgers.edu/~karin/140/articles/nytJune2005Cooney.pdf> that 
he favored editing Bush-era scientists’ reports on climate change.

It isn’t just Ebell. Trump has other insiders, some of who represent fossil 
fuel companies, working on the transition.

What this selection also tells us about Trump is that he is surrounding 
himself with people who are not knowledgeable in a topic and will not 
effectively educate him. Not that educating Trump was ever possible. But there 
was always the outside chance he would take his contrarian streak to a new 
level and be contrarian to the contrarians. We now see that is not going to 
happen. If Trump listens to anyone, it will be people who think like he does 
and represent special interests who would be most affected by his policies. We 
have a fox guarding the hen house.

I know Trump won’t listen, but I have a wager for him. I could randomly pull 
an Earth scientist’s name out of a hat and any name I pulled would be better 
than Myron Ebell. I challenge Trump and his administration to actually include 
real scientists in forming legislation and action on environmental issues. And 
I am not talking about scientists that are connected to rightwing thinktank 
groups. I am talking about independent unaffiliated scientists. Cripes, just go 
down to the neighborhood university, pick anyone – they will be better than 
what you have now.


Or Trump could attend the world’s largest geophysics meeting, which occurs in 
just a few weeks (American Geophysical Union Fall Meeting 
<https://fallmeeting.agu.org/2016/>). He could walk around with a TV camera and 
a clipboard. Ask any random 10 scientists any question on climate change. Let’s 
see how their answers compare to the information he is going to get from his 
handpicked insiders. Let’s put it on TV; Trump likes TV.

Maybe someday Trump will realize that he actually could be the savior of the 
Earth. Could you imagine the transformative power of a Republican president 
getting the Republican party to findsolutions to climate change 
<https://www.theguardian.com/environment/climate-consensus-97-per-cent/2014/jun/13/how-revenue-neutral-carbon-tax-creates-jobs-grows-economy>
? It would fit a megalomania frame. It would be powerful and inspiring. 
However, the chances it will happen are about as good as the chance we can 
avoid our targeted 2C temperature rise (almost zero). Not if you surround 
yourselves with foxes as you go in to raid the hen house.

At the risk of losing objectiveness but keeping candor, we are fucked 
<https://medium.com/@SnoozeInBrief/an-analysis-of-donald-trumps-election-win-and-the-prospects-for-his-presidency-f6a87eef6d70#.ntd1iib85>
.
 