
At war with the US intelligence agencies he compares to Nazi Germany 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/11/us-intelligence-trump-dossier-leak>
, damning them for leaking an unverified dossier on his alleged links with 
Moscow,Donald Trump’s bizarre press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/11/trumps-trainwreck-press-conference-ushers-in-a-clueless-presidency>
 left the world agog. What if the Russians have so well destabilised America 
that no sooner inaugurated, their chosen president has to be impeached? Don’t 
count on it. Ordinary rules don’t apply to the man who is the raw spirit of the 
lawless wild west.

Polly Toynbee’s 1988 interview with Donald Trump | Polly Toynbee
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/polly-toynbee-1988-interview-donald-trump>
And Trump’s nature was never a secret. He has never dissembled, he can’t 
dissemble. Why would he when he worships every aspect of himself, each hair on 
his head, each word he tweets? Greater self-love hath no man.

Apart from his lost good looks, he is unchanged since I interviewed him for 
the Guardian back in 1988. He was 41 and in Britain to plug his book,The Art of 
the Deal <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/trump-the-art-of-the-deal.html/>. 
Then as now, he was a petrifying megalomaniac with no grip on reality, or not a 
reality shared by others. At the time I described his “demonic power and energy 
waiting to spring”. Now look how far he has sprung.

I wrote about his aura of “glitz, greed, glamour and an ambition so colossal 
that it will probably not rest until he rules the world – which one day he just 
might”. And next week, God help us, he will. But nearly 30 years ago was his 
eye already on running for the presidency? I put the question to him. “Not for 
a period but I am involved politically. You could do it from where I am,” he 
replied with the same nonchalance he might describe making a pitch for some new 
property or casino in New York.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff668386e29768dec0256b698037190caa3526e18%2F0_0_1323_969%2F1323.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20revealed%20his%20presidential%20dream%20to%20me%20in%201988.%20Now%20the%20nightmare%20begins%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20revealed%20his%20presidential%20dream%20to%20me%20in%201988.%20Now%20the%20nightmare%20begins%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Ff668386e29768dec0256b698037190caa3526e18%2F0_0_1323_969%2F1323.jpg>
 Polly Toynbee’s interview with Donald Trump in 1988 
What would his platform be? “Respect. We’re a second-rate economic power, a 
debtor nation. We’re getting kicked around.” His current determination to tear 
up Barack Obama’s carefully brokerednuclear deal with Iran 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/iran-blog/2017/jan/06/iranian-americans-join-tug-of-war-for-trumps-ear-over-nuclear-deal>
 has a long history. He told me that as president, “I’d be harsh on Iran. 
They’ve been beating us psychologically, making us look like a bunch of fools … 
It’d be good for the world to take them on.”

How will Britain fare? Though his boastful book was a US bestseller, it had 
snooty reviews over here, as eminent British business people of the John 
Harvey-Jones type shuddered with repulsion at the cut-throat swagger of Trump’s 
style. In his corporate deals the other guy is always shafted, especially 
decent old-world types stupid enough to think a gentleman’s word is his bond.

Trump was in London in the midst of Margaret Thatcher’s big bang 
<https://www.theguardian.com/books/2012/dec/30/bang-history-1980s-stewart-review>
, red braces and loadsamoney mania years, yet his judgment on Britain was this: 
“Your country’s distaste for success is a national disease.” Bear that in mind 
as our government begs for a post-Brexit trade deal, with a Theresa May date 
not in Trump’s diary. What kind of trade deal does Liam Fox imagine he will 
broker with this man whose contempt for Britain, even back in its most Trumpish 
era, was so withering? Just as Trump’s view on Iran is unchanged, I doubt he 
has formed any new views about Britain.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78af2d95c32c2c1c8caf22d099fbef5a079e5d1%2F0_149_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20revealed%20his%20presidential%20dream%20to%20me%20in%201988.%20Now%20the%20nightmare%20begins%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20revealed%20his%20presidential%20dream%20to%20me%20in%201988.%20Now%20the%20nightmare%20begins%20%7C%20Polly%20Toynbee&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fcommentisfree%2F2017%2Fjan%2F12%2Fdonald-trump-interview-1988-megalomaniac%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-3%23img-3&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2Fd78af2d95c32c2c1c8caf22d099fbef5a079e5d1%2F0_149_3000_1800%2F3000.jpg>
 ‘My own assessment back then was: ‘He’s sharp as a gold-plated razor-blade.’’ 
Donald and Ivana Trump on their luxury yacht in 1988 Photograph: Marty 
Lederhandler/AP 
The craven caperings of Nigel Farage 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/22/nigel-farage-uk-ambassador-us-donald-trump>
 andBoris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/nov/11/nigel-farage-boris-johnson-blame-theresa-may-for-donald-trump-snubbing-uk>
 may amuse him, but the deal will be cut-throat. If you had doubts about the
Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/ttip>, just wait and see what kind of 
deregulation, anti-working rights, anti-environmental, anti-product safety and 
food contamination rules he will impose when he shakes hands with British 
gentlemen on their knees for anything they can get.

Britain stares at him across the Atlantic, aghast at this grotesque man-baby, 
this loud-mouth buffoon and braggart, but my own assessment back then was: 
“He’s sharp as a gold-plated razor-blade.” Never underestimate the power of a 
person without self-doubt. Never underestimate the power of a gargantuan 
appetite for possessing everything. If he was frightening back then, he’s 
terrifying now.

That gigantic egotism is an Americanism with deep roots. Though not religious, 
Trump says he attendsMarble Collegiate Church 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/nov/09/donald-trump-president-billionaire-sociopath-star>
, home of the rightwing theology ofNorman Vincent Peale 
<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Norman_Vincent_Peale> – a pastor Ronald Reagan 
rewarded with the Presidential Medal of Freedom. I recognised in Trump the 
strong affirmation he drew from Peale’s bestsellerThe Power of Positive Thinking
 <https://bookshop.theguardian.com/power-of-positive-thinking.html>. Every atom 
of Trump’s being is imbued with the Peale magical thinking that says only 
believe in yourself (not God, not self-sacrifice) and you can take whatever you 
want in the here and now, not the hereafter. I can imagine Trump chanting to 
himself daily in front of the mirror the famous mantra, “Every day, in every 
way, I am getting better and better.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20attacks%20media%20and%20intelligence%20community%20in%20press%20conference%20%E2%80%93%20video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fus-news%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F11%2Fdonald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video&media=>
Trump attacks media and intelligence community in press conference 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/video/2017/jan/11/donald-trump-press-conference-president-elect-video>
When I met Trump, I had already heard Peale preach to a congregation of the 
rich, but addressing the poor too: just want it enough, and you can get it. If 
you fail that’s because you lack the necessary will, was a comforting message 
for the hyper-wealthy, confirming their meritorious deserts. To all the rest, 
the message was self-blame: you just don’t want it enough. That’s Trumpism.

Back in that 1988 interview I wrote: “Could Trump possibly make it to the 
White House? Of course not, says everyone who knows anything about American 
politics. It’s a bad joke. But then Trump has often done what can’t be done and 
if the White House can take a senile movie star, why not a casino operator?”

BuzzFeed was wrong to publish the Trump rumours. Here's why | Jane Martinson
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/12/buzzfeed-was-wrong-to-publish-the-trump-rumours-heres-why>
That bad joke has landed. Here he is, transparent in all his hateful habits. 
So far those who voted for him show no sign of regretting it. What they saw is 
what they got. The more he transgresses, the more it proves the rules were 
“establishment” fixes to deny him his rights. Ethics? Conflict of interest?
Everything is fake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/12/trump-russia-dossier-claims-fake-news-press-conference>
 except him, authentic Trump whatever he does. If there is a sex tape and if it 
bursts on to the web, that might just cause a wobble – but why wouldn’t that 
just be fake too?

In foreign relations, a shockingly out-of-control and wildly unpredictable 
finger on the nuclear button may yield extraordinary results. Others may 
crumble before him when there are no rules, when mutually assured destruction 
is no longer a game of double and triple bluff but a possibility. He may 
confound the careful Chinese and outdo the North Koreans. My own hunch is that 
those dealing with him should beware of underestimating this man. There is 
method in his madness – and no one in the world is more primed to win anything 
and everything against any odds.

• This article was amended on 13 January 2017. An earlier version referred to 
“Peale’s famous mantra”; the mantra referred to was that of Émile Coué, whose 
ideas Peale later adopted.
 