
Donald Trump <https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> struck a 
conciliatory tone with US intelligence officials after meeting with their 
leadership, but did not publicly support their conclusion that Russia 
interfered in the 2016 US presidential contest.

In a statement issued ahead of the release of a declassified version of the 
intelligence assessment, Trump said he had “tremendous respect for the work and 
service done by the men and women of this community”, describing his meeting 
with James Clapper, the director of national intelligence, and other senior 
intelligence officials, as “constructive”.

His comments came after an extraordinary public feud between Trump and leaders 
of the intelligence apparatus he will soon control. However, Trump discussed 
the hack and leak of embarrassing Democratic National Committee data in generic 
terms, suggesting he had not moved away from his earlier statements casting 
attribution for the data breach as unknowable.

“Russia, China, other countries, outside groups and people are consistently 
trying to break through the cyber infrastructure of our governmental 
institutions, businesses and organizations,” Trump said in a Friday afternoon 
statement, and underlined “there was absolutely no effect on the outcome of the 
election including the fact that there was no tampering whatsoever with voting 
machines”.

In a statement issued after the New York meeting, Trump pledged to task his 
administration with creating a 90-day plan to “combat and stop cyberattacks”.

Trump and his deputies have treated discussion of potential foreign 
interference in a US election as an effort merely to delegitimize his 
presidency before it begins.

In an interview with the New York Times hours before the meeting, the 
president-elect derided the concentration on Moscow as a “political witch-hunt” 
by bitter political opponents. “They got beaten very badly in the election,” he 
said.

Young Russian denies she aided election hackers: ‘I never work with douchebags’
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/06/russian-hacker-putin-election-alisa-shevchenko>
The interview emerged just as Clapper, CIA 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/cia> director John Brennan and FBI 
director James Comey arrived at Trump Tower to present detailed findings and 
likely motives for Moscow’s alleged interference.

Barack Obama was given the same briefing on Thursday, while senior Democrats 
and Republicans in Washington received it on Friday morning. Nancy Pelosi, the 
House minority leader, said the intelligence report was “quite a stunning 
disclosure” and parts would be made public later on Friday.

US intelligence officials told the Washington Post and broadcaster NBC that 
the classified document, said to be more than 50 pages long, says intercepted 
communications revealed senior Russian intelligence officials celebrating 
Trump’s win.

Trump called for lawmakers to investigate the leak to the media. “I am asking 
the chairs of the House and Senate committees to investigate top secret 
intelligence shared with NBC prior to me seeing it,” he tweeted on Friday.

Asked about Trump’s tweet, Josh Earnest, the White House press secretary, 
noted that Trump had earlier this weekmade a “steadfast defence” of Julian 
Assange of WikiLeaks 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/04/republicans-break-donald-trump-tweet-julian-assange-dnc-hacks>
, suggesting that this raised questions over his true motives. The 
president-elect had cited a denial by Assange that his source for Democratic 
party emails released during the election was the Russian government or “a 
state party”.

Trump argued in a phone interview with the New York Times on Friday that China 
had, “relatively recently, hacked 20 million government names ... how come 
nobody even talks about that? This is a political witch-hunt.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Trump%20on%20Russia%20hacking%20claims%3A%20'It%20could%20be%20somebody%20else'%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Trump%20on%20Russia%20hacking%20claims%3A%20%27It%20could%20be%20somebody%20else%27%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fglobal%2Fvideo%2F2017%2Fjan%2F01%2Fdonald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video&media=>
Trump on Russia hacking claims: ‘It could be somebody else’ – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/video/2017/jan/01/donald-trump-questions-russia-hacking-video>
The president-elect also cited reports this week that the Democratic National 
Committee (DNC) had refused to give theFBI 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/fbi> access to its computer servers after 
it was hacked. “The DNC wouldn’t let them see the servers,” Trump told the 
paper. “How can you be sure about hacking when you can’t even get to the 
servers?”

The DNC has previously claimed that the FBI did not ask to examine the servers 
themselves.

The unprecedented dispute broke into the open at a congressional hearing on 
Thursday as the head of US intelligence publicly defended his analysts, who he 
said “stand more resolutely” than ever behind their conclusion of “Russian 
interference in our electoral process”.

Clapper told the Senate armed services committee that there was a “difference 
between scepticism and disparagement”.

Clapper and Adm Michael Rogers, the director of the NSA, expressed concerns 
about intelligence analysts’ morale after Trump’s perceived disparagement of 
their work, with Rogers suggesting some may quit.

Clapper said Russia <https://www.theguardian.com/world/russia> “has clearly 
assumed an even more aggressive cyber posture”, and described the assault on 
the 2016 election as “multifaceted”.

“Hacking was only one part of it,” he said. “It also entailed classical 
propaganda, disinformation and fake news.”

Clapper, who has in the past signalled his discomfort with public intelligence 
testimony – and who has apologised forprevious false statements to the Senate 
on the scope of domestic NSA surveillance 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jul/02/james-clapper-senate-erroneous> 
– said he intended to “push the envelope as much as I can on the unclassified 
version” of the report “because I think the public should know as much of this 
as possible”.

The US vice-president, Joe Biden, also weighed in 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-attacks-trump-for-mindless-dismissal-of-agencies-intelligence>
. He said it would be legitimate to question intelligence and ask for more 
detail or disagree but “dangerous” to publicly criticise the agencies and claim 
to know more than them. “For a president not to have confidence in, not to be 
prepared to listen to, the myriad intelligence agencies, from defence 
intelligence to the CIA, is absolutely mindless,” he said in an interview with 
PBS.

Biden attacks Donald Trump for 'mindless' dismissal of agencies' intelligence
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/06/joe-biden-attacks-trump-for-mindless-dismissal-of-agencies-intelligence>
“The idea that you may know more than the intelligence community knows – it’s 
like saying I know more about physics than my professor. I didn’t read the 
book, I just know I know more.”

Several advisers due to join Trump and Vice-president elect Mike Pence for 
Friday’s intelligence briefing included incoming White House chief of staff 
Reince Priebus; incoming national security adviser Michael Flynn; incoming 
deputy national security adviser K T McFarland; Thomas Bossert, Trump’s pick 
for homeland security adviser; and representative Mike Pompeo of Kansas, 
Trump’s choice to head the CIA.

Sean Spicer, the incoming White House press secretary, insisted that Trump 
would go into Friday’s meeting “prepared to listen and understand how they got 
to the conclusions”. Asked on ABC’s Good Morning America if Trump would have an 
open mind, Spicer replied: “100%.”

He added: “The president-elect, I think, has a healthy scepticism on 
everything.” He added that “a rush to judgment is not in the country’s best 
interest”.

The Trump transition team has sought to weaken the impact of the intelligence 
findings on Russia meddling in the election by highlighting the US intelligence 
community’s failures over Iraq prior to the 2003 invasion. Clapper claimed that 
US intelligence collection and analysis had vastly improved since then.

“We do make mistakes, but we try to learn from them and make changes,” he 
said, insisting that the contrast between US intelligence then and now was “the 
difference of night and day”.

Amid the background of distrust is a plan Trump is reportedly considering to 
reorganise the US intelligence apparatus. According to the Wall Street Journal, 
which first reported the proposal, Trump is considering diminishing the role of 
the director of national intelligence and returning the CIA directorship, under 
Trump’s pick, Mike Pompeo, to its prime role within the intelligence community. 
Trump’s incoming press secretary Sean Spicer called the report “100% false”.

Since Trump’s election, some career US intelligence officials have told the 
Guardian they fear retaliation for their assessment of Russian electoral 
interference. Clapper, who resigned in November and will leave his post when 
Trump is inaugurated, said the current intelligence leadership had not been 
consulted any reorganisation plan.


Also on Friday, before his meeting with intelligence bosses, Trump met with 
editors of Condé Nast, whose titles include Vogue, the New Yorker, and Vanity 
Fair. He tweeted to say he had been asked to meet with them by Anna Wintour, 
the Vogue editor, who backed Hillary Clinton during the election.
 