
Many thousands of people joined the Labour party and voted for Jeremy Corbyn 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/jeremy-corbyn> as leader because he 
offered something uniquely different to other politicians as he appeared to say 
what he meant and mean what he said. So when he asked me by email, as Labour 
leader, to support the Labour In campaign I willing did so. While disappointed 
with the EU referendum result, the motion passed unanimously at conference – 
“Unless the final settlement proves to be acceptable, then the option of 
retaining EU membership should be retained. The final settlement should 
therefore be subject to approval, through parliament and potentially through a 
general election” – gave me hope that Labour was committed to staying in the EU.

You report (10 January) Corbyn as saying 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
 that “Labour is not wedded to freedom of movement for EU citizens as a point 
of principle. But nor can we afford to lose full access to the European single 
market on which so many British businesses and jobs depend.” Yet the EU says 
that the single market goes with the freedom of movement. It really is time 
that the Labour leadership started to take note of party policy on Brexit and 
the 65-70% of Labour members and voters who voted remain. A good start would be 
to oppose invoking article 50 and act like a real opposition.
David Melvin
Mossley, Greater Manchester

Corbyn on Brexit: UK can be better off out of the EU
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/09/jeremy-corbyn-uk-is-better-off-out-of-eu-with-managed-migration>
• After scratching their heads for months, Labour 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/labour> have finally caught up with us. 
We have been saying for months that it is inevitable, not probable, that Brexit 
will happen. So, in November we published our three commonsense goals that any 
Brexit plan should meet: secure people’s jobs and livelihoods, fully fund the 
NHS, and create a fair immigration system that benefits our country. Since then 
thousands of supporters have joined us. We’re delighted that common sense has 
finally prevailed with one of the two major political parties in the UK, which 
means we’re now just waiting for the government to arrive at the party. Let’s 
hope they bring a decent crate of lager rather than a cheap three-litre bottle 
of cider.
Kyle Taylor
Director, Smart Brexit

• Jeremy Corbyn and his circle, having made the political calculation that 
Labour has more to salvage by appeasing Brexit voters than by placating remain 
supporters, have cobbled together policies with unpromising historical 
precedents. Copying Ukip and the Tories by restricting the free movement of 
labour resembles payingDanegeld <https://www.britannica.com/topic/Danegeld> to 
an enemy who has occupied your territory. Promising to revive ailing British 
industries by recovering the power to offer them state aid looks remarkably 
like Stalin’s policy of “socialism in one country”. Nine hundred years apart in 
time, these policies have one thing in common: they both failed.
Glyn Turton
Baildon, West Yorkshire

• Aditya Chakrabortty should not be disappointed by Corbyn’s “triangulation” 
on freedom of movement (Is it time for a maximum wage cap? Our panel responds 
<https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2017/jan/10/jeremy-corbyn-maximum-pay-panel>
, theguardian.com, 10 January). Freedom of movement is currently synonymous 
with freedom for employers to degrade pay and conditions at one end of the 
labour market, and freedom to asset-strip poorer economies at the other end.

It does not have to be so but, as Corbyn has suggested, foreign workers would 
not be so attractive to employers if they could not be exploited and had to 
join a trade union.

Calls to stop the misuse of reserve armies of overseas labour should be 
supported, regardless of whether or not a reduction in immigration is a 
byproduct. Any other position objectively sustains exploitation and the 
neoliberal enterprise.
Peter McKenna
Liverpool

PMQs verdict: Corbyn has best of a home fixture for Labour
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/global/2017/jan/11/pmqs-verdict-jeremy-corbyn-has-best-of-home-fixture-labour-theresa-may>
• Jeremy Corbyn now campaigns for freedom of movement in Europe 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/europe-news> for goods, services and 
capital, but not for people. The champion of the “true” left now campaigns for 
Theresa May’s reactionary project. It is as wrong as it is futile: readers of 
the Sun and the Mail will not flock to Labour as a result.

In France, this process goes by the name of “lepénisation of minds” (“la 
lepénisation des esprits”). Marine Le Pen doesn’t need to win elections to hold 
power. Politicians of all persuasions now speak her language. It is very 
worrying to see the same mechanism so effectively at work in the UK.
François Chabat
London

• Now that Corbyn has “insisted Labour has no principled objection to ending 
free movement”, one can only guess what the next objection the rightwing MPs 
will make to his leadership. Could it be that those who are “intensely relaxed” 
about people getting obscenely rich will now condemn his statement on the radio 
about capping high pay? After all, how could the leader of the Labour party in 
this country possibly see anything wrong with top bosses earning in three and a 
half days what the average worker earns in a year?
Bernie Evans
Liverpool 

• Join the debate – email guardian.letters@theguardian.com 
<mailto:guardian.letters@theguardian.com>

• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/tone/letters>
 