
Alexis Tsipras <https://www.theguardian.com/world/alexis-tsipras>, the Greek 
prime minister, likes to shake things up and, in recent days, he has reverted 
to form. After 16 months of faithfully toeing the line, the leader rebelled, 
cautiously at first and then almost jubilantly, casting off the fiscal 
straightjacket that has encased his government with thinly veiled glee.

First came the announcement that low-income pensioners, forced to survive in 
tax-heavy post-crisis Greece on €800 or less a month,would receive a one-off, 
pre-Christmas bonus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/09/greece-under-fire-over-christmas-bonus-for-low-income-pensioners>
. Then came the news that Greeks living on Aegean isles which have borne the 
brunt of refugee flows would not be subject to a sales tax enforced at the 
behest of creditors keeping the debt-stricken country afloat.

Finally, another announcement both antagonising and pointed: 30,000 children 
living in poverty-stricken areas of northernGreece 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/greece> will henceforth be entitled to free 
meals in schools.

The reaction wasn’t instant but, when it came, it was delivered with force. 
The European Stability Mechanism, the eurozone’s financing arm, announced that 
short-term relief measures, agreed only a week before to ease Greece’s debt 
pile,would be frozen with immediate effect 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/dec/14/greece-on-collision-course-with-lenders-as-esm-freezes-debt-relief>
.

It did not take long before the German finance ministry, under the unwavering 
stewardship of Wolfgang Schäuble, followed suit, requesting that creditor 
institutions assess whether Tsipras had acted in flagrant violation of Athens’ 
bailout commitments with his unilateral moves.

The leftist insisted that the aid – €61m in supplementary support for pensions 
and €11.5m for the school meals – would be taken from the primary surplus his 
government, unexpectedly, had managed to achieve. The assistance would help 
“heal the wounds of crisis”.

“We want to ... alleviate all those who have over these difficult years made 
huge sacrifices in the name of Europe,” he announced before holding talks with 
German chancellorAngela Merkel <https://www.theguardian.com/world/angela-merkel>
 late Friday.

Those who live in Athens know that while the Greek crisis may ebb and flow, it 
never goes away.

Everyone involved – Europe’s paymaster, Germany, the 19-member euro group of 
eurozone finance ministers, the ESM and the International Monetary Fund – are 
acutely aware that almost any move could reignite the problems. “Let us not 
play shadowy games with Greece’s future,” wrote EU economic affairs 
commissioner Pierre Moscovici in the pages of theFinancial Times, urging that 
decisions be made “in the common interest”.
 <> Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftsipras-greek-spending-spree-flouts-bailout-rules-syriza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_fb%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&picture=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40c22f0905989acc58a21f2049a2c8a6df3b11ae%2F186_327_2987_1793%2F2987.jpg>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Tsipras%E2%80%99s%20spending%20spree%20may%20be%20relief%20to%20Greeks%20but%20it%20won%E2%80%99t%20end%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftsipras-greek-spending-spree-flouts-bailout-rules-syriza%3FCMP%3Dshare_btn_tw%26page%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Tsipras%E2%80%99s%20spending%20spree%20may%20be%20relief%20to%20Greeks%20but%20it%20won%E2%80%99t%20end%20crisis&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fbusiness%2F2016%2Fdec%2F17%2Ftsipras-greek-spending-spree-flouts-bailout-rules-syriza%3Fpage%3Dwith%3Aimg-2%23img-2&media=https%3A%2F%2Fmedia.guim.co.uk%2F40c22f0905989acc58a21f2049a2c8a6df3b11ae%2F186_327_2987_1793%2F2987.jpg>
 Tsipras held talks with Angela Merkel on Friday 16 December. Photograph: 
Michele Tantussi/Getty Images 
But, inexorably, the next act has already begun. Seven years after the scale 
of its deficit was revealed, prompting the first of three bailouts to avert 
bankruptcy, Greece is nowhere near economic recovery. Despite rosy 
prognostications by the country’s central bank – on Friday, it predicted that 
the economy, which grew by a mere 0.1% in 2016, would expand by 2.5% next year 
and 3% in 2018 – the nation has lost a third of its economic output.

The byproducts of the crisis, starting with an unemployment rate of 27% – and 
52% among the young – are the backdrop against which the drama is played.

Tsipras has seen his support haemorrhage as fury has grown over his embrace of 
the very austerity measures his Syriza party once pledged to overthrow. If 
elections were held tomorrow, he would lose outright to the conservative New 
Democracy party shown to be leading by as many as 15 percentage points in a 
recent poll.

But that also makes the leftist leader unpredictable. Demands for further tax 
increases, wage and pension cuts – reforms Athens says it is under immense 
pressure to apply by the International Monetary Fund if it is to come anywhere 
close to achieving a projected primary budget surplus of 3.5% by 2018 – have 
created a tinderbox situation. And that, say analysts, is one that at 42, with 
much of his political career still before him, Tsipras may well elect to 
exploit. “All scenarios are open, including fresh elections,” says professor 
Dimitris Keridis, who teaches political scientist at Athens’ Pandeion 
University.

“He’s playing the resistance fighter on the one hand and the leader who wants 
resolution and Greece to remain in the euro on the other,” he told theObserver. 
“But the reality is very hard and he is also hostage to his rhetoric. That 
means he could go either way.”

Which way depends to great degree on how the lender institutions also react. A 
report looking into the impact of the social benefits – passed into law on 
Thursday – will be evaluated next week.

The appetite for more Greek drama when Europe is dealing with crises on so 
many other fronts is limited. But there are rules – and uncompromising 
positions – that have a force of their own and may well propel the drama 
forward. This time around, away from Greece, the main actors are in open 
conflict.

Speculation is rife that the IMF may not decide until the spring whether it 
should support the latest bailout, with officials in Washington not only making 
the case for more debt relief, but citing deep-seated disagreement over 
Germany’s demand that Athens achieve such a high primary surplus in the years 
ahead. Without the IMF on board, it is doubtful whether Berlin can muster the 
legislative backing to keep disbursing funds from the €86bn programme agreed 
last summer.
 