
In these times of turmoil, the escalating crisis in Turkey struggles in the 
competition for coverage. For some, last week’sfailed coup and its aftermath 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/erdogan-purge-fears-of-wider-crackdown-on-political-opponents-turkey>
 are simply a reminder of an increasingly unstable world, perhaps brought 
closer to home because the country is a popular tourist resort. But make no 
mistake: as Turkey’s ever more repressive AKP government wages war against 
democracy, our own rulers are complicit.

Turkey is our Nato ally. It is a “priority market 
<https://inews.co.uk/essentials/news/uk/campaigners-call-turkey-removed-expanded-uk-arms-export-list/>
” for our arms exports – £550m worth. Britain’s new prime minister has declared 
that this country “stands firmly in support 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/pm-commons-statement-on-future-of-trident-18-july-2016>
 of Turkey’s democratically elected government and institutions”. But rather 
than condemning the mounting crackdown, Theresa May offered only a weak “call 
for the observance of Turkey’s constitutional order”, and stressed “the 
importance of the rule of law”.

Consider the facts. Turkey has long been a serial violator of human rights, 
but endured all too little criticism – let alone tangible consequences – from 
its western allies. In the war with Kurdish guerrillas fighting for 
independence in the 1990s, the country’s security forces destroyed up to 4,000 
villages and settlements – often byburning them 
<http://www.nytimes.com/2003/10/24/world/kurds-are-finally-heard-turkey-burned-our-villages.html>
 to the ground. Hundreds of thousands of civilians were displaced, and an 
estimated 30,000 people died. The country is one of the worst jailers of 
journalists. “Since 2013, the AKP government has become increasingly 
authoritarian, increasingly intolerant of dissent, and has resorted to extreme 
measures such as silencing the press,” says Andrew Gardner, Amnesty 
International’s Turkey researcher.

Erdoğan refuses to rule out execution of failed Turkey coup leaders
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/jul/18/erdogan-purge-fears-of-wider-crackdown-on-political-opponents-turkey>
The situation only deteriorated after the resumption of conflict with Kurdish 
PKK fighters 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jul/28/turkey-urged-nato-meeting-not-abandon-kurdish-peace-process>
 in July 2015. “The media faced unprecedented pressure from the government,” was
Amnesty’s verdict 
<https://www.amnesty.org/en/countries/europe-and-central-asia/turkey/report-turkey/>
, and anti-terror laws were used to launch mass prosecutions. Last September 
British lawyers wrote adamning report  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/sep/28/british-lawyers-warn-of-human-rights-violations-in-turkey>
about Turkey’s human rights record, citing the rigging of the judiciary, 
internet censorship, restrictions of freedom of expression, and degrading 
treatment for detainees. “Turkey’s allies have been remarkably silent in 
calling upon Turkey to cease these violations,” says Gardner. “Surely the 
British government can’t be shocked by what’s going on in Turkey. The writing 
has been on the wall for several years.”

According to Hisyar Özsoy, a senior spokesperson for Turkey’s leftist 
opposition People’s Democratic party (HDP): “Europe has been so nice about 
President Erdoğan’s authoritarian tendencies because they think it can help 
temporarily stop the flow of refugees.”
Facebook  
<https://www.facebook.com/dialog/share?app_id=180444840287&href=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkey-coup-military-faction-fails-to-topple-erdogan-video&picture=>
Twitter  
<https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=Turkey%20coup%20attempt%3A%20what%20happened%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkey-coup-military-faction-fails-to-topple-erdogan-video>
Pinterest  
<http://www.pinterest.com/pin/create/button/?description=Turkey%20coup%20attempt%3A%20what%20happened%20%E2%80%93%C2%A0video&url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.theguardian.com%2Fworld%2Fvideo%2F2016%2Fjul%2F16%2Fturkey-coup-military-faction-fails-to-topple-erdogan-video&media=>
Turkey coup: military faction fails to topple Erdogan – video 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/video/2016/jul/16/turkey-coup-military-faction-fails-to-topple-erdogan-video>
We must all agree that there was no justification for last week’s failed coup. 
“Opposing the coup was a matter of principle for us,” says Özsoy, “even though 
there are so many severe problems about the functioning of democratic 
institutions.”

The instigators must face justice, not least for crimes Amnesty says include 
firing into crowds from helicopters. “But it has to be that: justice,” says 
Gardner. That includes justice for civilians who, under the watchful eye of 
police officers, attacked unarmed soldiers.

And “justice” does not mean holding detainees incommunicado in unofficial 
detention centres; it doesn’t mean ill-treatment in detention, which 
photographs of accused soldiers with bruises and injuries to their faces attest 
to; and it certainly doesn’t mean the reintroduction of the death penalty, as 
senior Turkish politicians now threaten. Nor does it mean detentions that range 
wider than any coup might justify. Judges and prosecutors are among the 7,500 
arrested: when they are questioned it is not about the coup, but about their 
political affiliations.

But our Turkish allies are now exploiting the failed coup to the full by 
implementing a mass purge of up to 50,000 people, including teachers and 
university deans. Journalists are having their press cards revoked – without 
which they are unable to work.

“It’s turning into collective punishment,” says Özsoy. “They will expand this 
repression and will include all dissents in this country.”

As Gardner puts it, this is “discrimination based on their political 
opinions”. From severe sanctions to loss of livelihood, those purged will 
suffer.

And so, critically, will an already battered Turkish democracy and secular 
system – as well as wider security and peace. “The country is on the brink of 
civil war,” warns Özsoy. Yes, the west may believe it will win concessions, not 
least on refugees. But, as the HDP points out, at what longer-term cost? If 
Turkey descends into political polarisation, violence and conflict – not least 
when it comes to war with Kurdish fighters – what will that mean not just for 
Turkey, but for Europe and the Middle East? An attempt to eliminate legal 
political opposition in Turkey will not be as straightforward as Erdoğan’s 
goons suggest.

This is where the role of Britain and the west is critical. Whenever the 
behaviour of western allies – and the responsibility of western states – is 
highlighted, the response is often “whataboutery”: what about even worse 
behaviour committed by regimes hostile to the west, such as North Korea? Where 
are the protests outside Britain’s North Korean embassy?

But our governments are not complicit in North Korean totalitarianism: we do 
not arm Pyongyang’s dictators, or support them, let alone form alliances with 
them. Our governments frequently issue indictments of North Korea’s despicable 
lack of human rights.

When it comes to allies such as Turkey, our government’s failure to publicly 
condemn, let alone ensure there are consequences, renders it culpable. If we as 
citizens put pressure on our government to take a stand on human rights abuses 
in, say, Turkey, Israel or Saudi Arabia, there is at least the possibility of 
fostering change.

All too often, “stability” trumps democracy when it comes to western foreign 
policy. Turkey’s western allies have a responsibility to stand against the 
curtailing of basic rights and freedoms, and to support democratisation. To 
fail to do so risks peace and security for all of us. These might be febrile 
times, and many injustices are being committed. But if you believe in democracy 
and human rights, you have a responsibility to demand that our government 
stands for both.
 