
Publishers in Turkey are often in court, but for the first time the 
authorities have censored a book that is not even finished. On 24 March police 
launched a series of raids on newspapers, publishers and even cells at Silivri 
prison in an attempt to pick up drafts ofThe Army of the Imam 
<http://theopinions.info/thearmyoftheimam.htm>, a book the investigative 
journalistAhmet Sik <http://ahmetsik.com/> had nearly finished when he was 
taken into custody in early March.

An Istanbul court ordered all his work to be seized. "Operation Delete has 
started," wrote Ertugrul Mavioglu, a journalist on the Radikal daily. Police 
forced him to wipe a copy of his friend's manuscript from his computer.

The public prosecutor alleges that Sik belongs to the Ergenekon organisation, 
purportedly an ultranationalist group, and is trying to undermine the moderate 
Islamist government. But inarresting Sik and another journalist, Nedim Sener 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/greenslade/2011/mar/04/turkey-press-freedom>
, who has criticised the police, the courts prompted an outcry among Turkish 
democrats who maintain that the Ergenekon affair 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2011/mar/17/turkey-erdogan-ergenekon-arrests>
 is just an excuse for settling political scores.

Demonstrations in support of the writers were held in Istanbul and the capital 
Ankara. "Anyone who touches Gülen gets burnt," Sik shouted, as he was led away 
in handcuffs.

The Army of the Imam was expected to throw light on the murky links between 
the police and the religious brotherhood led by the Turkish imam Fethullah 
Gülen, who has been living in exile in the US since 1999. His followers control 
whole swaths of the nation's economy, operate schools all over the world, and 
have interests in banking, healthcare, humanitarian action and the media. The 
elitist, secretive Islamic organisation has patiently infiltrated state 
apparatus over the past 20 years.

In a book published last year a former police chief, Hanefi Avci, lodged 
various allegations. His book was a bestseller when he too was imprisoned, 
charged with "entertaining links with a terrorist organisation", the 
Revolutionary Headquarters.

From his home in Pennsylvania, Gülen, 70, issued a statement via his lawyer, 
denying involvement in the arrest of the various writers. "Even books that have 
already been proved to be illegal are still being published," Gülen said, 
according to a CNNTürk television report. He may yet be proved right. The 
Imaminordusu.com website claims Sik's book will be published on the net on 11 
April.

This article originally appeared in Le Monde <http://www.lemonde.fr/>
 