
Malcolm Turnbull <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/malcolm-turnbull> 
has rejected One Nation’s proposed medicinal cannabis amnesty, saying the 
government does not have the power and an amnesty for dangerous illicit 
substances would be “irresponsible”.

In an interview with ABC radio in Brisbane, the prime minister also reassured 
Australians that it was “unlikely” classified information had leaked as the 
result ofYahoo <https://www.theguardian.com/technology/yahoo> accounts of 
ministers being compromised in 2013.

Immediately before the interview Steve Dickson, the former Queensland Liberal 
National party MP whodefected to One Nation on Friday over the cannabis issue 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/13/one-nation-poach-lnp-steve-dickson-queensland-pauline-hanson>
, told ABC that calling an amnesty would help Turnbull demonstrate he had “not 
lost touch”.

Voters turn off Bill Shorten but Labor continues to lead Coalition, poll shows
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/17/voters-turn-off-bill-shorten-but-labor-continues-to-lead-coalition-poll-shows>
Queensland <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/queensland> has passed 
a bill legalising the use of medicinal suppliers but there are no licensed 
suppliers yet in Australia, raising fears that people could be prosecuted for 
using the drug for pain relief.

“We don’t have the power to issue a general amnesty,” Turnbull said.

He warned the health department was concerned people were “treating themselves 
with a powerful medicine sourced from elicit market” because there were “no 
controls on the safety and quality of medicines bought this way”.

Turnbull cited the example of two women in New South Wales hospitalised 
because the strength of cannabis used in their treatment was “much higher than 
expected”.

“It would be irresponsible to be giving a free-ranging amnesty over conduct 
that is against the law ... And may well involve using substances that are very 
very dangerous indeed.”

He said the government had set up a medicinal cannabis licensing scheme to 
allow for cultivation of safe products but conceded none were yet licensed in 
Australia.

Turnbull said medicinal cannabis could be imported under a Therapeutic Goods 
Administration scheme, if it was prescribed by a doctor.

Addressing Pauline Hanson’s claim she was invited to Donald Trump’s 
inauguration 
<https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2017/jan/16/would-you-believe-it-pauline-hanson-ponders-invite-to-trump-inauguration>
 and the fact he was not, the prime minister said his understanding was it was 
not the practice to invite foreign leaders such as himself and he “wouldn’t 
lose a moment’s sleep” if a One Nation parliamentarian attended.

Medicinal cannabis crops now legal in Australia
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/society/2016/oct/30/medicinal-cannabis-crops-now-legal-in-australia>
Turnbull appeared uncertain of what the Department of Foreign Affairs and 
Trade had already confirmed 
<http://www.news.com.au/finance/work/leaders/pauline-hanson-gets-trump-inauguration-tickets/news-story/5d89e76cdcb23317f8e60ba133b314da>
, that Australia’s ambassador, Joe Hockey, would attend. Turnbull said Hockey 
would attend if other diplomats did.

Turnbull said Hockey had secured excellent access to the incoming Trump 
administration and he had personally spoken to Trump about the Trans-Pacific 
Partnership.

He attacked Labor for refusing to pledge support for a parliamentary motion in 
favour of the TPP.

On Tuesday ABC reported that thousands of Australian government officials 
<http://www.abc.net.au/news/2017-01-17/senior-australian-politician-among-victims-of-massive-yahoo-hack/8185162>
, including high-profile politicians and senior defence officials, were among 
theone billion victims of the Yahoo data breach 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>
 in 2013.

Among those reportedly affected were the social services minister, Christian 
Porter, the shadow treasurer, Chris Bowen, the Victorian premier, Daniel 
Andrews, the Liberal MP Andrew Hastie, the opposition health spokeswoman, 
Catherine King, and the Liberal senator Cory Bernardi.

Turnbull said he had not been compromised in the Yahoo attack. He offered IT 
advice from his time as chairman of OzEmail including setting up two-factor 
identification and setting better passwords than “password”, “internet” or 
“computer”.

Turnbull said he would get a report from his cybersecurity adviser, Alastair 
MacGibbon, about the Yahoo leak but noted since it occurred in 2013 it may have 
been before theCoalition <https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/coalition> 
was elected to government.

“It begs the question as to what was in those accounts and clearly, in terms 
of classified government information, can only be transmitted and used on 
approved government communications systems.”

Turnbull concluded it would be “very unlikely” there were security issues for 
the named politicians.

On Tuesday MacGibbon told ABC TV there hadn’t been any indication that 
sensitive government information was on any of the politicians’ or officials’ 
accounts.

“It’s just that they used a government email address as a recovery email 
address, if they lost their password, for example,” he said.

“There is a chance that criminals would blackmail people. I would say if they 
wanted to do it, they would have done it already.”

Yahoo hack: 1bn accounts compromised by biggest data breach in history
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/dec/14/yahoo-hack-security-of-one-billion-accounts-breached>
MacGibbon said politicians were supposed to keep personal and public emails 
separate, so it was good that they had separate accounts.

Turnbull offered support for the Liberal MP Andrew Laming, but said his 
daughter, Daisy, who is a teacher, had expressed concern abouthis comments on 
the supposedly generous working hours of Queensland teachers 
<http://www.news.com.au/national/breaking-news/laming-takes-aim-at-teachers-cops-rebukes/news-story/9419bbd3b655b0e683bbf6235a6fb14f>
.

“She had a very strong reaction, so I think Andrew will have received some 
very emphatic feedback from teachers in his electorate and elsewhere,” he said.

Turnbull said teachers worked very hard and were “at the front line of our 
future”.
 