
For the first time, Twitter’s chief executive, Jack Dorsey, has described his 
“complicated” feelings about the US president-elect Donald Trump’s use of the 
social media service.

Speaking at the Code Commerce conference 
<https://events.recode.net/events/code-commerce-series-dec-2016/> in 
California, Dorsey demurred when asked if he felt responsible for Trump’s 
election. “America is responsible for Donald Trump being president,” he said, 
before conceding that, more than any other candidate, Trump excelled in his use 
of Twitter.


“He’s known how to use it for quite some time. I think it’s an important time 
for the company and service. And having the president-elect on our service, 
using it as a direct line of communication, allows everyone to see what’s on 
his mind in the moment. I think that’s interesting. I think it’s fascinating. I 
haven’t seen that before.

“We’re definitely entering a new world where everything is on the surface and 
we can all see it in real time and we can have conversations about it. Where 
does that go? I’m not really sure. But it’s definitely been fascinating to 
learn from.”

Asked how he felt about Trump’s use of the service, Dorsey said: “Complicated”.

“I feel very proud of the role of the service and what it stands for and 
everything that we’ve done, and that continues to accelerate every single day. 
Especially as it’s had such a spotlight on it through his usage and through the 
election.”


More than any other social network, Twitter has taken a stand against the 
surge of far-right activity that followed Donald Trump’s victory. A few days 
after the election,the company announced a host of new safety features 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/16/twitter-suspends-american-far-right-activists-accounts>
, including a crackdown on hate speech and a renewed focus on training its 
moderators to better react to threats of violence and hateful conduct.

“The amount of abuse, bullying, and harassment seen across the internet has 
risen sharply over the past few years,”Twitter 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/twitter> said at the time. “In the 
worst cases, this type of conduct threatens human dignity, which we should all 
stand together to protect.”

That same day, Twitter banned a host of notable “alt-right” users 
<https://www.theguardian.com/technology/2016/nov/16/twitter-suspends-american-far-right-activists-accounts>
, members of the far-right subculture who push a meme-filled variant of 
traditional white supremacist views. Banned accounts included that of Richard B 
Spencer, a white nationalist Trump supporter who hosted a conference last month
where supporters gave Nazi salutes 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/nov/21/alt-right-conference-richard-spencer-white-nationalists>
.

While Twitter has received praise from some for taking action, the move has 
also raised difficult questions for the company: what would it do if the 
president-elect tweeted views that his supporters have been banned from the 
network for expressing?
 