
Politicians including Britain’s foreign secretary, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, arrived in Geneva on Thursday for 
a landmark conference as the UK, Greece and Turkey – Cyprus’s three 
postcolonial guarantor powers – joined talks aimed at bringing peace to the 
island.


Britain believes the chances of a framework agreement of substance have 
increased now that the Turkish prime minister, Binali Yıldırım, has also agreed 
to attend.Turkey <https://www.theguardian.com/world/turkey> has always said it 
would only be represented at such a senior level at the conference if there was 
serious progress.

The UN secretary general, Antonio Guterres, hailed progress in the talks but 
cautioned against hopes of a “quick fix”. He trumpeted “enormous progress” 
since the two Cypriot leaders embarked on issues like territory, property and 
relations with the European Union, but said “we need to find a number of 
instruments” when it comes to security options.

One of the west’s most intractable disputes had edged closer to resolution on 
Wednesday as the leaders of Cyprus’s Greek and Turkish communities discussed 
the critical issue of territorial realignment.


Nicos Anastasiades and Mustafa Akıncı moved to the make-or-break issue of 
territorial trade-offs and the contours of an envisioned two-state federation 
on the third day of peace talks without a breakdown in negotiations.

Any agreement would however require further talks ahead of a summer 
referendum. Johnson will offer half of the territory currently held by UK 
sovereign bases on the island, a former British colony, to ease land swaps. The 
UK will also say it is open to ending its formal role as security guarantor if 
other parties agree.


“The UK fully supports the settlement process and is ready and willing to help 
in any way it can,” Johnson said ahead of his arrival. “I hope that all those 
involved will approach the talks with a sense of openness and flexibility. I 
believe that if approached in this light, a solution is in reach to bring 
lasting peace to Cyprus”.

In a country where more than 200,000 people lost their homes, territory and 
the boundaries both states would have is key to a solution. For the first time, 
away fromCyprus <https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus> in the 
psychologically less charged atmosphere of Switzerland, the two leaders pored 
over maps and tackled the thorny question of land swaps and percentages on the 
war-torn island.


“We have dealt with some of the most difficult issues,” said Espen Barth Eide, 
a former Norwegian foreign minister who is overseeing the negotiations at the
United Nations <https://www.theguardian.com/world/unitednations> headquarters 
in Geneva. “We have touched upon almost all of them, we have solved many of 
them and we are close to resolving some other issues.”

Earlier, Eide had described the discussions as “the moment of truth”. But he 
also warned there was still work to doamid growing signs of slippage in the 
timetables 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/10/cyprus-reunification-talks-making-slow-progress>
 the two leaders had originally agreed to keep.

Fear and loathing in Nicosia: will peace talks unify Europe's last divided 
capital?
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/cities/2017/jan/12/fear-loathing-nicosia-peace-talks-unify-divided-cypriot-capital>
Delegates instead spoke of an “open-ended” process in which the clock would 
stop if necessary. One said: “We recognise that issues that have taken years to 
address cannot be solved in a day. Negotiations may well extend into the 
weekend. We may adopt that age-old conference policy of stopping the clock.”


Others said that they had not booked return flights out of Geneva.
Cyprus map 
<https://interactive.guim.co.uk/uploader/embed/2017/01/cyprus-zip/giv-3902KK51jqoPkoCt/>
For Anastasiades, land swaps present by far the most delicate stage of the 
negotiations, which are highly emotive among his own constituency.


Although Cypriots from both sides of the ethnic divide rallied in support of a 
solution on Tuesday – braving icy temperatures to sing in the name of peace 
near the UN-patrolled buffer zone that divides the capital, Nicosia – the 
leader also faces considerable opposition from a cohort of rejectionist 
politicians. Six of the eight parties represented in Cyprus’s parliament oppose 
a settlement, mostly on the grounds that no deal would ever properly compensate 
those who lost property and homes when Turkey invaded in 1974.

Anastasiades, who sees this as the last chance to reunite Cyprus 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/cyprus>, has the daunting task of convincing 
the Turks to surrender enough territory to allow 90,000 refugees to return to 
their homes.

Cyprus peace talks – all you need to know
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/news/2017/jan/09/cyprus-peace-talks-all-you-need-to-know>
Under Akıncı, the Turkish Cypriots have signalled they would be prepared to 
give up territory under their control but only if granted more power-sharing 
rights, including a rotating presidency. That is anathema to Greek 
nationalists, who argue that as the majority population they should exercise 
more power.

Eide said competing maps presented by the leaders were expected to be seen and 
studied by only a handful of aides in the respective negotiating teams before 
being stored in a UN vault, in acknowledgment of the sensitive diplomatic task 
ahead.

The framework of an agreement could be built, he said, if the foreign 
ministers of Cyprus’s three guarantor powers agreed to post-unification 
security arrangements during Thursday’s meeting.

Turkey has maintained an estimated 40,000 troops on the island since 1974. A 
far smaller contingent has also been stationed on the island by Athens, which 
now says the guarantor system should be dismantled – in sharp contrast to 
Ankara, which insists troops must stay.

The European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, said: “I really think, 
without over-dramatising what is happening in Geneva, that this is the very 
last chance to see the island being recomposed in a normal way.”
 