
The UK’s top bosses will have made more money by lunchtime on Wednesday than 
the typical UK worker will earn all year, according to an analysis that exposes 
the gulf between executives and the rest of the workforce.

On “Fat Cat Wednesday” campaigners say that public anger with elites will 
intensify unless action is taken to tackle excess among executives at a time 
whenpressures on household budgets are rising 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2017/jan/03/petrol-food-prices-uk-rising-2017>
.

The High Pay Centre calculated that the average FTSE 100 boss now earns more 
than £1,000 an hour, meaning they will pass the UK average salary of £28,200 by 
around midday on Wednesday. The thinktank said that afterenjoying rapid 
earnings growth in recent years 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/aug/08/uks-top-bosses-earned-10-pay-rise-2015-average-salary-hit-55m>
, leadingbosses now typically earn 129 times more than their employees 
<http://highpaycentre.org/pubs/10-pay-rise-thatll-do-nicely>.

Sir Martin Sorrell: I'm worth every penny I'm paid
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/18/sir-martin-sorrell-im-worth-every-penny-im-paid>
It hopes its stark findings will act as a spur to the prime minister, Theresa 
May, to act on her promises to create an economy that works for everyone. In 
the political fallout from last year’s Brexit vote that catapulted her to power,
May tapped into voters’ frustrations over inequality 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2016/jul/11/theresa-may-tory-leadership-pitch-andrea-leadsom>
 and since being made prime minister she has vowed to reform capitalism.


Stefan Stern, the head of the High Pay <https://www.theguardian.com/money/pay> 
Centre, said forcing companies to publish pay ratios would be a good start.

“Our new year calculation is not designed to make the return to work harder 
than it already is. But ‘Fat Cat Wednesday’ is an important reminder of the 
continuing problem of the unfair pay gap in the UK,” he said.

“We hope the government will recognise that further reform to pay practices 
are needed if this gap is to be closed.”

He said giving workers a seat at the table when pay is set, something May 
aproposed but has recentlysoftened  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/21/theresa-may-force-firms-appoint-workers-boards-cbi>
her approach on, would help restrain executive rewards.

The rise in pay for FTSE 100 bosses such as Sir Martin Sorrell 
<https://www.theguardian.com/media/2016/apr/18/sir-martin-sorrell-im-worth-every-penny-im-paid>
 of the advertising company WPP and Bob Dudley of BP is in stark contrast to 
the fortunes of average workers, who have seen their living standards stagnate 
as a result of slow earnings growth since the financial crisis.

Frances O’Grady, the TUC general secretary, said the prime minister must stick 
to her commitment to put workers on boards.

'Negligible' link between executive pay and firm's performance, says study
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
Responding to the High Pay Centre analysis, she said: “Working people deserve 
a fair share of the wealth they help create. But while the pay of top 
executives has been rocketing up, the average weekly wage is still worth less 
than it was nine years ago.”

Campaigners at the Equality Trust highlighted the gulf between UK executives 
and key workers. Using High Pay Centre figures for 2015, it found average 
annual pay for a FTSE 100 boss was £5.48m, or 401 times that of a minimum wage 
worker. It was also 172 times more than a nurse’s pay and 145 times more than a 
teacher’s.

The trust’s executive director, Wanda Wyporska, said: “Bosses continue to rake 
in millions even when they fail, but those who care for us, protect us and 
teach our children are left struggling to get by. It’s clear our priorities are 
all wrong.”

The Fat Cat Wednesday calculation assumes bosses started back at work after 
Christmas on 2 January and is based on median FTSE 100 chief executive pay of 
£3.97m in 2015 – up from £3.87m in 2014.

The hourly pay rate of £1,009 is calculated on the assumption that FTSE bosses 
work 12 hours a day, including three out of every four weekends, and take fewer 
than 10 days holiday a year. The “national living wage” is £7.20 an hour for 
over-25s.

Stern said the big increase in executive pay in recent years appears to have 
been driven by “performance-related” awards, but highlightednew research 
published last week 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
 that poured cold water on the link between pay and performance, suggesting it 
had beennegligible 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/27/negligible-link-between-executive-pay-and-firms-performance-says-study>
.

Top Canada CEOs have already earned more than average worker's 2017 salary
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/03/canada-ceo-pay-2017-earnings-average-worker>
Labour market experts said that despite continued talk of reforming executive 
pay, the gulf between top bosses and average workers was likely to widen this 
year as employers hold off pay rises because of the uncertainty surrounding 
Brexit and cost pressures from a weak pound.

Sterling’s fall since the referendum has raised import costs and is expected 
to stoke inflation, meaning that those workers who do get a pay rise are still 
likely to be worse off in real terms.

“The situation is likely to get worse before it gets better,” said Ben 
Willmott, the head of public policy at the Chartered Institute of Personnel and 
Development, the trade group for the human resources sector.

“Higher inflation in 2017 will mean many frontline workers will face a pay 
squeeze at a time when FTSE 100 CEO pay is already 129 times that of the 
average employee.”


He also highlighted CIPD research that found six in 10 employees identified 
CEO pay as an issue that demotivates them at work. “The message from the 
workforce is clear: ‘the more you take, the less we’ll give’,” he said.
 