
Britain has been accused of cowering in the face of Donald Trump 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/donaldtrump> after becoming involved in a 
second row in 24 hours with European leaders over the future of the Middle East 
peace process.


The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/boris>, with support from Estonia and 
Hungary, blocked an EU foreign ministers’ statement on how the EU could support 
the process, it emerged on Monday.


Do not abandon hope of two-state solution, world warns Israel and Trump
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/do-not-abandon-hope-of-two-state-solution-world-warns-israel-and-trump>
The latest move came after the UK rejected the conclusions of a Middle East 
peace conference staged by France in Paris on Sunday 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/do-not-abandon-hope-of-two-state-solution-world-warns-israel-and-trump>
. In blunt language, the UK dismissed the conference as ill-advised because of 
the absence of the Israelis and Palestinians, as well as the imminent 
inauguration of Trump.

While more than 70 countries attended the Paris conference, with roughly 30 at 
foreign secretary level, the UK refused to send a minister or ambassador and 
was the only major EU country to attend only in observer status. It alsorefused 
to sign 
<https://www.theguardian.com/politics/2017/jan/15/uk-snubs-middle-east-peace-summit-in-paris-to-keep-trump-onside>
the ensuing communique.

The EU foreign ministers’ text would have welcomed the results of the Paris 
conference and set out the potential incentives that the EU could provide if 
the two sides managed to restart talks. The statement would have pledged “an 
unprecedented package of political, economic and security support to be offered 
to both parties” in the event of a peace deal, bolstering earlier EU statements.

But the statement was shelved as the UK and other opposing countries thought 
the statement was mistimed just four days before the new US president took 
office. The UK argued that the statement risked hardening positions without 
helping to solve the conflict.

Other countries saw the British stance as a concession to Trump, who has 
worried Middle East experts with a plan tomove the US embassy to Jerusalem 
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2016/dec/21/us-israel-embassy-jerusalem-peace-process>
.

One European diplomat said the UK had changed 20 years of policy in the hope 
of a good relationship with Trump’s administration, adding: “How many more 
concessions are we to expect?”

Until recently, Britain has been a strong supporter of a negotiated two-state 
solution, but it appears concerns about the attitude of the Trump 
administration has led the UK to modify its approach, if not yet its policy 
stance.

Another EU diplomat said the British in Brussels were motivated primarily by a 
need to cosy up to Trump. “The Brits read what Trump said and implemented it 
immediately,” they said.

“It’s madness. Just three weeks ago the Brits pushed for UN security council 
resolution 2334 on the settlements and voted for it, and now they’re blocking 
resolutions on the matter at the foreign affairs council. With all due respect 
to the British, you can’t run foreign policy according to someone’s tweets.”

The Trump interviews: what he said about Brexit, Putin, Israel, Syria ... and 
Twitter
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2017/jan/16/the-trump-interviews-what-he-said-about-brexit-putin-israel-syria-and-twitter>
In an interview with the Times and Bild 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/2017/jan/15/angela-merkel-refugees-policy-donald-trump>
, Trump urged the UK to veto any further resolutions on Israel at the security 
council. The president-elect vented his anger at the failure of the Obama 
administration to veto a UN security council resolution in December that 
condemned illegal Israeli settlements as a threat to a two-state solution. The 
resolution also called for a differentiation between products produced in 
Israel and those produced in the occupied territories.

In the interview Trump would not be drawn on the plan to move the US embassy 
from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.

On Monday, UK diplomats suggested the latest row in Brussels had been caused 
by EU officials presenting conclusions on the Middle East that had not been 
circulated in advance. The UK officials claimed the discussion was supposed to 
be a brainstorming exercise.

Federica Mogherini, the EU’s foreign policy chief, tried to play down the row, 
saying she did not rule out the EU being able to agree a Middle East statement 
at a later stage, “when things are a little more mature on the side of the US 
administration, which for the moment is not yet clear”.

It was pointed out that the Paris statement had been considerably softened 
from the original French text. The final statement made no mention of the 4 
June 1967 lines as a basis for negotiations, nor did it urge participating 
countries to distinguish, in all their actions, betweenIsrael 
<https://www.theguardian.com/world/israel> and the settlements.

The clause urging Israeli and Palestinian leaders to dissociate themselves 
from opponents of two states was also softened; the draft had demanded that 
they “disavow official voices on their side that reject this solution”.
 