
A child born in Britain today may never see fuel poverty eradicated, according 
to a report backed by the star ofI, Daniel Blake 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/i-daniel-blake> –Ken Loach’s critically 
acclaimed film 
<https://www.theguardian.com/film/2016/oct/23/i-daniel-blake-ken-loach-review-mark-kermode>
 about the benefits system.

The report, published by charity National Energy Action to kick off its Warm 
Homes Campaign <http://www.nea.org.uk/campaigns-policy/warm-homes-campaign/>, 
documents stagnating efforts to solve fuel poverty. The government has pledged 
to make as many “fuel poor” homes as possibleachieve a minimum standard 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/news/a-strategy-to-end-cold-homes-for-good> of 
energy efficiency by 2030, in an attempt to end fuel poverty.

People in 4 million UK households face restricted life chances because they 
live in a cold, damp property, according to the NEA report.

It warned that that the current rate of progress in tackling the problem means 
fuel poverty will not have ended by the time a child born today turns 80. The
average life expectancy at birth 
<http://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/birthsdeathsandmarriages/lifeexpectancies/bulletins/nationallifetablesunitedkingdom/20132015>
 in the UK is 83 years for girls and 79 for boys, according to the Office for 
National Statistics.

People are defined as fuel poor 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/fuel-poverty-statistics> in England 
and Wales if the cost of heating their home is high, but meeting this amount 
would see them fall below the poverty line.

While the number of fuel poor households is lower than it was at the peak of 
the recession in 2009, it crept up from 2.36 million in 2012 to 2.38 million in 
2014, the latest year for which figures are available.

The average fuel poverty gap – between households’ energy bills and what they 
can afford to pay 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/nov/17/one-in-three-families-struggle-to-pay-energy-bills-says-uswitch>
 – has grown in the past decade from £235 in 2003 to £371 in 2014, or £882m at 
a national level.

The actor Dave Johns, who played the lead character in I, Daniel Blake, said: 
“It is a complete scandal that people die because they can’t afford to heat 
their homes.

“I’m backing NEA’s Warm Homes Campaign to highlight what help is available to 
cope with rising energy bills as winter takes hold, and demand more support 
from the government.”

NEA cited low levels of energy efficiency in poor-quality housing and 
difficultyaccessing the cheapest energy tariffs 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jan/23/loyal-energy-customers-overpay-300-big-six-standard-tariffs>
, forcing residents to tolerate the cold or spend more on fuel than wealthier 
people who live in well-insulated homes.

The UK is lagging behind the rest of the world on energy efficiency measures 
such as insulation, according to NEA.

The Committee on Climate Change recently said the UK has “no action plan” 
<https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/2016-CCC-Progress-Report.pdf>
 to improve energy efficiency, while the National Audit Office has lamented the 
lack of investment.

The Green party co-leader Caroline Lucas said: “We know that investing in 
energy efficiency reduces people’s bills, cuts carbon emissions and keeps 
people warm, yet the government is slashing support for insulation.


“This approach fails people living in fuel poverty who can’t afford to keep 
their homes warm and is utterly misguided financially.

“Britain should be leading the way, making energy efficiency and home 
insulation an overriding infrastructure priority.

“Let’s not get left behind other countries who are now leaving us in their 
wake as they drastically reduce their energy demand.”

NEA also identified stagnant wage growth 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/grogonomics/2016/nov/17/three-years-of-stagnant-wage-growth-dont-be-surprised-if-people-look-for-someone-to-blame>
, coupled withrising energy bills 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/01/home-energy-bills-will-rise-following-brexit>
, as the key factors keeping people mired in fuel poverty.

“We need to see much more ambition from national and local government if we 
are to end the unnecessary cost and suffering caused by fuel poverty,” said the 
NEA chief executive, Jenny Saunders.

The Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy said: “The 
government is committed to tackling fuel poverty. The warm home discount will 
ensure that more than 2 million households will receive £140 off their energy 
bills this winter.

“The best long-term solution is to improve the energy efficiency of 
households. We are reforming the requirement on energy companies to install 
efficiency measures in homes across Great Britain, which will insulate 1m homes 
by 2020, tackling the root cause of fuel poverty.”

A Labour spokesman said: “As the cold weather hits, many people will be 
worrying about how they’ll pay their energy bills this winter. It is 
unacceptable that the big six energy companies are raking in profits while 
families have to choose between heating their home and putting food on the 
table.

“Labour have led the way by calling for caps on energy bills while we fix our 
broken energy market. David Cameron promised parliament 17 times that he would 
force energy companies, by law, to put all customers on their cheapest tariff, 
but still the government are doing nothing to help people with energy costs. 
Once again, we have seen that we can’t trust the Tories to stand up for 
ordinary people.”
 