
UK house price growth will slow in 2017 but the legacy of insufficient 
housebuilding will mean that demand will outstrip supply and lead to a 3% rise 
over the year, surveyors have predicted.

Although the most bullish housing market forecast for the new year released so 
far, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors said it expected growth to be 
about half that in 2016. A year ago, it predicted price rises of 6% and 
official figures are on track to meet that, with October’s annual growth rate 
at 6.9%.

Rics said it expected supply issues to continue to drive prices upwards over 
the next 12 months. “Following on from the 2016 forecast, the supply pipeline 
or lack of it is at the forefront of the analysis and dominates the residential 
market,” it said. “While there is an improvement, the legacy of building on an 
insufficient scale has left the average inventory on estate agents’ books close 
to a historic low.”

Value of UK housing stock has risen by 7% to £8.17tn, study finds
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/20/value-uk-housing-stock-2016-zoopla-diss-norfolk>
Since June’s referendum, Rics members around the UK have reported a fall in 
the number of homes coming on to the market, while would-be buyers have 
continued to register their interest. This has been backed up by figures from
mortgage lenders, which showed a 20% fall in the number of loans to home movers 
in October. 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/14/mortgage-data-slowdown-in-housing-market-october>

Rics said the number of sales was set to fall slightly from 2016’s figure, 
from about 1.25m to between 1.15m and 1.2m, reflecting a downwards trend over 
recent months.

The organisation said it expected East Anglia to have price rises above the 
national average, alongside the north-west of England and the West Midlands. 
Separate figures from the property website Zooplashowed that the east of 
England had seen prices rise by 12% in 2016 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/dec/20/value-uk-housing-stock-2016-zoopla-diss-norfolk>
, with the Norfolk town of Diss recording the biggest increase over the year. 
The West Midlands was the second-placed in its rankings, with growth of almost 
9%.

Prices in central London look set to stabilise after recent falls, Rics said, 
with the weak pound encouraging foreign buyers into the market. Meanwhile, 
across the UK rents are forecast to increase by between 2% and 3% and Rics said 
that they could rise more quickly than house prices over the next five years. 
In London, it said growth would be more modest in 2017, predicting rents could 
flatline or rise by up to 1% over the year.

The Rics chief economist, Simon Rubinsohn, said: “Although recent 
announcements by the government on housing are very welcome, the ongoing 
shortfall of stock across much of the sales and lettings markets is set to 
continue to underpin prices and rents. As a result, the affordability challenge 
will remain very much to the fore for many.

“Meanwhile, the lack of existing inventory in the market is impacting the 
ability of households to move and will contribute toward transaction activity 
over the whole of 2017 being a little lower that in the year just ending.”

Many of the biggest players in the property industry have now published their 
forecasts for 2017. Property firmSavills has suggested that prices will remain 
flat 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/nov/04/end-property-boom-uk-house-prices-flatline-savills-forecast>
 across the UK, and fall in the north of England, Wales and Scotland. In the 
east of England it expects 2.5% growth. On Monday, the UK’s largest building 
society, Nationwide, said it expected the UK average price to increase by 2% 
over the year, below the rate of growth it has reported in 2016. It had 
forecast growth between 4% and 6% this year, andat the end of November said 
year-on-year growth had slowed to 4.4% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/01/house-price-growth-nationwide-interest-rates>
.

Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist, said: “Like most forecasters, 
including the Bank of England, we expect the UK economy to slow modestly next 
year, which is likely to result in less robust labour market conditions and 
modestly slower house price growth.

“But we continue to think a small gain (around 2%) is more likely than a 
decline over 2017 as a whole, since low interest rates are expected to help 
underpin demand while a shortage of homes on the market will continue to 
provide support for house prices.”

The government is due to publish its long-awaited housing white paper in 
January, which will address the shortfall in supply in all types of homes, 
including rental properties and social housing. The Rics head of policy, Jeremy 
Blackburn, said this would be a “defining moment”. He said: “Whilst the system 
based on large, private housing developers and homes for owner occupation has 
increased house building, it’s not delivering. The UK needs a coordinated 
strategy for building across tenures, using all of the delivery and technology 
mechanisms at our disposal.”

Gardner said: “The major housebuilders appear to have capacity to expand 
output, with most reporting land banks that could support around five years’ 
worth of construction at current rates of building activity. However, there is 
a risk that the uncertain economic outlook may weigh on activity in the period 
ahead.”
 