
There have been two significant influences on the housing market in 2016: 
stamp duty and the EU referendum result.

Stamp duty <https://www.theguardian.com/money/stampduty> changes introduced 
two years ago had already started to have an impact at the top of the market, 
where the upfront cost of buying a home had increased substantially. Another 
change, the introduction of a higher rate of duty on second homes, was 
introduced in April.

From the beginning of the year, the Brexit poll had triggered uncertainty in 
the market and the shock result ensured that the feeling will linger into 2017. 
Here is a round-up of the state of the British property market in 2016 and 
where it could be heading in 2017.

House prices

The official house price index, relaunched in June 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/jun/14/newly-launched-land-registry-official-house-price-index-fall-london>
 by the Office for National Statistics, looks at the prices paid for homes and 
is published a couple of months after the data is collected. The latest 
figures, for October, show that across the UK prices were up by 6.9% 
year-on-year – the lowest figure since the end of 2015. The average price was 
£217,000.

Figures from all of the main indices show growth has slowed since the start of 
the year. What growth there has been is a result a shortage of homes for sale, 
according to the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (Rics). For several 
months it has reported a fall in the number of properties coming on to the 
market while buyer numbers have risen since the referendum.
 See the full visual 
Rics predicted 6% growth for the year, and the ONS figures are not far off. 
Simon Rubinsohn, chief economist at Rics, said 2016 had been “characterised by 
the stamp duty change” in April. “The stamp duty impact has been a much bigger 
factor in the profiles of activity over the year than the referendum.” For 
2017, Rics has forecast growth will fall by half, to 3% 
<https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/dec/21/uk-house-price-growth-2017-surveyors-rics>
.

The UK’s largest estate agency group, Countrywide, has a gloomier outlook and 
has predicted a 1% fall in 2017, with Brexit-fuelled uncertainty and higher 
inflation fuelling the drop. Its chief economist, Fionnuala Earley, said 
consumers faced rising costs, particularly for essentials like food and fuel. 
“These sort of things will be happening slightly later than expected,” she 
said. “They will make it more difficult for people to afford homes and also may 
make some people think twice about whether it is a good time to buy.”

Luxury market

The top-end of the property market started the year sluggishly and carried on 
in the same way. Sales of homes above £1m have been dented by thechanges to 
stamp duty brought in at the end of 2014 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2014/dec/03/george-osborne-stamp-duty-reform-key-facts-autumn-statement>
, and uncertainty around the referendum, together with this year’s further 
stamp duty change, have not helped.

Since the referendum, estate agents have reported interest from overseas 
buyers attracted by the weak pound, but some developers have reported falling 
sales. There have been price cuts in some of the most expensive developments, 
and also somereconfiguring of newbuilds so that apartments are smaller and 
cheaper <https://www.ft.com/content/f6692d4e-8327-11e6-8897-2359a58ac7a5>. 
Property firm Savills has said prices in the prime market for central London 
are set to 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/sep/21/prime-london-property-prices-fall-9pc-this-year-savills>
 end the year down 9%, while in other upmarket parts of the capital they will 
be down by 5%. For 2017, Savills predicts no luxury price growth in the centre 
of the capital. Rubinsohn agrees: “The high end is beginning to flatline now. 
It may be that there are overseas buyers starting to sniff around, and maybe 
some domestic buyers who previously didn’t think they could afford to buy 
there.”

Buy to let

The buy-to-let market has been dominated by April’s stamp duty change. Sales 
boomed in the run-up to the introduction of the higher rate – figures fromHM 
Revenue & Customs showed that in March, 162,000 properties changed hands 
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2016/apr/21/rush-to-beat-stamp-duty-changes-causes-surge-in-housing-market-activity>
, a rise of 77% on a year earlier. Data from the Council of Mortgage Lenders 
(CML) showed 29,300 mortgages were advanced to landlords that month, more than 
treble the number in March 2015. Lending to landlords fell after that and the 
numbers have run at just over half those recorded in 2015.

More changes face landlords in 2017 in the form of tougher affordability 
checks for buy-to-let mortgages and the start of the withdrawal of tax relief 
on mortgage interest. The CML said it expected activity to slow as a result and 
that 2015 will be viewed as the high watermark for buy-to-let purchases.

However Rubinsohn said it was unlikely investors would completely lose their 
appetite for buy to let. “You do have to bear in mind the alternatives,” he 
said. “Also the mentality of property investment is quite embedded despite 
these changes.”

 See the full visual 
Rental market

Some parts of the country have seen a flood of properties into the market and 
the balance has tipped in favour of tenants. Countrywide has reported that in 
London rents are falling. In November the average rent was 0.7% lower than a 
year earlier, the biggest fall in six years.

Savills, however, has forecast that while across the UK rents will rise by 
2.5% in 2017, in London the increase will be 3%. It said this would be 
supported by higher earnings growth and households made up of more sharers to 
pay the rent. Across the UK most commentators predict rent rises of 2-3%.

Housebuilding 

The latest government figures show that in the 12 months to the end of 
September the number of new homes that started construction in the UK in 
England was up by 4%, at 147,880. The net additions of housing, which factors 
in conversions and takes into account demolitions, shows that in the year 
2015-16 just under 190,000 homes were added to England’s stock.

This is the highest number since the financial crisis, but a House of Lords 
committeehas called for 300,000 new homes per year 
<http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld201617/ldselect/ldeconaf/20/2002.htm>
 in England. And there are fears that market uncertainty could mean fewer homes 
are started in 2017. The property firm JLL suggests the number of housing 
starts could fall to 134,000.
 See the full visual 
North-south divide

Growth has been driven by the south-east and east of England in 2016, but 
there are suggestions that some parts of the north will see higher growth – or 
lower falls – in the next 12 months. Rics forecasts that East Anglia will see 
higher growth than the UK average, but also picks the north-west and West 
Midlands as areas that will outperform.

Of the east of England, Rubinsohn said: “Away from Cambridge much of the area 
is affordable and it is still commuting distance to London.”

Earley said the effect of the Brexit decision could be felt most keenly in 
London, which is the part of the UK most vulnerable to issues in financial 
services sector and exports.

“The might actually be a boost in areas outside London with strong export 
markets, perhaps the West Midlands, as long as they are not buying a lot of 
materials in from overseas,” she said.
 