
British households are feeling happier about their finances, more confident 
about their future retirement income and less burdened by their debts, official 
data has shown.

The latest findings <http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171766_422909.pdf> from the 
Office for National Statistics Wealth and Assets Survey may surprise those used 
to reading about falling living standards and squeezed incomes – and are likely 
to be seized on by George Osborne, whoclaimed in the March budget 
<https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/chancellor-george-osbornes-budget-2015-speech>
 that Britain was “paying its way” and “walking tall again”.


The ongoing survey aims to track the economic wellbeing of households, with up 
to 40,000 households interviewed, and the latest data focuses on saving for 
retirement and keeping up with bills.


Despite ongoing concern about whether people are paying enough into a pension, 
the ONS said an initial analysis of the latest data found that the percentage 
of people “very confident” or “fairly confident” their income in retirement 
would provide the standard of living they hoped for had increased from 41% in 
the period July 2012 to June 2014 to 52% in the 12 months to June 2015.


However, the latest data also confirms that many people are pinning their 
hopes for a decent retirement income on property. When asked which method of 
saving for their later years was likely to make the most of their money, 44% of 
those quizzed said property – well ahead of the 25% who said a workplace 
pension scheme.


Warning for grandparents raiding their pension pots to help out family
 Read more  
<https://www.theguardian.com/money/2015/nov/08/grandparents-raid-pensions-risk-struggling>
Meanwhile, during the period July 2014 to June 2015, 63% of those asked said 
they were keeping up with their bills and credit commitments without any 
difficulty. This is up from 53% in the two years to June 2014.


There has also been a fall in the numbers of people reporting that their debts 
– excluding any mortgage – felt like a problem. Some 25% described their debts 
as either a “heavy burden” or “somewhat of a burden”, which is down from 34% 
last time. The percentage reporting their debt burden as “not a problem at all” 
rose from 66% to 75%.


The proportion of people who say they have sought help because of their debts 
in the last two years has been declining steadily: it now stands at 3%, 
compared with 5% in July 2010 to June 2012.


The idea that people use property to generate an income in retirement is 
widespread: a recent survey from investment group Fidelity found that one in 
four people expected part of their income in retirement to come from property, 
with 11% saying property would be their main source of income when they 
finished work.


Maike Currie, associate investment director at the firm, said: “Savers 
considering property as a means to generate income in retirement should seek 
proper financial advice to understand whether they will get the return they 
anticipate. Buy-to-let does not mean a guaranteed income, and it’s certainly 
not a diversified strategy.”

 